

1.
THE SOCIOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE
Introduction
‘Human beings learn their behaviour and use their intelligence whereas animals simply act on instinct.’
Like most commonsense notions, this idea has an element of truth but reality is far more complex.
The regimented society of social insects such as ants and bees is an object lesson in order and organization.
Every member has clearly defined tasks in a cooperative enterprise.
Thus in a beehive the worker bees, depending on their age, will either feed the young, stand guard and repel strangers, forage for food or ventilate the hive by beating their wings.
The behaviour of insects is largely ‘instinctive’, it is based on programmes contained in the genes which direct their actions.
However, it would be a mistake to assume that the behaviour of insects is based solely on instinct.
Experiments have indicated that at least some have the ability to learn.
For example, ants are able to memorize the path through a maze and are capable of applying this learning to other mazes.
Moving from insects to reptiles to mammals, the importance of learned, as opposed to genetically determined, behaviour gradually increases.
Studies of macaque monkeys on islands in northern Japan provide some indication of the importance of learned behaviour.
On one island the macaques lived in the forested interior.
Japanese scientists attempted to discover whether they could change the behaviour patterns of the troupe.
They began by dumping potatoes in a clearing in the forest.
Gradually the macaques changed their eating habits and became largely dependent on potatoes, a food previously unknown to them, as their staple diet.
The scientists slowly moved the food dumps towards the shoreline and the troupe followed.
The potatoes were then regularly placed on the beach which now became the normal habitat for the macaques.
In the following months, without any encouragement from the scientists, a number of new behaviour patterns emerged in the troupe.
Firstly, some members began washing the potatoes in the sea before eating them.
Others followed suit until it became standard practice in the group.
Then some of the younger macaques began paddling in the sea and eventually took the plunge and learned how to swim.
They were imitated by their elders and again, the novel behaviour of the few became the accepted behaviour of the group.
Finally, some adventurous youngsters began diving off low rocky outcroppings on the shoreline, a practice which was copied by other members of the troupe.
The Japanese macaques had learned new behaviour patterns and these  patterns were shared by members of the group.
The simple generalization that animal behaviour is genetically determined whereas the behaviour of humans is learned is clearly incorrect.
However, the range and complexity of learned behaviour in humans is far greater than in any other species.
This is shown by experiments with humanity's nearest living relative, the chimpanzee.
For a few years chimpanzees raised in human households learn as well as human infants of the same age, but they soon reach the limit of their ability and are rapidly overtaken by human youngsters.
Compared to mammals other than humans, chimpanzees have a considerable learning capacity.
They can solve simple problems to obtain food, they can learn a basic sign language to communicate with humans and even ape their more intelligent cousins in the famous chimpanzee tea party.
Yet despite this capacity to learn, the behavioural repertoire of chimpanzees is rudimentary and limited compared to people.
More than any other species, humans rely for their survival on behaviour patterns which are learned.
Humans have no instincts, that is genetically programmed directives to behave in particular ways.
An instinct involves not only the impulse to do something, but also specific instructions on how to do it.
Birds have an instinct to build nests.
They have an impulse for nest building and all members of a particular species are programmed to build nests in the same way.
The range and variety of dwellings constructed by humans clearly shows the absence of directives based on instinct.
The following examples from nineteenth-century North America provide an illustration.
In the Arctic, the Eskimos constructed igloos from rectangular blocks cut from closely compacted snow.
On the northwest coast of the USA and the west coast of Canada, tribes such as the Nootka built oblong houses with a framework of cedar logs, walled and roofed with planks.
On the opposite side of the subcontinent, in the eastern woodlands, the Iroquois also lived in oblong dwellings, known as ‘long houses’, but they substituted birch-bark for planks.
On the prairies, the easily transportable conical tipi made from long saplings covered in buffalo hides provided shelter for tribes such as the Sioux and Cheyenne.
Further south, the Apache of Arizona and New Mexico lived in domed wickiups made from brushwood and scrub.
In the same area, tribes such as the Zuni and the Hopi built the first apartment houses in the USA.
Even today many members of these tribes live in multi-occupation dwellings made from sun-dried mud bricks known as adobe.
These examples show clearly that the human genetic code does not contain specific instructions to behave in a particular way.
CULTURE AND SOCIETY
To all intents and purposes a newborn human baby is helpless.
Not only is it physically dependent on older members of the species but it also lacks the behaviour patterns necessary for living in human society.
It relies primarily on certain biological drives such as hunger and the charity of its elders to satisfy those drives.
The infant has a lot to learn.
In order to survive, it must learn the skills, knowledge and accepted ways of behaving of the society into which it is born.
It must learn a way of life; in sociological terminology, it must learn the ‘culture’ of its society.
Ralph Linton states that ‘The culture of a society is the way of life of its members; the collection of ideas and habits which they learn, share and transmit from generation to generation’.
In Clyde Kluckhohn's elegant phrase, culture is a ‘design for living’ held by members of a particular society.
Since humans have no instincts to direct their actions, their behaviour must be based on guidelines which are learned.
In order for a society to operate effectively, these guidelines must be shared by its members.
Without a shared culture, members of society would be unable to communicate and cooperate, and confusion and disorder would result.
Culture therefore has two essential qualities: firstly it is learned, secondly it is shared.
Without it there would be no human society.
Culture and behaviour
To a large degree culture determines how members of society think and feel: it directs their actions and defines their outlook on life.
Members of society usually take their culture for granted.
It has become so much a part of them that they are often unaware of its existence.
The following example given by Edward T. Hall provides an illustration.
Two individuals, one from North America, the other from South America, are conversing in a hall 40 ft long.
They begin at one end of the hall and finish at the other end, the North American steadily retreating, the South American relentlessly advancing.
Each is trying to establish the ‘accustomed conversation distance’ defined by his culture.
To the North American, his South American counterpart comes too close for comfort whereas the South American feels uneasy conversing at the distance his partner demands.
Often it takes meetings such as this to reveal the pervasive nature of culturally determined behaviour.
Culture defines accepted ways of behaving for members of a particular society.
Such definitions vary from society to society.
This can lead to considerable misunderstanding between members of different societies as the following example provided by Otto Klineberg shows.
Amongst the Sioux Indians of South Dakota, it is regarded as incorrect to answer a question in the presence of others who do not know the answer.
Such behaviour would be regarded as boastful and arrogant, and, since it reveals the ignorance of others, it would be interpreted as an attempt to undermine their confidence and shame them.
In addition the Sioux regard it as wrong to answer a question unless they are absolutely sure of the correct answer.
Faced with a classroom of Sioux children, a white American teacher, who is unaware of their culture, might easily interpret their behaviour as a reflection of ignorance, stupidity or hostility.
Every society has certain common problems to deal with, for example the problem of dependent members such as the very young and the very old.
However, solutions to such problems are culturally determined: they vary from society to society.
The solutions provided in one society may well be regarded as indefensible by members of other societies.
Under certain circumstances, ‘infanticide’(the killing of infants) and ‘geronticide’(the killing of old people) have been practised by certain groups of Australian aborigines, Eskimos and Caribou Indians.
Particularly in the more arid parts of Australia, female infanticide was practised to reduce the population in times of famine, and occasionally the baby was eaten.
In Tasmania aborigine hunters led a nomadic life to take advantage of the seasonal food supply in different regions.
The old and infirm who were too feeble to keep up with the  band were left behind to die.
The Caribou Indians, who lived to the west of Hudson Bay in Canada, were dependent for their food supply on the caribou herds.
Sometimes, in winter, the herds failed to appear.
To prevent the starvation of the whole community, the following priorities were established.
First the active male adults were fed because if they were too weak to hunt, nobody would eat.
Next, their wives were fed since they could bear more children.
Male infants were considered more important than female because they would grow up to become hunters.
Old people were the most expendable and in times of famine they committed suicide by walking naked into the snow.
If there were no old people left, girl babies would be killed.
The practices of infanticide and geronticide are culturally defined behaviour patterns designed to ensure the survival of the group in times of extreme food shortages.
Like many of the customs of non-Western societies, they appear strange and even heartless to Westerners, but in the context of the particular society, they are sensible, rational and an accepted part of life.
The above examples of culturally defined behaviour have been selected because they differ considerably from behaviour patterns in Western society.
It is easier to appreciate the idea that human behaviour is largely determined by culture with the use of examples which appear strange to Westerners.
Socialization
The process by which individuals learn the culture of their society is known as ‘socialization’.
Primary socialization, probably the most important aspect of the socialization process, takes place during infancy, usually within the family.
By responding to the approval and disapproval of its parents and copying their example, the child learns the language and many of the basic behaviour patterns of its society.
In Western society, other important agencies of socialization include the educational system, the occupational group and the ‘peer group’(a group whose members share similar circumstances and are often of a similar age).
Within its peer group, the young child, by interacting with others and playing childhood games, learns to conform to the accepted ways of a social group and to appreciate the fact that social life is based on rules.
Socialization is not, however, confined to childhood.
It is a lifelong process.
At the beginning of their working lives, the young bricklayer, teacher and accountant soon learn the rules of the game and the tricks of the trade.
Should they change jobs in later life, they will join a different occupational group and may well have to learn new skills and adopt different mannerisms and styles of dress.
Without socialization, an individual would bear little resemblance to any human being defined as normal by the standards of his or her society.
The following examples, though they lack the reliability demanded by today's standards of reporting, nevertheless provide some indication of the importance of socialization.
It is reported that Akbar, who was an emperor in India from 1542 to 1602, ordered that a group of children be brought up without any instruction in language, to test the belief that they would eventually speak Hebrew, the language of God.
The children were raised by deaf mutes.
They developed no spoken language and communicated solely by gestures.
There is also an extensive, though somewhat unreliable, literature on children raised by animals.
One of the best documented cases concerns the so-called  ‘wolf-children of Midnapore’.
Two females, aged two and eight, were reportedly found in a wolf den in Bengal in 1920.
They walked on all fours, preferred a diet of raw meat, they howled like wolves and lacked any form of speech.
Whether these children had been raised by wolves or simply abandoned and left to their own devices in the forest is unclear.
However, such examples indicate that socialization involving prolonged interaction with adults is essential not only for fitting new members into society but also to the process of actually becoming human.
Norms and values
Norms
Every culture contains a large number of guidelines which direct conduct in particular situations.
Such guidelines are known as ‘norms’.
A norm is a specific guide to action which defines acceptable and appropriate behaviour in particular situations.
For example, in all societies, there are norms governing dress.
Members of society generally share norms which define acceptable male and female apparel and which specify appropriate dress for different age groups: in British society, a 70-year-old grandmother dressed as a teenager would contravene the norms for her age group.
Norms of dress provide guidelines for what to wear on particular occasions.
A formal dance, a funeral, a day out on the beach, a working day in the bank, on the building site or in the hospital — all these situations are governed by norms which specify appropriate attire for the occasion.
Norms of dress vary from society to society.
A missionary presented with bare-breasted African females in his congregation provides an example.
Flushed with embarrassment, he ordered a consignment of brassières.
The ladies could make little sense of them in terms of their norms of dress.
From their point of view, the most reasonable way to interpret these strange articles was to regard them as headgear.
Much to the dismay of the missionary, they placed the two cups on the top of their heads and fastened the straps under their chins.
Norms are enforced by ‘positive’ and ‘negative sanctions’, that is rewards and punishments.
Sanctions can be informal, such as an approving or disapproving glance, or formal, such as a reward or a fine given by an official body.
Continuing the example of norms of dress, an embarrassed silence, a hoot of derision or a contemptuous stare will make most members of society who have broken norms of dress change into more conventional attire.
Usually the threat of negative sanctions is sufficient to enforce normative behaviour.
Conversely an admiring glance, a word of praise or an encouraging smile provide rewards for conformity to social norms.
Certain norms are formalized by translation into laws which are enforced by official sanctions.
In terms of laws governing dress, the nude bather on a public beach, the ‘streaker’ at a sporting event and the ‘flasher’who exposes himself to an unsuspecting individual are subject to official punishments of varying severity.
Like informal sanctions, formal sanctions may be positive or negative.
In terms of norms associated with dress, awards are made by official bodies such as tailors' organizations to the best-dressed men in Britain.
To summarize, norms define appropriate and acceptable behaviour in specific situations.
They are enforced by positive and negative sanctions which may be formal or informal.
The sanctions which enforce norms are a major part of the  mechanisms of social control which are concerned with maintaining order in society.
Values
Unlike norms, which provide specific directives for conduct, ‘values’ provide more general guidelines.
A value is a belief that something is good and desirable.
It defines what is important, worthwhile and worth striving for.
It has often been suggested that individual achievement and materialism are major values in Western industrial society.
Thus individuals believe it is important and desirable to come top of the class, to win a race or reach the top of their chosen profession.
Individual achievement is often symbolized and measured by the quality and quantity of material possessions that a person can accumulate.
In the West, the value of materialism motivates individuals to invest time and energy producing and acquiring material possessions.
Like norms, values vary from society to society.
The Sioux Indians placed a high value on generosity.
In terms of Sioux values, the acquisitive individual of Western society would at best be regarded as peculiar and more probably would be condemned as grasping, self-seeking and antisocial.
Many norms can be seen as reflections of values.
A variety of norms can be seen as expressions of a single value.
In Western society the value placed on human life is expressed in terms of the following norms.
The norms associated with hygiene in the home and in public places reflect a concern for human life.
Norms defining acceptable ways for settling an argument or dispute usually exclude physical violence and manslaughter.
The array of rules and regulations dealing with transport and behaviour on the highway are concerned with protecting life and limb.
The same applies to safety regulations in the workplace, particularly in mining and manufacturing industries.
Therefore the variety of norms concerned with the health and safety of members of society can be seen as expressions of the value placed on human life.
Many sociologists maintain that shared norms and values are essential for the operation of human society.
Since humans have no instincts, their behaviour must be guided and regulated by norms.
Unless norms are shared, members of society would be unable to cooperate or even comprehend the behaviour of others.
Similar arguments apply to values.
Without shared values, members of society would be unlikely to cooperate and work together.
With differing or conflicting values they would often be pulling in different directions and pursuing incompatible goals.
Disorder and disruption may well result.
Thus an ordered and stable society requires shared norms and values.
This viewpoint will be considered in greater detail in a later section.
Status and role
All members of society occupy a number of social positions known as ‘statuses’.
In Western society, an individual will usually have an ‘occupational status’ such as bus driver, secretary or solicitor; ‘family statuses’such as son or daughter, father or mother; and a ‘gender status’such as male or female.
Statuses are culturally defined, despite the fact that they may be based on biological factors such as sex or race.
For example, skin colour assigns individuals to racial statuses such as black and white but this merely reflects the conventions of particular  societies.
Other biological characteristics such as hair colour have no connection with an individual's status and, in future societies, skin colour may be equally insignificant.
Some statuses are relatively fixed and there is little individuals can do to change their assignment to particular social positions.
Examples of such fixed or ‘ascribed’ statuses include gender and aristocratic titles.
On rare occasions, however, ascribed statuses can be changed.
Edward VIII was forced to abdicate for insisting on marrying an American divorcee.
Anthony  Wedgwood-Benn renounced his peerage in order to stand for election to the House of Commons.
Revolutions in America and Russia abolished the ascribed status of members of the aristocracy.
Ascribed statuses are usually fixed at birth.
In many societies occupational status has been or still is transmitted from father to son and from mother to daughter.
Thus in the traditional Indian caste system, a son automatically entered the occupation of his father.
Statuses which are not fixed by inheritance, biological characteristics, or other factors over which the individual has no control, are known as ‘achieved’ statuses.
An achieved status is entered as a result of some degree of purposive action and choice.
In Western society an individual's marital status and occupational status are achieved.
However, as the following chapter will indicate, the distinction between ascribed and achieved status is less clear cut than has so far been suggested.
Each status in society is accompanied by a number of norms which define how an individual occupying a particular status is expected to act.
This group of norms is known as a ‘role’.
Thus the status of husband is accompanied by the role of husband, the status of solicitor by the role of solicitor and so on.
As an example, solicitors are expected to possess a detailed knowledge of certain aspects of the law, to support their client's interests and respect the confidentiality of their business.
Solicitors' attire is expected to be sober, their manner restrained, confident yet understanding, their standing in the community beyond reproach.
Playing or performing roles involves social relationships in the sense that an individual plays a role in relation to other roles.
Thus the role of doctor is played in relation to the role of patient, the role of husband in relation to the role of wife.
Individuals therefore interact in terms of roles.
Social roles regulate and organize behaviour.
In particular, they provide means for accomplishing certain tasks.
It can be argued, for example, that teaching can be accomplished more effectively if teacher and student adopt their appropriate roles.
This involves the exclusion of other areas of their lives in order to concentrate on the matter in hand.
Roles provide social life with order and predictability.
Interacting in terms of their respective roles, teacher and student know what to do and how to do it.
With a knowledge of each other 's roles they are able to predict and comprehend the actions of the other.
As an aspect of culture, roles provide an important part of the guidelines and directives necessary for an ordered society.
This section has introduced some of the basic concepts used by many sociologists.
In doing so, however, it has presented a somewhat one-sided view of human society.
Individuals have been pictured rather like automatons who simply respond to the dictates of their culture.
All members of a particular society appear to be produced from the same mould.
They are all efficiently socialized in terms of a common culture.
They share the same values, follow the same norms and  play a variety of roles, adopting the appropriate behaviour for each.
Clearly this picture of conformity has been overstated and the pervasive and constraining influence of culture has been exaggerated.
There are two reasons for this.
Firstly, overstatement has been used to make the point.
Secondly, many of the ideas presented so far derive from a particular perspective in sociology which has been subject to the criticisms noted above.
This perspective, known as functionalism, will now be examined.
THEORIES OF SOCIETY
This section will examine three of the main theories of society.
A ‘theory’ is a set of ideas which claims to explain how something works.
A sociological theory is therefore a set of ideas which claims to explain how society or aspects of society work.
The theories in this section represent only a selection from the range of sociological theories.
They have been simplified and condensed to provide a basic introduction.
Since they are applied to various topics throughout the text, an initial awareness is essential.
Criticism of the theories has been omitted from this chapter for the sake of simplicity.
It will be dealt with throughout the text and in detail in the final chapter.
There are many variations on the basic theories examined in this chapter.
Again for simplicity these variations will not be mentioned at this stage, but will be introduced when they become relevant to particular topics.
1 Functionalism
‘Functionalism’ was the dominant theoretical perspective in sociology during the 1940s and 1950s.
From the mid 1960s onwards, its popularity steadily declined due partly to damaging criticism, partly to competing perspectives which appeared to provide superior explanations, and partly to changes in fashion.
The key points of the functionalist perspective may be summarized by a comparison drawn from biology.
If biologists wanted to know how an organism such as the human body worked, they might begin by examining the various parts such as the brain, lungs, heart and liver.
However, if they simply analysed the parts in isolation from each other, they would be unable to explain how life was maintained.
To do this, they would have to examine the parts in relation to each other since they work together to maintain the organism.
Therefore they would analyse the relationships between the heart, lungs, brain and so on to understand how they operated and appreciate their importance.
From this viewpoint, any part of the organism must be seen in terms of the organism as a whole.
Functionalism adopts a similar perspective.
The various parts of society are seen to be interrelated and taken together they form a complete system.
To understand any part of society, such as the family or religion, the part must be seen in relation to society as a whole.
Thus where a biologist will examine a part of the body, such as the heart, in terms of its contribution to the maintenance of the human organism, the functionalist will examine a part of society, such as the family, in terms of its contribution to the maintenance of the social system.
Structure
Functionalism begins with the observation that behaviour in society is structured.
This means that relationships between members of society are organized in terms of rules.
Social relationships are therefore patterned and recurrent.
Values provide general guidelines for behaviour and they are translated into more specific directives in terms of roles and norms.
The structure of society can be seen as the sum total of normative behaviour — the sum total of social relationships which are governed by norms.
The main parts of society, its institutions — such as the family, the economy, the educational and political systems — are major aspects of the social structure.
Thus an institution can be seen as a structure made up of interconnected roles or interrelated norms.
For example, the family is made up of the interconnected roles of husband, father, wife, mother, son and daughter.
Social relationships within the family are structured in terms of a set of related norms.
Function
Having established the existence of a social structure, functionalist analysis turns to a consideration of how that structure functions.
This involves an examination of the relationship between the different parts of the structure and their relationship to society as a whole.
From this examination, the functions of institutions are discovered.
At its simplest, function means effect.
Thus the function of the family is the effect it has on other parts of the social structure and on society as a whole.
In practice the term function is usually used to indicate the contribution an institution makes to the maintenance and survival of the social system: a major function of the family is the socialization of new members of society.
This represents an important contribution to the maintenance of society since order, stability and cooperation largely depend on learned, shared norms and values.
Functional prerequisites
In determining the functions of various parts of the social structure, functionalists are guided by the following ideas.
Societies have certain basic needs or requirements which must be met if they are to survive.
These requirements are sometimes known as ‘functional prerequisites’.
For example, a means of producing food and shelter may be seen as a functional prerequisite since without them members of society could not survive.
A system for socializing new members of society may also be regarded as a functional prerequisite since without culture, social life would not be possible.
Having assumed a number of basic requirements for the survival of society, the next step is to look at the parts of the social structure to see how they meet such functional prerequisites.
Thus a major function of the economic system is the production of food and shelter.
An important function of the family is the socialization of new members of society.
Value consensus
From a functionalist perspective, society is regarded as a system.
A system is an entity made up of interconnected and interrelated parts.
From this viewpoint, it follows that each part will in some way affect every other part and the system as a whole.
It also follows that if the system is to survive, its various parts must have some degree of fit or  compatibility .
Thus a functional prerequisite of society  involves at least a minimal degree of integration between the parts.
Many functionalists argue that this integration is based largely on ‘value consensus’, that is on agreement about values by members of society.
Thus if the major values of society are expressed in the various parts of the social structure, those parts will be integrated.
For example, it can be argued that the value of materialism integrates many parts of the social structure in Western industrial society.
The economic system produces a large range of goods and ever increasing productivity is regarded as an important goal.
The educational system is partly concerned with producing the skills and expertise to expand production and increase its efficiency.
The family is an important unit of consumption with its steadily rising demand for consumer durables such as washing machines, videos and microwaves.
The political system is partly concerned with improving material living standards and raising productivity.
To the extent that these parts of the social structure are based on the same values, they may be said to be integrated.
Social order
One of the main concerns of functionalist theory is to explain how social life is possible.
l he theory assumes that a certain degree of order and stability are essential for the survival of social systems.
Functionalism is therefore concerned with explaining the origin and maintenance of order and stability in society.
Many functionalists see shared values as the key to this explanation: ‘value consensus’ integrates the various parts of society.
It forms the basis of social unity or social solidarity since individuals will tend to identify and feel kinship with those who share the same values as themselves.
Value consensus provides the foundation for cooperation since common values produce common goals.
Members of society will tend to cooperate in pursuit of goals which they share.
Having attributed such importance to value consensus, many functionalists then focus on the question of how this consensus is maintained.
Indeed the American sociologist Talcott Parsons has stated that the main task of sociology is to examine ‘the institutionalization of patterns of value orientation in the social system’.
Emphasis is therefore placed on the process of socialization whereby values are internalized and transmitted from one generation to the next.
In this respect, the family is regarded as a vital part of the social structure.
Once learned, values must be maintained.
In particular those who deviate from society's values must be brought back into line.
Thus the mechanisms of social control discussed earlier in the chapter, are seen as essential to the maintenance of social order.
In summary, society, from a functionalist perspective, is a system made up of interrelated parts.
The social system has certain basic needs which must be met if it is to survive.
These needs are known as functional prerequisites.
The function of any part of society is its contribution to the maintenance of society.
The major functions of social institutions are those which help to meet the functional prerequisites of society.
Since society is a system, there must be some degree of integration between its parts.
A minimal degree of integration is therefore a functional prerequisite of society.
Many functionalists maintain that the order and stability they see as essential for the maintenance of the social system are largely provided by value consensus.
This means that an investigation of the source of value consensus is a major concern of functionalist analysis.
Conflict perspectives
Although functionalists emphasize the importance of value consensus in society, they do recognize that conflict can occur.
However, they see conflict as being the result of temporary disturbances in the social system.
These disturbances are usually quickly corrected as society evolves.
Functionalists accept that social groups can have differences of interest, but these are of minor importance compared to the interests which all social groups share in common.
They believe that all social groups benefit if their society runs smoothly and prospers.
‘Conflict theories’ differ from functionalism in that they believe that there are fundamental differences of interest between social groups.
These differences result in conflict being a common and persistent feature of society, and not a temporary aberration.
There are a number of different conflict perspectives and their supporters tend to disagree about the precise nature, causes and extent of conflict.
For the sake of simplicity, this introductory chapter will concentrate upon one conflict theory: Marxism.
Other conflict theories will be introduced later in the book.
(For example, the influential conflict theory of Max Weber is dealt with in Chapter 2, p 42–5.)
2 Marxism
Marxist theory offers a radical alternative to functionalism.
It became increasingly influential during the 1970s, due partly to the decline of functionalism, partly to its promise to provide answers which functionalism failed to provide and partly because it was more in keeping with the tenor and mood of the times.
‘Marxism’ takes its name from its founder, the German-born philosopher, economist and sociologist, Karl Marx (1818–83).
The following account represents a simplified version of Marxist theory.
It must also be seen as one interpretation of that theory: Marx's extensive writings have been variously interpreted and, since his death, several schools of Marxism have developed.
Contradiction and conflict
Marxist theory begins with the simple observation that in order to survive, humans must produce food and material objects.
In doing so they enter into social relationships with other people.
From the simple hunting band to the complex industrial state, production is a social enterprise.
Production also involves a technical component known as the ‘forces of production’ which includes the technology, raw materials and scientific knowledge employed in the process of production.
Each major stage in the development of the forces of production will correspond with a particular form of the social relationships of production.
This means that the forces of production in a hunting economy will correspond with a particular set of social relationships.
Taken together, the forces of production and the social relationships of production form the economic basis or ‘infrastructure’ of society.
The other aspects of society, known as the ‘superstructure’, are largely shaped by the infrastructure.
thus the political, legal and educational institutions and the belief and value systems are primarily determined by economic factors.
A major change in the infrastructure will therefore produce a corresponding change in the superstructure.
Marx maintained that, with the possible exception of the societies of prehistory, all historical societies contain basic contradictions which means that they cannot survive forever in their existing form.
These contradictions involve the exploitation of one social group by another: in feudal society, lords exploit their serfs; in capitalist society, employers exploit their employees.
This creates a fundamental conflict of interest between social groups since one gains at the expense of another.
This conflict of interest must ultimately be resolved since a social system containing such contradictions cannot survive unchanged.
The points raised in this brief summary of Marxist theory will now be examined in greater detail.
The major contradictions in society are between the forces and relations of production.
The forces of production include land, raw materials, tools and machinery, the technical and scientific knowledge used in production, the technical organization of the production process and the labour power of the workers.
The ‘relations of production’ are the social relationships which people enter into in order to produce goods.
Thus in feudal society they include the relationship between the lord and vassal and the set of rights, duties and obligations which make up that relationship.
In capitalist industrial society they include the relationship between employer and employee and the various rights of the two parties.
The relations of production also involve the relationship of social groups to the means and forces of production.
The ‘means of production’ consist of those parts of the forces of production which can be legally owned.
They therefore include land, raw materials, machinery, buildings and tools, but not technical knowledge or the organization of the production process.
Under capitalism, labour power is not one of the means of production since the workers are free to sell their labour.
In slave societies, though, labour power is one of the means of production since the workforce is actually owned by the social group in power.
In feudal society, land, the major means of production, is owned by the lord whereas the serf has the right to use land in return for services or payment to the lord.
In Western industrial society, the means of production are owned by the capitalist whereas the workers own only their labour which they hire to the employer in return for wages.
Exploitation and oppression
The idea of contradiction between the forces and relations of production may be illustrated in terms of the infrastructure of capitalist industrial society.
Marx maintained that only labour produces wealth.
Thus wealth in capitalist society is produced by the labour power of the workers.
However, much of this wealth is appropriated in the form of profits by the ‘capitalists’, the owners of the means of production.
I he wages of the workers are well below the value of the wealth they produce.
There is thus a contradiction between the forces of production, in particular the labour power of the workers which produces wealth, and the relations of production which involve the appropriation of much of that wealth by the capitalists.
A related contradiction involves the technical organization of labour and the nature of ownership.
In capitalist society, the forces of production include the collective production of goods by large numbers of workers in factories.
Yet the means of production are privately owned, and the profits are appropriated by individuals.
The contradiction between the forces and relations of production lies  in the social and collective nature of production and the private and individual nature of ownership.
Marx believed that these and other contradictions would eventually lead to the downfall of the capitalist system.
He maintained that by its very nature, capitalism involves the exploitation and oppression of the worker.
He believed that the conflict of interest between capital and labour, which involves one group gaining at the expense of the other, could not be resolved within the framework of a capitalist economy.
Contradiction and change
Marx saw history as divided into a number of time periods or epochs, each being characterized by a particular mode of production.
Major changes in history are the result of new forces of production.
Thus the change from feudal to capitalist society stemmed from the emergence, during the feudal epoch, of the forces of production of industrial society.
This resulted in a contradiction between the new forces of production and the old feudal relations of production.
Capitalist industrial society required relations of production based on wage labour rather than the traditional ties of lord and vassal.
When they reach a certain point in their development, the new forces of production lead to the creation of a new set of relations of production.
Then, a new epoch of history is born which sweeps away the social relationships of the old order.
However, the final epoch of history, the communist or socialist society which Marx believed would eventually supplant capitalism, will not result from a new force of production.
Rather it will develop from a resolution of the contradictions contained within the capitalist system.
Collective production will remain but the relations of production will be transformed.
Ownership of the means of production will be collective rather than individual and members of society will share the wealth that their labour produces.
No longer will one social group exploit and oppress another.
This will produce an infrastructure without contradiction and conflict.
In Marx's view this would mean the end of history since communist society would no longer contain the contradictions which generate change.
Ideology and false consciousness
In view of the contradictions which beset historical societies, it appears difficult to explain their survival.
Despite its internal contradictions, capitalism has continued in the West for over 200 years.
This continuity can be explained in large part by the nature of the superstructure.
In all societies the superstructure is largely shaped by the infrastructure.
In particular, the relations of production are reflected and reproduced in the various institutions, values and beliefs that make up the superstructure.
Thus the relationships of domination and subordination found in the infrastructure will also be found in social institutions.
In Marx's words, ‘The existing relations of production between individuals must necessarily express themselves also as political and legal relations.’
The dominant social group or ‘ruling class’, that is the group which owns and controls the means of production, will largely monopolize political power and its position will be supported by laws which are framed to protect and further its interests.
In the same way, beliefs and values will reflect and legitimate the relations of production.
Members of the ruling class ‘rule also as thinkers, as producers of ideas’.
These ideas justify their power and privilege and conceal from all  members of society the basis of exploitation and oppression on which their dominance rests.
Thus under feudalism honour and loyalty were ‘dominant concepts’ of the age.
Vassals owed loyalty to their lords and were bound by an oath of allegiance which encouraged the acceptance of their status.
In terms of the dominant concepts of the age, feudalism appeared as the natural order of things.
Under capitalism, exploitation is disguised by the ideas of equality and freedom.
The relationship between capitalist and wage labourer is defined as an equal exchange.
The capitalist buys the labour power which the worker offers for hire.
The worker is defined as a free agent since she or he has the freedom to choose his or her employer.
In reality, equality and freedom are illusions: the employer-employee relationship is not equal.
It is an exploitative relationship.
Workers are not free since they are forced to work for the capitalist in order to survive.
All they can do is exchange one form of wage slavery' for another.
Marx refers to the dominant ideas of each epoch as ‘ruling class ideology’.
‘Ideology’ is a distortion of reality, a false picture of society.
It blinds members of society to the contradictions and conflicts of interest which are built into their relationships.
As a result they tend to accept their situation as normal and natural, right and proper.
In this way a ‘false consciousness’ of reality is produced which helps to maintain the system.
However, Marx believed that ruling class ideology could only slow down the disintegration of the system.
The contradictions embedded in the structure of society must eventually find expression.
In summary, the key to understanding society from a Marxist perspective involves an analysis of the infrastructure.
In all historical societies there are basic contradictions between the forces and relations of production and there are fundamental conflicts of interest between the social groups involved in the production process.
In particular, the relationship between the major social groups is one of exploitation and oppression.
The superstructure derives largely from the infrastructure and therefore reproduces the social relationships of production.
It will thus reflect the interests of the dominant group in the relations of production.
Ruling class ideology distorts the true nature of society and serves to legitimate and justify the status quo.
However the contradictions in the infrastructure will eventually lead to a disintegration of the system and the creation of a new society.
3 Interactionism
Although functionalism and Marxism provide very different perspectives on society, they have a number of factors in common.
Firstly, they offer a general explanation of society as a whole and as a result are sometimes known as ‘macro-theories’.
Secondly, they regard society as a system, hence they are sometimes referred to as ‘system theories’.
Thirdly, they tend to see human behaviour as shaped by the system.
In terms of Talcott Parsons's version of functionalism, behaviour is largely directed by the norms and values of the social system.
From a Marxist viewpoint, behaviour is ultimately determined by the economic infrastructure.
Interactionism differs from functionalism and Marxism on these three points.
It focusses on small-scale interaction rather than society as a whole.
It usually rejects the notion of a social system.
As a result it does not regard human action as a response or reaction to the system.
Meaning and interpretation
As its name suggests, interactionism is concerned with ‘interaction’ which means action between individuals.
The interactionist perspective seeks to understand this process.
It begins from the assumption that action is meaningful to those involved.
It therefore follows that an understanding of action requires an interpretation of the meanings which the actors give to their activities.
Picture a man and a woman in a room and the man lighting a candle.
This action is open to a number of interpretations.
The couple may simply require light because a fuse has blown or a power cut has occurred.
Or, they may be involved in some form of ritual in which the lighted candle has a religious significance.
Alternatively, the man or woman may be trying to create a more intimate atmosphere as a prelude to a sexual encounter.
Finally the couple may be celebrating a birthday, a wedding anniversary or some other red-letter day.
In each case a different meaning is attached to the act of lighting a candle.
To understand the act it is therefore necessary to discover the meaning held by the actors.
Meanings are not fixed entities.
As the above example shows, they depend in part on the context of the interaction.
Meanings are also created, developed, modified and changed within the actual process of interaction.
A pupil entering a new class may initially define the situation as threatening and even hostile.
This definition may be confirmed, modified or changed depending on his or her perception of the interaction which takes place in the classroom.
The pupil may come to perceive the teacher and fellow pupils and friendly and understanding and so change his or her assessment of the situation.
The way in which actors define situations has important consequences.
It represents their reality in terms of which they structure their actions.
For example, if the pupil maintains his or her definition of the classroom as threatening and hostile, he or she may say little and speak only when spoken to.
Conversely if the definition changed, there would probably be a corresponding change in the pupil's actions in that context.
Self-concepts
The actions of the pupil in the above example will depend in part on his or her interpretation of the way others see him or her.
For this reason many interactionists place particular emphasis on the idea of the self.
They suggest that an individual develops a ‘self-concept’, a picture of him- or herself which has an important influence on his or her actions.
A self-concept develops from interaction processes since it is in large part a reflection of the reactions of others towards the individual: hence the term ‘looking glass self’ coined by Charles Cooley.
Actors tend to act in terms of their self-concept.
Thus if they are consistently defined as disreputable or respectable, servile or arrogant, they will tend to see themselves in this light and act accordingly.
The construction of meaning
Since interactionists are concerned with definitions of situation and self, they are also concerned with the process by which those definitions are constructed.
For example, how does an individual come to be defined in a certain way?
The answer to this question involves an investigation of the construction of meaning in interaction processes.
This requires an analysis of the way actors interpret the language, gestures, appearance and manner of others and their interpretation of the context in which the interaction takes place.
The definition of an individual as a delinquent provides an example.
Research has indicated that police are more likely to perceive an act as delinquent if it occurs in a low-income inner city area.
The context will influence the action of the police since they typically define the inner city as a ‘bad area’.
Once arrested, a youth, for instance, is more likely to be defined as a juvenile delinquent if his manner is interpreted as aggressive and uncooperative, if his appearance is seen as unconventional or slovenly, if his speech is defined as ungrammatical or slang and if his posture gives the impression of disrespect for authority or arrogance.
Thus the jive-talking black American youth from the inner city ghetto with his cool, arrogant manner and colourful clothes is more likely to be defined as a delinquent than the white ‘all-American girl’ from the tree-lined suburbs.
Definitions of individuals as certain kinds of persons are not, however, simply based on preconceptions which actors bring to interaction situations.
For example, the police will not automatically define black juveniles involved in a fight as delinquent and white juveniles involved in a similar activity as non-delinquent.
A process of negotiation occurs from which the definition emerges.
Often negotiations will reinforce preconceptions but not necessarily.
The young blacks may be able to convince the policeman that the fight was a friendly brawl which did not involve intent to injure or steal.
In this way they may successfully promote images of themselves as high spirited teenagers rather than as malicious delinquents.
Definitions and meanings are therefore constructed in interaction situations by a process of negotiation.
Negotiation and roles
The idea of negotiation is also applied to the concept of role.
Like functionalists, the interactionists employ the concept of role but they adopt a somewhat different perspective.
Functionalists imply that roles are provided by the social system and individuals enact their roles as if they were reading off a script which contains explicit directions for their behaviour.
Interactionists argue that roles are often unclear, ambiguous and vague.
This lack of clarity provides actors with considerable room for negotiation, manoeuvre, improvisation and creative action.
At most, roles provide very general guidelines for action.
What matters is how they are employed in interaction situations.
For example, two individuals enter marriage with a vague idea about the roles of husband and wife.
Their interaction will not be constrained by these roles.
Their definition of what constitutes a husband, a wife, and a marital relationship will be negotiated.
It will be fluid rather than fixed, changeable rather than static.
Thus, from an interactionist perspective, roles, like meanings and definitions of the situation, are negotiated in interaction processes.
In summary, interactionism focusses on the process of interaction in particular contexts.
Since all action is meaningful, it can only be understood by discovering the meanings which actors assign to their activities.
Meanings both direct action and derive from action.
They are not fixed but constructed and negotiated in interaction situations.
From their interaction with others, actors develop a self-concept.
This has important consequences since individuals tend to act in terms of their definition of self.
Understanding the construction of meanings and self-concepts involves an appreciation of the way actors interpret the process of interaction.
This requires an investigation of the way in which they perceive the context of the interaction and the manner, appearance and actions of others.
While interactionists admit the existence of roles, they regard them as vague and imprecise and therefore as open to negotiation.
From an interactionist perspective, action proceeds from negotiated meanings which are constructed in ongoing interaction situations.
VIEWS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOUR
The previous section has briefly examined three theoretical perspectives in sociology.
This section deals with philosophical views of human behaviour.
These views have influenced both the type of data sociologists have collected and the methods they have employed to collect the data.
Views of human behaviour can be divided into those which emphasize external factors and those which stress internal factors.
The former approach sees behaviour as being influenced by the structure of society.
The latter approach places more emphasis upon the subjective states of individuals, their feelings, the meanings they attach to events and the motives they have for behaving in particular ways.
The use of this ‘dichotomy’(sharply defined division) is somewhat artificial.
In practice most sociologists make use of the insights provided by both approaches when carrying out research and interpreting the results.
There are also a number of variations on each approach.
For example, as a later section will show, phenomenologists differ in their approach from other sociologists who emphasize the importance of internal influences upon human behaviour.
Positivism
Many of the founders of sociology believed it would be possible to create a science of society based upon the same principles and procedures as the natural sciences such as chemistry and biology, even though the natural sciences often deal with inanimate matter and so are not concerned with feeling, emotions and other subjective states.
The most influential attempt to apply natural science methodology to sociology is known as ‘positivism’.
Auguste Comte (1798–1857), who is credited with inventing the term sociology and regarded as one of the founders of the discipline, maintained that the application of the methods and assumptions of the natural sciences would produce a ‘positive science of society’.
He believed that this would reveal that the evolution of society followed ‘invariable laws’.
It would show that the behaviour of humans was governed by principles of cause and effect which were just as invariable as the behaviour of matter, the subject of the natural sciences.
In terms of sociology, the positivist approach makes the following assumptions.
The behaviour of humans, like the behaviour of matter, can be objectively measured.
Just as the behaviour of matter can be quantified by measures such as weight, temperature and pressure, methods of objective measurement can be devised for human behaviour.
Such measurement is essential to explain behaviour.
For example, in order to explain the reaction of a particular chemical to heat, it is necessary to provide exact measurements of temperature, weight and so on .
With the aid of such measurements it will be possible to accurately observe the behaviour of matter and produce a statement of cause and effect.
This statement might read A x B = C where A is a quantity of matter, B a degree of heat and C a volume of gas.
Once it has been shown that the matter in question always reacts in the same way under fixed conditions, a theory can be devised to explain its behaviour.
From a positivist viewpoint such methods and assumptions are applicable to human behaviour.
Observations of behaviour based on objective measurement will make it possible to produce statements of cause and effect.
Theories may then be devised to explain observed behaviour.
The positivist approach in sociology places particular emphasis on behaviour that can be directly observed.
It argues that factors which are not directly observable, such as meanings, feelings and purposes, are not particularly important and can be misleading.
For example, if the majority of adult members of society enter into marriage and produce children, these facts can be observed and quantified.
They therefore form reliable data.
However, the range of meanings that members of society give to these activities, their purposes for marriage and procreation, are not directly observable.
Even if they could be accurately measured, they may well divert attention from the real cause of behaviour.
One man may believe he entered marriage because he was lonely, another because he was in love, a third because it was the ‘thing to do’ and a fourth because he wished to produce offspring.
Reliance on this type of data for explanation assumes that individuals know the reasons for marriage.
This can obscure the real cause of their behaviour.
The positivists' emphasis on observable ‘facts’ is due largely to the belief that human behaviour can be explained in much the same way as the behaviour of matter.
Natural scientists do not inquire into the meanings and purposes of matter for the obvious reason of their absence.
Atoms and molecules do not act in terms of meanings, they simply react to external stimuli.
Thus if heat, an external stimulus, is applied to matter, that matter will react.
The job of the natural scientist is to observe, measure, and then explain that reaction.
The positivist approach to human behaviour applies a similar logic.
People react to external stimuli and their behaviour can be explained in terms of this reaction.
They enter into marriage and produce children in response to the demands of society: society requires such behaviour for its survival and its members simply respond to this requirement.
The meanings and purposes they attach to this behaviour are largely inconsequential.
It has often been argued that systems theory in sociology adopts a positivist approach.
Once behaviour is seen as a response to some external stimulus (such as economic forces or the requirements of the social system) the methods and assumptions of the natural sciences appear appropriate to the study of humans.
Marxism has sometimes been regarded as a positivist approach since it can be argued that it sees human behaviour as a reaction to the stimulus of the economic infrastructure.
Functionalism has been viewed in a similar light.
The behaviour of members of society can be seen as a response to the functional prerequisites of the social system.
These views of systems theory represent a considerable oversimplification of complex theories.
However, it is probably fair to say that systems theory is closer to a positivist approach than the views which will now be considered.
Social action perspectives
Advocates of social action perspectives argue that the subject matter of the social and natural sciences is fundamentally different.
As a result the methods and assumptions of the natural sciences are inappropriate to the study of humans.
The natural sciences deal with matter.
To understand and explain the behaviour of matter it is sufficient to observe it from the outside.
Atoms and molecules do not have consciousness: they do not have meanings and purposes which direct their behaviour.
Matter simply reacts ‘unconsciously’ to external stimuli; in scientific language it behaves.
As a result the natural scientist is able to observe, measure, and impose an external logic on that behaviour in order to explain it.
Scientists have no need to explore the internal logic of the consciousness of matter simply because it does not exist.
Unlike matter, humans have consciousness — thoughts, feelings, meanings, intentions and an awareness of being.
Because of this, humans' actions are meaningful: they define situations and give meaning to their actions and those of others.
As a result, they do not merely react to external stimuli, they do not simply behave, they act .
Imagine the response of early humans to fire caused by volcanoes or spontaneous combustion.
They did not simply react in a uniform manner to the experience of heat.
They attached a range of meanings to it and these meanings directed their actions.
They defined fire as a means of warmth and used it to heat their dwellings; as a means of defence and used it to ward off wild animals; and as a means of transforming substances and employed it for cooking and hardening the points of wooden spears.
Humans do not just react to fire, they act upon it in terms of the meanings they give to it.
If action stems from subjective meanings, it follows that the sociologist must discover those meanings in order to understand action.
Sociologists cannot simply observe action from the outside and impose an external logic upon it.
They must interpret the internal logic which directs the actions of the actor.
Max Weber (1864–1920) was one of the first sociologists to outline this perspective in detail.
He argued that sociological explanations of action should begin with ‘the observation and theoretical interpretation of the subjective ‘states of minds’ of actors'.
As the previous section indicated, interactionism adopts a similar approach with particular emphasis on the process of interaction.
Where positivists emphasize facts and cause-and-effect relationships, interactionists emphasize insight and understanding.
Since it is not possible to get inside the heads of actors, the discovery of meaning must be based on interpretation and intuition.
For this reason objective measurement is not possible and the exactitude of the natural sciences cannot be duplicated.
Since meanings are constantly negotiated in ongoing interaction processes it is not possible to establish simple cause-and-effect relationships.
Thus some sociologists argue that sociology is limited to an interpretation of social action.
Nevertheless, both Weber and the interactionists did think it was possible to produce causal explanations of human behaviour so long as an understanding of meanings formed part of those explanations.
Some sociologists, particularly phenomenologists, take the argument further and claim that it is impossible for sociologists to find the causes of human action.
Phenomenology
To phenomenologists, it is impossible to measure objectively any aspect of human behaviour.
Humans make sense of the world by categorizing it.
Through language they distinguish between different types of objects, events, actions and people.
For instance, some actions are defined as criminal and others are not; similarly some people are defined as criminals while others are seen as law-abiding.
The process of categorization is subjective: it depends upon the opinions of the observer.
Statistics are simply the product of the opinions of those who produce them.
Thus crime statistics are produced by the police and the courts and they represent no more than the opinions of the individuals involved.
If sociologists produce their own statistics these too are the product of subjective opinions, in this case the opinions of sociologists.
Phenomenologists believe that it is impossible to produce factual data and it is therefore impossible to produce and check causal explanations.
The most that sociologists can hope to do is to understand the meaning that individuals give to particular phenomena.
Phenomenologists do not try to establish what causes crime; instead they try to discover how certain events come to be defined as crimes and certain people defined as criminal.
Phenomenologists therefore examine the way that police officers reach decisions about whether to arrest and charge suspects.
In doing so, they hope to establish the meaning attached to the words ‘crime’ and ‘criminal’by the police.
The end product of phenomenological research is an understanding of the meanings employed by members of society in their everyday life.
Although there are differences between those who support social action and phenomenological views, they agree that the positivist approach has produced a distorted picture of social life.
Peter Berger argues that society has often been viewed as a puppet theatre with its members portrayed as ‘little puppets jumping about on the ends of their invisible strings, cheerfully acting out the parts that have been assigned to them’.
Society instils values, norms and roles, and humans dutifully respond like marionettes.
However, interactionists and phenomenologists believe that humans do not react and respond passively to an external society.
They see humans as actively creating their own meanings and their own society in interaction with each other.
SOCIOLOGY AND VALUES
The positivist approach assumes that a science of society is possible.
It therefore follows that objective observation and analysis of social life are possible.
An objective view is free from the values, moral judgments and ideology of the observer: it provides facts and explanatory frameworks which are uncoloured by the observer's feelings and opinions.
An increasing number of sociologists argue that a value-free science of society is not possible.
They maintain that the values of sociologists directly influence every aspect of their research.
They argue that the various theories of society are based, at least in part, on value judgments and ideological positions.
They suggest  that sociological perspectives are shaped more by historical circumstances than by objective views of the reality of social life.
Those who argue that an objective science of society is not possible maintain that sociology can never be free from ‘ideology’.
The term ideology refers to a set of ideas which present only a partial view of reality.
An ideological viewpoint also includes values.
It involves not only a judgment about the way things are but also the way things ought to be.
Thus ideology is a set of beliefs and values which provides a way of seeing and interpreting the world which results in a partial view of reality.
The term ideology is often used to suggest a distortion, a false picture of reality.
However there is considerable doubt whether reality and ideology can be separated.
As Nigel Harris suggests, ‘Our reality is the next man's ideology and vice versa.
Ideology can be seen as a set of beliefs and values which express the interests of a particular social group.
Marxists use the term in this way when they talk about the ideology of the ruling class.
In this sense ideology is a viewpoint which distorts reality and justifies and legitimates the position of a social group.
Karl Mannheim uses the term in a similar way.
He states that ideology consists of the beliefs and values of a ruling group which ‘obscures the real condition of society both to itself and others and thereby stabilizes it’.
Mannheim distinguishes this form of ideology from what he calls ‘utopian ideology’.
Rather than supporting the status quo, the way things are, utopian ideologies advocate a complete change in the structure of society.
Mannheim argues that such ideologies are usually found in oppressed groups whose members want radical change.
As their name suggests, utopian ideologies are based on a vision of an ideal society, a perfect social system.
Mannheim refers to them as ‘wish-images’ for a future social order.
Like the ideologies of ruling groups, he argues that utopian ideologies are a way of seeing the world which prevents true insight and obscures reality.
Mannheim's ideas will now be applied to two of the major theoretical perspectives in sociology: Marxism and functionalism.
It has often been argued that Marxism is largely based on a utopian ideology, functionalism on a ruling ideology.
Marxism contains a vision and a promise of a future ideal society — the communist utopia.
In this society the means of production are communally owned and as a result oppression and exploitation disappear.
The communist utopia provides a standard of comparison for present and past societies.
Since they inevitably fall far short of this ideal, their social arrangements will be condemned.
It has been argued that the communist utopia is not a scientific prediction but merely a projection of the ‘wish-images’ of those who adopt a Marxist position.
Utopian ideology has therefore been seen as the basis of Marxist theory.
By comparison, functionalism has often been interpreted as a form of ruling class ideology.
Where Marxism is seen to advocate radical change, functionalism is seen to justify and legitimate the status quo.
With its emphasis on order and stability, consensus and integration, functionalism appears to adopt a conservative stance.
Rapid social change is not recommended since it will disrupt social order.
The major institutions of society are justified by the belief that they are meeting the functional prerequisites of the social system.
Although functionalists have introduced the concept of ‘dysfunction’ to cover the harmful effects of parts of the system on society as a whole, the concept is rarely employed.
In practice, functionalists appear preoccupied with discovering the positive functions, the  beneficial effects of social institutions.
As a result, the term function is associated with the idea of useful and good.
This interpretation of society tends to legitimate the way things are.
Ruling class ideology has therefore been seen as the basis of functionalist theory.
It is important to note that the above interpretation of the ideological basis of Marxism and functionalism is debatable.
However, a case can be made to support the view that both perspectives are ideologically based.
This section has provided a brief introduction to the question of the relationship between sociology and values.
The relationship will be considered in detail throughout the text.
Each chapter in the main section of the book will conclude with an interpretation of the values involved in the views that are discussed.
2.
SOCIAL STRATIFICATION
Introduction
Egalitarianism
People have long dreamed of an egalitarian society, a society in which all members are equal.
In such a society people will no longer be ranked in terms of prestige.
No one will experience the satisfaction of occupying a high social status; no one will suffer the indignity of being relegated to a position which commands little respect.
No longer will high status evoke deference and admiration or envy and resentment from those in less worthy positions.
Wealth will be distributed equally amongst the population: the rich and poor, haves and have-nots will be a thing of the past.
Words such as privilege and poverty will either change their meaning or disappear from the vocabulary.
In an egalitarian society, the phrase ‘power to the people’ will become a reality.
No longer will some have power over others: positions of authority and the obedience they command will disappear.
Exploitation and oppression will be concepts of history which have no place in the description of contemporary social reality.
People will be equal both in the sight of God and in the eyes of their fellow people.
Clearly the egalitarian society remains a dream.
All human societies from the simplest to the most complex have some form of social inequality.
In , power and prestige are unequally distributed between individuals and social groups and in many societies there are also marked differences in the distribution of wealth.‘Power’ refers to the degree to which individuals or groups can impose their will on others, with or without the consent of those others.
‘Prestige’ relates to the amount of esteem or honour associated with social positions, qualities of individuals and styles of life.
‘Wealth’ refers to material possessions defined as valuable in particular societies.
It may include land, livestock, buildings, money and many other forms of property owned by individuals or social groups.
This chapter is concerned with the study of the unequal distribution of power, prestige and wealth in society.
Social inequality and social stratification
It is important at the outset to make a distinction between social inequality and social stratification.
The term ‘social inequality’ simply refers to the existence of socially created inequalities.
‘Social stratification’ is a particular form of social  inequality.
It refers to the presence of social groups which are ranked one above the other, usually in terms of the amount of power, prestige and wealth their members possess.
Those who belong to a particular group or stratum will have some awareness of common interests and a common identity.
They will share a similar life style which to some degree will distinguish them from members of other social strata.
The Indian caste system provides an example of a social stratification system.
Hindu society in traditional India was divided into five main strata: four varnas or castes, and a fifth group, the outcaste, whose members were known as untouchables.
Each caste was subdivided into jatis or subcastes, which in total number many thousands.
jatis were occupational groups — there were carpenter jatis , goldsmith jatis , potter jatis , and so on.
Castes were ranked in terms of ritual purity.
The Brahmins or priests, members of the highest caste, personified purity, sanctity and holiness.
They were the source of learning, wisdom and truth.
Only they performed the most important religious ceremonies.
At the other extreme, untouchables were defined as unclean, base and impure, a status which affected all their social relationships.
They had to perform unclean and degrading tasks such as the disposal of dead animals.
They would be segregated from members of the caste system and lived on the outskirts of villages or in their own communities.
Their presence polluted to the extent that even if the shadow of an untouchable fell across the food of a Brahmin it would render it unclean.
In general, the hierarchy of prestige based on notions of ritual purity was mirrored by the hierarchy of power.
The Brahmins were custodians of the law, and the legal system which they administered was based largely on their pronouncements.
Inequalities of wealth were usually linked to those of prestige and power.
In a largely rural economy, the Brahmins tended to be the largest landowners and the control of land was monopolized by members of the two highest castes.
Although the caste system has been made illegal in modern India, it still exercises an influence, particularly in rural areas.
As exemplified by caste, social stratification involves a hierarchy of social groups.
Members of a particular stratum have a common identity, like interests and a similar life style.
They enjoy or suffer the unequal distribution of rewards in society as members of different social groups.
Social stratification, however, is only one form of social inequality.
It is possible for social inequality to exist without social strata.
For example, some sociologists have argued that it is no longer correct to regard Western industrial society, particularly the USA, as being stratified in terms of a class system.
They suggest that social classes have been replaced by a continuous hierarchy of unequal positions.
Where there were once classes, whose members had a consciousness of kind, a common way of life and shared interests, there is now an unbroken continuum of occupational statuses which command varying degrees of prestige and economic reward.
Thus it is suggested that a hierarchy of social groups has been replaced by a hierarchy of individuals.
Although many sociologists use the terms social inequality and social stratification interchangeably, the importance of seeing social stratification as a specific form of social inequality will become apparent as the chapter develops.
Strata subcultures
Before looking at some of the major issues raised in the study of social stratification, it is necessary to examine certain aspects of stratification systems.
There is a tendency for members of each stratum to develop their own  ‘subculture’, that is certain norms, attitudes and values which are distinctive to them as a social group.
When some members of society experience similar circumstances and problems which are not common to all members, a subculture tends to develop.
For example, it has often been suggested that distinctive working-class and middle-class subcultures exist in Western industrial societies.
Similar circumstances and problems often produce similar responses.
Members of the lowest stratum in stratification systems which provide little opportunity for improvement of status tend to have a fatalistic attitude towards life.
This attitude becomes part of their subculture and is transmitted from generation to generation.
It sees circumstances as largely unchangeable; it sees luck and fate rather than individual effort as shaping life and therefore tends to encourage acceptance of the situation.
An attitude of fatalism may be seen in typical phrases from traditional low-income black American subculture such as‘I've been down so long that down don't bother me’, ‘I was born under a bad sign’ and ‘It's an uphill climb to the bottom’.
Members of a social group who share similar circumstances and a common subculture will be likely to develop a group identity.
They tend to have a consciousness of kind, a feeling of kinship with other group members.
They will therefore tend to identify with their particular stratum and regard themselves, for example, as middle or working class.
Social mobility
Strata subcultures tend to be particularly distinctive when there is little opportunity to move from one stratum to another.
This movement is known as ‘social mobility’.
Social mobility can be upward, for example moving from the working to the middle class, or downward.
Stratification systems which provide little opportunity for social mobility may be described as ‘closed’; those with a relatively high rate of social mobility as ‘open’.
In closed systems an individual's position is largely ascribed: often it is fixed at birth and there is little he or she can do to change status.
Caste provides an example of a closed stratification system: individuals automatically belonged to the caste of their parents and, except in rare instances, spent the rest of their life in that status.
By comparison, social class, the system of stratification in capitalist industrial society, provides an example of an open system.
Some sociologists claim that an individual's class position is largely achieved; it results from their personal qualities and abilities and the use they make of them rather than ascribed characteristics such as the status of their parents or the colour of their skin.
By comparison with the caste, the rate of social mobility in class systems is high.
Life chances
A person's position in a stratification system may have important effects on many areas of life.
It may enhance or reduce ‘life chances’, that is their chances of obtaining those things defined as desirable and avoiding those things defined as undesirable in their society.
Referring to Western society Gerth and Mills state that life chances include ‘Everything from the chance to stay alive during the first year after birth to the chance to view fine arts, the chance to remain healthy and grow tall, and if sick to get well again quickly, the chance to avoid becoming a juvenile delinquent and very crucially, the chance to complete an intermediary or higher educational grade’.
A comparison of blacks and whites in the USA provides an illustration of the effect of one stratification system on life chances.
Blacks and certain other ethnic minority groups form the base of the stratification system.
The rate of infant mortality among blacks is twice that of whites and the proportion of black mothers dying during childbirth is four times that for whites.
Compared to whites, blacks are less likely to acquire educational qualifications, their marriages are more likely to end in separation or divorce and they are more likely to have a criminal record.
Many sociologists would see these differences in life chances as a direct consequence of social stratification.
Social versus natural inequalities
Biology and inequality
Many stratification systems are accompanied by beliefs which state that social inequalities are biologically based.
Such beliefs are often found in systems of racial stratification where, for example, whites might claim biological superiority over blacks and see this as the basis for their dominance.
The question of the relationship between biologically based and socially created inequality has proved extremely difficult to answer.
The French philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau provided one of the earliest examinations of this question.
He refers to biologically based inequality as ‘natural or physical, because it is established by nature, and consists in a difference of age, health, bodily strength, and the qualities of the mind or the soul’.
By comparison, socially created inequality ‘consists of the different privileges which some men enjoy to the prejudice of others, such as that of being more rich, more honoured, more powerful, or even in a position to exact obedience’(quoted in Bottomore, 1965, pp. 15–16).
Rousseau believed that biologically based inequalities between people were small and relatively unimportant whereas socially created inequalities provide the major basis for systems of social stratification.
Most sociologists would support this view.
However, it could still be argued that biological inequalities, no matter how small, provide the foundation upon which structures of social inequality are built.
This position is difficult to defend in the case of certain forms of stratification.
In the caste system, an individual's status was fixed by birth.
People belonged to their parents' jati and automatically followed the occupation of the jati into which they were born.
Thus no matter what the biologically based aptitudes and capacities of an untouchable, there was no way they could become a Brahmin.
Unless it is assumed that superior genes are permanently located in the Brahmin caste (and there is no evidence that this is the case) then there is probably no relationship between genetically based and socially created inequality in traditional Hindu society.
A similar argument can be advanced in connection with the feudal or estate system of medieval Europe.
Stratification in the feudal system was based on landholding.
The more land an individual controlled, the greater his or her wealth, power and prestige.
The position of the dominant stratum, the feudal nobility, was based on large grants of land from the king.
Their status was hereditary, land and titles being passed on from father to son.
It is difficult to sustain the argument that feudal lords ultimately owed their position to biological superiority when a son, no matter what his biological make-up, inherited the status of his father!
Biology and racial inequality
The most stubborn defence of the biological argument has been provided for systems of racial stratification.
In the USA, black Americans, who make up 12% of the population, have traditionally formed a distinct social stratum at the base of the stratification system.
The majority of blacks occupied the most menial and subservient occupational statuses, being employed as agricultural labourers and as unskilled and semi-skilled manual workers in industry.
In the mid 1960s, the average income for black families was only 54% of the average for white families.
Blacks had little political power being scarcely represented in local and national government: in 1962, in the southern states, only six blacks were elected to public office.
This system of racial stratification has often been explained in terms of the supposed genetically based inferiority of blacks.
In particular, it has been argued that blacks are innately inferior to whites in terms of intelligence.
‘Scientific’ support for this view has been provided by intelligence tests which indicate that on average blacks score 15 points below whites.
However, most sociologists would argue that systems of racial stratification have a social rather than a biological basis.
They would maintain that systematic discrimination against blacks, made possible by the power of the dominant stratum, accounts for the system of racial stratification in the USA.
Thus blacks have been excluded from high status occupations because of lack of power rather than the quality of their genes.
Support for this view is provided by evidence from the 1960s to the 1980s.
During the mid 1960s, in the USA, laws were passed banning racial discrimination in areas such as employment, politics and education.
Blacks are now moving out of the lowest stratum in ever increasing numbers.
By 1988, 2,908 blacks were elected to public office in the southern states.
Although the figure is small, it represents a dramatic increase compared with a total of six elected officials in 1962.
From 1960 to 1980, the percentage of blacks employed in professional, managerial and technical occupations rose steadily and in some cases doubled.
This evidence suggests that social rather than biological mechanisms were responsible for the traditional status of blacks in the USA.
The question of the relationship between intelligence and social inequality is particularly difficult to answer.
The average intelligence quotient of blacks in America is still significantly below that of whites.
In addition, blacks are still disproportionately represented in the lower levels of the stratification system.
Since it is generally agreed that intelligence has a genetic component, can it not be argued that social inequality has a biological basis?
This question will be examined in detail in the chapter on education (see pp. 25–258).
However, a few preliminary remarks can be made to refute this view.
Firstly, intelligence is based on both genetic and environmental factors; the two are inseparable.
Thus individuals' social backgrounds will affect their performance in an IQ test, and in particular the deprivations they experience as members of a low social stratum will reduce their IQ score.
Secondly, many researchers argue that intelligence tests are based on white middle-class knowledge and skills and are therefore biased against blacks.
Thirdly, the tests measure only a small part of the range of mental abilities.
Most sociologists would therefore conclude that the social status of blacks in the USA is the result of a social rather than a biological mechanism.
Natural and cultural inequality
So far the question of what exactly constitutes biological inequality has not been answered.
It can be argued that biological differences become biological inequalities when people define them as such.
Thus Andre Beteille states that ‘Natural inequality is based on differences in quality, and qualities are not just there, so to say, in nature; they are as human beings have defined them, in different societies, in different historical epochs’.
Biological factors assume importance in many stratification systems because of the meanings assigned to them by different cultures.
For example, old age has very different meanings in different societies.
In traditional aborigine societies in Australia it brought high prestige and power since the elders directed the affairs of the tribe, but in Western societies, the elderly are usually pensioned off and old age assumes a very different meaning.
Even with a change of name to senior citizen, the status of old age pensioner commands little power or prestige (although in the 1980s some ‘seniors’ in the USA formed organizations such as AARP which could wield great power).
So-called racial characteristics are evaluated on the basis of similar principles, that is values which are relative to time and place.
The physical characteristics of blacks in America were traditionally defined as undesirable and associated with a range of negative qualities.
However, with the rise of Black Power during the late 1 960s, this evaluation was slowly changed with slogans such as‘Black is beautiful’.
It can therefore be argued that biological differences become biological inequalities only to the extent that they are defined as such.
They form a component of some social stratification systems simply because members of those systems select certain characteristics and evaluate them in a particular way.
Andre Beteille argues that the search for a biological basis for social stratification is bound to end in failure since the ‘identification as well as the gradation of qualities is a cultural and not a natural process’.
Beliefs which state that systems of social stratification are based on biological inequalities can be seen as rationalizations for those systems.
Such beliefs serve to explain the system to its members: they make social inequality appear rational and reasonable.
They therefore justify and legitimate the system by appeals to nature.
In this way a social contrivance appears to be founded on the natural order of things.
SOCIAL STRATIFICATION-A FUNCTIONALIST PERSPECTIVE
Functionalist theories of stratification must be seen in the context of functionalist theories of society.
When functionalists attempt to explain systems of social stratification, they set their explanations in the framework of larger theories which seek to explain the operation of society as a whole.
They assume that society has certain basic needs or functional prerequisites which must be met if it is to survive.
They therefore look to social stratification to see how far it meets these functional prerequisites.
They assume that the parts of society form an integrated whole and thus examine the ways in which the social stratification system is  integrated with other parts of society.
Functionalists maintain that a certain degree of order and stability is essential for the operation of social systems.
They will therefore consider how stratification systems help to maintain order and stability in society.
In summary, functionalists are primarily concerned with the function of social stratification: with its contribution to the maintenance and well-being of society.
Talcott Parsons — stratification and values
Like many functionalists, Talcott Parsons believes that order, stability and cooperation in society are based on value consensus, that is a general agreement by members of society concerning what is good and worthwhile.
Parsons argues that stratification systems derive from common values.
It follows from the existence of values that individuals will be evaluated and therefore placed in some form of rank order.
In Parsons's words, ‘Stratification, in its valuational aspect, then, is the ranking of units in a social system in accordance with the common value system’.
Thus those who perform successfully in terms of society's values will be ranked highly and they will be likely to receive a variety of rewards.
At a minimum they will be accorded high prestige since they exemplify and personify common values.
For example, if a society places a high value on bravery and generosity, as in the case of the Sioux Indians, those who excel in terms of these qualities will receive a high rank in the stratification system.
The Sioux warrior who successfully raids the Crow and Pawnee, the traditional enemies of his tribe, captures horses and distributes them to others, may receive a variety of rewards.
He may be given a seat on the tribal council, a position of power and prestige.
His deeds will be recounted in the warrior societies and the squaws will sing of his exploits.
Other warriors will follow him in raids against neighbouring tribes and the success of these expeditions may lead to his appointment as a war chief.
In this way excellence in terms of Sioux values is rewarded by power and prestige.
Since different societies have different value systems, the ways of attaining a high position will vary from society to society.
Parsons argues that American society values individual achievement, efficiency and ‘puts primary emphasis on productive activity within the economy’.
Thus successful business executives who have achieved their position through their own initiative, ability and ambition, and run efficient and productive businesses, will receive high rewards.
Parsons's argument suggests that stratification is an inevitable part of all human societies.
If value consensus is an essential component of all societies, then it follows that some form of stratification will result from the ranking of individuals in terms of common values.
It also follows from Parsons's argument that there is a general belief that stratification systems are just, right and proper, since they are basically an expression of shared values.
Thus American business executives are seen to deserve their rewards because members of society place a high value on their skills and achievements.
This is not to say there is no conflict between the haves and have-nots, the highly rewarded and those who receive little reward.
Parsons recognizes that in Western industrial society ‘There will be certain tendencies to arrogance on the part of some winners and to resentment and to a ‘sour grapes’ attitude on the part of some losers'.
However, he believes that this conflict is kept in check by the common value system which justifies the unequal distribution of rewards.
Organization and planning
Functionalists tend to see the relationship between social groups in society as one of cooperation and interdependence.
Particularly in complex industrial societies, different groups specialize in particular activities.
As no one group is self-sufficient it cannot meet the needs of its members.
It must, therefore, exchange goods and services with other groups, and so the relationship between social groups is one of reciprocity.
This relationship extends to the strata in a stratification system.
To present an oversimplified example, it can be argued that many occupational groups within the middle class in Western society plan, organize and coordinate the activities of the working class.
Each class needs and cooperates with the other since any large-scale task requires both organization and execution.
In societies with a highly specialized division of labour, such as industrial societies, some members will specialize in organization and planning, others will follow their directives.
Talcott Parsons argues that this inevitably leads to inequality in terms of power and prestige.
Referring to Western society, he states that ‘Organization on an ever increasing scale is a fundamental feature of such a system.
Such organization naturally involves centralization and differentiation of leadership and authority; so that those who take responsibility for coordinating the actions of many others must have a different status in important respects from those who are essentially in the role of carrying out specifications laid down by others’.
Thus those with the power to organize and coordinate the activities of others will have a higher social status than those they direct.
Power
As with prestige differentials, Parsons argues that inequalities of power are based on shared values.
Power is legitimate authority in that it is generally accepted as just and proper by members of society as a whole.
It is accepted as such because those in positions of authority use their power to pursue collective goals which derive from society's central values.
Thus the power of the American business executive is seen as legitimate authority because it is used to further productivity, a goal shared by all members of society.
This use of power therefore serves the interests of society as a whole.
Summary and evaluation
Parsons sees social stratification as both inevitable and functional for society.
It is inevitable because it derives from shared values which are a necessary part of all social systems.
It is functional because it serves to integrate various groups in society.
Power and prestige differentials are essential for the coordination and integration of a specialized division of labour.
Without social inequality, Parsons finds it difficult to see how members of society could effectively cooperate and work together.
Finally, inequalities of power and prestige benefit all members of society since they serve to further collective goals which are based on shared values.
Parsons has been strongly criticized on all these points.
Other sociologists have seen stratification as a divisive rather than an integrating force.
They have seen it as an arrangement whereby some gain at the expense of others.
They have questioned the view that stratification systems derive ultimately from shared values.
These criticisms will be examined in detail in later sections.
Kingsley Davis and Wilbert E. Moore — role allocation and performance
The most famous functionalist theory of stratification was first presented in 1945, in an article by the American sociologists Davis and Moore entitled,Some Principles of Stratification .
Davis and Moore begin with the observation that stratification exists in every known human society.
They attempt to explain ‘in functional terms, the universal necessity which calls forth stratification in any social system’.
They argue that all social systems share certain functional prerequisites which must be met if the system is to survive and operate efficiently.
One such functional prerequisite is effective role allocation and performance.
This means that firstly, all roles must be filled, secondly that they be filled by those best able to perform them, thirdly that the necessary training for them be undertaken and fourthly that the roles be performed conscientiously.
Davis and Moore argue that all societies need some mechanism for insuring effective role allocation and performance.
This mechanism is social stratification, which they see as a system which attaches unequal rewards and privileges to the different positions in society.
If the people and positions which make up society did not differ in important respects there would be no need for stratification.
However, people differ in terms of their innate ability and talent, and positions differ in terms of their importance for the survival and maintenance of society.
Certain positions are more ‘functionally important’ than others.
They require special skills for their effective performance and there are a limited number of individuals with the necessary ability to acquire such skills.
A major function of stratification is to match the most able people with the functionally most important positions.
It does this by attaching high rewards to those positions.
The desire for such rewards motivates people to compete for them and in theory the most talented will win through.
Such positions usually require long periods of training which involve certain sacrifices such as loss of income.
The promise of high rewards is necessary to provide an incentive to encourage people to undergo this training and to compensate them for the sacrifice involved.
It is essential for the well-being of society that those who hold the functionally most important positions perform their roles diligently and conscientiously.
The high rewards built into these positions provide the necessary inducement and generate the required motivation for such performance.
Thus Davis and Moore conclude that social stratification is a ‘device by which societies insure that the most important positions are conscientiously filled by the most qualified persons’.
Functional importance
Davis and Moore realize that one difficulty with their theory is to show clearly which positions are functionally most important.
The fact that a position is highly rewarded does not necessarily mean it is functionally important.
They suggest that the importance of a position can be measured in two ways.
Firstly by the ‘degree to which a position is functionally unique, there being no other positions that can perform the same function satisfactorily’.
Thus it could be argued that a doctor is functionally more important than a nurse since his or her position carries with it many of the skills necessary to perform a nurse's role but not vice versa.
The second measure of importance is the ‘degree to which other positions  are dependent on the one in question’.
Thus it may be argued that managers are more important than routine office staff since the latter are dependent on direction and organization from management.
To summarize, Davis and Moore regard social stratification as a ‘functional necessity’ for all societies.
They see it as a solution to a problem faced by all social systems, that of ‘placing and motivating individuals in the social structure’.
They offer no other means of solving this problem and imply that social inequality is an inevitable feature of human society.
They conclude that differential rewards are functional for society, that they contribute to the maintenance and well-being of social systems.
Melvin M. Tumin — a critique of Davis and Moore
Davis and Moore's view provoked a long debate.
Tumin, their most famous opponent, has produced a comprehensive criticism of their theory.
He begins by questioning the adequacy of their measurement of the functional importance of positions.
Davis and Moore have tended to assume that the most highly rewarded positions are indeed the most important.
However, many occupations which afford little prestige or economic reward can be seen as vital to society.
Thus, Tumin argues that ‘some labour force of unskilled workmen is as important and as indispensable to the factory as some labour force of engineers’.
In fact a number of sociologists have argued that there is no objective way of measuring the functional importance of positions.
Whether one considers lawyers and doctors as more important than farm labourers and refuse collectors is simply a matter of opinion.
Power and rewards
Tumin argues that Davis and Moore have ignored the influence of power on the unequal distribution of rewards.
Thus differences in pay and prestige between occupational groups may be due to differences in their power rather than their functional importance.
For example, the difference between the wages of farm labourers and coal miners can be interpreted as a result of the bargaining power of the two groups.
This point will be examined in detail in later sections.
The pool of talent
Davis and Moore assume that only a limited number of individuals have the talent to acquire the skills necessary for the functionally most important positions.
Tumin regards this as a very questionable assumption.
Firstly, as the chapter on education will indicate, an effective method of measuring talent and ability has yet to be devised.
Secondly, there is no proof that exceptional talents are required for those positions which Davis and Moore consider important.
Thirdly, the chapter on education will suggest that the pool of talent in society may be considerably larger than Davis and Moore assume.
As a result, unequal rewards may not be necessary to harness it.
Training
Tumin also questions the view that the training required for important positions should be regarded as a sacrifice and therefore in need of compensation.
He  points to the rewards of being a student — leisure, freedom and the opportunity for self-development.
He notes that any loss of earnings can usually be made up during the first ten years of work.
Differential rewards during this period may be justified.
However, Tumin sees no reason for continuing this compensation for the rest of an individual's working life.
Motivation
According to Davis and Moore, the major function of unequal rewards is to motivate talented individuals and allocate them to the functionally most important positions.
Tumin rejects this view.
He argues that social stratification can, and often does, act as a barrier to the motivation and recruitment of talent.
This is readily apparent in closed systems such as caste and racial stratification: the ascribed status of untouchables prevented even the most talented from becoming Brahmins.
Until recently, the ascribed status of blacks in the USA blocked all but a handful from political office and highly rewarded occupations.
Thus closed stratification systems operate in exactly the opposite way to Davis and Moore's theory.
Tumin suggests, however, that even relatively open systems of stratification erect barriers to the motivation and recruitment of talent.
As the chapter on education will show, there is considerable evidence to indicate that the class system in Western industrial society limits the possibilities of the discovery and utilization of talent.
In general, the lower an individual's class position, the more likely he or she is to leave school at the minimum leaving age and the less likely to aspire and strive for a highly rewarded position.
Thus the motivation to succeed is unequally distributed throughout the class system.
As a result social class can act as an obstacle to the motivation of talent.
In addition, Tumin argues that Davis and Moore have failed to consider the possibility that those who occupy highly rewarded positions will erect barriers to recruitment.
Occupational groups often use their power to restrict access to their positions, so creating a high demand for their services and increasing the rewards they receive.
Tumin claims that the American Medical Association has been guilty of this practice.
By its control of entry into the profession, it has maintained a shortage of doctors and so ensured high rewards for medical services.
In this way the self-interested use of power can restrict the recruitment of talented individuals to highly rewarded positions.
Inequality of opportunity
Tumin concludes that stratification, by its very nature, can never adequately perform the functions which Davis and Moore assign to it.
He argues that those born into the lower strata can never have the same opportunities for realizing their talents as those born into the higher strata.
Tumin maintains that ‘It is only when there is a genuinely equal access to recruitment and training for all potentially talented persons that differential rewards can conceivably be justified as functional.
And stratification systems are apparently inherently antagonistic to the development of such full equality of opportunity’.
Social divisions
Finally, Tumin questions the view that social stratification functions to integrate the social system.
He argues that differential rewards can ‘encourage hostility, suspicion and distrust among the various segments of a society’.
From this viewpoint, stratification is a divisive rather than an integrating force.
Stratification can also weaken social integration by giving members of the lower strata a feeling of being excluded from participation in the larger society.
This is particularly apparent in systems of racial stratification.
For example, the saying ‘On the outside looking in’, is a typical phrase from traditional black American subculture.
By tending to exclude certain groups from full participation in society, stratification ‘serves to distribute loyalty unequally in the population’ and therefore reduces the potential for social solidarity.
Tumin concludes that in their enthusiastic search for the positive functions of stratification, the functionalists have tended to ignore or play down its many dysfunctions.
Michael Young — meritocracy
Many of the criticisms of Davis and Moore's views have been based on evidence which indicates that no stratification system operates as their theory argues.
Even in the relatively open systems of Western industrial societies, there is considerable evidence to suggest that large numbers of able and talented individuals remain in the lower strata.
Research has also indicated that many members of the upper strata owe their position primarily to the fact that they have been born into those strata and have capitalized on the advantages provided by their social background.
In a brilliant satire entitled The Rise of the Meritocracy , Michael Young imagines a future British society in which talent and social roles would be perfectly matched, in which the most able individuals would fill the functionally most important positions.
Social status would be achieved on the basis of merit in a society where all members have an equal opportunity to realize their talents.
Following Michael Young's usage of the term, such a system of role allocation has come to be known as a ‘meritocracy’.
The dysfunctions of a meritocracy
Despite removing the most obvious criticism of Davis and Moore's theory, Young questions the proposition that a stratification system based on meritocratic principles would be functional for society.
He notes the following dysfunctional possibilities.
Firstly, members of the lower strata may become totally demoralized.
In all previous stratification systems they have been able to divert blame from themselves for their lowly status by providing reasons for their failure.
They could claim that they never had the opportunity to be successful whereas those who filled the top jobs owed their position to their relatives, friends and the advantages of birth.
However, in a meritocracy, those at the bottom are clearly inferior.
As a result they may become demoralized since, as Young states, ‘Men who have lost their self-respect are liable to lose their inner vitality’.
Since all members of a meritocracy are socialized to compete for the top jobs and instilled with ambition, failure could be particularly frustrating.
Young argues that ‘When ambition is crossed with stupidity it may do nothing besides foster frustration’.
In a meritocracy, talent and ability are efficiently syphoned out of the lower strata.
As a result these groups are in a particularly vulnerable position because they have no able members to represent their interests.
Members of the upper strata in a meritocracy deserve their position; their privileges are based on merit.
In the past they had a degree of self-doubt because many realized that they owed their position to factors other than merit.
Since they could recognize ‘intelligence, wit and wisdom’ in members of the lower strata, they appreciated that their social inferiors were at least their equal in certain respects.
As a result they would accord the lower orders some respect and the arrogance which high status tends to encourage would be tempered with a degree of humility.
All this may change in a meritocracy.
Social inferiors really are inferior, those who occupy the top positions are  undoubtably superior.
Young argues that this may result in an upper stratum free from self-doubt and the restraining influence of humility.
Its members may rule society with arrogance and haughty self-assurance.
They may despise the lower strata whose members may well find such behaviour offensive.
This may result in conflict between the ruling minority and the rest of society.
Although Young's picture of a meritocracy is fictional, it indicates many of the possible dysfunctional elements of such a system.
It suggests that a society based on meritocratic principles may not be well integrated.
It indicates that a stratification system which operates in this way may, on balance, be dysfunctional.
Young's ideas are important because they cast serious doubt on liberal views of a just society.
As the chapter on education will illustrate, many liberal and social democratic reforms have aimed to create greater equality of opportunity, to give every member of society an equal chance of becoming unequal.
Michael Young's picture of a fully operative meritocracy suggests that the dream of a fair and just society of this type may produce a far from perfect reality.
Eva Rosenfeld — is stratification inevitable?
So far, criticism of functionalist theories has been concerned with the view that stratification is functional.
This section turns to the functionalists' claim that stratification is inevitable.
The chapter began by posing the possibility of an egalitarian society, a society without social inequality.
An example of one attempt to translate this idea into reality is provided by the Israeli kibbutzim system.
In Israel about 4% of the population live in some 240 kibbutzim.
These communities have an average population of between 200 and 700 and an economic base of agriculture plus some light industry.
Many kibbutzim are founded on the Marxist principle of ‘from everyone according to ability — to everyone according to need’, the guiding ideal being the creation of an egalitarian society.
Property such as machinery, buildings and produce is communally owned.
Commodities such as clothing, shoes and toiletries are distributed to members according to their need.
Services such as cooking, laundry and the education of children are freely available to all.
Wages as such and therefore wage differentials do not exist in many kibbutzim.
Stratification in terms of wealth is thus absent.
All major decisions are taken by a general assembly in which each adult member of a kibbutz has the right to vote.
It would therefore appear that power to the people has become a reality.
Inequality in kibbutzim
Despite these arrangements designed to create an egalitarian society, social inequality exists in the kibbutzim.
From her research, Eva Rosenfeld had identified two distinct social strata which are clearly recognized by members.
The upper stratum is made up of ‘leader-managers’, who are elected by members of the kibbutz and are responsible for the day-to-day running of the community.
The lower stratum consists of the ‘rank and file’, the agricultural labourers and machine operatives.
Authority and prestige are not equally distributed.
The right to organize and direct the activities of others is built into the role of leader-manager.
In addition the status itself carries high prestige: Rosenfeld notes that leader-managers are ‘respected for their contribution to the communal enterprise as leaders, organizers, managers of farms and shops’.
Rosenfeld also identifies an ‘unequal distribution of seemingly crucial emotional gratifications’.
Managers obtain more satisfaction from their work than the rank and file.
In the words of one old-timer, members of the rank and file sometimes ask, ‘What the hell am I breaking my neck for?
What do I get out of this?’
There is evidence of a conflict of interest between the two strata.
Managers call for ‘ever greater effort and self-sacrifice’ whereas the rank and file are often apathetic to such exhortations and concerned with more immediate rises in their living standards.
Managers are sometimes accused of not knowing ‘what kibbutz life tastes like’ while they in turn sometimes accuse the rank and file of insufficient effort and failing to appreciate the long-term goals of the kibbutz.
Rosenfeld's study seems to lend some support to the functionalist view that social stratification, at least in terms of power and prestige, is inevitable in human society.
The position of leader-manager in the kibbutz carries authority, and commands high prestige.
This seems to support Parsons's claim that any division of labour requires an authority structure to organize and coordinate the various tasks involved.
Parsons also maintains that in order to operate effectively, those in positions of authority must have more prestige than those over whom they exercise authority.
Egalitarian communities
Some commentators have questioned, though, whether kibbutzim can be seen as a serious attempt to produce an egalitarian society.
In particular they have been seen as a system of colonization, and as institutions designed to ensure the military dominance of Israel over the indigenous Palestinian population.
It is difficult to point to any experiments in egalitarian social life which have abolished stratification, and have survived for any length of time.
This does not, however, prove that social stratification is inevitable.
Simply because the egalitarian society has yet to become a reality does not mean that it is not possible.
SOCIAL STRATIFICATION-A MARXIST PERSPECTIVE
Marxist perspectives provide a radical alternative to functionalist views of the nature of social stratification.
They regard stratification as a divisive rather than an integrative structure.
They see it as a mechanism whereby some exploit others rather than a means of furthering collective goals.
They focus on social strata rather than social inequality in general.
Functionalists such as Parsons and Davis and Moore say little about social stratification in the sense of clearly defined social strata whose members have shared interests.
However, this view of social stratification is central to Marxist theory.
Marx's views will first be briefly summarized and then examined in more detail.
Classes
In all stratified societies, there are two major social groups: a ruling class and a subject class.
The power of the ruling class derives from its ownership and control of the means of production.
The ruling class exploits and oppresses the subject class.
As a result, there is a basic conflict of interest between the two classes.
The various institutions of society, such as the legal and political systems, are instruments of ruling class domination and serve to further its interests.
Only when the means of production are communally owned will classes disappear, thereby bringing an end to the exploitation and oppression of some by others.
From a Marxist perspective, systems of stratification derive from the relationships of social groups to the means of production.
Marx used the term ‘class’ to refer to the main strata in all stratification systems, though most modern sociologists would reserve the term for strata in capitalist society.
From a Marxist view, a class is a social group whose members share the same relationship to the means of production.
Thus during the feudal epoch, there are two main classes distinguished by their relationship to land, the crucial part of the means of production in an agricultural society.
They are the feudal nobility who own the land, and the landless serfs who work the land.
Similarly, in the capitalist era, there are two main classes: the ‘bourgeoisie’ or capitalist class which owns the means of production, and the ‘proletariat’or working class whose members own only their labour which they hire to the bourgeoisie in return for wages.
Classes and historical epochs
Marx believed that Western society had developed through four main epochs: primitive communism, ancient society, feudal society and capitalist society.
Primitive communism is represented by the societies of prehistory and provides the only example of a classless society.
From then on, all societies are divided into two major classes: masters and slaves in ancient society, lords and serfs in feudal society and capitalists and wage labourers in capitalist society.
During each historical epoch, the labour power required for production was supplied by the subject class, that is by slaves, serfs and wage labourers respectively.
The subject class is made up of the majority of the population whereas the ruling or dominant class forms a minority.
The relationship between the two major classes will be discussed shortly.
Classes did not exist during the era of primitive communism when societies were based on a socialist mode of production.
In a hunting and gathering band, the earliest form of human society, the land and its products were communally owned.
The men hunted and the women gathered plant food, and the produce was shared by members of the band.
Classes did not exist since all members of society shared the same relationship to the means of production.
Every member was both producer and owner, all provided labour power and shared the products  of their labour.
Hunting and gathering is a subsistence economy which means that production only meets basic survival needs.
Classes emerge when the productive capacity of society expands beyond the level required for subsistence.
This occurs when agriculture becomes the dominant mode of production.
In an agricultural economy, only a section of society is needed to produce the food requirements of the whole society.
Thus many individuals are freed from food production and are able to specialize in other tasks.
The rudimentary division of labour of the hunting and gathering band was replaced by an increasingly more complex and specialized division.
For example, in the early agricultural villages, some individuals became full-time producers of pottery, clothing and agricultural implements.
As agriculture developed, surplus wealth, that is goods above the basic subsistence needs of the community, was produced.
This led to an exchange of goods and trading developed rapidly both within and between communities.
This was accompanied by the development of a system of private property.
Goods were increasingly seen as commodities or articles of trade to which the individual rather than the community had right of ownership.
Private property and the accumulation of surplus wealth form the basis for the development of class societies.
In particular, they provide the preconditions for the emergence of a class of producers and a class of non-producers.
Some people are able to acquire the means of production and others are therefore obliged to work for them.
The result is a class of non-producers which owns the means of production and a class of producers which owns only its labour power.
Dependency and conflict
From a Marxist perspective, the relationship between the major social classes is one of mutual dependence and conflict.
Thus in capitalist society, the bourgeoisie and proletariat are dependent upon each other.
The wage labourers must sell their labour power in order to survive since they do not own a part of the means of production and lack the means to produce goods independently.
They are, therefore, dependent for their livelihood on the capitalists and the wages they offer.
The capitalists, as non-producers, are dependent on the labour power of wage labourers, since without it, there would be no production.
However, the mutual dependency of the two classes is not a relationship of equal or symmetrical reciprocity.
Instead, it is a relationship of exploiter and exploited, oppressor and oppressed.
In particular, the ruling class gains at the expense of the subject class and there is therefore a conflict of interest between them.
This may be illustrated by Marx's view of the nature of ownership and production in capitalist society.
The capitalist economy and exploitation
The basic characteristics of a capitalist economy may be summarized as follows.
‘Capital’ may be defined as money used to finance the production of commodities for private gain.
In a capitalist economy goods, and the labour power, raw materials and machinery used to produce them, are given a monetary value.
The capitalists invest their capital in the production of goods.
Capital is accumulated by selling those goods at a value greater than their cost of production.
In Raymond Aron's words, ‘The essence of capitalist exchange is to proceed from money to money by way of commodity and end up with more money than one had  at the outset’.
Capitalism therefore involves the investment of capital in the production of commodities with the aim of maximizing profit.
Capital is privately owned by a minority, the capitalist class.
However, in Marx's view, it is gained from the exploitation of the mass of the population, the working class.
Marx argued that capital, as such, produces nothing.
Only labour produces wealth.
Yet the wages paid to the workers for their labour are well below the value of the goods they produce.
The difference between the value of wages and commodities is known as ‘surplus value’.
This surplus value is appropriated in the form of profit by the capitalists.
Since they are non-producers, the bourgeoisie are therefore exploiting the proletariat, the real producers of wealth.
Marx maintained that in all class societies, the ruling class exploits and oppresses the subject class.
Power and the superstructure
From a Marxist perspective political power derives from economic power.
The power of the ruling class therefore stems from its ownership and control of the means of production.
Since the superstructure of society — the major institutions, values and belief systems — is seen to be largely shaped by the economic infrastructure, the relations of production will be reproduced in the superstructure.
Therefore the dominance of the ruling class in the relations of production will be reflected in the superstructure.
In particular, the political and legal systems will reflect ruling class interests since, in Marx's words, ‘The existing relations of production between individuals must necessarily express themselves also as political and legal relations’.
For instance, the various ownership rights of the capitalist class will be enshrined in and protected by the laws of the land.
Thus the various parts of the superstructure can be seen as instruments of ruling class domination and as mechanisms for the oppression of the subject class.
In the same way, the position of the dominant class is supported by beliefs and values which are systematically generated by the infrastructure.
As noted in the previous chapter, Marx refers to the dominant concepts of class societies as ‘ruling class ideology’ since they justify and legitimate ruling class domination and project a distorted picture of reality.
For example, the emphasis on freedom in capitalist society, illustrated by phrases such as ‘the free market’, ‘free democratic societies’ and ‘the free world’, is an illusion which disguises the wage slavery of the proletariat.
Ruling class ideology produces ‘false class consciousness’, a false picture of the nature of the relationship between social classes.
Members of both classes tend to accept the status quo as normal and natural and are largely unaware of the true nature of exploitation and oppression.
In this way the conflict of interest between the classes is disguised and a degree of social stability produced, but the basic contradictions and conflicts of class societies remain unresolved.
Class and social change
Class struggle
Marx believed that the class struggle was the driving force of social change.
He states that ‘The history of all societies up to the present is the history of the class struggle’.
A new historical epoch is created by the development of superior forces  of production by a new social group.
These developments take place within the framework of the previous era.
The merchants and industrialists who spearheaded the rise of capitalism emerged during the feudal era.
They accumulated capital, laid the foundations for industrial manufacture, factory production and the system of wage labour, all of which were essential components of capitalism.
The superiority of the capitalist mode of production led to a rapid transformation of the structure of society.
The capitalist class became dominant, and although the feudal  aristocracy maintained aspects of its power well into the nineteenth century, it was fighting a losing battle.
The class struggles of history have been between minorities.
Capitalism, for instance, developed from the struggle between the feudal aristocracy and the emerging capitalist class, both groups in numerical terms forming a minority of the population.
Major changes in history have involved the replacement of one form of private property by another and of one type of production technique by another: capitalism involved the replacement of privately owned land and an agricultural economy by privately owned capital and an industrial economy.
Marx believed that the class struggle which would transform capitalist society would involve none of these processes.
The protagonists would be the bourgeoisie and the proletariat, a minority versus a majority.
Private property would be replaced by communally owned property.
Industrial manufacture would remain as the basic technique of production in the society which would replace capitalism.
Marx believed that the basic contradictions contained in a capitalist economic system would lead to its eventual destruction.
The proletariat would overthrow the bourgeoisie and seize the means of production, the source of power.
Property would be communally owned and, since all members of society would now share the same relationship to the means of production, a classless society would result.
Since history is the history of the class struggle, history would now end.
The communist society which replaces capitalism will contain no contradictions, no conflicts of interest, and will therefore be unchanging.
However, before the dawning of this utopia, certain changes must occur.
Class consciousness
Marx distinguished between a ‘class in itself’ and a ‘class for itself’.
A class in itself is simply a social group whose members share the same relationship to the means of production.
Marx argues that a social group only fully becomes a class when it becomes a class for itself.
At this stage its members have class consciousness and class solidarity.
Class consciousness means that false class consciousness has been replaced by a full awareness of the true situation, by a realization of the nature of exploitation.
Members of a class develop a common identity, recognize their shared interests and unite, so producing class solidarity.
The final stage of class consciousness and class solidarity is reached when members realize that only by collective action can they overthrow the ruling class and when they take positive steps to do so.
Marx believed that the following aspects of capitalist society would eventually lead to the proletariat developing into a class for itself.
Firstly capitalist society is by its very nature unstable.
It is based on contradictions and antagonisms which can only be resolved by its transformation.
In particular, the conflict of interest between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat cannot be resolved  within the framework of a capitalist economy.
The basic conflict of interest involves the exploitation of workers by the capitalists.
Marx believed that this contradiction would be highlighted by a second: the contradiction between social production and individual ownership.
As capitalism developed, the workforce was increasingly concentrated in large factories where production was a social enterprise.
Social production juxtaposed with individual ownership illuminates the exploitation of the proletariat.
Social production also makes it easier for workers to organize themselves against the capitalists.
It facilitates communication and encourages a recognition of common circumstances and interests.
Polarization of the classes
Apart from the basic contradictions of capitalist society, Marx believed that certain factors in the natural development of a capitalist economy will hasten its downfall.
These factors will result in the polarization of the two main classes.
Firstly the increasing use of machinery will result in a homogeneous working class.
Since ‘machinery obliterates the differences in labour’ members of the proletariat will become increasingly similar.
The differences between skilled, semi-skilled and unskilled workers will tend to disappear as machines remove the skill required in the production of commodities.
Secondly, the difference in wealth between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat will increase as the accumulation of capital proceeds.
Even though the real wages and living standards of the proletariat may rise, its members will become poorer in relation to the bourgeoisie.
This process is known as ‘pauperization’.
Thirdly, the competitive nature of capitalism means that only the largest and most wealthy companies will survive and prosper.
Competition will depress the intermediate strata, those groups lying between the two main classes, into the proletariat.
Thus the ‘petty bourgeoisie’, the owners of small businesses, will ‘sink into the proletariat’.
At the same time the surviving companies will grow larger and capital will be concentrated into fewer hands.
These three processes — the obliteration of the differences in labour, the pauperization of the working class and the depression of the intermediate strata into the proletariat — will result in the polarization of the two major classes.
Marx believed he could observe the process of polarization in nineteenth-century Britain when he wrote ‘Society as a whole is more and more splitting into two great hostile camps…bourgeoisie and proletariat’.
Now the battle lines were clearly drawn: Marx hoped that the proletarian revolution would shortly follow and the communist utopia of his dreams would finally become a reality.
Marx's work on class has been examined in detail for the following reasons.
Firstly, many sociologists claim that his theory still provides the best explanation of the nature of class in capitalist society.
Secondly much of the research on class has been inspired by ideas and questions raised by Marx.
Thirdly, many of the concepts of class analysis introduced by Marx have proved useful to Marxists and non-Marxists alike.
And, as T.B.
Bottomore writing in 1965 noted, ‘For the past eighty years Marx's theory has been the object of unrelenting criticism and tenacious defence’.
This observation remains true today.
SOCIAL STRATIFICATION-A WEBERIAN PERSPECTIVE
The work of the German sociologist Max Weber (1864–1920) represents one of the most important developments in stratification theory since Marx.
Weber believes that social stratification results from a struggle for scarce resources in society.
Although he sees this struggle as being primarily concerned with economic resources, it can also involve struggles for prestige and for political power.
Market situation
Like Marx, Weber sees class in economic terms.
He argues that classes develop in market economies in which individuals compete for economic gain.
He defines a class as a group of individuals who share a similar position in a market economy and by virtue of that fact receive similar economic rewards.
Thus in Weber's terminology, a person's ‘class situation’ is basically their ‘market situation’.
Those who share a similar class situation also share similar life chances.
Their economic position will directly affect their chances of obtaining those things defined as desirable in their society, for example access to higher education and good quality housing.
Like Marx, Weber argues that the major class division is between those who own the forces of production and those who do not.
Thus those who have substantial property holdings will receive the highest economic rewards and enjoy superior life chances.
However, Weber sees important differences in the market situation of the propertyless groups in society.
In particular the various skills and services offered by different occupations have differing market values.
For instance, in capitalist society, managers, administrators and professionals receive relatively high salaries because of the demand for their services.
Weber distinguished the following class groupings in capitalist society:
1
The propertied upper class
2
The propertyless white-collar workers
3
The petty bourgeoisie
4
The manual working class.
In his analysis of class, Weber has parted company with Marx on a number of important issues.
1 Factors other than the ownership or non-ownership of property are significant in the formation of classes.
In particular, the market value of the skills of the propertyless varies and the resulting differences in economic return are sufficient to produce different social classes.
2 Weber sees no evidence to support the idea of the polarization of classes.
Although he sees some decline in the numbers of the petty bourgeoisie (the small property owners) due to competition from large companies, he argues that they enter white-collar or skilled manual trades rather than being depressed into the ranks of unskilled manual workers.
More importantly, Weber argues that the white-collar ‘middle class’ expands rather than contracts as capitalism  develops.
He maintains that capitalist enterprises and the modern nation state require a ‘rational’ bureaucratic administration which involves large numbers of administrators and clerical staff.
(Weber's views on bureaucratic administration are outlined in Chapter 7, pp. 406–411).
Thus Weber sees a diversification of classes and an expansion of the white-collar middle class rather than a polarization.
3 Weber rejects the view, held by some Marxists, of the inevitability of the proletarian revolution.
He sees no reason why those sharing a similar class situation should necessarily develop a common identity, recognize shared interests and take collective action to further those interests.
For example, Weber suggests that individual manual workers who are dissatisfied with their class situation may respond in a variety of ways.
They may grumble, work to rule, sabotage industrial machinery, take strike action or attempt to organize other members of their class in an effort to overthrow capitalism.
Weber admits that a common market situation may provide a basis for collective class action but he sees this only as a possibility.
4 Weber rejects the Marxist view that political power necessarily derives from economic power.
He argues that class forms only one possible basis for power and that the distribution of power in society is not necessarily linked to the distribution of class inequalities.
Status situation
While class forms one possible basis for group formation, collective action and the acquisition of political power, Weber argues that there are other bases for these activities.
In particular, groups form because their members share a similar ‘status situation’.
Whereas class refers to the unequal distribution of economic rewards, status refers to the unequal distribution of ‘social honour’.
Occupations, ethnic and religious groups, and most importantly styles of life are accorded differing degrees of prestige or esteem by members of society.
A status group is made up of individuals who are awarded a similar amount of social honour and therefore share the same status situation.
Unlike classes, members of status groups are almost always aware of their common status situation.
They share a similar life style, identify with and feel they belong to their status group and often place restrictions on the ways in which outsiders may interact with them.
Weber argues that status groups reach their most developed form in the caste system of traditional Hindu society in India.
Castes and sub-castes were formed and distinguished largely in terms of social honour; life styles were sharply differentiated and accorded varying degrees of prestige.
Social closure
Castes also provide a good example of the process described by Weber as ‘social closure’.
Social closure involves the exclusion of some people from membership of a status group.
In the caste system social closure is achieved through prohibitions which prevent members of a caste from marrying outside their caste.
The caste system is an extreme example of social closure since the exclusion of outsiders from the status group is so complete.
Other status groups erect less formidable barriers to entry.
In modern Britain studies of ‘elite self-recruitment’ suggest that certain types of job, such as senior positions in the Civil Service, are usually filled by those who have attended public  school.
Although individuals who went to state schools have some chance of entering these jobs, public school educated elites largely reserve such positions for themselves and their children's group.
(For details of elite self-recruitment see pp. 139–42.)
Class and status groups
In many societies class and status situations are closely linked.
Weber notes that ‘Property as such is not always recognized as a status qualification, but in the long run it is, and with extraordinary regularity’.
However, those who share the same class situation will not necessarily belong to the same status group.
For example the nouveaux riches (the newly rich) are sometimes excluded from the status groups of the privileged because their tastes, manners and dress are defined as vulgar.
Status groups may create divisions within classes.
In a study of Banbury, conducted in the 1950s, Margaret Stacey found that members of the manual working class distinguished three status groups within that class: the ‘respectable working class’, the ‘ordinary working class’ and the ‘rough working class’.
Economic factors influenced the formation of these groups — for example the ‘roughs’ were often in the lowest income bracket — but they did not determine status since the income of many ‘roughs’was similar to that of members of other status groups.
Status groups can also cut across class divisions.
In the USA, blacks, no matter what their class situation, belong to the same status group.
This can form the basis for collective political action: in the 1960s and 1970s many middle and working-class blacks united in various organizations under the banner of the Black Power movement.
Weber's observations on status groups are important since they suggest that in certain situations status rather than class provides the basis for the formation of social groups whose members perceive common interests and a group identity.
In addition, the presence of different status groups within a single class and of status groups which cut across class divisions can weaken class solidarity and reduce the potential for class consciousness.
These points are illustrated by Weber's analysis of ‘parties’.
Parties
Weber defines ‘parties’ as groups which are specifically concerned with influencing policies and making decisions in the interests of their membership.
In Weber's words parties are concerned with ‘the acquisition of social ‘power’ '.
Parties include a variety of associations from the mass political parties of Western democracies to the whole range of pressure or interest groups which include professional associations, trades unions, the Automobile Association and the RSPCA.
Parties often, but not necessarily, represent the interests of classes or status groups.
In Weber's words, ‘Parties may represent interests determined through ‘class situation’ or ‘status situation’….
In most cases they are partly class parties and partly status parties, but sometimes they are neither’.
The combination of class and status interests can be seen in the various Black Power organizations in the USA.
They represent a status group but they also represent class interests.
The majority of blacks are working class and many black organizations are directly concerned with improving their class situation.
Weber's  view of parties suggests that the relationship between political groups and class and status groups is far from clear cut.
Just as status groups can both divide classes and cut across class boundaries, so parties can divide and cut across both classes and status groups.
Weber's analysis of classes, status groups and parties suggests that no single theory can pinpoint and explain their relationship.
The interplay of class, status and party in the formation of social groups is complex and variable and must be examined in particular societies during particular time periods.
Marx attempted to reduce all forms of inequality to social class and argued that classes formed the only significant social groups in society.
Weber argues that the evidence provides a more complex and diversified picture of social stratification.
Modern theories of stratification
Most contemporary studies of stratification are based either upon a Marxist or a Weberian perspective.
Some modern sociologists have remained close to the original theories of Marx and Weber.
Others have drawn their inspiration from one or other of these classic sociologists, but have made significant alterations to their original theories in an attempt to describe and explain the class structures of capitalist industrial societies.
Such sociologists can be referred to as new, or neo-Marxists and neo-Weberians.
There has been a longstanding debate between those who draw their inspiration from Marx, and those who follow Weber, as to which approach is more useful as a way of developing a sociological understanding of class.
This debate will be considered in later sections of the chapter which deal with the different classes in contemporary capitalism.
CHANGES IN THE BRITISH STRATIFICATION SYSTEM
As the previous section indicated, most contemporary theories of stratification have been influenced by the pioneering work of Marx or Weber.
Despite the differences between these sociologists, both gave primary importance to material inequalities.
Marx saw the most important divisions in any system of stratification as stemming from differences in the ownership of wealth, and specifically ownership of the means of production.
Weber also saw ownership of wealth as an important criterion for distinguishing classes.
Weber, however, placed more emphasis than Marx on divisions within the propertyless class, the class who did not own sufficient property to support themselves without working.
For this group income levels and other life chances depended largely upon the market situation of the occupational group to which the individuals belonged.
No system of class stratification is fixed and static.
The distribution of resources within the class system constantly changes and the size and market situation of occupational groups also alters over time.
The next sections will describe some of the broad patterns of change in the composition of the occupational structure and the distribution of income and wealth in Britain in the  twentieth century.
Later sections will examine the changing position of particular classes in more detail.
Changes in the occupational structure
Sociologists from Marx and Weber onwards have debated how best to define social classes.
Many, though not all, now base their class categories, at least partly, upon occupational groupings.
Official government statistics distinguish between socio-economic groups, which it is claimed, bring together ‘people with jobs with similar social and economic status’.
Although there are disagreements about where the boundary between the middle and working classes should be placed, it has often been the case that manual workers are regarded as being working class, and non-manual workers as middle class.
In official publications types of manual job are usually distinguished according to levels of skill, with separate categories being used for the unskilled, semi-skilled and skilled manual worker.
Non-manual jobs are also usually divided into three categories: routine non-manual jobs include clerical and secretarial work; intermediate non-manual jobs such as teachers, nurses, librarians and some managers; and the highest class in this scheme, which includes professionals, such as doctors and accountants, as well as senior managers.
The following two tables and chart, although calculated in different ways, are all based upon the idea of socio-economic grouping.
Table 1 shows changes in the occupational structure between 1911 and 1971.
Table 2 shows the occupational structure in 1981, while Figure 1 shows changes between 1979 and 1985.
The shift to non-manual employment
The information contained in the above tables shows that there has been a long-term trend this century for the proportion of non-manual jobs to increase, and of manual jobs to decrease.
Less than half of all employees now have manual jobs, whereas in 1911, according to Routh, 79% of jobs were manual.
There have been marked increases in professional, managerial, and routine non-manual work.
Women, particularly married women, have increasingly started taking employment this century, but they are not equally distributed throughout the occupational structure.
Although women are more likely to have non-manual jobs than men, most female non-manual workers are concentrated in the lowest paid sectors of non-manual work and have routine non-manual jobs.
Over the course of this century various factors have contributed to the shift towards non-manual employment.
Manufacturing industry has declined, whilst service industries, which employ a lower proportion of manual workers, have expanded.
Between June 1971 and June 1988 the number employed in manufacturing industries fell by nearly 3 million, while the number employed in service industries rose by over 2.5 million.
Since the Second World War increasing numbers of people have been employed in jobs connected to the Welfare State, particularly in the NHS, education and the welfare services: in 1987 the NHS and local government employed 4.3 million people.
The first half of the 1980s did not see the same rate of increase in local and central government employment as most of the post-war period.
NHS employment  held steady between 1981 and 1985, and it declined slightly between 1985 and 1988.
Furthermore, employment in education declined slightly in the 1980s.
This means that most of the recent increase in the proportion of non-manual employment in the employed population has been due to the expansion of service industries and not due to a rise in the number of government employees.
The significance of these changes has been hotly debated; these debates will be examined later in the chapter.
The changing distribution of income
The importance of income
Some sociologists have argued that inequalities in industrial societies are being progressively reduced; others go further and claim that class divisions are disappearing.
Income has an important effect upon your life chances: for example the chance of owning your own house and your life expectancy.
If income inequalities were gradually disappearing this would be strong evidence that class divisions were weakening.
Some government policies seem designed to achieve greater income equality by redistributing income from more affluent to poorer groups.
However, as the next sections will show, income can be measured in various ways and official statistics should be used with caution.
In addition, it should not be assumed that long-term trends in income distribution continue forever: there is evidence that recent years have seen significant changes in these trends in Britain.
The measurement of income distribution
Official statistics measure income in a variety of ways.
The term ‘original income’ refers to income from sources such as employment, occupational pensions, gifts, alimony payments, and investment.
Figures on original income do not include benefits such as state pensions, family credit, and income support, which are paid by the state.
‘Gross income’ is a measure of all sources of income.
Most individuals are not, however, free to spend all of their gross income, for some is deducted to pay income tax and national insurance contributions.
‘Disposable income’ is a measure of gross income less the above deductions.
Some taxes, indirect taxes, are not paid directly out of income, but are paid by consumers as part of the purchase price of goods.
For example, value added tax,(VAT), is payable on most categories of goods, and duties are also payable on such products as petrol, tobacco and alcohol.
‘Income after all taxes’ is the measure of income after the above taxes, and taxes such as the poll tax, are deducted.
‘Final income’ adds on to income after taxes the value of benefits provided by the state which are not given in cash, for example medical care and education.
By examining these different measures it is possible to discover the effects of government policy on the distribution of income.
Table 3 gives figures for 1986, and is based upon the Family Expenditure Survey.
The effects of taxation and benefits
Table 3 demonstrates that even after taxation and benefits are taken into account, considerable income inequalities remain.
In 1986 the poorest 20% of households received less than half the average final income, whilst the richest 20% received nearly twice the national average.
However, it is clear that benefits help to reduce        income inequality.
In particular, benefits boost the very low original income of the poorest 20% of households.
Overall taxation and benefits also reduce the final income of richer groups in the population, but less than the higher rates of income tax for high earners would suggest.
This is partly because poorer groups in the population tend to pay a higher proportion of their income in indirect taxes than richer ones.
The official government figures need to be treated with some caution.
Only about 70% of households approached agreed to participate in the Family Expenditure Survey.
Furthermore, there is no guarantee that the information obtained is entirely reliable.
Individuals may not declare all their income, particularly if they have not been truthful to the Inland Revenue or the DSS.
The figures may be particularly prone to underestimating the income of the highest earners, who have more opportunities to hide substantial amounts of income than middle and lower income groups.
Trends in income distribution
Despite the limitations of the official figures, they do provide some indication of the overall historical trends in the distribution of income.
In 1979 The Royal Commission on the Distribution of Income and Wealth published a report examining the changes in the distribution of income and wealth between 1949 and 1978–9.
The results relating to income are summarized in Table 4.
Table 4 demonstrates that in the period covered there was some income redistribution, but mainly towards middle income groups rather than those on the lowest levels.
The top 10% of income earners reduced their share of total income by 3.7%, but the bottom 30% also had their share reduced, in this case by 2.5%.
Although there was a slight shift in income distribution — from the top half of income earners to the bottom half — the poorest were not the beneficiaries.
Changes in taxation
The Royal Commission report was published in the same year as Margaret Thatcher's Conservative government came to power.
Successive Conservative governments implemented policies which reversed the slight trend for income redistribution to poorer groups.
The policies which had the most direct impact concerned income tax.
Income tax is a progressive tax because higher earners pay a higher proportion of their income in this tax than lower earners.
If overall levels of income tax are cut, and if the higher rates in particular are reduced, the redistributive effects of taxation become smaller.
Between 1979 and 1988 the basic rate of this tax was reduced from 33% to 25%, while the highest rate fell from 80% to 40%.
Furthermore, over the same period there was a shift towards indirect taxation, which tends to take a greater proportion of the income of lower than higher income groups.
In 1979 the twin VAT (value added tax) rates of 8% and 12.5% were replaced with a single rate of 15%.
In 1990 the community charge, or ‘poll tax’, replaced rates as a way of financing local government.
This means that the taxation system in Britain became more regressive, since all those living in  particular areas were charged the same, regardless of their ability to pay.
Even though there are rebates of up to 80% on the community charge for the poorest, previously the worst-off could claim a full 100% rebate on rates.
Figures from the Central Statistical Office suggest that some of the changes implemented by Conservative governments helped to reverse the trend in redistribution of income from the rich, so that it became redistribution to the rich.
Between 1976 and 1986 the top 20% of income earners increased their share of total final income from 37.9% to 41.7%, while the share of the bottom 20% fell from 7.4% to 5.9%.
Furthermore, these figures refer to the period before the top rate of income tax was reduced from 60% to 40%, and the ‘poll tax’ was introduced.
Although income inequalities have been reduced in Britain this century, this reduction has not been sufficient to justify the claim that class divisions are disappearing.
The figures suggest that the 1980s saw an increase in income inequality and a strengthening of class divisions.
The changing distribution of wealth
The importance of wealth
Inequalities in the distribution of wealth, like inequalities in the distribution of income, are an important indicator of class divisions and class inequality.
A particular form of wealth — the means of production — is especially important to Marxist sociologists.
Like income, wealth can affect life chances but to Marxists ownership of the means of production also gives power.
(Today ownership of the means of production usually takes the form of share ownership.)
If it could be shown that over the years there had been a major redistribution of wealth from the rich to the poor, this would indicate a reduction in class inequalities.
However, wealth is perhaps even more difficult to measure than income and reliable data prove elusive.
Measuring wealth
The definition and measurement of wealth, like income, is not straightforward.
One problem is that the government does not collect information on wealth for tax purposes.
There is no wealth tax on the living, but taxes do have to be paid on the estates of those who have died.
Figures on the value of estates left by the deceased are sometimes used to calculate the overall distribution of wealth.
However, they may not be a reliable guide to the distribution of wealth among the living: for instance individuals may transfer some of their wealth to other family members before they die; moreover those who die tend to be older than other members of the population, and wealth is not equally distributed between age groups.
Another method of collecting information on wealth distribution is to use survey research, but this too has its drawbacks.
Those who refuse to cooperate with the research may be untypical of the population as a whole, and their failure to take part may distort the findings.
Those who do cooperate may not be entirely honest, and the richest members of society may be particularly prone to underestimating their wealth.
Defining wealth
Not only is wealth difficult to measure, defining it is also problematic.
Official statistics distinguish between marketable wealth and non-marketable wealth.
‘Marketable wealth’ includes any type of asset that can be sold and its value realized.
It therefore includes land, shares, savings in bank, building society or other accounts, homes (minus any outstanding mortgage debts), and personal possessions such as cars, works of art, and household appliances.
The figures on marketable wealth exclude the value of occupational pensions which cannot normally be sold.
If such pensions are included in the figures, the statistics show wealth as being more equally distributed than is otherwise the case.
('Non-marketable wealth' includes items such as salaries, non-transferable pensions, etc.)
From a sociological point of view the official figures on wealth are not ideal.
They fail to distinguish between wealth used to finance production and wealth used to finance consumption.
Wealth used for production (for example shares) is of particular interest to Marxist sociologists as they believe that power largely derives from ownership of the means of production.
The distribution of wealth used for consumption is of less interest to Marxists, though its distribution does give some indication of life style.
Such figures are also useful for indicating the distribution of various life chances, for instance the chance that different social groups have of owning their own home.
Trends in wealth distribution
Despite the limitations of the available figures, it is possible to discern overall trends in wealth distribution this century.
Table 5 is derived from two separate sources, so the figures for the years up to 1960 are not strictly comparable with those for 1971 and after.
The earlier figures include an estimate for hidden wealth; the later figures do not.
The later figures may therefore underestimate the extent to which wealth is concentrated.
Table 5 suggests that there has been a considerable reduction in the degree of wealth inequality this century.
The changes have clearly been more marked than the changes in the distribution of income.
Although the long-term trend is towards greater equality, most wealth still remains concentrated in the hands of a small minority.
Thus in 1985 the wealthiest 1% of the population still owned  20% of all wealth and the wealthiest 10% owned 54%, leaving the other 90% of the population with less than half of all personal wealth.
A number of factors have contributed to the trends noted above.
Westergaard and Resler (who produced the figures for the period up to 1960 in Table 5) suggest that the most significant redistribution was within the wealthiest groups, rather than between them and the less well-off.
A major reason for this was the transfer of assets from wealthy individuals to friends and other family members in order to avoid death duties.
In recent decades the most important factors have probably been the increasing number of home owners and rises in house prices.
Rising living standards for those in work have also enabled them to buy more consumer goods.
Thus most of the redistribution of wealth has probably affected wealth used for consumption rather than for production.
Share ownership
Shares are a particularly important type of wealth used to finance production.
In Britain there has certainly been an increase in recent years in the percentage of the population who own shares.
Westergaard and Resler estimated that in 1970 only 7% of adults over the age of 25 owned shares.
A survey conducted in 1988 by the Treasury and the Stock Exchange found that about 21% of the population owned shares.
Much of this increase was due to the government's privatization programme, which encouraged small investors to buy shares in companies such as British Telecom and British Gas.
However, most new shareholders have only a small stake in the companies in which they have invested, and in reality they may have little influence upon the way that the companies are run (see, for example, the claims of John Scott pp. 57–62).
Most privately owned shares remain in the hands of a small minority of the population.
Furthermore, fewer and fewer shares are owned by private individuals as an increasing proportion come to be owned by institutions.
The stockbrokers Phillips and Drew estimated that between 1979 and 1989 the proportion of shares in private hands fell from 33% to 18%.
Wealth taxes
Successive governments in Britain have made much less attempt to tax wealth than income.
Before 1974 the main tax on wealth was estate duty, paid on the estate of someone who had died.
It was easy to avoid this tax by transferring assets before death.
In 1974 the Labour government introduced capital transfer tax which taxed certain gifts given by people who were alive.
In 1981 the Conservative government abolished capital transfer tax and replaced it with inheritance tax.
This raised the limits before which tax on wealth transfers were paid, and abolished taxes on gifts made ten years or more before someone died.
In 1986 this was reduced to seven years and a sliding scale was introduced to determine the amount of tax paid.
The longer you survived after giving assets to someone the less tax they paid on the gift.
These changes have reduced the burden of taxation on the wealthy considerably.
CLASSES IN CAPITALIST SOCIETIES
The following sections will examine the changing position of particular classes within the class structure of capitalist societies, using British and American data.
Three main classes — the upper class, the middle class and the working class will be considered in turn, though as will become clear, the location of the boundaries between these classes is disputed.
Most of the views dealt with in the following sections have been influenced by Marxist or Weberian theories of stratification.
THE UPPER CLASS
John Westergaard and Henrietta Resler — a Marxist view of the ruling class
Class divisions
John Westergaard and Henrietta Resler argue from a Marxist perspective that Britain is dominated by a ruling class.
They claim that the private ownership of capital provides the key to explaining class divisions.
In detail the class system is complex but in essence it is simple: the major division is still between capital and labour.
Sociologists who focus on the details of class, for example, the differences between manual and routine white-collar workers, merely obscure the overall simplicity of the system.
Such differences are insignificant compared to the wide gulf which separates the ruling class from the bulk of the wage and salary earning population.
Distribution of wealth
To support their argument, Westergaard and Resler point to the concentration of wealth in the hands of a small minority.
They say ‘I he retention of a massive share in all wealth by the top 5% of the population is very striking’.
Although there has been some change in the distribution of wealth in Britain this century, this has largely taken place within the richest 10%.
Some members of the ruling class have transferred property to relatives and friends to avoid death duties.
The spread of home ownership has spread wealth a little more widely but the ownership of capital in private industry has remained highly concentrated.
Thus they calculated that in 1970 only about 7% of adults over 25 owned any shares and most of them were ‘smallholders’ with less than 1,000's worth of stock.
Ruling class power
Westergaard and Resler argue that the maintenance of inequalities of wealth is due to the power of the ruling class.
They maintain that ‘The favoured enjoy effective power, even when its members take no active steps to exercise power.
They do not need to do so — for much of the time at least— simply because things work that way in any case’.
It is generally taken for granted (by members of society and governments alike) that investments should bring profit and that the living standards of the propertyless should be based on the demands of the market for their skills.
In general, governments have favoured the interests of capital, assuming that the well-being of the nation is largely dependent upon the prosperity of private industry.
Composition of the ruling class
Westergaard and Resler believe that the ruling class is made up of perhaps 5% and at most 10% of the population.
It includes the major owners of the means of production, company directors, top managers, higher professionals and senior civil servants, many of whom are large shareholders in private industry.
The subordinate classes consist of the bulk of the wage and salary earning population.
Westergaard and Resler reject the view that the so-called separation of ownership and control in the joint stock company results in the rise of salaried managers who should properly be placed in a middle class.
They argue that ‘directors and top executives, in whose hands the major strategic decisions lie, are, in fact, owners of large stockholdings themselves’.
Like the ‘absentee owners’, their main concern is the maximization of profit.
As such, the interests of owners and controllers are largely similar.
Westergaard and Resler put forward a conventional Marxist view of the ruling class.
They assume that the ruling class is united, that all members of the ruling class own substantial amounts of wealth and that the ruling class is almost all-powerful.
They believe that the ruling class has changed relatively little in the last hundred years.
All these assumptions and claims are challenged by John Scott, even though Scott works within a broadly Marxist framework.
John Scott — the upper classes
Strata
John Scott has provided the most comprehensive description and analysis of the development of the upper classes in Britain.
Scott does not see strata as consisting of individuals, nor does he see them simply as positions generated by the economic system, but rather as groups of inter-marrying and inter-connected families.
The composition of the upper strata has clearly changed since pre-industrial times.
Before the industrial revolution the landed aristocracy and the gentry were the dominant groupings in British society.
Family contacts were very important in uniting the upper classes and achieving a high degree of social closure (the exclusion of outsiders).
The development of British industry in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries opened up new avenues for achieving success and becoming part of the upper strata.
Most successful entrepreneurial business people made use of social assets based on kinship, friendship and other social contacts.
Most early industrial enterprises were owned and controlled by groups of individuals united by kinship.
It was common for families who were linked through a business partnership to become linked by marriage as well, and vice versa .
Divisions in the upper classes
Scott claims that in the nineteenth century there were three overlapping, but not united sections of the upper class: landowners, financiers (mainly in the City of London), and manufacturers.
As the nineteenth century progressed these three groups came closer together.
For example some landowners invested money in manufacturing or industries such as mining, and some manufacturers bought large estates in an attempt to gain the social acceptance enjoyed by the aristocracy.
However, financiers, merchants and bankers, such as the Rothschilds and the Barings, remained the most distinctive group.
Scott says that financiers formed a ‘tightly integrated group with numerous overlapping business activities’.
Most were based in close physical proximity to each other in the City of London; they were often related or united by ties of friendship, and had ample opportunity to meet one another informally in coffee houses or elsewhere.
Despite their distinctiveness, they had a good deal in common with the other upper-class groups; and they were an important source of loans for the growing group of  entrepreneurs .
The growth of joint stock companies
The development of the industrial and financial bourgeoisie during industrialization ended the dominance of landowners.
The potential for conflict between these groups was reduced by kinship and friendship ties, and by involvement together in common enterprises.
The opportunities for common involvement in enterprise were, however, limited by the fact that most companies remained family owned.
As the nineteenth century gave way to the twentieth, two related changes began to alter the relationship between the upper classes and the ownership of the means of production.
Firstly, companies became larger and larger as wealth became concentrated in the hands of a small number of firms.
Secondly, family ownership began to be replaced by the joint stock company in which shares could be bought and sold in the open market.
As late as 1880 the top 100 industrial firms controlled only 10% of the total market for goods.
However, legislation in the middle of the nineteenth century had begun to make it easier for partnerships and individually owned firms to issue shares.
This allowed them to take advantage of limited liability: the owners of the shares were not liable for repaying the firm's debts.
Joint stock companies found it possible to grow larger by issuing new shares to increase their capital, and mergers and takeovers saw the average size of firms grow.
According to Scott, by 1909 the top 100 manufacturing companies were producing 15% of total output, and by 1930 26%.
He believes that during the inter-war years the three sections of the upper class virtually fused together as they all became increasingly involved in the growing industrial enterprises.
As the twentieth century progressed the family-owned firm became less and less important in British capitalism.
From the Second World War onwards the top 100 firms became even more dominant: by 1970 they produced 45% of total output.
Many of the major firms became too large to be owned by an individual or single family, and the number of shareholders in each firm increased.
At the same time, the proportion of shares held by individuals began to decline.
Increasingly, institutions such as pension funds, insurance companies, and unit and investment trusts, held the majority of shares.
The table below shows the decline in personal share ownership between 1963 and 1981.
The ‘managerial revolution’
Some commentators have suggested that a decline in the family ownership of companies has meant that a ruling class based on the ownership of the means of production no longer exists.
According to their arguments, shareholdings have become too fragmented for individuals to exercise control over the companies in which they have a stake.
A ‘managerial revolution’ has taken place which has resulted in effective control over industry passing from owners to managers.
(For further details of the managerial revolution theory see pp. 160–61.)
The increasing percentage of shares owned by pension funds, insurance companies, and the like, also implies that the ruling class has lost power.
Many of the funds held by such institutions come from investments made by ordinary employees, rather than the most wealthy members of society.
The core and periphery of the business class
John Scott rejects the view that the changes described above have reduced the power of the upper classes.
Indeed, he believes that a very small section of the population, which he calls the business class, now forms a tightly integrated group which dominates British business.
He defines the core of the business class as ‘those who participate in the strategic control of the enterprises which form the monopoly sector of the British economy’.
They are the directors, top executives and main shareholders in the 1000 largest British companies.
Less than one in a thousand members of the population belongs to this class.
Scott does admit that there is a larger group of people who are on the ‘periphery’ of the business class.
This group includes retired businessmen, and people who hold senior positions in such institutions as the church, the army, and the universities; wealthy individuals whose families retain links with the business class, and whose children may well eventually enter business.
The business class as a whole does not make up more than 0.2% of the population, although if its outer fringes are included it could approach 1%.
Entrepreneurial, internal and finance capitalists
Most of Scott's discussion focusses on the core of the business class.
He divides this into three main groupings: entrepreneurial capitalists, internal capitalists and finance capitalists.
1'Entrepreneurial' capitalists are those who have a substantial stake in their own firm.
They are most concerned about the level of the share dividend, the stock market valuation of their company, and the potential for longer term profits.
2 ‘Internal capitalists’ are senior executives who work for a single firm, but do not have a substantial ownership stake in it.
They are mainly concerned with their salary and job security; these are linked to their personal image, which in turn is linked to the performance of their company.
3 The most important group of all is ‘finance capitalists’, who have an important stake in the ownership, management, or financing of more than one company.
They have similar interests to entrepreneurial and internal capitalists, but in addition may be concerned with the ability of firms to cover interest payments and loan repayments without jeopardizing long-term profitability.
Scott thinks that landowners no longer form a distinctive group within the upper classes: the growth of ‘agribusiness’ has meant that agriculture is run in much the same manner as any other business.
Although there are minor divisions of interest between these three groups, Scott does not regard the divisions as particularly significant.
He states ‘whatever internal divisions there may be within the business class are secondary to their common interests in the continuing success of big business as a whole’.
When the groups come together, particularly at board meetings, differences are resolved in the long-term interests of the company so that it can remain profitable.
The core of the business class makes the important decisions about planning for the future.
Managers below the chief executive level are distinct from the business class itself.
According to Scott they occupy a ‘contradictory class location’ between labour and capital, but essentially they act as a service or lieutenant class for business leaders.
They implement decisions rather than deciding on the overall direction of a company; they do not have effective control over the company they work for.
Given these considerations, there has not been a managerial revolution.
Family ownership
Scott, of course, acknowledges that family firms have become less important in the British economy.
However, he also points out that in a number of important companies a single family of entrepreneurial capitalists retain a majority of the shares.
Such companies include Sainsbury's Supermarkets, The Rank Organization, N.M.
Rothschild, Baring Brothers, and Trust Houses Forte.
In other companies a family owns a minority of shares, but still retains effective control because the smaller shareholders are too fragmented to defeat the voting power of the family concerned.
This category includes Tesco Stores, Arthur Guinness, United Biscuits, Unilever, W.H. Smith, Trafalgar House, Ladbrokes, Lonrho, and Hill Samuel.
Constellations of interest
Other companies are not controlled by managers alone, or institutional investors alone, but by what Scott calls a ‘constellation of interests’.
This constellation of interests includes entrepreneurial capitalists, internal capitalists who sit on the board, and finance capitalists.
Finance capitalists are particularly important.
In companies where many of the shares are owned by small investors, the largest  blocks are likely to be controlled by insurance companies, unit trusts and pension funds.
The representatives of these institutions often sit on the board of directors.
In theory, they are answerable to their investors, but in practice investors have no control over their activities unless they withdraw their investments.
This is only likely to happen on a large scale if an institution is failing to achieve a good return on the capital invested.
The senior officials of these institutions are therefore more or less free to act as they wish, so long as they show a reasonable profit.
Interlocking directorships
According to Scott, finance capitalists are at the very core of the business class, because they can coordinate its activities.
They sit on the board of more than one company, and this creates a network of interlocking directorships, which is illustrated in Figure 2.
Banks
Interlocking directorships allow the exchange of information between firms, and facilitate the development of policies which take into account more than the narrow interests of a single company.
Perhaps even more important in coordinating the activities of the business class are the merchant banks, and the big four clearing banks (Barclays, Midland, Lloyds, and National Westminster).
Scott says that the clearing banks are ‘of great significance in the allocation of capital, the recruitment of business leaders and the flow of information’.
Through finance capitalists and the banks, the activities of the business class can be coordinated so that their shared interests are not harmed by competition between companies.
Reproduction
Having traced the development of the upper class and described the nature of the business class today, Scott goes on to discuss how the upper classes reproduce themselves.
Although social classes change over time, they are able to reproduce themselves to the extent that they can maintain their distinctive position in the social structure within and across generations.
The direct transfer of capital from one generation to the next is the primary way in which reproduction takes place, because it ensures that wealth will remain in the family.
Economic assets are also converted into ‘social and cultural assets’.
It is important that the children of the upper class attend the ‘right’ sort of school (a public school) and preferably one of the top public schools.
It is in these schools that personal contacts begin to be built up and these help to produce the ‘old-boy networks’.
This involves personal ties between those in elite positions in society.
The ‘establishment’, which consists of those members of society with the highest social statuses, is based around the Conservative Party, the Church of England, Oxford and Cambridge Universities, the Guards regiments and gentlemen's clubs, as well as the public schools.
The business class and the establishment are not totally closed to outsiders.
However, it is necessary to undergo the appropriate socialization in the institutions just mentioned to gain acceptance in either of these groups.
Constraints on upper class power
Scott clearly attributes considerable power to the upper classes in modern Britain.
He sees the business class in particular as exercising a crucial role in the economy, and he argues that it is able to draw upon its social contacts with a wider establishment to try to ensure that its interests are not fundamentally damaged.
He does not though, claim that the upper classes are all-powerful.
He accepts that their actions are constrained to some extent by trade unions, workers, managers, and the government of the day (in the last case particularly if the Conservative Party is not in government).
Individual companies are also constrained by the need to sell their services and goods in the face of competition from other companies at home and abroad.
Nevertheless, Scott clearly believes that the upper classes have a disproportionate amount of power given the tiny percentage of the population that they make up.
Other views on the upper classes
The next chapter will examine quite different views on the top of the stratification system.
Elite theories accept that power is concentrated in the hands of a few, but deny that the power derives from wealth.
Instead, they see power deriving from the occupation of top jobs in society (see pp. 135–45 for further details).
Pluralists deny that higher social classes monopolize power and believe that in liberal democracies the wishes of the people determine government policy.
According to this view, power is dispersed and not concentrated in the hands of the upper classes (see pp. 124–35 for details).
THE MIDDLE CLASSES
Marx and the middle class
The most usual way of defining the middle class is to see it as consisting of those individuals who have non-manual occupations, that is occupations which involve, in some sense, an intellectual element.
If the distinction between manual and non-manual labour is used to distinguish the middle class, then as an earlier section indicated, it is a growing sector of capitalist industrial societies such as Britain.
The attempt to analyse the position of the middle class in the class structure has been a major preoccupation of sociologists of stratification.
This has been the case particularly for Marxist and neo-Marxist sociologists, since the growth of the middle class has often been cited as evidence against Marx's theory.
According to many interpretations of his work, Marx sees capitalist society as divided into only two classes of any importance: the bourgeoisie and the proletariat.
This leaves no room for a middle class.
In reality, though, Marx recognized the existence of intermediate classes (for example members of the petty bourgeoisie, such as shopkeepers and small businessmen).
The growth of what is usually called the middle class has largely been the result of the increasing amount of white-collar work.
In Capital , Volume 3 Marx noted this trend when he argued that the increasing size of enterprises made it impossible for them to be run by a single person.
In these circumstances it necessitated ‘the employment of commercial wage-workers who make up the actual office staff’.
Although he identified the trend towards more non-manual jobs, Marx made no detailed attempt to explain how they fitted into his theory of stratification.
On the surface at least, as non-owners of the means of production, they could hardly be considered as part of the bourgeoisie.
Nor, it is often argued, can they be seen as part of the proletariat.
Many commentators have suggested that non-manual workers enjoy considerable advantages in employment over their manual counterparts: they tend to enjoy more job security, work shorter hours, have longer holidays, more fringe benefits, and have greater promotion prospects (Table 7 below illustrates some of these points).
Life chances
A variety of studies have also shown that non-manual workers enjoy advantages over manual workers in terms of their ‘life chances’.
They are likely to enjoy higher standards of health, and to live longer; they are less likely to be convicted of a criminal offence; they are more likely to own their own house and a variety of consumer goods.
Many of these relative advantages for the middle class may be related to their most obvious material advantage, a higher income.
As Table 8 shows, there has been a consistent gap between the earnings of the two groups.
The gap in earnings has existed throughout this century.
Westergaard and Resler have calculated that in 1913–14 men in full-time non-manual employment earned 142% of the average male wage, male manual workers 88%.
The situation had changed little by 1960, when the figures were 145% and 82% respectively.
Conflicting perspectives on the middle class
In Weberian terms, the sort of evidence outlined above can be used to suggest that there is a middle class in Britain, distinguished from the working class through its superior market situation and life chances.
From this point of view the middle class is held to consist of non-manual workers.
However, this relatively simple and straightforward view has, for a variety of reasons, been rejected by many sociologists.
Firstly, the distinction between manual and non-manual work is not seen by some as an adequate way of distinguishing between classes.
Often Marxist and neo-Marxist sociologists try to distinguish classes according to their role within the economic system, while Weberians are more likely to analyse class in terms of the market situation of particular occupational groups.
Secondly, on the face of it, the middle class contains an extremely diverse group of workers ranging from secretaries to accountants, shop-assistants to managers, shopkeepers to social workers.
Thirdly, the position of particular occupational groups — their wages, conditions of employment and responsibilities — has changed during the course of the century, and these changes may in turn have affected the class structure as a whole.
These complications have led to a whole variety of views as to the composition of the middle class and its place in the social structure.
Some have argued that there is a distinctive and relatively homogeneous middle class; others that the middle class as such does not exist.
Some of those who accept the existence of a middle class believe that it is divided into many different strata; others that it is divided, but only into two main groupings.
The precise location of the boundaries between the middle class and the classes above and below it has also been the subject of dispute.
Before examining the place of the middle class as a whole in the class structure, the main strata of the middle class will be examined in detail.
THE UPPER MIDDLE CLASS
For the sake of convenience different parts of the middle class will be examined in two main sections.
The first section will consider the position of the more highly rewarded groups including professionals, senior managers and administrators, and more successful small business people.
In the early twentieth century small business people (the self-employed and shopkeepers) made up a greater proportion of the working population than they did by 1971.
As the size of many businesses grew, the number of employers was reduced.
Guy Routh found that the number of employers in Britain declined from 763,000 in 1911 to 621,000 in 1971.
The number of self-employed also fell by 24,000 over the same period.
Obviously larger employers might be considered part of the upper class, but the others are often seen as part of the ‘old’ middle class.
Marx predicted that this group, which he referred to as the petty (or petit) bourgeoisie, would be progressively squeezed into the proletariat.
They would be unable to compete with larger companies which could buy and sell in bulk, and take advantage of advanced technology.
Although the trends up to 1971 provided support for Marx's view on the likely fate of the petty bourgeoisie, the 1980s saw a reversal of previous trends.
According to official figures the numbers of self-employed and small proprietors rose from 1,954,000 in December 1971, to 2,925,000 in June 1988, a rise of very nearly one million.
Nevertheless, it is the growth of white-collar employment which has accounted for most of the expansion of the upper middle class.
Some sociologists distinguish between different strata of the upper middle class identifying, for example, higher professionals, lower professionals, and  managers as separate groups.
Others see the upper middle class as being more homogeneous.
The next section will examine the position of one strata of the upper middle class — the professions — in the class structure.
The professions in the class structure
The growth of the professions
This century the professions have been one of the fastest growing sectors of the occupational structure.
According to Guy Routh the professions rose from 4.05% of the employed population in 191 1 to 1 1 .07% in 1 971.
Since 1971 this growth has continued, and a similar trend is evident in all Western industrial capitalist societies.
Several reasons have been given for the rapid growth of the professions.
The increasing complexity of trade and commerce demands financial and legal experts such as accountants and lawyers.
The growth of industry requires more specialized scientific and technical knowledge which results in the development of professions such as science and engineering.
The creation of the welfare state and the expansion of local and national government has produced a range of ‘welfare professions’, and has resulted in the growth of the medical and teaching professions and the greater employment of professionals in government bureaucracies.
Professionals have been seen both as producers and products of industrialization.
Their skills and knowledge are regarded as essential for the development and expansion of industrial economies.
In turn, the wealth produced by this development has provided the means to pay for the specialized services which the professionals supply.
Higher and lower professionals
In terms of their market situation, the professionals can be divided into two groups: the higher and lower professionals.
The higher professionals include judges, barristers, solicitors, architects, planners, doctors, dentists, university lecturers, accountants, scientists and engineers.
The lower professionals include school teachers, nurses, social workers and librarians.
As Table 9 indicates, there are significant differences in earnings between the two groups.
Measured in terms of earnings, the market situation of lower professionals is not substantially superior to that of skilled manual workers.
However, compared to skilled manual workers, lower professionals have a number of market advantages which include greater security of employment, wider promotion opportunities, annual salary increments, and more valuable fringe benefits.
The functionalist perspective on professions
Various explanations have been advanced to account for the occupational rewards of professionals.
These explanations are influenced by the sociologist's theoretical perspective and their evaluation of the services provided by professionals.
Bernard Barber offers a functionalist view of the role and rewards of higher professionals.
He argues that professionalism involves ‘four essential attributes’.
1 A body of systematic and generalized knowledge which can be applied to a variety of problems.
For instance, doctors have a body of medical knowledge which they apply to diagnose and treat a range of illnesses.
2 Professionalism involves a concern for the interests of the community rather than self-interest.
Thus the primary motivation of professionals is public service rather than personal gain: doctors are concerned primarily with the health of their patients rather than with lining their own pockets.
3 The behaviour of professionals is strictly controlled by a code of ethics which is established and maintained by professional associations and learned as part of the training required to qualify as a professional.
Doctors take the Hippocratic Oath which lays down the obligations and proper conduct of their profession.
Should they break this code of conduct, their association can strike them from the register and ban them from practising medicine.
4 The high rewards received by professionals, which include the prestige accorded to professional status as well as earnings, are symbols of their achievements.
They denote the high regard in which professionals are held and reflect the value of their contribution to society.
Barber argues that the knowledge and skills of professionals provide them with considerable power and it is therefore essential for the well-being of society that this power be used for the benefit of all.
He accepts the view that professionals are primarily concerned with service to the community and believes they use their expertise for public benefit.
He claims that professionals make important contributions to the functional well-being of society and in addition, their services are highly regarded in terms of society's values.
As a result, professionals are highly rewarded.
Criticisms of functionalism
Functionalist explanations of the role and rewards of professionals have been strongly criticized on the grounds that they make the following assumptions, all of which are questionable.
Firstly, professionals make important contributions to the well-being of society as a whole.
Secondly, they serve all members of society rather than particular groups.
Thirdly, they are concerned with service to the community rather than with self-interest.
In recent years, there has been increasing criticism of the view that professionals provide valuable services to society.
Prince Charles has denounced  architects for defacing British cities; Margaret Thatcher's governments have challenged the monopolies enjoyed by opticians and the legal profession; planners have been condemned for producing urban chaos; teachers have been attacked for crushing originality and stifling creativity in their pupils; and lawyers have been accused of mystifying the legal system to the point where the layman finds it largely unintelligible.
In Medical Nemesis , a savage attack on the medical profession, Ivan Illich provides an example of this type of criticism.
He claims that ‘The medical establishment has become a major threat to health’.
Contrary to the view promoted by the medical profession, Illich argues that the environment, in particular food, working conditions, housing and hygiene, rather than medical provision, is the main determinant of the health of a population.
He notes that the incidence of diseases such as tuberculosis, cholera, dysentery , typhoid and scarlet fever declined rapidly long before medical control.
He attributes this decline to changes in the environment rather than to antibiotics and widespread immunization.
In the same way, Illich argues that much of the illness in contemporary society is due to the environment.
He claims that industrial society is characterized by boring and monotonous work, lack of freedom for the individual to control his or her own life and a compulsion to acquire material possessions, directed by the mistaken belief that they bring happiness and fulfilment.
These ‘ills’ of industrial society are responsible for much of the illness experienced by its members.
In claiming to diagnose and treat this illness doctors can do more harm than good.
In Illich's view, such treatment ‘is but a device to convince those who are sick and tired of society that it is they who are ill, impotent and in need of repair’.
By claiming exclusive rights to the diagnosis of illness, doctors obscure its real source.
By treating the individual rather than the environment, doctors not only do little to prevent illness but also direct attention away from measures which could prove more effective.
Space prevents a full summary of Illich's closely reasoned attack on the medical profession but his views suggest that the functionalist argument that the higher professions confer positive benefits on society is at least questionable.
(See Chapter 5 for Illich's criticisms of the teaching profession, pp. 235–7.)
The Weberian perspective on professions
From a Weberian point of view the professions can be seen as occupational groups which have succeeded in controlling and manipulating the labour market in such a way that they can maximize their rewards.
Thus Noel and Jose Parry define professionalism as ‘a strategy for controlling an occupation in which colleagues set up a system of self-government’.
The occupation is controlled primarily in the interests of its members.
From this perspective, professionalism involves the following factors.
Firstly, there is restriction of entry into the occupation, which is provided by the profession's control of the training and qualifications required for membership and the numbers deemed necessary to provide an adequate service.
By controlling supply, professionals can maintain a high demand for their services and so gain high rewards.
Secondly, professionalism involves an association which controls the conduct of its members ‘in respects which are defined as relevant to the collective interests of the profession’.
In particular, professional associations are concerned with  promoting the view that professional conduct is above reproach and that professionals are committed to public service.
This serves to justify high occupational rewards.
By claiming the right to discipline their own members, professional associations largely prevent public scrutiny of their affairs and so maintain the image which they project of themselves.
Thirdly, professionalism involves a successful claim that only members are qualified to provide particular services.
This claim is often reinforced by law.
Thus in Britain, a series of laws have guaranteed solicitors a monopoly on particular services.
These monopolies are jealously guarded: the Law Society has prosecuted unqualified individuals for performing services which are defined as a legal monopoly of the law profession.
In this way professions can control rival occupational groups which might threaten their dominance of a section of the market.
Parry and Parry conclude that by adopting the strategy of professionalism, certain occupational groups are able to extract high rewards from the market.
Viewing professionalism as a market strategy provides an explanation for the differing rewards of various so-called professions.
Some of the occupational groups which claim professional status lack many of the attributes of professionalism.
In terms of Parry and Parry's definition, they are professions in name only.
They have little control over their market situation and as a result receive lower rewards than occupational groups which are more fully professionalized.
Parry and Parry illustrate this point by a comparison of doctors and teachers.
They claim that doctors receive higher rewards than teachers because they are more fully professionalized.
This is due largely to the fact that doctors were able to organize themselves into a professional group before the state intervened in medicine and became a major employer of medical practitioners.
The British Medical Association was founded in 1832 and the Medical Registration Act of 1858 granted doctors a monopoly on the practice of medicine and gave them important powers of self-government.
Once established as a professional body, doctors had considerable control over their market situation.
Teachers, however, failed to achieve professionalism before state intervention in education.
Since the state was largely responsible for initiating and paying for mass education, it was able to establish greater control over teachers.
In particular, the state controlled both the supply of teachers and standards for entry into the occupation.
Since they lack the market control which professionalism provides, teachers have turned to trade unionism to improve their market situation.
Parry and Parry conclude that the differences in occupational reward between doctors and teachers are attributable to the degree of professionalization of the two groups.
Professions as servants of the powerful
The Weberian claim that the professions are able to act primarily in their own interests has been called into question.
It has been argued that the higher professionals primarily serve the interests of the wealthy and powerful.
Accountants and lawyers are employed in the service of capital, architects build for the wealthy and doctors and psychiatrists in private practice care for the physical and mental needs of the rich.
The American sociologist C. Wright Mills makes the following observations on the law profession in the USA: rather than being guardians of the law for the benefit of all, lawyers have increasingly become  the servants of the large corporation.
They are busily employed ‘teaching the financiers how to do what they want within the law, advising on the chances they are taking and how to best cover themselves’.
Lawyers draw up contracts, minimize taxation, advise on business deals and  liaise between banks, commercial and industrial enterprises.
In the service of the corporation, the ‘leading lawyer is selected for skill in the sure fix and the easy out-of-court settlement’.
The lucrative business open to members of the legal profession means that members of low-income groups are largely unable to afford their services.
Mills suggests that the rewards of the professionals are directly related to the demand for their services by the rich and powerful.
Since lawyers increasingly serve ‘a thin upper crust and financial interests’ they are highly rewarded.
C. Wright Mills saw professionals as increasingly becoming the servants of the rich and powerful, but he did not believe that the individual professionals themselves were losing their power and influence.
Although they acted more as employees than as members of a profession, they had important positions within the companies for which they worked.
Indeed, Mills saw some professionals as members of the ‘power elite’, which dominated American society.
For example, he argued that the corporate lawyer acted as a key go-between in the affairs of business, political and military elites.
He said ‘When you get a lawyer who handles the legal work of investment bankers you get a key member of the power elite’(for more details of Mills's views on elites see pp 138–9).
The deskilling of professions
A number of sociologists have followed Mills in arguing that professionals are increasingly employed in large organizations, and in this situation are less able to pursue the interests of their profession.
However, unlike Mills they see professional groups as losing their power and influence rather than as joining the power elite.
This view has been inspired by the work of the American Marxist Harry Braverman.
Braverman claims that ‘deskilling’ has taken place in many white-collar jobs.
As the skill content of the work has been reduced, then some white-collar workers have lost the advantages they previously enjoyed over manual employees.
They have become ‘proletarianized’.
Although primarily concerned with routine white-collar work, Braverman does believe that some professional jobs have also become deskilled.
The people who do these jobs lose the power they once had, their work is closely regulated, and they are made aware of their subordination.
Braverman says ‘We may cite here particularly the mass employment of draftsmen and technicians, engineers and accountants, nurses and teachers’.
Such groups find that their work becomes more and more routine as it is divided into specialist tasks.
Their pay levels are threatened as they become unable to control the supply of labour into their profession: there is always a ‘reserve army’ of suitably qualified workers ready to step into their jobs.
The declining independence of professions
Braverman's views are rather general but other sociologists have suggested ways in which the position of specific professional groups in the class structure have deteriorated.
Geoff Esland points out that since the 1946 National Health Service Act levels of pay and conditions of work in the medical profession, and spending on medical research, have been largely determined by central  government.
He points to the growth of unionism among junior doctors as evidence of their need to move beyond professionalism as a market strategy for protecting their interests.
Similarly, Martin Oppenheimer claims that many professionals employed in the public sector find that their jobs are ‘related to the oppressive functions of government — keeping welfare clients quiet, policing, regulating’.
Their jobs become more and more difficult, their independence is eroded, and their wages are threatened by government attempts to cut spending.
Other writers have made similar claims about professionals employed in private companies.
Kummar has tried to show how engineers in private industry have had their work increasingly fragmented and broken down into a series of simple individual steps.
Computerized systems have reduced the amount of skill required by many engineers and their performance is closely regulated.
Terence Johnson has pointed to the limits that can be placed on some professions by their clients or employers.
In the profession of accountancy most practitioners are employed by companies and are not independent advisors.
Accountants are expected to be loyal first and foremost to their company, and not to their profession.
Some of their skills and knowledge are specific to the company for which they work, and they would be of less value to another company.
Consequently accountants are in a highly dependent position compared to most professions; it is difficult for them to use professionalism as a market strategy.
It is certainly true that during the course of this century professionals have increasingly become employees, rather than being employers or the self-employed.
Guy Routh calculated that in 1931 34% of higher professionals were self-employed or employers; by 1971 this had fallen to 16%.
Routh attributes most of this change to the increasing employment of professionals by businesses.
It may also be true that some professional groups have had their independence and autonomy reduced.
However, it is certainly an exaggeration to claim that they have been ‘proletarianized’.
Higher professionals in particular continue to enjoy many advantages over manual workers, and, for that matter, routine non-manual workers.
Barbara and John Ehrenreich — the professional-managerial class
Although many sociologists see professionals as a distinctive part of the upper middle class, others have argued that they have much in common with managers.
Arguing from a neo-Marxist point of view Barbara and John Ehrenreich claim that there is a distinctive ‘professional-managerial’ class, which consists of ‘salaried mental workers who do not own the means of production and whose major function in the social division of labor may be described broadly as the reproduction of capitalist culture and capitalist class relations’.
They estimate that 20–25% of the population are members of the professional-managerial class in the USA.
Members of the class include teachers, social workers, psychologists, entertainers, writers of advertising copy, and middle level administrators, managers and engineers.
In identifying this class the Ehrenreichs diverge from more conventional Marxist accounts of class in capitalist societies.
Unlike some other Marxists, the Ehrenreichs believe that there are three main classes in capitalist society rather than two.
Origins and functions
According to their account, the professional-managerial class started to develop towards the end of the nineteenth century as a class which specialized in the ‘reproduction of capitalist class relations’ became necessary.
The first function of the new class was to organize the process of production.
Some scientists and engineers are directly involved in developing productive technology for the benefit of the ruling class, while many managers are involved in applying the principle of ‘scientific management’ to the workforce (see pp. 434–5 for a description and discussion of scientific management).
The second function of the professional-managerial class is to exercise social control over the working class.
Thus teachers and social workers exercise social control over children and ‘problem’ members of society.
A third function is to propagate ruling class ideology.
This is carried out by groups such as entertainers, teachers and advertising copy writers.
The final function that the professional-managerial class perform for the ruling class is helping to develop the consumer goods market, ensuring that the working class consume new products produced by capitalism.
The overall role of the professional-managerial class then is to reproduce the relationship of domination and subordination between the ruling and subject classes.
Evidence of reproduction
Although the Ehrenreichs define the professional-managerial class in terms of the functions it performs for capitalism, they also advance empirical evidence to show that it is a distinct grouping within the stratification system.
For example, they claim that children of professional-managerial class parents are more than twice as likely to enter the professional-managerial class themselves, than the children of working-class parents.
Entry to the professional-managerial class depends largely upon educational qualifications, and the class helps to reproduce itself by devoting considerable effort to ensuring the educational success of its children.
In addition members of the class usually find marriage partners from the same class.
Interests
The Ehrenreichs believe that the professional-managerial class has quite different interests to the working class even though both groups consist of wage labourers.
The professional-managerial class is paid out of the surplus produced by the working class.
In the course of their work the professional-managerial class develop techniques to control the working class.
They also encourage the development of false class consciousness.
These differences of interest are reflected in the tension, distrust and conflict which is often evident between social workers and clients, managers and workers, and teachers and students.
The professional-managerial class also has different interests from the ruling class.
Both groups have an interest in maintaining the capitalist system, but the professional-managerial class have an interest in maximizing its own independence or autonomy; the ruling class, on the other hand, try to restrict it  as far as possible.
Managers and professionals justify or legitimate their position in terms of their technical expertise, objectivity, and rationality.
In these circumstances they cannot be seen to be sacrificing their independence for that would undermine their claims to being objective in taking decisions at work.
From this point of view the professional-managerial class are likely to try to maintain their position by forming themselves into professions.
Some groups of workers are more successful than others in achieving this.
The Ehrenreichs suggest that between 1880 and 1920 in the USA, medicine, law, social work and teaching established themselves as professions, whilst, for example, engineering did not.
The Ehrenreichs do accept that there is some degree of division within the professional-managerial class.
Some members of the class, including some managers, administrators, and engineers, work directly for industry and may aspire to join the ruling class.
Others are not employed directly by the ruling class and work in the liberal arts and service professions.
Although there may be some ‘suspicion and distrust’ between the two sections of the professional-managerial class, the Ehrenreichs stress that the division should not be exaggerated.
Professionals in academic institutions often have an administrative and managerial role within the institution; and over 80% of managers have had a college education, half of them studying liberal arts subjects.
Such divisions as there are, are no greater than those within the working class.
Class conflict
Having discussed the place of the professional-managerial class in the stratification system, the Ehrenreichs go on to consider the role that it has played in class conflict in the USA over recent decades.
They argue that during the 1960s the USA had a growing and increasingly confident professional-managerial class which came into conflict with the ruling class.
Students in particular began to demand greater independence from the ruling class, and claimed the right to run society more in their own interests than those of the ruling class.
Organizations such as Students for a Democratic Society contributed to the development of the ‘New Left’ whose main aim was to ensure that professionals, managers and students were not reduced to being the mere tools of the ruling class.
The Vietnam War was particularly important in stimulating the rise of the New Left.
The American capitalist state looked to universities to help them in their war effort, enlisting the help of scientists, engineers, psychologists and sociologists.
The Ehrenreichs claim that partly as a reaction against the actions of the government ‘large numbers of young people pushed professional-managerial class radicalism to its limits and found themselves, ultimately, at odds with their own class’.
Students turned against their universities and universities are the most important institutions for the professional-managerial class.
The growing radicalism was partly a consequence of the increasing recruitment of working-class students who were necessary to fill the rising number of professional-managerial class jobs.
One section of the New Left allied itself to the black working class who were demanding civil rights, and so acted against the narrow interests of the professional-managerial class.
In the 1970s these developments led to a split within the professional-managerial class.
One group distanced themselves from the class and adopted a communist ideology advocating the overthrow of capitalism by the working class.
The more moderate  group of radicals continued the traditions of the New Left by trying to work within the professions to improve society.
Criticisms of the Ehrenreichs
The Ehrenreichs provide an interesting attempt to analyse the position of one part of the ‘middle class’ within a neo-Marxist framework.
However, they have been criticized by Marxists and non-Marxists alike.
Nicholas Abercrombie and John Urry accuse them of failing to take account of ‘proletarianizing tendencies’ within the professional-managerial class.
After 1971 in the USA there was a reduction in demand for professional and managerial workers.
This led to a surplus of qualified workers and made it possible for their work and pay to be devalued.
Abercrombie and Urry also claim that the professional-managerial class is ‘proportionately and politically stronger’ in the USA than in other capitalist countries.
They therefore question the degree to which the views of the Ehrenreichs are applicable to Europe.
The American neo-Marxist Erik Olin Wright does not accept that there is a unified professional-managerial class.
He argues that capitalist societies remain polarized between two main classes: the ruling class and the working class.
He does not deny that there are groups of workers who are intermediate between these two classes, but he argues that they do not constitute a fully developed class.
Instead he sees them as occupying a number of strata which are in ‘contradictory class locations’.
Some of their interests coincide with those of the working class, and some with those of the ruling class, but they do not have a coherent set of interests of their own.
Weberian theories
Weberian and neo-Weberian sociologists generally reject the approach to defining and distinguishing classes adopted by the Ehrenreichs.
They deny that classes can be defined in terms of their functions for capitalism and instead stress the importance of the market situation of those in particular occupations.
This has led to one Weberian sociologist identifying a larger middle class than the professional-managerial class discussed by the Ehrenreichs.
From Giddens's point of view the middle class should also include lower level white-collar workers (for further details see p. 80).
However, the neo-Weberian sociologist John Goldthorpe, distinguishes a number of separate white-collar strata.
He denies that there is a single professional-managerial class (or as he calls it the service class), but instead he sees it as being split in two.
He distinguishes between higher grade managers, administrators and professionals, and those in lower grades but similar jobs.
Unlike Marxists and neo-Marxists, Goldthorpe believes that proprietors of businesses should be considered part of the upper and lower strata of the service class, and not part of the ruling class.
The implications of these various views for the analysis of the middle class as a whole will be considered after the lower middle class has been discussed.
(See pp. 80–81 for full details of Goldthorpe's class scheme).
THE LOWER MIDDLE CLASS
Routine white-collar workers include such groups as clerks, secretaries and shop assistants.
The growth in their numbers this century has led to a longstanding debate about their position in the class structure.
Some sociologists argue that they have become proletarianized, that is they have effectively become members of the working class.
Others claim that routine white-collar workers still belong to the middle class.
A third viewpoint suggests that they form an intermediate group between the middle and working classes.
Proletarianization
The theory of ‘proletarianization’ suggests that routine white-collar workers have become part of the proletariat and so can no longer be considered middle class.
This viewpoint has most usually been associated with Marxist sociologists who have questioned the assumption that the working class is a rapidly declining section of the population in capitalist societies.
They see routine non-manual workers as little different to manual workers: they neither own the means of production nor do they perform important social control functions for capitalists.
For example, the British Marxists Westergaard and Resler estimated that in 1913–14 male clerks earned 122% of the average manual wage, but by 1971 this had fallen to just 96%.
They argued that, at least with respect to earnings, ‘male clerks and shopworkers are now firmly among the broad mass of ordinary labour; and indeed often well down towards the bottom of the pile’.
Harry Braverman — the deskilling of clerical work
The American Marxist Harry Braverman supports the proletarianization thesis on the grounds that many routine non-manual jobs have become deskilled.
He argues that over the last century or so the number of white-collar jobs has increased rapidly, but at the same time the skill required to do the jobs has been reduced.
He calculates that in 1870 0.6% of the population of the USA were engaged in clerical work; by 1970 it had reached 18%.
However, at the same time the wages of clerical workers fell in relation to other occupational groups.
By 1970 in the USA they earned less on average than any category of manual worker.
According to Braverman, clerical workers in 1870 had many similarities to manual craft workers; both had wide ranging responsibilities and had plenty of opportunity to use their initiative and develop their skills.
Each company would employ a small number of clerical workers who would take care of all the dealings an enterprise had with the world outside.
Each clerk would have the knowledge and experience to deal with many different tasks, and would be a valued member of the workforce.
As companies grew larger and their clerical workforce expanded, clerical work was reorganized so that each worker specialized in particular tasks.
As a result the skills required became minimal.
As tasks were broken down the office became like a production line for mental work.
Clerical workers lost the opportunity to use their initiative and instead their work became highly regulated.
The nature of the workforce changed at the same time as the work.
Clerical work was  increasingly feminized: by 1970 75% of clerical workers in the USA were women.
Braverman also claims that most ‘service workers’ have been deskilled.
He says ‘the demand for the all-round grocery clerk, fruiterer and vegetable dealer, dairyman, butcher, and so forth, has long ago been replaced by a labor configuration in the supermarkets which calls for truck unloaders, shelf stockers, checkout clerks, meat wrappers, and meat cutters; of these only the last retain any semblance of skill, and none require any general knowledge of retail trade’.
Computerization has further reduced the skill required of checkout assistants, and the control of stock and the keeping of accounts have also become largely automated.
Braverman believes that as a consequence of the changes outlined above the skills required of most routine white-collar workers are now minimal.
Basic numeracy and literacy are often all that are required.
With mass compulsory education this century the vast majority of the population now have the necessary skills to undertake these types of work.
As a result the bargaining position of these workers when they try to find work or gain promotion is little better than that of manual workers.
David Lockwood — a Weberian perspective
According to many Marxists then, the positions in the class structure occupied by most routine non-manual workers have been proletarianized.
In an early study of clerks from a neo-Weberian point of view, however, David Lockwood denied that clerks had been proletarianized.
Lockwood did not follow Weber in identifying an upper class based on the ownership of property; he did, though, use a Weberian approach to distinguish between different groups of employees.
He suggested that there were three aspects of class situation'.
These were market situation, work situation and status situation.
By ‘market situation’ he was referring to such factors as wages, job security and promotion prospects.
By ‘work situation’ he meant social relationships at work between employers and managers and more junior staff; this involved consideration of how closely work was supervised.
By ‘status situation’ he meant the degree of prestige enjoyed by particular groups of workers in society.
In terms of market situation Lockwood admitted that the wages of clerical workers began to drop below the average for skilled manual workers from the 1930s onwards.
However, he claimed that in other respects clerks had retained distinct market advantages over manual workers.
They had more job security and were less likely to be laid off or made redundant.
They also worked shorter hours, had more chance of being promoted to supervisory and managerial positions, and they were more likely to be given fringe benefits such as membership of a pension scheme.
Some manual workers had only overtaken clerical workers in terms of pay because of the overtime they worked.
Lockwood reaches similar conclusions with regard to work situation.
He accepts that there have been changes, in particular the modern office has grown in size, but he denies that this has led to clerical workers becoming proletarian.
Compared to manual workers clerks still work in relatively small units, they do not work on huge factory floors.
Lockwood accepts that clerical work is often divided up into separate departments, but he does not believe that this has led to deskilling.
Lockwood believes that the division of the clerical workforce into  smaller groups with specialized roles leads to closer contacts and greater cooperation between them and management.
Furthermore, he claims that attempts to make clerical work more routine have had a limited impact because clerical skills and qualifications have not been standardized.
The job of each clerical worker therefore has unique elements.
It is not as easy to switch clerical workers around or to replace them as it is with manual workers.
Finally, in terms of status situation Lockwood is more willing to concede a deterioration in the position of the clerical workforce.
He attributes this to the rise of the modern office, mass literacy, the recruitment of growing numbers of clerical workers from manual backgrounds, and the increasing employment of female labour in these jobs.
Nevertheless, he does not believe that clerical workers have an identical status to the working class.
Nor do they have the same status as managers.
Lockwood believes that clerks are in a position of ‘status ambiguity’ which falls somewhere between the degree of status enjoyed by the middle and working classes.
John H. Goldthorpe — clerks as an intermediate strata
In a more recent study, John H. Goldthorpe et al .
also maintain that clerical workers fall between the working class and the middle class.
Like Lockwood they base their analysis on market and work situations, but they do not take account of status situation.
They believe that there is an ‘intermediate strata’ sandwiched between what they refer to as the working and service classes.
This intermediate strata also includes such groups as personal service workers, the self-employed, and supervisors of manual workers.
The intermediate group lacks any strong class identity because of the range of occupations within it, and because many of its members become socially mobile and move into a different class.
A. Stewart, K. Prandy and R.M. Blackburn — clerks and social mobility
Other sociologists have supported Lockwood and Goldthorpe in denying that clerical workers have become proletarian, but they have attacked the proletarianization thesis in a different way.
In a study based on a sample of male white-collar workers in firms employing over 500 people A. Stewart, K. Prandy and R.M. Blackburn argue that individual workers in the stratification system should be distinguished from the positions that they occupy.
To them whether or not routine white-collar work has become deskilled is largely irrelevant in discussing whether the workers in these jobs have become proletarian.
This is because most male clerks do not stay as clerks for all their working lives.
According to their figures only 19% of those who start work as clerks are still employed in clerical work by the time that they are 30.
By that age, 51% have been promoted out of clerical work and for them it is merely a stepping-stone to a higher status non-manual job.
The remaining 30% leave clerical work before they are 30.
Stewart et al .
claim that many of those who are promoted before they are 30 embark upon successful management careers and they end up in unambiguously middle-class jobs.
According to this study, clerical work is merely an occupational category through which men pass.
Stewart et al .
say that ‘clerks have diverse relationships  to the labour market’.
Young men who take clerical work as the first step in a management career can be considered middle class.
Older men who change from manual work to non-manual clerical work late in their careers can more reasonably be regarded as proletarian, but as Stewart et al .
point out, as the latter have always been proletarian, it is senseless to see them as being proletarianized.
R. Crompton and G. Jones — a defence of the proletarianization thesis
Rosemary Crompton and Gareth Jones have strongly attacked the work of Stewart et al .
Crompton and Jones studied 887 white-collar employees in three large bureaucracies: a local authority, a life assurance company, and a major bank.
They advance four main arguments to undermine the conclusions of Stewart et al .
1They point out that the study by Stewart et al .
ignored female white-collar workers.
In their own sample, a large majority of clerical workers, 70%, were female.
Furthermore, they found that female clerical workers were much less likely to achieve promotion than their male counterparts.
Crompton and Jones found that 82% of female white-collar workers in their sample were on clerical grades, compared to 30% of men.
Only 12% of female workers had reached supervisory and 1% managerial positions, while the equivalent figures for men were 36% and 34%.
Thus, the high rates of male upward social mobility out of clerical work were at the expense of the large number of female workers who were left behind.
They argue that even if male clerical workers cannot be considered proletarian because of their upward mobility, this is not true of female clerks.
2 Crompton and Jones point out that the high rates of upward mobility for men in the study by Stewart et al .
depended not only on the immobility of women, but also on the 30% of male clerks who left this type of employment.
Crompton and Jones suggest that in the future it will not necessarily be the case that male clerks will be able to enjoy so much upward mobility.
If the number of managerial jobs does not continue expanding, more and more men may become trapped in the way that female clerks already are.
3 They question the view that promotion to managerial and administrative jobs necessarily represents genuine upward mobility.
On the basis of their own study they claim that many managerial and administrative jobs have become increasingly routine and require little use of initiative.
Crompton and Jones claim that employers use the grade structure to encourage loyalty and dedication from employees, but in reality many of the lower level management and administrative jobs are little different to clerical work.
Promotion might not necessarily represent a change in class position for all white-collar workers.
4 Crompton and Jones suggest that Stewart et al .
ignored one of the central issues in the proletarianization debate, that is, whether clerical work had actually been deskilled.
Crompton and Jones disagree that class consists only of people, and has nothing to do with places in the stratification system.
They say ‘classes can be conceived of as sets of places within the social division of labour’.
If the  places occupied by clerical workers have lost their advantages over working-class jobs, then clerks can be considered proletarian.
Crompton and Jones carried out detailed investigations of the three institutions they studied and found strong evidence that proletarianization had taken place.
91% of their sample of clerical workers did not exercise any control over how they worked, they simply followed a set of routines without using their initiative.
As a result their work required very little skill.
Deskilling appeared to be closely linked to computerization: least skill was required by the clerks at the most computerized of the institutions, the local authority.
Crompton and Jones concluded that clerical workers were a white-collar proletariat, and that female clerical workers in particular have little chance of promotion to what could be called middle-class or service-class jobs.
G. Marshall, H. Newby, D. Rose and C. Vogler-clerks and personal service workers
In a more recent contribution to the debate Gordon Marshall, Howard Newby, David Rose and Carolyn Vogler have rejected Crompton and Jones's views that clerical work has been deskilled.
Marshall et al .
do accept, though, that personal service workers such as shop assistants, check-out and wrap operators, and receptionists are little different to the working class.
Their evidence is based on structured interviews carried out with a sample of 1770 British men and women.
In one of their questions they asked respondents whether their job required more, less or the same skill as when they had started work.
Overall only 4% claimed that their jobs required less skill, and only 4% of women in lower-grade white-collar jobs claimed to have been deskilled.
No men in the latter type of job claimed that skill requirements had gone down.
Workers were also questioned about such issues as whether they could design and plan important parts of their work, decide on day-to-day tasks, and decide the amount and pace of their work.
From this evidence Marshall et al .
also conclude that clerical work has not been proletarianized.
They support the views of Goldthorpe and Lockwood that clerical workers are in an intermediate class between the working and service classes.
However, they did find that personal service workers tended to give different answers to the questions about autonomy at work.
For example, 80% of female personal service workers said they could not design and plan important parts of their work; 96% said they could not decide their starting and finishing times; and 63 % said they could not initiate new tasks during their work.
Marshall et al .
conclude that personal service workers are ‘virtually indistinguishable’ from the working class.
The work of Marshall et al .
draws attention to the position of personal service workers in the stratification system, and they, compared to clerical workers, have been a somewhat neglected part of the workforce in stratification research.
Certainly it is hard to see how it is possible to regard, for example, check-out assistants as middle class given their low wages, working conditions, and lack of autonomy at work.
The rejection of the proletarianization theory for clerical workers by Marshall et al .
must, however, be regarded with some caution.
In particular, the significance of the small number who say their work has been deskilled is open to question.
The deskilling argument as advanced by Braverman refers to a timespan of a century or more, stretching back far earlier than the  experience of those currently employed in such jobs.
Indeed, Marshall et al .
themselves admit that ‘a definitive answer to the question of job techniques and job autonomy could be provided only by systematic and direct observation over a prolonged period of time’.