

Preparations
The woman walked round the corner of the house and saw a snake consuming a large Tuscan toad.
The victim was motionless, looking about it only slightly puzzled, blinking, whilst the snake attacked its leg.
The toad had the appearance of a fat businessman being done some sexual service by a hard-faced girl on the make and doing his best not to notice.
The snake, with its sleek, shiny head and curled body, was long and smartly patterned in grey and black.
The woman, wishing to put an end to this outrage and feeling involved on the side of the toad, picked up a stick.
But as she straightened, armed, the nervous snake abandoned its prey and slithered away into the shadows under a fig tree.
There it was lost among the wild flowers and in the spring-grass.
The toad sat on, unafraid, bleeding slightly and blinking into the sun.
The woman dropped her stick and stood looking at it, bewildered.
‘Mrs Pargeter.’
A man came up behind her and she turned towards him.
He was dressed in a blue blazer and white trousers as though for some pre-war cruise.
The sunlight behind him penetrated the thinness of his ginger hair and polished his scalp.
‘Is there anything more I can show you?’
‘No, thanks.
Nothing more.’
She looked back towards the fig tree and saw that the toad  had lumbered off into the tangled garden, perhaps to rejoin its tormentor.
‘Do you honestly think,’ she asked, standing in front of the stone walls and cool archways of the villa, ‘that it'll be suitable?’
‘Suitable for what?’
‘For children, of course.’
‘My dear Mrs Pargeter.
You've read the advertisement?’
Read it?
She had learnt it by heart.
Villa to let near small Tuscan town.
Suit couple early forties with three children (females preferred).
Recently installed swimming-pool may compensate for sometimes impassable road.
Owner suggests preliminary viewing to prevent disappointment or future misunderstandings .
‘Doesn't it say,Suit couple…with three children ?
‘It says that.’
She had noticed it particularly.
‘I should've thought that was pretty plain.’
The man smiled as though that were quite enough on the subject of children.
‘I'll be around in the summer to show you the ropes, depend upon it.
You'll want to know a source of Gordon's gin, angostura bitters, streaky bacon.
All life's little essentials.
I can even find potted shrimps when the wind's in the right direction.
The Financial Times may be a bit of a problem.
Hard to come by in Mondano-in-Chianti.
I happen to know of a supply in Siena but I'd rather you kept it dark.
It's not the sort of knowledge one likes to have spread around.’
‘Don't bother.’
There was sunshine on her face, an unusual sensation in March, and she felt light-hearted now that the snake and its co-operative victim had withdrawn.
‘The Financial Times is probably the least of our worries.’
And then she added, as casually as possible, ‘Grey with sort of black markings.
Would that be a grass snake?’
‘I don't know.
I've never seen one.’
‘No grass snakes around here at all?’
‘No snakes of any kind,’ he said firmly.
‘Not as far as I'm  concerned.
And don't worry, Mrs Pargeter.
No scorpions getting into your slippers at night either.
Seen all you want to see, have you?’
She looked for the last time.
The doves gave up strutting and whitening the old ping-pong table and set off, flapping busily towards the purple hillside.
However, their flight was soon aborted and they settled back on the table.
‘Yes.’
She had seen all she wanted to see.
‘Then perhaps you'll run me into Mondano?’
The seat in the rented Fiat was warm under her skirt.
The man sat beside her and, after asking her permission, lit one of the thin Havana cigars he happened to know where to come by.
His features were regular but he had a distinct cast in one eye, so that he couldn't stare straight at her without looking somewhere else.
Apart from that he was rather a handsome man, she thought, if you happened to like that type of thing.
Molly Pargeter's drive down the long, rutted track across the hills to Mondano was part of a journey that had started in her childhood and only reached its present stage when, in the middle of a freezing London January, she read the advertisement in the Daily Telegraph: Villa to let near small Tuscan town .
She had always had, as she would say with that breathless half of a nervous laugh with which she met anyone's emotions including her own, this sort of a ‘thing’ about Italy.
Her father had wanted her to turn out to be something exotic, an actress perhaps, or even, in the camera-obsessed sixties, a model, and he couldn't conceal his disappointment at the growth of a big-boned daughter who seemed without ambition.
Her mother spent most of her afternoons resting and Molly's was a lonely childhood.
She would kneel on the floor behind the sofa and pull out the tall books of art reproductions.
Avoiding those which formed part of her father's collection  of naked Indian or Japanese bodies locked together in unusually gymnastic postures, she had, throughout her childhood, stuck to the Italian schools of painting.
So she gazed and her finger traced the outlines of nymphs — thinner, higher cheek-boned than she could ever hope to be, garlanded with flowers, stepping barefoot through the forest; and sometimes she saw an exhausted Venus, a hand below her belly, lying in a countryside where oxen were driven and ships set sail on uncharted seas.
She had looked seriously at soft-eyed young men, pierced, as often as not, by arrows.
At the chilly boarding-school to which her parents sent her in the mistaken belief that she would be less lonely among girls of her own age, the prizes for mathematics — a subject which she didn't particularly care for but which came easily to her — were framed reproductions of the works of Italian painters.
Duccios and Signorellis and Martinis hung by her bedside at a time when other girls pinned up Elvis and Cliff or even Paul Anka.
Such pictures she always found calming to her nerves and she had no need of the large net which was hung at the top of the staircase, to catch those distracted adolescents who attempted suicide in the converted country house where she received her education.
Villa to let near small Tuscan town Suit couple early, forties with three children (females preferred).
When she was sixteen, in the age of Gucci shoes and Lambrettas, and being taken by her father on birthday treats to his favourite trattoria in the King's Road (white lavatory tiles and low-slung lights, waiters singing ‘O Sole Mio’ and her father embarrassingly ordering due cannelloni per favore and molto formaggio for my daughter'), Molly was conscious of becoming attracted to men with a lot of black hair round the bracelets of their wrist-watches.
She went on a school trip to Tuscany and saw many of the  pictures she had known for so long.
At first they seemed brighter, smaller and cruder than she had been led to expect by the polite reproductions.
Her friend, Rosie Fortinbras, always getting lost between the Pinacoteca and the Duomo in Siena, boasted of having kissed her way round all the waiters in the restaurant in the Piazza del Campo, saving for the last, like a favourite soft creamy centre, little Vittorio with the face of a page-boy in the corner of an Adoration of the Magi.
‘Kiss?
You can call it kiss if you like.
It's a quite different word in Italian.’
Rosie whispered ‘scopare ’ to her as they sat beside each other at a concert in a dark and chilly palace behind the square.
‘What's that mean?’
‘It means ‘he ground himself into me’, as it says in the book I bought at the airport.’
Rosie's further explanation was lost in a burst of Vivaldi and Molly didn't believe her.
All the same, the holiday had excited and disturbed her.
She never forgot the sound of Italy, brutal as the sunshine on the hard pavements, and the nightly passage of crowds in the Piazza.
Sharing a single ice-cream, she and Rosie watched an ever-circulating stage army of lovers arm in arm, young and old, walking very fast as though to give the illusion of purpose.
Among them, young men with shining, pointed shoes astride snarling Vespas shouted,Ciao bellissima but usually to someone else.
As the years passed, the sights and sounds became less alarming in her memory and she came to think of Italy as the place where she had been happy.
Three children .
Why females preferred ?
It sounds a bit fishy.’
‘Perhaps they think girls do less damage.’
‘Damage?’
‘To the furniture.’
‘I'm not sure I like the sound of it.’
Molly's husband frowned.
He looked, as always at the prospect of a new  departure, an undertaking likely to cost money, desperate for ways of escape.
Although he had no dark hairs growing round his wrist-watch, Hugh Pargeter had, in his youth, the regular features and slightly curled hair of young men who model knitting patterns.
He had gone into his father's firm of solicitors where his looks endeared him to wives in divorce cases, although his extreme reluctance to take decisions prevented them obtaining the best results.
As a rule he would wait for others — judges, opponents, even his wife — to decide matters of importance.
If things turned out well he would quietly take the credit.
If not, his brown eyes wore an expression as helpless and martyred as those of Saint Sebastian in the paintings Molly had always admired.
‘What do we know of these people?
We know nothing of them.’
As a lawyer, he had learnt that the safest course was inactivity; if you don't do things, you can't usually be blamed for them.
Now he hoped he had found a fatal flaw in his wife's plans and they could, as usual, spend the summer holiday with his mother in Dorset.
‘Nothing, until I write to the box number.
Of course, I shall get full details.’
Hugh sighed.
Once she had written, another decision would have been taken, and he would tell them in the office that they were having a stab at Italy this year, he'd managed to track down a villa in Tuscany.
So much of their lives, each of the three children, the house in Kensington Park Road and now, it seemed, their summer holiday, followed inexorably after Molly had made a decision.
It was not only the prospect of Tuscany that had captivated Molly, it was the strange provision about three children, females preferred.
Her husband had found this fishy, and perhaps for that reason it filled her with intense curiosity.
Her life had not been particularly adventurous and at school, where her friend Rosie Fortinbras courted adventure, she had  been regarded as a dull girl and a plodding worker.
At night, however, or during the long school holidays, she read detective stories, earning the contempt of her father who told her that his answer to the question ‘Who dunnit?’ was invariably ‘Who cares?’
But, indulging a passion more secret than her love for Italian painting, Molly had early gone off with Holmes and Watson in a cab through the pea-souper, or sat on the edge of her chair while Poirot summoned the guests to assemble in the library after tea.
She read with great attention, few dues escaped her, and it was with a suppressed little scream of excitement and fear that this large, lonely girl would guess the murderer three or four chapters before the end.
She disposed quickly of red herrings, usually sought out the least probable suspect and rarely failed.
So why should anyone advertise their house as being specially suitable for a couple in their early forties with three children (females preferred)?
The fact that she and Hugh happened to fit the bill seemed to give her every opportunity for finding out.
Accumulating the evidence would be an occupation to keep her going whilst she organized her children's lives with Mrs O'Keefe, who came in each day to look after them.
Some of it arrived about two weeks after she had written to the box number, in the shape of three typewritten pages.
There were also several coloured photographs of the villa ‘La Felicità’; all taken from a low angle, so that it seemed to tower against the sky; a place where the owners might appear on the battlements to a flourish of trumpets and a cry of heralds.
The swimming-pool, also shot from ground-level, might have been a sizeable lake, only the distant, slightly blurred figure of a man betrayed the scale.
There was a photograph of the bedroom in which the bed appeared gargantuan, with a great carved wooden headboard and foot, neatly made, although somebody's sunglasses had been left on the patchwork quilt.
There was a picture of the terrace on  which meals were taken ‘except during thunderstorms’ and several of the garden, but none of the kitchen or of the children's accommodation.
Each photograph had stamped upon the back the words PRIVATE PROPERTY.
She turned next to the typewritten pages.
The work was divided into various sections, the first being headed General remarks: The villa ‘La Felicità’ can only be enjoyed by the observance of strict rules and a certain discipline.
Most of these rules will be obvious.
The wasteful use of the bathrooms, for instance, can turn a summer holiday into a time of intense anxiety and the purchase of water by the lorry load may strain the budget of even the best-heeled family.
None of the following devices should, on any account, be switched on at the same time: the immersion heater in the master bathroom, the swimming-pool filter or the dishwashing machine.
If a hair-drier is in use, it's generally wise to temporarily disconnect the refrigerator.
More detailed instructions will be found taped on the walls over the appliances concerned.
Above all, avoid flushing the lavatory next to the small sitting-room more than once in any given half hour or serious results may follow .
Whose was this voice which Molly found to be both bossy and patronizing?
She turned to the end of the document and saw a signature S. KETTERING over the address of the villa, LA FELICITÀ, MONDANO-IN-CHIANTI, SIENA, ITALY.
Probably a Sam and not a Selina Kettering, she thought, and the signs of an absentee male landlord's domination became more pronounced in the final paragraph.
In conclusion, ‘La Felicità’ has a certain atmosphere and is used to special treatment which we ask you to respect.
The house is unaccustomed to the sound of transistor radios or record-players by the pool.
There is adequate equipment to play music on the lowest shelf of the bookcase in the small sitting-room.
We would also ask you to observe the tradition of dinner on the terrace taking place by candlelight.
Those alarmed by insect life should consider holidaying in Skegness .
S. Kettering had gone too far.
Why should the children be consumed by mosquitoes and confined to three or four scratched LPs?
‘Frank Sinatra Goes down Memory Lane’ she imagined or ‘The Magic Flute of James Galway’, tucked into their disintegrating sleeves on the bottom shelf.
And then she read The villa will appeal in particular to devotees of Italian painting.
It makes a perfect centre for the study of the Sienese school.
More importantly, perhaps, the work of Piero della Francesca can be followed from the frescos in Arezzo to the pregnant Madonna in the small chapel at Monterchi.
Enthusiasts can take the trail to Sansepolcro and on, across the Mountains of the Moon, to see the sublime ‘Flagellation’ in the Ducal Palace at Urbino, undoubtedly the greatest small picture in the world.
Those making this journey should ensure that the stopcock is closed and all electrical appliances switched off before departure.
The pleasures of art tend to be diminished by returning to a complete absence of hot bath water .
Now, in spite of the unsympathetic tone of his letter, S. Kettering had won her.
Molly could put up with the mysterious fallibility of the electric devices; she would overcome her husband's reluctance at the prospect of any sort of adventure.
She was going, at some time that summer, to follow the Piero della Francesca trail across the Mountains of the Moon to undoubtedly the world's greatest small picture.
And if the shadowy Mr Kettering's requirements had some secret explanation, as she suspected, she was going to find it out.
So she wrote to the box number and suggested a date for a preliminary viewing to avoid disappointment or misunderstandings.
Everything was working out more easily than she could have hoped.
Leave the Florence-Siena raccordo and follow signs to Conterchi.
In Conterchi take the concealed right-turning between the church and the supermercato, then left under the bridge, following signs to S. Pietro in Crespi.
In S. Pietro, turn right by the  fountain and immediately left, just past the posto di polizia.
After two kilometres you will cross a bridge and see a large ilex tree on your right.
You are best advised to turn left down the dirt road which provides a short cut (known only to the Kettering family) to Mondano-in-Chianti.
In Mondano, turn left again by Signora Fantoni's alimentari (best mozzarella cheese in the district) and immediately double back to the right down a single-track road which will bring you out behind the Castello Crocetto (most reliable source of Chianti).
From then on the unmade road (beware of pot-holes) will take you straight to ‘La Felicit à'.; anti Further orders, typed and duplicated, lay beside Molly on the empty passenger-seat.
In front of her the motorway shimmered in the sun like the sands of a desert.
She was in a mood of high excitement, flicking on her indicator light and passing thundering lorries and bucketing Fiats, overloaded with Italian families, with unexpected expertise.
She was elated by a further message, not typed this time, but written, apparently in haste, on paper printed with the villa's address.
Will be at the house between two and three on the afternoon of the 12th, getting things ready for the children's holidays.
Look forward to meeting you then .
The last document was signed, as always S. KETTERING.
This almost welcoming message kept her going down the raccordo to Siena.
After she'd turned off, she became tired and nervous.
She drove slowly in Conterchi so as not to miss the turning and Italians hooted at her or raised their fingers in gestures she knew to be obscene.
Once, knowing she couldn't be heard, she shouted back and was conscious of looking like a pinkish, fair-haired and flustered fish with its mouth moving silently behind glass.
Her hands sweated and soaked the steering-wheel.
In San Pietro she drove fast to avoid abuse, missed the road by the police station and had to do a U-turn to obey her directions.
As her anxiety grew the small towns and villages looked grey and inhospitable.
Steel shutters  barricaded most of the shops and those that were open displayed only a few boxes of tired vegetables and strings of plastic toys.
In Mondano-in-Chianti three old men, busily engaged in sitting on a wall beside the petrol pumps, seemed to jeer at her and a child threw a small stone which rattled against her car bonnet.
She had doubts about the road but then found herself driving along the grey fortress walls of what she hoped might be the Castello Crocetto.
At its gates a tall woman leading a Borzoi dog viewed her passing with disdain.
And then she dived and rattled down the dirt-track which seemed to go on for ever across an empty hillside.
As the insects met a sticky death on her windscreen and brambles and gorse bushes clawed at the bright sides of her hired Fiat, she wondered if she should have stayed at home and if she would ever, in fact, see ‘La Felicità’.
Suddenly she did.
The track had climbed, twisted, rocked her in its pot-holes and then swept down in a flurry of loose stones and flying dust, to a house gradually lit, theatrically, as the sun returned from behind a stray afternoon cloud.
Her first thought was that the photographs hadn't lied.
The place looked fortified, not as a grim walled castle but impregnable all the same, with thick walls and, in the centre of the square, unornamented two-storey building, a stocky tower from which arrows or muskets might have been shot or red-hot ploughshares hurled down on invaders.
The iron-studded door in the central archway looked impervious to battering-rams, but above it, behind a line of similar arches, was the big open terrace on which S. Kettering expected the family to dine — an instruction, Molly thought, which it would be no particular hardship to follow.
Three great stone pots contained geraniums which trailed down to the walls beneath them, softening the stern appearance of the house.
In the centre of a pavement leading to the front door was a  well head with an ornate ironwork structure over it.
She had no idea of the age of ‘La Felicità’ but such houses had stood on the white furrowed hillsides in the pictures she knew by heart.
She felt then that S. Kettering's almost military orders were appropriate and added to the feeling of security about the place.
She parked under a straw-covered shelter and got out slowly, still vibrating.
The silence was underlined by the drumming of grasshoppers and she noticed that there was no other car which might have brought S. Kettering.
The door she tried was unyielding; the bell she pulled echoed inside some shuttered hallway but nobody answered.
Her confidence, which had returned on her first view of the house, once more ebbed.
She wanted to pee and she walked round the house in search of a bush.
It was there that she saw the man lying on the plastic strips of an off-white metal reclining chair beside the pool, which was undoubtedly smaller than it had looked in the photograph.
His straw hat was balanced on his forehead, his jacket lay folded on the concrete beside him, and she noticed that he wore balding suede shoes and some form of club or regimental tie.
‘You've arrived.’
He opened one eye and said, ‘You must be a practical sort of person.’
‘The directions were brilliant, actually.’
She knew she sounded effusive but she remembered the lordliness of S. Kettering's style and wished to propitiate him.
‘Some people,’ he told her, ‘get horribly lost in Conterchi.’
‘Poor them!’
She wanted to assure him that she wasn't that kind of idiot.
‘So you drove here straight from Pisa?’
‘Yes.’
All the bushes she could see were small and scrubby and she couldn't find an excuse to leave S. Kettering and double back to the front of the house.
‘Then you'll want to use the facilities.’
He stood up smartly  and she followed him with gratitude as he took from his pocket a large bunch of keys, from each of which dangled a carefully written label.
The chain requires one sharp downward pull.
Don't be tentative or give repeated tugs which achieve nothing .
So read the notice in the particular facility to which he led her.
She pulled sharply and was rewarded.
She rejoined the man, embarrassed by the sound of the cascade behind her.
‘Managed it first go.’
He smiled at her.
‘Unusually masterful.’
‘This’— she held the fluttering pages of description in her hand —‘must be the small sitting-room.’
The room was lit by a shaft of sunlight from the single open shutter.
The furniture seemed large and dark, pieces designed for a grander room.
‘What's this used for?’
‘For anything, I imagine, that you have a mind to.
The big sitting-room's downstairs.
Converted from the cowsheds.
You could do anything in there.
Get up a musical comedy.’
‘Is that what you do?’
‘Good heavens, no.’
He looked at her as though it was she who had made the unusual suggestion.
‘That's not my style of thing at all.’
‘And the children's bedrooms?’
‘Top floor, I should think.
I haven't much personal experience.
Not of where children sleep.’
‘I should like to see them, please.’
‘I suppose, if you're really keen on it.’
‘I've come all this way…’ she smiled.
‘And so you have.
I'm here to help you.
Absolutely all I can.’
He led her quickly up a staircase which began by being broad and stone and went on up to twist woodenly to the top of the tower.
She followed the short-back-and-sides hair-cut of this curious S. Kettering, who, apparently, never said goodnight to his children.
‘How many have you got?’
The rooms he opened for her had few signs of childish occupation.
There were some rows of books, bright bed-covers and cushions, some reproductions such as she had once had of Italian paintings.
There were no photographs, posters, record-players, piles of clothing from Oxfam shops, drawings pinned to the wall — nothing much to indicate children at all.
‘Myself, absolutely none,’ the man told her.
‘It's been the experience of my chums that offspring break up marriages.
Mother gets wrapped up in the kids and the poor old husband gets left on his ownio.’
‘But you said you'd be here getting things ready for the children's holidays…’
‘Checking up, yes.
Seeing that nothing's drowned in the pool recently.’
The man looked at her with sudden amusement as a penny dropped.
‘You hadn't taken me for Kettering?’
He laughed at her confusion.
‘I'm not Kettering, or anywhere near it.
The name's Fosdyke.
William Fosdyke.
I'm cursed with living in Mondano all the year round, all through the rains of January and Feb.
So I do things for chaps from the U.K. Keep an eye on their properties.
And the like.’
Of course, she told herself, she should have known at once that he wasn't Kettering.
Kettering would have been a less accessible and more commanding presence.
‘No, I'm certainly not him,’ Fosdyke went on, garrulous after her mistake had been discovered.
‘Wish I were sometimes.
Lucky fellow, Kettering.
He's got ‘La Felicità’, of course.
And his marriage; that's something I miss.
Mrs K. thinks the world of Kettering.
One hundred per cent devotion.
Kettering, not to put too fine a point on it, is the apple of her eye.’
They stood in the single child's bedroom and Molly joined in a short, silent tribute to the Ketterings' marriage, whilst some large, blundering insect bumped against a window that had been long dosed.
‘I lost my wife,’ Fosdyke told her.
‘Many years ago.’
‘I'm sorry.’
‘Oh, that's all right.
I mean literally lost her.
We went shopping in Brighton.
We arranged to meet at twelve-thirty under the clock.
She never showed up.
Missing, believed to have scarpered with the manager of Boots.
Women are curious creatures.
Nothing personal, Mrs Pargeter.’
She did her best to become businesslike.
‘I think this will do splendidly for our three.’
She crossed to the window and looked down to where the pool sparkled in the early sunshine.
‘Got snaps of them, have you?’
Mr Fosdyke asked her.
‘What?’
‘I'll bet you carry snaps of your young.
I know Mrs Kettering does.
I'd feel very privileged if you'd let me see them.’
So she opened her handbag and produced for the man with the scarpered wife a selection, some faded a little and creased with age.
Although mistrusting children, he showed an absorbed interest as he took the photographs and gazed at Henrietta (fourteen), Samantha (just ten) and the baby Jacqueline (now three and born after a long period during which Hugh had displayed a lack of interest in physical contact).
As soon as Fosdyke had taken the pictures, she felt that she had shown him too much of her private life and put out her hand to receive them back.
‘Fine little family,’ he said, releasing them.
‘They look as though they'd fit in jolly well at ‘La Felicità’.’
‘I think,’ Molly said firmly, ‘I'd like to have one more look round.
By myself this time.’
‘Of course.
Be my guest.
Or rather’— he stood with one hand in his blazer pocket, squinting only a little —‘the guest of Mr Kettering.’
When she looked round the house on her own, it seemed more impressive.
The big downstairs room might have been a converted cowshed, but when she opened the tall shutters and  the sunlight poured in, it looked more like a state apartment.
At one end there was a platform with a piano on it, so Fosdyke might, for all she l–new, have been right about the musical comedies.
The kitchen was a huge stone cavern with an open fireplace, the size of a small room, beside which logs were piled so that she could see herself (but certainly not Hugh) barbecuing thick steaks on an iron grill, turning them over with tongs the size of a medieval weapon.
In the bedroom cupboard, scented with lavender, a man's shirt and a woman's white skirt swung among the empty coat-hangers.
None of the drawers was locked; all of them were empty.
Looking around the bedroom, she saw that it was almost exactly as it had been in the photograph, although now there was a book open and face downwards on the patchwork quilt.
She wondered who had been reading so recently on the carefully made bed, or if this fat book, which she now saw to be a collection of Sherlock Holmes stories, were a relic of the past summer, and the maid, or whoever cleared the house, was devotedly keeping her employer's place.
She also left the book undisturbed but felt, as soon as she saw the title, a further fellow feeling with S. Kettering.
Her inspection of the bedroom finished, she walked down the staircase into the coolness of the stone-flagged hallway.
A large collection of sun-hats hung on pegs in the entrance hall, bowls were filled with dried lavender and a huge pottery jar was crammed with walking-sticks, some of which had ornate silver handles.
By the time she reached the front door the house, she knew, had to be hers for the summer.
If it had a secret she would do her best to discover it and she was not going to miss the trail across the Mountains of the Moon to what was undoubtedly the greatest small picture in the world.
Molly Pargeter, a woman of forty, whose hair was kept in place with difficulty, might have looked like one of the larger Graces in the paintings she admired had not her size caused  her such embarrassment that she lowered her head and stooped a little as she walked.
She was a woman of mixed awkwardness and determination.
Now dressed in striped cotton with sensible shoes and a cardigan, she stepped into the sunshine and walked round the corner of the house.
And there she caught a snake consuming a large Tuscan toad.
As she drove William Fosdyke back to Mondano he assured her that he would be always at her disposal and could guarantee to make her family holiday a success.
‘You know what the Brits in this part of Tuscany call me?’ he asked her.
‘Signor Fixit.
They know they can rely on me, you see.
And I must say that gives me a great pleasure.’
She left him in front of a café and as she drove away to follow the complex instructions back to the raccordo she saw him in her mirror, standing with his hand still raised in the sort of military salute with which he'd taken his leave of her.
‘You really liked the place?’
‘Of course.
I loved it.’
‘Can we afford it?’
‘I can afford it,’ she assured him.
A legacy from a great-aunt had bought their house and provided her with a small income.
She was free to dream of paintings and detective stories.
‘No drawbacks?’
Hugh's voice betrayed his disappointment.
‘Absolutely no drawbacks whatever.
Of course, we must be careful to see that the children wear shoes.’
‘Shoes?’
He sounded more hopeful.
‘Why shoes?’
‘Prickles in the grass.
Things like that.
It's really all very wild.
But beautiful.’
She didn't tell him about the snake.
Had she done so, he might have had a reason to object to the holiday and a great deal of trouble would have been saved.
‘I hear you're going to take that house in Italy.’
The elderly voice, half a challenge and half a tease, came down the telephone to Molly as she was in the middle of giving Jacqueline her supper.
She popped a toast soldier into her own mouth to give herself the strength to deal with her father.
‘I called you earlier.
Sam answered, she seemed to be alone in the house…’
‘She wasn't alone.
Mrs O'Keefe was here.’
And Gamps,’ Sam said.
‘You'll never guess.
We rented this unbelievable posh villa.’
How pleasant it is to have money, heigh ho!
Of course, I could never have your patience and study the stock exchange prices, Molly Coddle.
I'd far rather do something exciting, like sit here and watch my fingernails grow.’
Not for the first time she wondered how on earth her father had persuaded the children to call him ‘Gamps’ and decided that he had done it for the sole purpose of driving her mad.
With the same end in view, no doubt, he called her ‘Molly Coddle’— a name he had never thought to use when she was a child — and he insisted on changing the sex of his grandchildren so that Henrietta became Henry or Hal, Samantha was naturally Sam, and the three-year-old Jacqueline ‘Jack the Lad’.
So far as her father was concerned, Molly didn't know what to call him.
She had never responded to his  embarrassing invitation, made to her during the permissive sixties, to use ‘Haverford’, his Christian name.
Now that he was in his mid-seventies he signed his rare letters to her ‘Daddy’ or even ‘Pops’.
When they spoke she did her best to avoid calling him anything.
‘That was my toast soldier and you took it,’ said Jacqueline.
‘I've been brushing up on my Italian,’ Molly's father went on, ‘with the aid of an extremely sexy-sounding signorina I got on a tape from the Fulham Public Library.
We have spent some passionate evenings together changing traveller's cheques and looking for medicine to cure stomach disorders.
Each night I try to memorize a spot of Dante.
I have it in English down one side of the page and in Italian on the other.’
‘It was mine!’
The child's voice rose in righteous indignation as Molly bit desperately into another toast soldier.
‘Oh, shut up,’ Molly said, ‘and don't be so selfish.’
‘Selfish?’
Her father's voice protested.
‘I haven't said a single word about joining you in Italy.’
‘I was talking to Jacqueline.’
She restrained herself from pinching another soldier.
She always found the supper she cooked for the children irresistible and when she gave them bacon and baked beans she would swoop down on their plates like a vulture on a battlefield.
She didn't like herself for it.
‘I wasn't talking to you, of course.’
‘As a matter of fact, I had taken it for granted that you wouldn't want a boring old fart like me trailing after you round Siena.’
‘I never said that.
You know I never did.’
She resented the guilt she felt because the thought had crossed her mind.
‘Believe it or not, Molly Coddle, I rang up quite simply to wish you arrivederci .’
‘It's not until August.
We shan't be going until then.’
‘And where shall I be in August?
Set out on the Great Package Tour of the Skies.’
It was her father's habit to refer  to his approaching death as a sort of cosmic joke.
‘I suppose I might have liked one last lunch in the Piazza del Campo.’
‘Don't do that, please!’
Molly shouted.
Jacqueline, starved of toast soldiers, had slid from her chair and, having circled the table, was starting to de-gut the loaf of bread.
‘Don't do what?’ the old voice crackled down the telephone.
‘I suppose you're accusing me of trying to manipulate you.’
‘I never said that.’
‘I'm not manipulating you at all.
I'm merely stating facts.
I shall not be with you much longer and I may well not see Italy again.’
‘I told you.
I'm busy.
It's Jacky's tea-time.’
‘What a full, rich life you lead!
Could you just look in your diary.
Let me know when it's not bath-night and you can have a few minutes’ chat with your aged Pops.’
‘I've got to go now.’
She meant it.
‘Don't sound so serious .
You know me better than that, don't you?
I was only teasing.
Only having that quaint old thing, a joke .
So out of fashion nowadays.
I shall be perfectly happy at home this summer, having a very meaningful relationship with Signorina Berlitz.
You know old Nancy Leadbetter lives the spit of an olive stone from Mondano?
Remind me to kit you out with a letter of introduction…’
‘Please!
Leave the bread alone!’
‘Of course, if I were with you, Nancy would have us all over to dinner.’
He rang off then, before she had a chance to reply.
As Molly put down the telephone, she saw Jacqueline, her mouth full of dough, staring at her with the large, accusing eyes of an Oxfam poster.
Molly's father awoke the next morning with a start, a dry mouth and an erection for which he had no need.
His first feeling as he emerged from the short but deep sleep which  came to him at the end of every restless night, was that he was bloody glad to be alive.
But then why, as he lay there pink and rested in his striped Viyella pyjamas feeling no older and certainly very little wiser than he had when he used to open his eyes in his prep school dormitory over sixty-five years ago, should he not be alive and kicking?
The answer came in a sudden cramp in his left leg which caused him to roll out of bed yelling as though the flat were on fire and stamp away to the bathroom as the bones and muscles slowly settled into a position to cause him only moderate discomfort.
What had he to look forward to during the day ahead?
What girls could he telephone?
What gossip might he learn in the old Nell Gwyn pub down the end of the King's Road?
Above all, what mischief might he get up to?
He considered the matter as he might have done when he was only half a century old in what he still called the ‘swinging’ sixties, when lunch for two might be had at Alvaro's for a five pound note and his column ‘Jottings’by Haverford Downs in the weekly Informer had been described on the wireless as ‘Max Beerbohm with a social conscience’.
This was an assessment with which Haverford, in all humility, felt bound to agree.
It might not be a bad day.
He could call in at the Informer office in Chancery Lane and use the telephone to arrange a suitably stimulating lunch.
And then he caught sight in the bathroom mirror of the collapsed features, the swollen neck and ragged grey hair of the old man upon whom he still looked as a stranger.
He also remembered with a sense of humiliation and disgust that the pages of the Informer were now given over to articles on gay rights, the ‘politics of feminism’ and peer pressure towards glue-sniffing in the inner cities.
‘Jottings’ had not quite been pushed overboard; it was clinging by its fingernails to the edge of the raft, to be found, often seriously cut, between the competition and the personal column at the back of the paper.
The feeling of gloom persisted as he bathed and dressed slowly, having particular difficulty with his socks.
He made many a false attempt, standing on one leg tottering like an overweight stork before he could trap a dangling foot and pull the wool over it.
And then, when both feet were clothed and he sank into a chair exhausted, he suddenly remembered Italy and felt cheered.
In the end Molly would have to take him.
She owed that to him at least for having been, over the years, such a disappointment to her father.
And if he could put up with humourless Hugh for three weeks in the sun, the family, who couldn't have many jokes to look forward to, would be glad of a running commentary on their holiday by the well-known author of ‘Jottings’.
It was not that he had never loved his only child.
She was a girl, which greatly predisposed him towards her.
When she was two years old she had seemed to be of a cheerful disposition and laughed obediently when he made a witch out of his knotted handkerchief or cast a swan's shadow against her bedroom wall with his fingers.
Molly's mother, married for her beauty, had turned out to be a solemn and conventional woman, alternately angry and exhausted.
He and his daughter, he imagined, would form an alliance based on shared jokes and secret indulgences against a lonely and often disapproving wife.
But then Molly grew up to be serious and, what was worse, she grew up to be big.
As some girls suddenly look too tall to be ballet dancers, she became too large for her father's devotion, for Haverford always preferred smallish women with what he had once described in one of his more personal ‘Jottings’ as the ‘tip-tilted noses of impertinent page-boys’.
And then, as a schoolgirl, Molly had further distanced herself from him by being good at mathematics.
After he had separated from her mother and when she was away at boarding-school, he would drive down to visit her, often accompanied by some rather mature page-boy in jeans or a mini-skirt and  Molly would sit with them in silence at an endless tea in the local Trusthouse Forte.
‘The young have become so puritanical,’ Haverford would explain to his companion on the way home.
‘I get to feel more and more like some splendid Regency buck surviving sadly into the horrible reign of Prince Albert the Good.’
To do Haverford justice, he wasn't altogether happy about his lack of rapport with his daughter; at times he came as near as he ever could to feeling guilty about it.
He had therefore decided to be as charming as possible to her during the summer holiday in Italy — as soon as he had managed to persuade her to let him join the family there.
Meanwhile, he shuffled off towards the tube station and Chancery Lane.
The girl behind the desk in the untidy and cluttered reception area of the Informer , sitting below a poster protesting about Eskimo rights and an original cartoon showing the American President as an ageing cowboy astride a Cruise missile, had certain page-boy qualities, although her tip-tilted nose supported a pair of granny glasses and she was working hard at her chewing-gum.
Haverford Downs, dressed now in a tweed jacket, grey flannels and a white polo-necked sweater, holding an ivory-topped walking-stick in a plump hand on which a single green-stoned ring — alleged by him in his wilder moments to have been worn by Aubrey Beardsley — winked malevolently, gave her his full septuagenarian charm.
‘How are you, darling?’
‘Was you wanting something?’
‘Only to lay my ‘Jottings’ on you, my dear.’
He reverently produced two folded typewritten pages from an inside pocket.
‘I deal this week with the innate puritanism of the young.
Although you look far too pretty to suffer from the present malaise, you might find it means something to your generation.’
‘What was the name again?’
‘You're joking!’
‘I'm meant to ask all the names like.’
The girl, on a youth training scheme, was waiting sullenly for an opening in a hairdresser's.
‘Haverford Downs, my dear.
And I think you might remember that my ‘Jottings’ have been in the paper since long before your grandmother had her first G.I. in the War.
I'll take it through to the Editor.’
‘I think he's just slipped out,’ the girl said, as she had been instructed to do if ever Mr Downs presented himself.
At which moment, the Editor, a young man from Glasgow, who seemed to bear on his narrow shoulders guilt for all the sins of the Western world, emerged from his office and was off to lunch with a left-wing Labour M.P.
in the Gay Hussar.
He moved towards the door with his head down but Haverford laid an ancient mariner's hand on his arm and detained him.
‘The ‘Jottings’, Stuart.
I have an idea for the ‘Jottings’.’
‘Oh, yes?’ said Stuart, the Editor.
‘We'll have to give the future of your column some thought.
Considerations of space, you know, and the advertising ratio…’
In fact, he would have elbowed the ‘Jottings’ long ago had not the Chairman of his Board reminded him that Nye Bevan had once found them ‘bloody civilized’.
‘How would you like, my dear boy’— Haverford appeared to be offering his Editor a unique opportunity — Jottings’ from Italy this summer?’
‘Random thoughts on Botticelli?
Not for us, I'm afraid.’
‘The hell with Botticelli.’
Haverford, moving forward in a conspiratorial manner, almost had to stand on tip-toes to reach the ear of the pale Scot.
‘I thought more of pieces on the lines of ‘Whither Euro-Communism?’,
‘The Scandal of the Vatican Banks’, ‘The Common Market and the Black Economy’, ‘Child Prostitution’….
He ended hopefully —‘On the Appian Way’?’
Haverford was not entirely a fool.
He knew his market and the Editor appeared partially hooked.
‘We couldn't possibly pay your travelling expenses though.’
‘Of course you won't have to.
Have no fear.’
Haverford reached up and put a hand on the young man's shoulder.
‘It won't cost you a penny, you dear old thing.
Except, of course, for my usual modest fee.’
Before he was allowed to escape, the Editor had muttered his agreement, and his heartfelt wish to supplant the ‘Jottings’ with a regular feature on ethnic cooking, written by his live-in companion, was once again postponed.
‘We're trying Italy this year.
Managed to find a villa for the children's holidays.’
‘Oh, I know about them.
School holidays are when all the men suddenly disappear.’
The woman having lunch with Hugh Pargeter opened her eyes to an almost impossible extent.
‘I'm going to get desperately hungry in August.’
Her name was Mrs Tobias and Hugh had met her when he handled her divorce case, successfully, because Mr Tobias had made a determined rush for freedom, scattering alimony lavishly as he went.
Now their lunches were a regular event to which Hugh looked forward with a certain amount of trepidation.
Mrs Tobias was kept thin by regular visits to Forest Mere and she dressed expensively.
To Hugh she seemed beautiful and he delighted, somewhat guiltily, in having her eat opposite him.
When not at Forest Mere, her appetite was more than usually healthy.
‘Do you have to go?’
‘Oh yes.’
He gave her one of his martyred looks.
‘I can't disappoint the children, you know.
Anyway, I have organized this holiday.’
In fact he had worried about it so much that he felt now that he had done it all.
‘Is it a nice house?’
‘Oh, I think so.
Actually I sent my wife to check up on it.
You can't be too careful.’
‘You didn't take a look?’
‘I've been rather too busy here.’
He frowned, wondering whether they could recoup the entire cost of the holiday by letting the house in London to an American.
But Americans had been rather thin on the ground lately, fearing such Libyan terrorists as might haunt the dark streets round Notting Hill Gate.
‘If you're so busy can't you tell her that you've got to stay here?
Then we could still have lunch.’
‘Of course, I'd love to.
But I'm afraid I'm fully committed.’
He looked noble, as though he were saying goodbye before catching a troop ship to almost certain death on some foreign front.
Indeed he treated his children's holidays and an uninterrupted period of married life as a stern duty for which he was prepared to make the supreme sacrifice.
In this solemn moment they both gazed abstractedly at the sweet trolley.
‘I'm sorry!’
‘Oh, that's all right.’
She also was looking brave at the prospect of three weeks in the summer without their regular Thursday table at the ‘Dolce Vita’ near his office in the City.
‘A girl learns to get used to school holidays.’
‘I really am sorry,’ he repeated and wondered why it was that these lunches, designed as an escape from responsibility, had begun to weigh on him with the weariness of marriage itself.
‘Not your fault.’
She was giving her doe-eyed look to a pile of profiteroles.
‘At least I can indulge myself when you've gone.’
‘Actually, I hope you don't.’
‘Indulge in dessert?’
‘Oh, pudding,’ he said.
‘I shan't worry about pudding.’
‘Just as well.’
Marcia Tobias was now disposing of a plateful  of chocolate-coated balls with discreet efficiency.
To his mind, she represented the sort of rare treat to which he was entitled, sixteen years after he married Molly.
Or rather, he often thought, Molly had married him.
He had been carried along by his wife's extraordinary power of making decisions, from the time when she had walked into the offices of Glebe and Pargeter, when his old father was alive, and told him that her great-aunt had left her some money and she had decided to invest it in a London house.
At the end of the protracted negotiations with her great-aunt's executors, and the vendor's solicitors, Hugh and Molly had been out to several dinners in bistros, for which she insisted she paid her share.
He arranged bridging-loans and a mortgage to make up the price of the tall house with the basement into which she had decided he should move as a lodger, abandoning his awful little bed-sit in Chepstow Road.
Since then, looking back on it, there had been too many children's holidays and not nearly as many lunches with girls in the ‘Dolce Vita’ as a man deserved.
‘Good grief!’
Mrs Tobias turned her wrist which was fettered with a thin and glittering watch.
‘Such a load of things to do.
It's impossible.’
In fact she had a heavy date with a lady who undertook to slim thighs with ultra-sound.
‘But we'll meet again before you go?’
She smiled at him over the table napkin, which was removing a minute trace of profiterole.
‘Of course we will.
Thursday week?’
She nodded.
‘And you'll send me hundreds of postcards from Italy?’
‘I promise.’
He felt safe, now lunch was over, to put his hand consolingly on hers.
So they left the restaurant and Hugh got a taxi for Mrs Tobias before he walked back to his office.
As they parted, she pursed her lips and lifted her well-attended face, which  didn't look quite so young as it had in the restaurant.
Hugh gave her its regular after-lunch kiss, and as he did so he saw, out of the corner of his wary eye, the extremely unwelcome figure of his father-in-law coming down Chancery Lane, carrying a walking-stick and an armful of newspapers.
Hugh urged Mrs Tobias into her taxi and walked off smartly in the opposite direction.
‘Three weeks !
You mean three whole weeks?’
Henrietta's voice mounted tragically.
She looked at Molly as though she had just sentenced her to a lengthy and quite undeserved term of imprisonment.
‘Three weeks in Italy.
In the sun.’
The kitchen table was covered with homework, dictionaries, ring notebooks and ‘All you Need to Know about the Russian Revolution’ pulled out of the huge pieces of luggage Henrietta took every day to school, books used to erect tottering towers wherever the family was next about to eat.
‘Honestly!
I don't believe this.
I simply can't believe you'd do it to me!’
Her daughter's outrage had turned to half-amused incredulity.
Where had the long silences gone, Molly wondered, into which she used to retreat in the company of her parents?
‘Do what to you?’
‘In August !’
‘Yes.’
‘Don't you remember anything ?’
Henrietta started to explain patiently, as though to a child.
‘That's when both parties are and the Ball at Hurlingham — and when we were all going to the Muckrakers Club for a really good evening.
And then we were going to have a day shopping in Ken.
High Street and sleep at Rachel Koo's flat.
And I told you Mrs Koo knows all about it.’
‘Sorry.
We're going to Italy.’
‘You really enjoy that, don't you?’
Henrietta gave her well-known hollow laugh.
‘You revel in disappointing somebody.’
‘Don't be ridiculous, Henrietta.
We'll have fun.’
‘Can't you all have fun while I stay here?’
‘On your own?’
‘Rachel Koo would come over.’
‘You're not staying here without us.’
‘Why not?’
‘You know why not.’
‘Because I'd shoot up drugs or have parties and get drunk and sleep with boys?
Thank you very much.
It's nice to know you think your daughter's a raving drug addict and a tart.
That really cheers me up!’
‘Of course I don't think that.’
‘Oh yes, you do.
To you I'm just someone who can't be left in your house alone.’
It was the point at which her mother usually said, ‘You are only fourteen,’— an undeniable truth which Molly decided to save for the endless discussions on the subject which would be bound to occur in the weeks to come.
Of course she couldn't leave Henrietta alone in the house, the tall building she had bought with great-aunt Dorothy's money.
And it was here, after the house-warming party which began with hours of few arrivals and long silences, that she and Hugh had finished what was left of the Carafino and found themselves in the narrow bed in the basement where this dramatically argumentative child had been conceived.
She couldn't leave her there alone; she would be safer with them in Italy.
Her husband came home then and found them quarrelling, engaged in a power struggle in which he felt he had no place.
Three-year-old Jacqueline ran at him and grasped his knees; he put down his briefcase and lifted her in his arms, flattered by her attention.
Later he said, ‘Your father called me in the office.’
‘I wish he wouldn't do things like that.’
‘It seems his paper's asked him to write a series of articles from Italy.
On social problems.
Serious stuff, that's what it sounded like.’
‘Hugh, you didn't….’
Molly had the same feeling of doom she remembered when her father wrote to say he'd be coming down to see her at school and would take her out to tea, so she could meet a ‘new friend’.
‘Well, he said he'd lose his job if he couldn't go.
Poor old Haverford, it's really all he's got left.’
‘Is that what he said?’
‘Not all he said.’
In fact his father-in-law had congratulated him on the perfectly splendid bit of crackling Hugh had in his arms in Chancery Lane, and naturally mum was the word, and his lips were sealed as far as Molly Coddle was concerned.
And, by the way, he did have this job in Italy, but if it was in the slightest degree inconvenient to join them in the villa, he'd book into a cheap little pensione by the railway station in Siena.
Hugh was not an absolutely brilliant solicitor but he knew when he'd been out-manoeuvred by a ruthless opponent.
‘He said he knew the part of Tuscany we were going to extremely well and all the priests were Communists.
Do you think that's true?’
‘It will be,’ Molly said with considerable feeling, ‘when he's finished writing about them.’
At the end of the month Molly received another communication from S. Kettering setting out the arrangements for paying the rent.
Half the sum due should be converted into dollars and placed in the overseas account of Barone Bernardo Dulcibene in the Banco dell'Annunziazione in Siena.
The other half can most conveniently be received in lire (cash please) by William Fosdyke, an Englishman who has long made his home in Mondano and who has certain bills to discharge in relation to the property.
I intend to travel extensively during the summer and I  may not have the pleasure of meeting you.
It has, however, been pleasant to do business with you and I am sure you and your little family will be extremely happy at ‘La Felicit à'; .
So she felt, with an unexpected disappointment, that she would never get to know her landlord.
All she had learned was that he was a man whose wife thought him the apple of her eye and who had tastes in Italian painting that were remarkably similar to her own.
Arrival
‘Why can't you sit up and look about you?’
‘Because we're feeling sick.’
‘We paid out all this money to bring you here.’
Hugh, driving a large, family-sized Fiat, blamed his two elder daughters whom he knew to be slumped in varying attitudes of distress on the seat behind him.
‘At least you ought to show a bit of gratitude and look about you.’
Not only had he paid out money, some of it his own, but he had forgone almost a month of lunches with Mrs Tobias in the ‘Dolce Vita’.
‘My advice to you, if you want my advice, is never look about you.’
Haverford, exercising an old man's privilege, was sitting next to the driver.
In the back, squashed in beside two hot and complaining children, Molly tried her best to restrain the youngest on her lap from wrenching open the door and free-falling out towards the autostrada.
‘Never look about you as you go,’ was old Haverford's advice, ‘and then arriving will come to you as a total surprise.
Besides which, there's nothing much to see except the motorway and a lot of Krautish industrialists hurrying south in their Mercedes towards the bum-boys of Naples.’
Molly's heart sank.
Having her father with them on holiday was going to turn out as disastrously as she had expected.
Why hadn't Hugh hardened his heart and refused to accept his ridiculous story of having been commissioned to do his  ‘Jottings’ from Tuscany?
Haverford had jotted away from the furthest reaches of the King's Road for the past forty years.
His journey was, she now felt, quite unnecessary.
‘Why don't you read Jacky a story?’ she asked Samantha.
And to the desperately wriggling child, ‘You'd like a story, wouldn't you, about Postman Pat?’
‘I can't possibly read when I'm feeling sick,’ Samantha told her.
‘And, anyway, what's a bum-boy, Gamps?’
‘Look about you, anyway,’ said Hugh quickly.
‘It's Italy.
That's what we've paid to see.’
‘A gay tart,’ Henrietta explained with what sounded like her last breath.
‘Anyway, how many more kilometres is it now?’
‘Ask your mother.’
Hugh moved out to pass a lorry, disclaiming all responsibility for this endless and ruinous journey.
‘She knows all about it.’
‘How many miles to Babylon?’
Haverford intoned.
‘Three score miles and ten.’
‘When shall we be there?’
Samantha asked with her eyes closed.
‘Whenever shall we be there?’
‘The only decent journeys are the package tours of the imagination, trips to a wood near Athens or Ruritania.
You don't have to queue up at passport control.
You don't have to fight your way into a plastic-wrapped leg of hairy chicken, while you're hurtled through space at the mercy of some suburban pilot with piles who thinks only of his duty frees and having it off with the stewardess.
You don't have to spend half a day in a moving microwave oven racing lorries down the autostrada.
You can travel the world from your own armchair.’
Haverford was warming to a theme which he had expanded in some of his best-loved ‘Jottings’.
Why on earth, Molly wondered, couldn't he have followed his own advice and imagined their progress towards the raccordo to Siena.
‘We should be there in an hour,’ Molly said, ‘and Jacqueline says she wants to stop.’
‘Don't you think she's lying?’
‘It's not worth risking.
Anyway, we don't want to get there too soon.’
‘Getting there's absolutely all I want,’ Samantha moaned.
Molly didn't remind her that they mustn't arrive too early because S. Kettering had told them not to.
Suggested arrival time [his latest communiqué read]should be about 16.00 hours, after Giovanna has recovered from her siesta.
In the normal course of events, she will be at your disposal for three hours in the morning between 9.30 and 12.30.
Her cleaning is admirable, but she will not undertake washing (the machine will be available to you provided you take proper precautions) or cooking.
Don't be put off by Giovanna's somewhat harsh and peremptory manner.
She is an orphan, both her parents having been shot by the Germans.
She's matched with a somewhat feckless husband and has the sole responsibility for a large family.
She will present you with your personal bunch of keys and explain their uses.
You will find each key clearly labelled.
Signed , S. KETTERING.
They stopped at a Motta bar.
‘Dov'è la toiletta ?’
Haverford asked on the children's behalf, but they had already found it, scampering away through the display of giant dolls, plastic picnic tables, local cheese and wine, and returned resentful at having been glowered at by the resident guardian because they hadn't understood the purpose of her saucer of lire.
Haverford ordered a coffee and a cognac italiano per favore .
Hugh drank a beer; with his sleeves rolled up he looked masculine and masterful, in charge of his family on the journey his wife had planned for so long.
He was all the more determined to appear in control because his father-in-law was giving him the half-amused, half-pitying look, which Hugh interpreted as ‘I know you're sorry you've got to put up with me.
It's just because you're the poor fish my daughter married; but then the unfortunate girl couldn't get a better catch in her particular sea.’
When they got outside, the early afternoon heat hit them like a blast of air from the Underground.
The hot car seats stung the children's bare legs and made them cry out in protest.
Hugh remained calm at the wheel, driving with the window open.
He accepted his wife's instructions and negotiated Conterchi and San Pietro in Crespi without hesitation or mishap.
Mondano was as deserted as a ghost town, wrapped in the silence of its siesta.
As they passed the alimentari (shut, as it might be forever) and then plunged off the road into the shadows of the bramble-lined single track, Haverford quoted, as he had been waiting to do ever since they left Heathrow: ‘‘In the middle of the journey of our life, I found myself lost in a dark wood,’’ he began to translate for the benefit of the children, but they were all, including the baby, asleep now and Molly thought that for her father to pretend to be in the middle of his life was a bit of a cheek anyway.
So she sat, with the sleeping Jacqueline on her lap and waited, it seemed forever, for the moment she both longed for and dreaded.
The pot-holed drive seemed endless and dustier than before, with the fine show of spring flowers over.
And then the car bumped and scrambled to the top of the little hill and there, once more and changeless, was ‘La Felicità’.
No one spoke, no one congratulated her.
Her family showed no sign of amazement.
Hugh drove neatly into the straw-covered shelter as though he were coming to rest in a multi-storey car park; then he switched off the engine and opened his door.
But the family sat on with the inertia of those who have travelled a long way and are reluctant to face the effort of arrival.
Hugh said, ‘There doesn't seem to be anyone here.’
‘But what do you think?’
‘It's a fort,’ Hugh said suspiciously.
‘Oh, God!’
Henrietta now grumbled as she awoke.
‘We're not here, are we?’
‘This castle hath a pleasant seat; the air nimbly and sweetly recommends itself unto our gentle senses,’’ Haverford orated.
The silence that followed was broken only by the buzzing and blundering of insects, the uninterrupted beating of cricket legs.
‘Where's the pool?’
Samantha opened her eyes.
‘I can't see any pool.’
‘It's there,’ Molly told her.
‘Everything's there.’
But she sat, afraid to get out and face some possible disappointment.
The house looked cooler, clearer, its angles sharper and shadows blacker in the high summer sunshine.
There was bougainvillaea in flower, clambering up the stone walls, small white roses on thin stalks among the weeds, and wild flowers in what could hardly be called a garden.
And then, when she looked at the high terrace with its pots of trailing geraniums, she could see nothing for the shadow was so intense — not the pale blob of a face or the movement of a hand — but she was suddenly as sure as she could be of anything that someone was standing there, looking down, waiting for them to get out of the car and watching them.
‘I suppose the children could go and find the swimming-pool,’ Hugh suggested.
‘I think Giovanna's got here early.
We're in luck.’
Molly swung open the car door.
Jacqueline was awake and starting to complain.
Molly carried her a little way towards the house and then set her down on the pavement by the front door.
She no longer felt the presence of anyone on the terrace above her.
She pulled the bell; there was no answer.
Then she called ‘Giovanna!’ fruitlessly into the silence.
She looked back at the  shelter where theirs was the only car.
If the maid had arrived and was waiting for them she would have to be driven back to Mondano.
And now, as she watched, the car doors were swinging open and the two older girls were struggling out, clutching books, hats and plastic bags full of personal possessions.
Her old father was extricating himself from the front seat slowly, painfully, gasping, as though he had to push open a heavy coffin lid in order to rise from the dead.
It was only then she saw what she should have noticed immediately: a bunch of keys with one stuck in the lock, many of them hung with labels.
It was a collection she had last seen in the hands of William Fosdyke, Signor Fixit, as he locked up the house after her first visit.
She turned the key in the lock; the heavy door swung open and she and her family were admitted to the house.
Ten minutes later she was in possession of the huge kitchen.
The children had stood for a moment, awestruck in the hall, as she had hoped they might, amazed at the broad stone staircase, the hanging lantern and the dark portraits of who?
Certainly not the Ketterings' ancestors as they appeared to be mostly of sly Italian clerics.
Then Henrietta and Samantha charged up to the tower, with Jacqueline stumbling after them, to quarrel about their bedrooms.
So Molly stood in the kitchen, the centre of the house, with its door opening on to the terrace, where now, for certain, no one stood watching her.
The big wooden table had been scrubbed as white as a bone on the seashore.
The knives stood sharp and shining in their racks.
Out of the window she could see her father sitting in the plastic chair by the pool.
He had stayed awake long enough to remember Dante and Duncan and now he was asleep, the sun on his face and his hat on the grass beside him.
She opened the tall refrigerator and found, to her surprise, that it was stocked with white wine, beer, mineral water and coke for the children.
There was also butter, cheese, peaches and packets of milk.
She opened a wooden chest and found pasta, jam, and, put there even more thoughtfully, packets of Rice Krispies and tins of baked beans.
On a marble slab near to the cooker there was a joint of ham and a fat salami ready for slicing.
Next to them was a huge watermelon and a bowl of green figs.
On the shelves of a tall dresser, she saw tins of coffee and chocolate biscuits and a collection of Twinings teas ranging from Darjeeling, through English Breakfast to Lapsang and Rose Pouchong.
Her tiredness seemed to soak away from her, as though she were lying in warm water; she felt not only welcome, but positively needed.
She decided to treat herself to a fig from the bowl and found its skin still damp, as though it had been recently washed.
Then she heard the sound of a car starting and tyres sliding on a dirt road.
But when she pushed open the door and walked out on to the terrace the only car to be seen was their family-sized four-door saloon hired from Pisa airport.
The boot was open and Hugh was manfully pulling the remaining suitcases out of it.
‘Was that a car?’ she called out to him.
‘Was what a car?’
‘I thought I heard something….’
‘I didn't.
Do these all have to go up to the tower?’
‘Not ours.
We're in the big bedroom.’
And then the silence of the hillside was rent by a further sound, a high buzzing at first like a gigantic and enraged wasp, and then a roar and a rending of the air, so that Molly felt as though she were standing on the bridge of a warship and some huge Exocet missile was being hurled in her direction.
And indeed it was, for over the brow of the little hill a bright-red motor-scooter erupted and upon it swayed the figure of a monumentally built woman, her classic features frozen into a mask of anger and her grey hair flying in the wind so that she had the appearance of a vengeful Medusa.
This was no doubt Giovanna aroused from her siesta.
She skidded to a halt, threw her leg over the saddle as though dismounting from a charger, and began to harangue Hugh in words he didn't understand.
Molly watched the scene feeling calm, even amused, and bit into her fig.
Then she walked back into the kitchen and soon heard the hard clatter of shoes on the stone stairs and Giovanna was upon her.
‘Dov'è la chiave ?’
The furious figure, stone-faced, and with magnificently controlled rage demanded of her new employer.
‘Ecco su la tavola.
Ecco qui .’
Molly pointed to the bright bunch on the scrubbed table and Giovanna gathered them up and strode to a hook on the dresser where they dangled with all their labels.
It wasn't fair, just or right for the Signora to come before the hour appointed; she should have been admitted by Giovanna herself and the keys should have remained hanging on their appointed hook; the other set being in the pocket of Giovanna's overall from which she now drew them and held them up making it clear that they would be relinquished only upon her death and then only into the hands of Signor Kettering.
What had occurred was quite contrary to the wishes of the padrone who would be outraged if he ever got to hear of it.
Despite this disastrous beginning, however, Giovanna would be there in the morning, her own family circumstances permitting, and she would be much obliged if the Signora would make sure that her children were up and dressed, and the breakfast eaten, so that she could see that the house was returned to something like the order which Signor Kettering expected of it.
‘The key was in the lock of the front door, so we simply walked in.
In view of the fact that we have paid half the rent into the Banco dell'Annunziazione.’
Molly spoke quietly and in English, only for the purpose of relieving her feelings and not in the expectation that this woman would understand.
She  had only caught the meaning of the outraged Italian aria in snatches.
Then, remembering the tragic death of Giovanna's parents, she spoke with exaggerated courtesy to the elderly orphan.
‘Molte, molte grazie, Giovanna.
Capito.
Domani a la nove e mezzo.
Grazie tanto .’
In spite of Molly's smiles and her anglicized Italian, the woman still stood, wrathful and unappeased.
Then the door opened, and old Haverford, rosy from his sleep and the unaccustomed sun, stared at the avenging Gorgon.
‘Signora Giovanna?
 Benvenuto .
 Che bellissima figura.’
And he went on in English and in the manner of his ‘Jottings’: ‘How many generations ago, when she was a young girl, might she have sat for Pietro and become his Madonna della Misericordia?
It's a face which only grows more beautiful with the years.’
Molly's discomfiture at her father's unstoppable awfulness was increased by the spectacle of the hard-faced Giovanna, who appeared to her to be simpering, her eyes modestly downcast.
Then, instead of leaving them, the maid began to take plates and glasses off the dresser and carry them out on to the terrace.
‘And a few generations later,’ Haverford went jotting on, ‘she must have turned up as Susanna in Figaro .
What, exactly, do you think she's doing?’
‘Goodness knows.’
Molly felt she had lost all control of the situation and was only anxious to withdraw from it.
‘I'm going upstairs to see about the children.’
She could hear them as she climbed to the top of the tower.
They had returned noisily to life after the journey, consoled by spreading the contents of their suitcases, which always looked to her like carefully collected rubbish, old dresses bought from barrows, ratty bits of fur, crumpled and disorderly history notes, about their new quarters.
Jacqueline, naked as a fish, ran screaming with delight from room to  room, slithering out of her sisters' hands as they tried to catch her.
The tasteful domain of the unknown Kettering children, with its bright bedspreads, art reproductions and posters from exhibitions in Florence, had been taken over by the Pargeters, who would soon reduce it to a tip.
Her children felt, it seemed, as immediately at home as she had.
Molly moved to a high window someone had left open, fearing that the baby, to escape its pursuing sisters, might leap out.
She thought again what a point of defence the tower was, commanding the countryside, and then she saw that there was a back road leading away from the tower, narrower, bumpier even than the drive to the front door, which snaked quickly down the hill and out of sight.
That way, whoever had brought the ham and cheese, and she could guess who it must have been, had vanished as they arrived, leaving a set of keys behind.
‘Why don't you come down and have a swim?
Then you can unpack and get ready for dinner.’
‘Dinner.’
Samantha laughed at this pretentious way of describing their last meal.
‘You mean supper, don't you?’
‘No.
I mean dinner.
I know we're not really settled in yet.
But we're all going to have a proper dinner by candlelight.
On the terrace.’
‘Can I have it in my dressing-gown?
I'm going to be terribly tired.’
Samantha sank on to her bed to show the helpless state she expected to be in by the evening.
‘No.
You can put on dresses.
We're going to have dinner on the terrace with candles.’
‘Why on earth?’
‘Because that's the way we do things, out here.’
Molly spoke with quiet confidence as though she had become in the few hours since their arrival the owner of ‘La Felicità’ and the organizer of life in the house.
‘When I was staying with your sainted mother in Siena, small hotel in Via dei Cappuccini, and we were just leaving, I handed a postcard to the hall porter to stamp and send to England.
Well, your mother came rushing in from the car with a rare display of energy and snatched it from the fellow's hands.
Of course, it was written to some girlfriend or other in England.
The message was how much I missed her, time dawdling on leaden feet until we could slide between the sheets together; picture on front of a Piero angel, undoubtedly her face.
Hughie will be acquainted with the sort of thing.’
‘I don't know why you should think that.’
Hugh in a white shirt, neatly consuming prosciutto and figs, was thinking of Mrs Tobias far away from‘La Felicità’.
‘Anyway, the Queen of the Night, always called your mother that, you know, because of her amazing devotion to sleep, which she seemed to prefer to almost any other activity, in particular to that which I believe today's lovers refer to so elegantly as ‘boffing’ or ‘shafting’….
Do you ‘shaft’ nowadays, Hughie?’
‘Would you like another fig?’
Molly found herself strangely unaffected by her father's appalling conversation.
There had been half a dozen bottles of red wine left standing in a corner of the huge kitchen hearth.
She drank a mouthful of unchemicated Chianti someone had brought from the Castello Crocetto.
‘Samantha, darling, do try not to fiddle with the candle.
We don't want to set the place alight.’
‘You mean pas avant les jeunes filles en fleur .
Oh, I understand.’
Haverford laid a finger upon his bluish lips.
He was wearing an elderly white linen jacket and a blue spotted bow-tie, so that, given a boater hat set at a jaunty angle, he might indeed have looked like the late Max Beerbohm.
‘Well, then your outraged mother leapt into the car which was loaded with our luggage because we intended to be off to Urbino that morning, and apparently she decided on some kind of hara-kiri or felo de se , a consummation of our marriage  devoutly to be wished but never performed.
Anyway, she drove off at high speed, ignoring all senso unicos , and finally crashed into a bollard by the ospedale .
And you, Molly Coddle’— he smiled at his daughter as though it were all, in some comic way, entirely her fault —‘you were in an awful pink plastic carry-cot in the back seat and you never even woke up!’
‘That's not true, is it, Mummy?
It can't be true!’
Samantha's common sense was outraged.
‘How should I know?
Babies don't remember that sort of thing.’
Molly smiled, thinking of Jacqueline, no longer a baby it was true, but so trusting, so unperturbed by being transported to the top of a Tuscan tower, that she had not stirred when her mother knelt beside the bed to kiss her.
Molly felt similarly safe, brought to this strange place about which she would have clearly so much to learn.
It was knowledge which could be postponed until they were days older and more experienced in the ways of ‘La Felicità’.
If she looked at her father with tolerance on that first night it was because his flattering of Giovanna had resulted in the table being elaborately laid on the terrace, fresh candles put in the brass candlesticks, and flowers in a big green and white pottery jug set in the centre of the table.
She had even found the records to which S. Kettering had directed her.
They were piled haphazardly, some put back in the wrong sleeves, and were mainly recordings of Italian opera.
Now, a somewhat scratchy and hissing Turandot , playing from the small, lit sitting-room which opened on to the terrace, added a mixture of Italian and oriental excitement to the occasion.
‘Of course your marriage isn't subject to these accidents, is it, Molly Coddle?
You never caught old Hugh trying to smuggle out an illicit view of the backside of the Cathedral to some little angel in Pimlico.
Modern wedlock is so terribly much more like the home life of our dear Queen.’
‘I'm not much of an expert,’ Hugh said, ‘but isn't the wine rather good?’
‘The Classico of Chiantishire.
Grown to suit the palates of N.W. as they turn up at their summer villas.
I recall when Nancy Leadbetter and I stayed in a terrible fleapit of a room in Siena.
What we drank then tasted like sulphur and ox blood; it set fire to your tonsils.’
‘There's one thing we have got to remember —’ Molly wondered how she had forgotten to tell them.
‘But we were drunk the whole time on the aphrodisiac of youth.’
‘— Shoes.
No one can walk about in this garden without shoes on.’
‘Why ever not?’
‘It seems there are all sorts of stinging things.
You just have to be careful.’
‘Not snakes?’
Molly was surprised to see her father looking at her, blue-eyed, smiling, as though they were alone in an entertaining conspiracy.
‘No.
Not snakes in particular,’ Molly told the children.
‘Just everyone be careful.’
‘You have your instructions, girls,’ Haverford winked at them.
‘Keep your shoes on or you will get kicked out of the garden of Eden.
I must leave you for a while.
When you get to my age life seems little more than one long march to and from the lavatory.’
‘What do you mean, not snakes in particular?’
Hugh asked after his father-in-law had wandered off into the shadows at the end of the terrace and they heard his stick tapping along the stone floors.
But before Molly could answer they all looked out as a car breasted the top of the small hill and lit them as brightly as actors on a stage.
Molly and her husband covered their eyes and peered out towards the lights.
So whoever it was driving the silent car must have seen them before twisting  the wheel, reversing against the dry grass and brambles, and driving away as quietly towards the castle and the village.
‘Whatever was that?’
‘Who knows?
Somebody lost, I suppose.
It must be quite easy to mix up all these tracks,’ Molly told them.
They were no longer shading their eyes, and the terrace was now lit only by the candles and the open door into the small sitting-room.
‘But how did they know?’
Henrietta was puzzled.
‘How did they know what?’
Samantha looked at her sister with contempt.
‘How did they know they were lost?
They didn't even stop to ask.’
In the bedroom cupboard the man's shirt and woman's skirt were still swinging.
Molly moved them carefully to one end of the bar before she hung up Hugh's clothes and her summer dresses.
She wanted the room to be tidy before they went to sleep as, after only some nine hours' occupation, she felt a proprietorial interest in ‘La Felicità’ and wanted it to look its best always.
‘He's worse.’
Hugh came out of the bathroom which was dimly lit and marbled as a side chapel.
‘Absolutely worse than he's ever been.’
‘I know.’
He had a white trace of toothpaste at the corner of his mouth.
Molly took a handkerchief and tidied him up as though he were the room.
‘Nothing but talk of ‘bum-boys’ and ‘shafting’in front of the girls.’
‘They don't really mind.
I mean, they're extremely knowledgeable.’
‘Well, I mind.
And suggesting I'd creep out and send a postcard to some, well, some girlfriend or another!’
Hugh was deeply offended by the suggestion.
‘What's he trying to do, split us up or something?’
‘Probably.’
‘Whatever for?’
‘It entertains him.’
She was surprised by her tolerance.
‘I suppose he hasn't got much else to do, at his time of life.’
‘Can't he grow old with dignity?’
‘Apparently not.’
‘Does he think about sex the whole time?’
Hugh was already in bed, his wife still tidying.
‘So it seems.’
‘I can't imagine being like that, when I'm old.’
He gazed towards his mid-seventies with an anxious expression.
He hadn't been, in his wife's experience, very much like that when he was young.
‘It's his generation,’ Molly reassured him, lifting an empty suitcase on to the top of a cupboard.
‘Apparently they hardly ever thought about anything else.
You like it here, don't you?’
‘Yes,’ he had to admit.
‘Of course, it's very grand.’
‘Not really.
It seems quite homely.’
It wasn't what she meant.
She would have liked to say that, in her opinion, it wasn't in the least like home, but in every respect better.
‘Grand, and, my god, it's expensive.’
‘Much cheaper than a hotel, for all of us.’
He shook his head, hardly able to bear the thought of what they were paying out to have his antique father-in-law insult him at mealtimes.
‘Anyway, I'm going to pay for it.’
‘I'm not sure I altogether approve of that.’
‘It's all fixed.
I've fixed it all with S. Kettering.
So don't worry.’
She resisted the temptation to add, ‘Your pretty head.’
But Hugh's brown eyes were closed and his martyred Saint Sebastian head was flat on the pillow.
He had had a long drive and, in the face of great provocation, behaved, on the whole, exceedingly well.
Molly, now in her nightdress, got into bed  beside him.
As she stretched out an arm to switch off the light she saw, on the marble-topped bedside table, the book which had been open on the bedcover when she had first visited the house.
It was closed now but a dry leaf marked a place.
She was too tired to read and fell asleep.
First Week
Molly's sleep had been deep and dreamless but she woke up early, saw Hugh unconscious beside her and replaced the sheet he had kicked away as she might cover one of the children.
Then she moved quietly into the kitchen and made herself a mug of tea.
Framed in the narrow window she saw the landscape, lit and brilliant as the background of a painting.
The terrace tiles were already warm under her bare feet; the sunlight, when she looked towards it, stung her eyes and made them water.
When she moved, a bright green lizard sprinted up the wall and vanished.
She sat and drank the tea and thought about S. Kettering.
Then she got the photographs out of her handbag and looked at the view of the swimming-pool.
The figure sitting on its far side was a man wearing sand-coloured trousers and a red shirt; he had reddish-brown hair brushed straight back and looked square-shouldered and sturdy.
The focus in the distance was not sharp enough for her to be able to tell much more about him.
She stood at the foot of the staircase which led up to the tower but even Jacqueline, so well known for her early rising that her grandfather called her the Dawn Patrol, was silent.
She wandered back into the small sitting-room with her mug of tea, put it down on the polished surface of a table but removed it hastily in case it left a tell-tale ring which S. Kettering might complain about in the future.
And yet, now she had taken possession of  ‘La Felicità’, she no longer felt so much in awe of the absentee landlord as a half-amused curiosity about him.
Finding out about Kettering was, she thought, a private game which she might set herself to play on this holiday.
The room gave her no help.
It was too appropriate, too suitable, to betray any particular personality.
There were a couple of oriental rugs on the tiled floor, old maps, comfortable armchairs and sofas, flower vases which tactfully avoided the awfulness of Italian ceramics.
Only a picture over the fireplace seemed out of place: an archly primitive painting of a large tabby cat and a Victorian child in a formal garden.
It was so painted, Molly thought, that the cat looked considerably more human than the child, who had the embarrassing appearance of a performing animal dressed in frilly pantaloons and a bright blue sash.
She avoided its eye and knelt in front of the bookcase.
The books were hardly more revealing, seeming to be less of a private collection than the sort of works which might help visiting tourists dedicated to culture.
There was a shelf of art books, another of guides, Italian history and works on wine and Tuscan cooking.
There were none of the battered paperbacks usually left abandoned after rainy afternoons in holiday houses, no near pornography and, she thought, no detective stories, until she remembered the Sherlock Holmes collection beside the bed.
S. Kettering was either a particularly serious-minded chap or anxious to show off to his tenants.
Having reached that judgement Molly felt, for the first time, one up.
So she smiled to herself and pulled out a tall book from the bottom shelf,Piero della Francesca by the fellow whom her father always called K. Clark.
The plates flickered past, solemn and beautiful faces, sleeping soldiers, angels carrying flutes, and then a page fell open more easily because, slipped into it, she found a sheet of the villa's notepaper on which was typed what she at first thought to be a shopping-list, but, as she began to read, discovered it was no such thing.
‘On the floor looking at artworks, crouched in front of forgotten masterpieces!
That's how I always remember you, Molly Coddle.’
Her father came into the room, looking like an unreformed convict in his striped pyjamas, his grey hair upright at the back of his head, a smouldering cigarette held in one cupped hand and his mug of tea in the other.
‘Forget art,’ he said.
‘Life's the thing, isn't it?
My ‘Jottings’ will describe Italy as a place where the drama in the streets is never ending.
Not as a museum.’
‘Don't put your mug on that table,’ she said.
‘It's going to leave a ring.’
‘Life is for living and, for God's sake, tables are for putting mugs down on.’
All the same he stood his on the rug as he sat down, inhaled smoke and coughed with pleasure.
‘When do you propose to begin life, Molly Coddle?’
‘I don't know what you mean.’
‘A husband, three jolly girls and a holiday in Italy.
Is that enough to satisfy your taste for living?
At least there was a bit of drama in your mother's life.
She used to crash cars.’
‘Only because of the way you behaved,’ Molly was angry enough to answer.
‘The way I behaved, yes.’
He smiled complacently and gulped his tea.
‘The way I behaved certainly gave rise to a bit of drama, from time to time.
Don't you long for it, Molly Coddle?
You must do, as your father's daughter.
Tell me honestly, are we as different as all that?’
What he had said was meant to be consoling.
He thought, once again, how large she looked and yet how vulnerable, wearing nothing but her nightdress, kneeling on the floor in front of him so that he could see, although he tried not to, the tops of her ample breasts.
He had never been much of a fellow for breasts.
In a way she was imposing, and as statuesque as the pictures in front of her; it was just that she was not, and never could be, her father's type.
He held  out his hand to her, feeling, unusually for him, guilty.
‘We should try and get on a little better, Molly Coddle.
You've never understood me.’
She thought, I understand you all too well.
‘I was fifty-three when I used to meet all those wonderful girls striding down the King's Road, blonde hair flying, boots like little musketeers.
Only fifty-three.
I could feel quite young then.
Now I'm seventy-seven and I'm hardly a day older.’
What a pity you can't feel your age, she thought.
It would make life so much more pleasant.
‘Let's all go into Mondano in search of adventure.
Anyway I want to root out the priest.
Chase up a few stories.
You'll have shopping to do, most likely?’
‘Yes,’ she said.
‘I'll have shopping.’
And then she looked down again at the neatly typed list in the book, open on the floor in front of her.
ASSETS
1
La Felicità
2
Being together
3
The children
CURRENT LIABILITY
The existence of B.
MEANS
1
Lawyers (useless)
2
Other means to be considered
OBJECTIVE
lost and gone forever
Nancy L. Which side is she on?
‘What are you looking at, Molly Coddle?’
‘Really nothing.’
‘Isn't that ‘The Flagellation’?’
Her father squinted down  at the page but she banged the book shut and slid it back on the shelf.
‘Yes, I suppose it is.’
And then, to her relief, Jacqueline appeared at the doorway and asked, accusingly, if anyone was going to get her breakfast.
‘Lardo .
Bacon.
Have you any lardo ?
And marmellata di arancia .
And matches.
Fiammiferi .
The wooden ones.
Fiammiferi di legno .
Not the little wax jobs.’
Molly smiled and laughed nervously.
‘Niente fiammiferi di cera .’
She remembered trying to light the gas at the villa with a flaming wax Vesta, which twisted and burnt her thumb.
‘Lardo ,’ she repeated, reading from her list with diminishing confidence.
The woman behind the counter had been gazing at her through strong spectacles and now scratched doubtfully at her moustache with a thumb-nail.
The three old men seated on chairs in the dark shop were looking at her as though she were an amusing variation on their usual routine of watching the shopping.
‘Well,uova then.’
Eggs had not been one of the things left by her unknown benefactor and there had been complaints about the absence of toast soldiers.
Now Jacqueline, trotting about the shop telling herself some endless and only vaguely comprehensible story, knocked down a pile of brightly coloured buckets.
Being with young children, Molly thought desperately, is like having to take out a geriatric, or a drunk.
Samantha wandered out through the plastic strips of a door-curtain to where death-dealing lorries thundered down Mondano's main street.
Only Henrietta stood in a silent spasm, her entire body controlled by the Walkman which gripped her head and blared into her ears the sound of her own personal disco, reminding her, to her quiet fury, of the parties she was missing by coming on holiday with her parents.
The shop-keeper nodded with eventual understanding, cut off a huge bunch of bright green grapes and threw them on to the scales.
‘No, no.
No uva , grapes.
Uova , eggs.’
Molly tried to speak slowly and rationally but the calm which had sustained her in the villa seemed to have drained away.
She could feel the sweat soaking her cotton dress and the red flush rising up her neck like an infection.
As she struggled with Italian pronunciation, Jacqueline doubled away behind her and slid out of the shop.
‘Where's she gone?’
She turned on Henrietta.
‘I told you, I told you to keep an eye!’
But her eldest daughter only smiled vaguely, deafened by her private music.
It was at this moment that Signor Fixit appeared in the doorway with the plastic strips draped over his shoulders like variously coloured spaghetti.
He was holding Jacqueline, who seemed to trust him, by the hand and Samantha was on his other side.
‘Just caught your nippers apparently setting out for Siena,’ Fosdyke said.
‘You want to watch out for the lorries.
Accidents have been known.’
‘It's too bad of you!’
Molly heard her voice rise miserably in a forced panic caused by guilt and love.
‘I told you not to wander off.’
‘But they will, won't they?
You can't stop people wandering.
Let me tell you, no one shops in here.
Absolutely nobody.
I'll take you across to Lucca's.
He's an old scoundrel but he's got all the Oxford marmalade you want.
Why don't you give me la lista and relax?’
Lucca's, across the lorry-ridden road and down a small sour-smelling alley, was as small as the shop from which Fosdyke had led them.
But lame Lucca skipped and dived into dark recesses at Signor Fixit's commands barked out in Italian that was not much better than Molly's.
‘Thank you,’ she said, ‘for all you've done.’
‘Absolutely niente , Mrs Pargeter.
Sorry I couldn't get some basic staples up at the house for your arrival.
Had to pop down to Rome on a spot of business.’
‘But there were all sorts of things there: salami, figs, even baked beans.
I thought how thoughtful you'd been.’
‘Not me, I'm afraid.
I can't take the credit.’
‘Then who do you think?’
‘Someone, I suppose, used to the ways of offspring.
By the way, Mrs Pargeter —’ He moved closer to her and lowered his voice; she got a whiff of Imperial Leather and small cigars.
‘The bank here stays open until twelve.
Would you like to get it over?
Then you can enjoy your holiday without thinking of money!’
‘Of course.
I was going to let you have the rent as soon as we met again.’
She hastened to reassure him that she would never be less than totally reliable in her dealings with S. Kettering.
To show her continual readiness, she carried her traveller's cheques and her passport in her handbag.
They loaded the car and then Fosdyke offered to take the children for a coke in the café opposite the petrol pumps.
They could all meet there and he wouldn't embarrass her by coming into the bank while she did her little bit of business.
The children seemed willing, indeed anxious, to go with their newfound friend.
Even Henrietta took off her ear-phones as Fosdyke asked her how she liked the villa: and, to her surprise, her mother heard her answer, as she walked away, ‘It's absolutely brilliant.’
In the branch of the Banco dell'Annunziazione a girl, whose face was a mask of disappointment nobly borne and from whose carmined lips dangled a cigarette miraculously balancing a tube of ash, clattered calculations as she stood before an upright typewriter and, in less time than she had expected, Molly was in possession of a mound of hundred thousand lire notes.
In the cafe she found Fosdyke nursing a malt whisky ('Kept for me specially by Carlo because I was once able to do him a favour') and the children occupied with a Space Invader machine for which he had advanced them  hundred lire pieces.
When she gave him the second half of S. Kettering's rent, he put it in his pocket without counting it.
‘I trust you implicitly, Mrs Pargeter,’ he told her.
‘You won't want a formal receipt?’
‘I suppose,’ she felt bound to say, ‘I ought to have one.’
‘Then I'll knock something out for you.
Kettering…
Well, Kettering's travelling.’
Kettering travelling and Fosdyke in Rome?
Then who, she began to wonder, had supplied last night's dinner?
‘I've been meaning to ask you about the Ketterings.’
‘Relax, Mrs Pargeter.
You'll have a drink, I'm sure you will.’
‘Mrs Kettering, for instance…’ she asked after Fosdyke had called the pale and sullen-looking girl wearing glasses and a blue overall from behind the zinc-covered bar to bring vino bianco to the Signora, plus ancora malt whisky con acqua .
‘Is she travelling with her husband?’
‘Travelling, I think.
Not necessarily with her husband.’
Fosdyke smiled, as though enjoying a joke.
‘But you told me that Mr Kettering was the apple of his wife's eye.’
She remembered the curious expression he had used.
‘Well, yes, of course.’
He seemed to find her questions more and more comical.
‘But you can't always travel with the apple of your eye.’
And then, no longer smiling, ‘What's this, Mrs Pargeter?
Some sort of an interrogation?’
She looked round the café, a bleak, concrete erection with plastic chairs and tables.
At one of them sat the men who, she was sure, had jeered at her from the wall beside the petrol pumps and were now slapping down playing cards and shouting Ventidue ! with much of their remaining strength.
Behind the bar the wall was decorated with postcards of the Pope and the Madonna.
On a shelf stood wilting plants and very small stuffed animals, squirrels and starlings which had  fallen victim to the chase.
Their table was close to the door of the toilette from which came the smell of urine mixed more faintly with disinfectant.
‘Naturally, I feel curious about the people who own such a splendid house.’
‘You're happy there?’
‘I'm sure we're going to be.’
‘Then what else do you need to know?’
She thought for a moment and then said, ‘Well, do they live at ‘La Felicità’ all the winter?
I mean, do they have somewhere in England?’
‘Oh, nowhere in England.
People like me and the Ketterings have severed all connections.
We're the ex-pats.’
He said it as though they had settled in some remote outpost of the old British Empire and not in handy, holidaymaker's Chiantishire.
The Star Wars machine, eagerly watched by all her children, hummed and twittered.
‘And the Kettering children?’
‘What about them?’
‘They seem very neat and tidy.’
‘Kettering, I believe, runs a fairly tight ship.’
‘And are they travelling too?’
‘I'll tell you quite frankly, I wouldn't know where to put my hands on them at the moment.
Any other questions?’
‘Yes —’ Drinking white wine, she felt bold enough to ask ‘What's the S. for?’
‘The what?’
‘The S, in ‘S. Kettering’.’
‘I think we'll leave you to find that out.’
He was smiling at her again now.
‘It seems to me that you enjoy a bit of detection.’
She didn't deny the accusation, for they were interrupted by the children with hands outstretched for more lire to finance the Star Wars programme.
Driving out of Mondano  she thought that Fosdyke had, perhaps, understood her.
She wanted to be more than an outsider in ‘La Felicità’, more than a vague summertime nuisance for whose sake the family had to go travelling, someone only to be communicated with by notes or as a new source of rent.
She was also, in a way which she found surprising, beginning to feel the remote attraction of a powerful force called ‘S. Kettering’.
Whatever you thought of Hugh, no one could accuse him of running a ‘tight ship’.
Then she remembered that she had forgotten to get a receipt from Signor Fixit.
She had also failed to pick up her father.
Having been driven with the children into Mondano he had wandered off on his own unexplained concerns.
Now she saw him, standing on the pavement outside the church, holding his thumb out to her and grinning beseechingly as though he were some hopeful teenager off on the hippy trail.
And beside him, an elderly priest in a black soutane was also holding up a thumb and laughing as though he were taking part in a particularly outrageous joke.
‘ Arrivederci , Don Marco.
 Arrivederci .
Grazie mille.
Grazie tanto ,’ Haverford said to the priest, as he climbed into the car.
‘Terrific fellow,’ he told Molly as they drove away.
‘Red as a baboon's bum.
I mean, not just a Euro-Communist or of the pinkish persuasion.
Hard-core Stalinism, with strong support from the Holy Ghost.’
‘Are you sure?’
Molly wondered how far the language tapes borrowed from the Fulham Public Library had allowed her father to penetrate the political opinions of a Tuscan cleric.
‘Of course, the old God-botherer speaks pretty good English.
Learnt it off an R.A.F. prisoner on the run during the war.
And another thing.
He's suggested a way we might persuade Giovanna to do the washing.
You won't have to spend the entire holiday peering into that steamy little porthole, watching the children's vests revolving in the suds.
All we have to do is tell her that we know all about her parents.’
‘They were shot by the Germans.’
‘Not according to the highest authority.
They were a couple of collaborators.
The red resisters of Mondano shot them, by popular request.
Oh, and the priest gave me a pot of wild boar pâté.
It'll be a treat for the children.’
In the back of the car, Henrietta and Samantha made exaggerated vomiting sounds at the very thought of it, and Jacqueline joined enthusiastically in the pantomime.
Molly drove skilfully back down the road, taking the short cut to what she had already grown to think of as home.
The children lay round the pool and slowly lost the prison pallor of Notting Hill Gate.
Sometimes they sent the pigeons fluttering up to the sky and played ping-pong on the white encrusted table.
Haverford got up early, sat in the garden jotting away until, as often as not, Don Marco arrived in a small rattling car and took him off on an unknown errand.
Hugh would get up purposefully and drive into Mondano, returning with a large number of bread rolls and a few croissants over which the children quarrelled.
Later, exhausted by the morning's expedition, he would retire to the poolside where he read yesterday's Daily Telegraph , of which Signor Fixit had found him a source.
After lunch he formed the Italian habit of taking a siesta and he went to bed early.
When Molly joined him he would ask hopefully if she were feeling tired or, even perhaps more hopefully, as though it relieved him of all responsibility, if she had the curse.
Almost always she answered ‘yes’ because she had come to prefer lying still, with his soft sleeping body behind her, breathing the night air scented with pine wood and wild thyme as it came to her through the open shutters, and listening to the faraway ululation of the Borzoi dog chained beneath the walls of the Castello Crocetto.
She often wondered about the note left in the art book in the small sitting-room and typed, she was sure (and her interest  in detection took her so far), on the same instrument that had typed the instructions sent to her.
‘La Felicità ’ came first among S. Kettering's assets, above The children and Being together .
But who or what was B .,
the only liability?
And why was her landlord's object to have B. lost and gone forever ?
Something to do with his business, she thought, but she still had to discover what his business might be.
It had been enough for her that he was a man who thought his house a good point of departure for the Piero della Francesca trail.
One night she dreamed that she got up and went to the lavatory, where she found a new, neatly typed notice fixed over the bowl.
The master bedroom at ‘La Felicità’ is intended for regular sexual intercourse.
Visitors are asked to respect the traditions of the house .
S. KETTERING.
The note embarrassed her considerably, although she suspected, even while she read it, that it was a dream.
When she awoke she was surprised at herself for dreaming so foolishly and resolved to think less about the mysterious Mr Kettering in the future.
A remarkable change had taken place in Giovanna.
She spoke and understood more English than had at first appeared but it seemed to be English she had got from the Kettering children, so she was easily understood by Jacqueline who would run to her, climb on to her lap, whenever the maid sat down for a moment and stay there silent and apparently overawed.
Giovanna said she often sat in with the Kettering children if their parents were out and would be glad to do the same for the Signora Pargeter.
Now she left with plastic bags full of washing and returned after lunch the next day with Hugh's shirts, Molly's dresses and the children's T-shirts and jeans beautifully ironed.
She arranged them on the big table on the terrace where they looked impeccable, like clothes set out for a wedding.
Molly had a bad moment wondering if her father had somehow used the fate of Giovanna's parents to blackmail the  cleaning lady.
She wouldn't put it past him but in the brilliant afternoon heat she wasn't inclined to pursue the matter.
The next day she put her shirt and cotton trousers, even her knickers, out for Giovanna.
She could spend more time by the pool, thanks, perhaps, to a long-forgotten act of collaboration with the Nazis.
‘I wish I had red hair,’ Samantha said to her mother, inspecting herself as she so often did in the tarnished mirror surrounded with gilded laurel leaves and intertwined cherubs.
‘Gorgeous thick chestnut hair, considered artistic, like the girl in the Sherlock Holmes story.’
‘Which Sherlock Holmes story?’
‘The one Gamps was reading to us.
He found the book here.
‘The Copper Beeches’.’
‘Which one is that?’
Molly, of course, knew perfectly well.
She was thinking of the book that had been left open on the bedcover when she first visited ‘La Felicità’.
‘You know.
The one where this governess is told to put on a special dress and sit with her back to the window.
Just so she can be mistaken for someone else.’
‘Yes, of course.’
Molly caught sight of herself in the mirror, standing beside her daughter.
Strangely enough, the idea which occurred to her, in that first moment of its discovery, didn't make her feel at all afraid.
She went over to the pool and found the book on a table, damp from having been left out all night among towels and goggles, sunglasses, an old Daily Telegraph and the girls' bikini bottoms.
The story was still marked with a dry leaf.
She read it through and then sat for a long time on the white strips of the reclining chair in which she had first seen Signor Fixit.
She was afraid then, rather as a skier might feel when he looks down the steep whiteness of a dangerous slope, or a high diver who seems far above the water, but the sensation was so unusual to her that she  couldn't be sure that it was entirely unpleasant still strongly mixed, as it was, with curiosity.
‘And how many children did you say Mr Kettering had?’
‘Well, three.
At the last count.’
‘And girls, of course?’
‘Well, yes.
Now that you come to mention it.’
‘How old?’
‘Fifteen, the eldest, I think they told me.
Jail-bait, actually.
She looks well over the age of consent.’
‘And the next?’
‘Oh, I think a few years younger.’
‘And, finally…’
‘Little Violetta seems to have come as a bit of an afterthought.
She was a surprise to most of us.’
‘Only a toddler, Violetta?’
‘She's certainly not four, but bright as a button.
Knows a few rude words in Italian, I'm reliably informed.’
‘And girls don't, on the whole, need very different accommodation from boys,’ Molly said, thoughtfully.
‘If I'd had three boys I could have fitted them into the same bedrooms.’
‘You tell me, Mrs Pargeter.
I'm afraid offspring are something of a closed book to me.’
She had expected to see Fosdyke the day before when she went shopping.
He was so often in Lucca's, tasting a slice of salami, cutting off a sliver of cheese to try or speculatively pinching the melons.
He hadn't been there that morning and now she had run him to earth in the café.
She had sat down opposite him and immediately started on her inquisition.
‘So why did the advertisement say girls preferred ?’
‘Females preferred , wasn't it?’
‘Exactly.
Females .
I suppose that made it sound more businesslike.
Why females …and three ?’
‘I suppose because little girls are less likely to possess catapults, air-guns, or lob cricket balls through windows.’
It was no good, she thought, for Signor Fixit to pretend that he still lived in the age of Just William .
She had another explanation of the matter entirely.
‘Or did he want a couple with the same number of children as he had?
The same ages, the same sex?’
‘Giovanna may get on better with them.
Boys tend to annoy the servants.’
He said it as though it were some deep truth, a secret he had been let into.
‘I have read ‘The Copper Beeches’.’
‘Have you, by Jove?’
He looked at her, smiling.
‘Super chap, Conan Doyle.
One of my own favourites.’
‘The Complete Sherlock Holmes is one of the books in the house.’
‘I know Kettering reads, of course,’ Signor Fixit said, ‘but pictures are his great love.’
‘Oh, I know that.’
And then Molly plucked up her courage to say, as casually as she could, ‘I wonder why the advertisement didn't tell me what dress to wear.’
‘Come again?’
Fosdyke cupped his ear in his hand, suddenly afflicted with deafness.
‘Mr Kettering might have told me how to dress.
When I was sitting at dinner on the terrace.
With the candles lit, according to his instructions.’
‘Well, I suppose he might.
But why on earth, my dear lady, should he want to?’
He smiled at her tolerantly, as though there were no accounting for the ideas girls got in their heads.
And when that smile, that patronizing masculine smile which she had endured so often, was beamed at her, she felt her confidence drain away and retreat with a scrabbling of small stones like a departing wave.
The explanation which had been so clear to her when she shut the book by the pool now seemed only a thought, whimsical and without any solid  foundation.
And even if it were, as it just might be, true, why should she assume that this old ex-pat, mainly interested in the hunt for gentleman's relish, knew anything about it?
‘I managed to get hold of this mag from a shop off the Piazza di Spagna in Rome.’
Delving into a plastic bag on the seat beside him Signor Fixit unearthed the Informer and managed to change the subject.
‘It keeps me sane.’
‘What keeps you sane?’
‘This wonderful fellow.’
He opened the familiar magazine.
‘Must be thirty years ago I started reading his ‘Jottings’.
What's his name?
Haverford West?’
‘Downs,’ Molly corrected him.
The bar was hot and the small, stuffed animals with beady eyes staring down at her seemed especially repulsive.
‘What wisdom.
What true knowledge of life!’
‘You think so?’
Molly looked at him.
Did he really know nothing or was he trying to stop her questions by this extravagant praise of her least favourite weekly column?
‘An artist in words.’
Fixit was rambling on.
‘And with a good deal more education than I've had hot dinners.
Wouldn't I be right in saying that?’
‘I don't know.’
Molly looked at him, anxious to discover what he was trying to conceal.
‘I mean, I don't know anything about your education.’
‘Kicked out of Oundle before I had a chance to get to grips with the first line of the Aeneid , if you want to know the truth.
Anyway, you can tell this fellow's educated.
And women!
From the way he writes, and there's nothing offensive about it mind you, nothing that I shouldn't be ashamed to show my aunt…
Well, she's quite a racy old girl herself, just between the two of us…
But from the little things this Haverford Downs slips in about the ladies, would I be right in thinking he's had a fair amount of experience with the sex?’
‘I don't think’— Molly was finishing her glass of wine, which seemed even warmer and oilier than usual, as quickly as she could —‘that you should believe all you read in the papers.’
‘And the weird and wonderful thing is this week's ‘Jottings’…
Here, look.’
He flicked through the pages.
‘Of course, I'm really saving it up for when the hotpot comes out of the oven, but I just happened to cast my eye and yes, look….’
He found the page triumphantly.
‘It comes from here.’
‘From here ?
It can't do.’
‘Can't?’
‘We only got here three days ago.’
Only three days and they seemed to have travelled a great distance.
Fosdyke laughed, showing her an unexpected quantity of gold fillings.
‘Don't tell me, Mrs Pargeter, that ‘Haverford Downs’ is your nom de plume .
I mean, why would when you got here have anything to do with it?’
‘He's my father.’
‘That distinguished old gent I've noticed in your company is the author of ‘Jottings’?’
She admitted it.
She had come to question him and, as had happened so often, her father had taken over the conversation.
‘You wait till I tell Kettering!
He'll be tremendously impressed.’
‘You mean he doesn't know?
I thought Mrs Kettering must have an old father who wrote somewhere about the place.’
‘If she has, dear Mrs Pargeter’— Fosdyke was being almost intolerably gallant —‘he can't be anything like the great Haverford Downs.’
He looked at his watch.
‘Must go now.
I'm sure we'll meet again.
It's a small world in Chiantishire, a very small world indeed.’
He left her then, smiling and bowing, carrying the plastic bags full of the good things he knew how to put his hands on.
The idea that the Pargeters had been specially chosen because of their similarity to the Ketterings had in no way been confirmed by Fosdyke but it grew in her mind steadily.
If the Ketterings had wanted another family to stand in for them, it could only be for recognition by someone they wished to avoid or who might be a danger to them.
No doubt she should have been alarmed at this thought but she remained excited by it.
And this excitement, and the feeling of being involved in a half-guessed-at mystery, became her private obsession as she went about the house, visited the shops and looked after the children.
‘I've met a fan.’
‘I thought you might.’
‘He's asked me to dine at the villa he's looking after for a few months, just to oblige a couple of ex-pats.
It seems he's able to lay on steak and kidney pudding.
Remarkable fellow and a devoted reader of the ‘Jottings’.
Might be a source of useful information.’
‘I doubt it.’
‘Well, then, you'll be out tomorrow evening?’
Hugh asked his father-in-law from behind the Daily Telegraph .
‘You'll just have to make your own entertainment.’
Haverford finished his cup of breakfast coffee and lit a cigarette.
His fit of coughing echoed across the landscape, an early morning salute, as he often put it in his ‘Jottings’, to an old man still courageous enough to face death at the hands of a packet of filter-tips.
Hugh, who had been reading about the dangers of having a smoker as a cohabitee, waved his handkerchief through the air and moved to the edge of the terrace.
‘Oh and we're all going to a party.
Good thing you brought me along with the baggage, you know.
I've got you into Mondano society.’
‘A party?’
‘Nancy Leadbetter.
There'll be young people there.’
‘God, how awful,’ Henrietta sighed.
‘I don't think I can stand young people.’
Since their arrival at ‘La Felicità’ she seemed to have forgotten all the social life she was missing in England and devoted her energies to the narcissistic process of going brown, measuring each day the contrast between her exposed wrist and the satisfying white band left beneath her watch-strap.
‘How's your watch mark?’ her sister would ask her, to which she was able to answer ‘Brilliant’.
‘Anyway, what young people?
Probably the most awful little squeakies.’
‘They may be quite grown up.
Nancy's unbelievably long in the tooth,’ Haverford told them.
‘Her mind's going too.
I met her walking up by the castle, great big straw hat, floating veils, general appearance of a female Friar Tuck out for a constitutional.’
Molly waited for an embarrassing reminiscence and got it.
‘I greeted her.
‘Nancy Leadbetter, my old girlfriend.’
‘Who are you?’ she said.
‘Who am I?
Well, only the chap who rogered you regularly in the sixties.’
I told her.
‘I'm too old,’ she said.
‘Far too old to remember that sort of nonsense.
So don't ask me anything about it.’
Then I said I was here with the family and she announced she was having a party for the local English, ‘a rather disgusting barbecue’ which she knew young people liked, and she supposed we'd better come along.
Arnold Leadbetter made a fortune in property after the war.
Luckily he was away from home a good deal, which was when we got rogering.’
Molly remembered the note still stuck, so far as she knew, opposite ‘The Flagellation’ in the Piero della Francesca book.
Nancy L. Which side is she on ?
She said, ‘How do we find a babysitter?’
‘I'll ask Giovanna,’ Haverford volunteered.
‘No.
I'll ask her.’
At least Molly could see there would be no more blackmail.
‘Do we really want to go to this bash?’
Hugh wondered.
‘What's the matter, Hughie?’
Haverford ground his cigarette out into the remainder of the butter left on his croissant plate and gave what he described as one of his ‘nice loose coughs’ as he grinned at his son-in-law.
‘Haven't you got a thing to wear, darling?’
The next evening they were deprived of Haverford's company when he went to dine with Signor Fixit.
Hugh became more cheerful than usual.
He sat at the head of the table in his white shirt, beautifully washed by Giovanna, with a silk scarf knotted at the neck, looking handsome and quizzical as he drank Chianti and told the girls about his less lurid divorce cases and more eccentric clients.
He wondered if they'd ever find husbands or boyfriends who would take them on such a holiday as this and rather doubted it.
He was glad, at any rate, that he had been able to arrange these weeks at ‘La Felicità’, a summer which they would always remember.
But such occasions, to be really memorable, had to be worked at.
Tomorrow they would go into Siena.
Molly, at least, wanted to see some pictures.
‘Oh, not Siena,please ,’ Henrietta said.
‘I want to go brown .’
Molly wasn't listening to them.
She had seen, like a distant lighthouse, headlamps moving round the castle on the skyline.
Then the light had crept forward, down the rutted track that led to nowhere but their house.
It vanished for a while, but then shone brightly at them as the car reached the top of the small hill and again they shielded their eyes to look at it like actors on a stage.
Only this time the car didn't stop or turn but drove on, slithering a little on the loose gravel, until it stopped by their front door.
‘Whoever?’
Hugh began, but Molly was already up and almost running down the stone steps as if she were hurrying towards some long-planned assignation.
The car was long, low and extremely dusty.
The man who got out of it left the headlights full on and the engine running.
He was in his early forties with a receding hairline, a plump face and a small mouth.
He wore a short-sleeved shirt and dark blue trousers; one hand patted his moist forehead with a white handkerchief and the other held out an envelope.
‘Signora Kettering?’
She stood facing him, a large fair woman in an embroidered jacket and white trousers for their formal dinner on the terrace.
She said nothing but put out her hand and took the envelope.
‘Buona notte, Signora Kettering.’
He got back into the car and she heard the door slam, the engine accelerate and the tyres slide again on the gravel.
She walked up the stone stairs to the sound of the scratchy long-playing record, highlights from Turandot , which she had put on as they had sat down for dinner.
When she got to the terrace there were four faces looking at her.
‘Well?’ said Hugh.
‘What was it?’
‘Oh, nothing.
Just something for the Ketterings.’
She took the envelope into the small sitting-room and put it on the mantelpiece under the painting of the Victorian child with its crafty cat-like eyes.
It was for Signora Kettering and her English upbringing told her that it was unthinkable to open letters addressed to someone else; and yet as she came down the stairs and met the driver she had been taken, as she felt sure she was meant to be taken, for Signora Kettering.
She had been Kettering's wife, the letter was hers and sometime, perhaps, she would have to open it.
Nancy Leadbetter's grandchildren and a generous selection of their best friends, teenage lovers and hangers-on arrived by taxi, bus and hitch-hike from the station in Siena to the grandeur of Villa Baderini, her house on the other side of Mondano.
Some were dressed in old riding-breeches, boots and grubby lace shirts; many in jeans and flak-jackets; some inappropriately, when the afternoon sun made the paving stones almost too hot for naked feet, in long Oxfam overcoats and black Homburg hats.
They looked like a collection of the pallid child revolutionaries who emerged on the streets of Moscow after the Revolution.
Their military appearance was emphasized by the fact that some of the girls wore scout knives, compasses, even tin mugs, hanging from their belts, and they carried haversacks and sleeping-bags bought from Army Surplus shops.
The boys, especially those with hats and overcoats, carried battered suitcases and rolled umbrellas.
All these preparations for living off the land were unnecessary, for between them they knew of a network of wealthy houses, stretching from St Tropez to Mykonos, where bedrooms with a bath en suite , swimming-pools and occasional servants in white gloves would be put at their disposal by parents only too grateful to discover that their daughters had not, as yet, been violated by a lorry-driver or their sons arrested for the importation of stuff.
Their stay at each of these billets was short  and they left behind them minor breakages, burnt saucepans, cigarette holes in the sheets and, as often as not, their forgotten passports.
Nancy moved among them for a while, making them welcome, peering into their pale faces with the object of discovering which were her grandchildren.
She had invited four, if she remembered rightly; the product of two families and none much over sixteen.
Out by the pool she found a girl who greeted her warmly and, delving into the recesses of her knapsack, brought out a box of nougat and gave it to her.
‘Why are you giving me a present?’
Nancy Leadbetter asked.
‘You're certainly no grandchild of mine.’
‘No, but I take these for the people we stay with,’ the girl told her.
‘It seems more polite.’
Having decided that she was too old for nougat, Nancy stood for a moment admiring her pool flanked by statues painstakingly collected by her husband, two Henry Moores, a Giacometti and an Elizabeth Frink, all concreted to the ground and wired with electrical devices to a central burglar alarm in the Mondano police station.
What gave her the greatest satisfaction was the water, now bloodstained by the final, flamboyant exhibition of the setting sun.
It had been a dry summer but the pool was full and the young people, many of them travel-stained after a long trek from Portofino, were lying in steaming baths, their toes poised to activate the gilded taps.
She went upstairs to change, thinking how proud Arnold would have been of the way she had coped with the water shortage.
Arnold Leadbetter had left the Pay Corps at the end of the war with nothing but his demob suit and fifty pounds.
Ten years later he had acquired, thanks to some daring mortgaging and a firm way with sitting tenants, a hold on Notting Hill Gate and a sizeable amount of the East End of London.
He moved into Mayfair and bought his first Matisse.
He was a  shy, lonely man who married the nearest thing to hand, which happened to be Nancy, the entertaining redhead who looked after his fingernails in the barber's shop at the Dorchester.
Once married, Arnold began to give parties, admirably hosted by the young and vivacious Nancy, for the artists before whom he became speechless with respect.
His wife, who was never speechless in those days, entertained the painters, art critics and sculptors more successfully than her husband and found herself slipping into various love affairs which her Arnold, smiling quietly and getting on with his business and his collection, seemed to expect.
Perhaps she felt it was up to her to enter the ‘artistic’ world to which Arnold remained a devoted but remote outsider.
When she was in her fifties and had grown to a generous obesity, her husband would whisper proudly to his dinner guests as they stood in front of some glowing nude or abstract construction, ‘Wonderful artist, wasn't he?
And of course, you know, an old boyfriend of Nancy's.’
The guests would smile politely at the work and the information, often not quite sure how to take either of them.
After Arnold died, Nancy, feeling more strongly than ever what she had always known, that he was the only man she had loved, came to live permanently in the house where he had always seemed happiest, a piece of property he had picked up for a song in the sixties from Barone Dulcibene's father-in-law, old Count Umberto Baderini.
The villa had been built in the days of Lorenzo the Magnificent by a Baderini banker.
The Baderini Cardinal gave it its baroque facade and had its gardens laid out with descending terraces, fountains, a grassy-staged theatre, grottoes and a lemon house guarded by statues of antique giants.
Into this grandiose villa with its chapel and immense central staircase Arnold Leadbetter had moved his business interests and his collection of modern art.
His widow continued to give parties, for that had always been her talent, inviting the owners of neighbouring villas, the local Chianti growers and the aristocratic keepers of boutiques in Siena.
She also asked her two sons.
They were always too busy to come but they sent their children.
Nancy enjoyed seeing them and an occasional painter or writer who asked to renew acquaintance with Arnold's collection.
They found Nancy, now in her sixties, had become larger and much quieter.
She missed the sight of Arnold padding around in the background filling up glasses and, because he was no longer there to enjoy the effect of her jokes, she had given up making them.
Now she stood looking out of her bedroom window, feeling lonely in spite of the car headlights crawling up the avenue of tall cypresses towards the villa's ornate façade and the first arrivals climbing the twin stone staircases to the central entrance.
She saw the old man who had accosted her on her walk that afternoon proceeding at the head of a little posse consisting of a neatly dressed man, a woman with untidy hair and a couple of children.
He was waving his stick in a proprietorial fashion, as though he were showing them round his estate.
‘A couple of good Picassos.
Four or five Braques, a Léger.’
Haverford waved his stick in the vague direction of the front door.
‘In Chiantishire!
Where they'd steal your children if you didn't bolt them to the ground!’
‘Oh, do shut up!’ said Molly, thinking of Jacqueline left in the sole care of Giovanna.
What on earth was she doing, she wondered, climbing the steps of a palazzo, as behind her what seemed like the entire English colony of ex-pats in the province of Siena came straggling.
Of course she knew why she had been so anxious to come; there must be some, perhaps many, people here who could tell her about S. Kettering.
‘Come along in.
I'm Nancy Leadbetter.’
The huge woman came billowing down to the entrance hall, dressed in bright orange, which went uncomfortably with her recently revivified red hair.
‘I do know you, Nancy.’
Haverford reached up to kiss her unoffered cheek.
‘In every sense, of course, including the biblical,’ he added in a penetrating whisper clearly audible to his embarrassed family.
‘And I've brought along the fruit of my loins, my small claim on posterity.
This is my Molly.’
‘I haven't met you, have I?’
Nancy looked at Molly, puzzled.
‘Of course not.’
Haverford told her.
‘When we were together we were far too happy to worry about issue.
Molly's old man, Hugh Pargeter, and the young people.
Henry and Sam.’
‘Young people,’ Nancy said firmly, ‘are all in the kitchen getting to know each other.’
She opened a door into a cavernous room where the young army were grouped round a huge table on which their boots and packs rested, smoking, rolling cigarettes or making each other up.
‘Need we?’
Samantha whispered in desperation.
‘Go along,’ said Hugh.
‘You know you've been wanting to meet someone of your own age.’
‘I've never understood that.’
Haverford stood in the middle of the entrance hall, wondering.
‘I don't go to parties to meet septuagenarians.
We rather hope to be asked to dance by a couple of twenty-year-olds, don't we, old thing?’
He started to put his arm round Nancy's waist and reached some of the way towards her mouth before she moved away from him.
‘All the men seem to be in the garden helping with the barbecue.
That's what men like doing, isn't it?’
‘Well, it's not the only thing that men like doing, is it, Hughie?’
‘Of course’— Hugh seemed deeply impressed with his surroundings —‘we'll help with the barbecue.
Be pleased to.’
‘Why don't you come into the drawing-room?
You might meet someone.’
Nancy, ever vague, led Molly towards a pair of high double doors and then left her to talk to an English couple coming up behind them.
‘It's the Corduroys,’ said the  man helpfully.
‘Ken and Louise.’
‘Go into the garden, Corduroys.’
Nancy raised a large arm with the authority of a policeman directing traffic.
‘Help with the barbecue.
That's where you're needed.’
Then she sent Molly into a shadowy room which seemed at first to be empty.
She paused at a picture on the wall, a grey and beige cubist arrangement of lines and broken planes around a torn fragment of newspaper.
‘A bad moment, wasn't it,’ a voice behind her said, ‘when art surrendered to geometry?
By the way, I am Vittoria Dulcibene.
We live, you might say, in the next castle.’
The woman who came towards Molly from the shadows by the bookcase was very tall and swaying like a poplar in a high wind.
A long arm, seeming likely to snap at the wrist from the excessive weight of a diamond bracelet, was raised in what she thought might be a greeting, but ended in a gesture to brush a wisp of free-flowing grey hair from in front of the Baronessa's eyes.
‘I'm Molly Pargeter,’ was all she could think of to say.
‘I've seen you with your dog.
He's very beautiful.’
Being English, she thought that a sure way of bestowing pleasure on strangers was to compliment them on their dogs.
‘You find him so?
To me it is a most hideous brute.
Our walks together are painfully boring.
Anyway, he is not mine, this Manrico.’
She pronounced the dog's name with special contempt.
‘He was dumped on me by your friend when he vanished, promising, of course, to be back in a day or two.’
‘My friend?’
‘Your landlord.
I assume you know Signor Kettering?’
‘We haven't met.’
‘Really?’
‘We have corresponded, of course.’
‘But correspondence, that doesn't give you, does it, the full flavour of a person?
Kettering, I assure you, is nothing like his letters.
So cold, so impersonal, so businesslike.
Come, shall we sit down?
Nancy has not arranged for us to be brought a drink.
Her mind is on the young people.’
And as they sat together in the darkening room, as flares were lit in the garden and there was a blast of distant pop music through a crackling loudspeaker system, Molly confessed, ‘I must say I'm curious about Mr Kettering.’
‘It's natural,’ the Baronessa smiled at her.
‘I would wish to know about anyone whose house I inhabit.’
‘The house seems a bit anonymous.’
‘There's safety in that, no doubt.’
She was still smiling.
‘Our Kettering doesn't give things away.
But you want to know what he's like, in the flesh?
Is that the expression?’
‘I'm beginning to find a few clues.’
‘How clever of you!
But whatever impression you have, it will be wrong, unless you allow for his charm.
Believe me, he is a bloody bewitcher.
Who else would persuade me to care for his revolting Manrico, a creature who consumes at least two sheep hearts a day.
Believe me, that monster is costing me a fortune!’
Vittoria Dulcibene suddenly clutched her forehead, like a woman facing ruin.
‘Would not your children like a nice pet to take back to England?’
‘I'm afraid not.
The quarantine laws.’
‘Of course, in England, you have laws against everything.
And I believe you take them seriously!’
She was cheered up again and amused.
‘So are you happy in ‘La Felicità’?’
‘The children love it.
The house is very beautiful.’
‘That is Kettering's doing.
He has an eye for beauty, I would say.
And of course, you have the wonderful Giovanna.’
‘She's babysitting tonight.’
‘Then your baby is indeed fortunate.
This is a totally loyal servant.’
‘I'm sure.’
Molly, anxious again to show that she was not a stranger to the life of Mondano said, ‘Is it true, do you think, about her parents?’
‘Is what true?’
The word sounded melodramatic but she said it.
‘Collaborators.’
‘You are English, Mrs Pargeter.’
The Baronessa was looking straight at her, speaking seriously.
‘I suggest you shouldn't use words you don't understand.’
‘I'm sorry.’
‘I don't suppose you have ever killed a person in your life.’
‘Well.
No…’
‘Don't apologize.’
The Baronessa raised a long white finger, weighted at the base by a sapphire ring, and wagged it as though to a child.
‘Living in England you would have no call to do so.’
‘Well, have you?’
Molly smiled back, by no means certain if this was a conversation meant to be taken seriously.
‘Oh, yes.
I had to when I was a child, you know.
It was for me like the young people out there doing their Licenza Classica.
What do you call it?
‘A-levels’.’
‘A-levels.
Yes.’
‘I was sixteen, I think, at the time.
My friends and I were of the resistance.
With the Communists, of course.’
‘The Communists?’
Molly looked away to the crackling logs in the huge fireplace, the only light in the dark room.
The idea of this elderly, bejewelled woman as a young revolutionary seemed particularly absurd.
‘Oh yes.
And to join the group you had to have killed a German soldier.
You see, if you had killed one you were not so likely to betray the others.
It was a sensible precaution.’
‘I suppose so.’
Molly did her best to look at the matter in a practical manner.
‘Well, I bicycled round Siena with a gun in the basket on my handlebars, underneath my exercise books and Petrarch's sonnets.
It was November, cold and wet and the streets were empty.
I rode up the Via Pendo and I saw one.
He was a private; he was waiting by a big car, probably for his officer  to come out of his mistress's apartment.
Well, I cycled up quite slowly behind him and then I stopped with my feet on the ground and felt for the gun.
But he took his cap off and he had grey hair.
He was an old man with a wife and children, I thought.
Grandchildren possibly.
Well, I couldn't shoot a grandfather.
So I pedalled up the Via San Pietro.
And then I saw another Tedesco.
An officer, this time.
He came out of a restaurant and stood waiting.
I said to myself, ‘All right, this will be it, now I will be a member of the group.’
And you know what he did, the bastard?’
‘Ran away?’
Molly suggested.
‘He took out a beautiful silk handkerchief It was a big square, with a green and golden pattern.
And he blew his nose on just one corner of it, very carefully.
He brought it out rather shyly, as though he didn't want anyone else to see it.
And I thought, if a man has a handkerchief like that his heart can't be in the war.
So I pedalled on up the Via Capitano.
And on the corner by the Duomo a lieutenant in the uniform of the S.S. whistled at me.
He had neither grey hair nor a silk handkerchief.
I shot him between the eyes and then I was off, down the smallest streets, and I didn't stop pedalling until I was back in this Villa Baderini, which, as a matter of fact, used to be my father's.
I slept almost all the next day.
My family thought I had been studying too hard.
It was the sleep of innocence, or experience, perhaps.
All I wanted to say was when you speak of ‘collaborators’, you English don't know what you are talking about.’
‘I suppose not.’
Never having shot anyone, Molly was doing her best to look apologetic.
‘And I don't think you can ever understand Italians.
The English are always so complacent.
You always appear to be perfectly contented.’
Molly removed the smile from her face, now afraid that she was looking contented.
‘We are usually in a mood of black despair.
That's why you get all this singing and shouting.
All this meaningless laughter in the streets.
‘Funiculì, funiculà ’, all that sort of balderdash.
That is to hide our deep pessimism.
Kettering understood that.
In many ways Kettering was typically Italian.’
Was ?
They sat together in the darkness, in front of the log fire which was welcome on a summer night suddenly grown cool, and Molly wondered why S. Kettering should be referred to in the past tense.
She wanted to ask, ‘Have you any idea where he is?’
But the room was suddenly bathed in light and Nancy Leadbetter, who had pressed all the switches by the door, was among them and telling them to go out to the barbecue because that was where the fun was about to begin.
‘Not for me,cara .’
The Baronessa looked more solemn than she had when she described shooting her German officer.
‘Squatting on the ground trying to balance a singed beefburger and a paper-cup load of Chianti, that is an occupation entirely for the English.
If you don't mind, I will go and make myself an omelette.
I do remember where our old kitchen used to be.’
As Nancy led Molly into the garden she said, ‘There are a whole lot of English people here, the local inhabitants.
I expect you'll know some of them already.’
‘Only a man called Fosdyke,’ Molly confessed the extent of her ignorance.
‘He seems a very helpful sort of person.’
‘If you're being helped by Fosdyke,’ Nancy smiled, dimpling several of her chins, ‘then you really are in trouble.’
‘Oh, not as bad as that, surely?’
‘Arnold wouldn't put up with the man, not at any price.
He tried to sell him a picture.
Can you imagine?
A religious subject.
Anyway, Arnold couldn't ever stick religion.
It made him think of death.’
‘I was wondering’— single-minded, Molly pursued her investigations —‘you must know my landlord quite well…?’
Nancy L. Which side is she on ?
She had the words by heart of the note pressed in the page opposite Piero's ‘Flagellation’.
‘Kettering?
Oh yes, of course.
We all love Kettering.
Now I must try to get the young people dancing.’
She moved purposefully away to the group who lay in the darkness under the cypress trees, or sat on the walls and steps of the garden, and began to activate them so that a light dress, or white pair of jeans could be seen jigging about in the night that had suddenly fallen.
There was no wind so that the flares stuck in the earth burnt straight upwards.
The dancers avoided the illuminated area, which was left to the middle-aged, balancing plates and only occasionally laughing.
Peering into the shadows Molly saw her two daughters, otherwise un-partnered, dancing together.
Then she was pleased to see a girl, slightly older than Henrietta and Samantha, talking to them and offering them sweets.
‘Quite a party, isn't it?
Nancy's an exceedingly generous person.’
The couple she had met as the Corduroys, Ken and Louise, were holding plates and looking round for somewhere to sit.
‘Absolutely no side about Nancy,’ Louise told her.
‘Arnold left her all the money in the world and she gives us the sort of barbecue we threw for our friends in Haywards Heath.’
‘Of course she does have staff to hand around the nosh,’ Ken told her.
‘Nancy has staff to a large extent’— Louise seemed proud of their hostess's wealth —‘but there's absolutely no side about her.’
She was looking at the maids carrying plates of singed meat to the young people and a servant who was bringing a tray full of raw steaks and sausages out from the house.
‘I was in landscape gardening, pools and patios,’ said Ken Corduroy, who had heavy hornrimmed glasses and the soft, urgent voice of a salesman.
‘But my tummy was playing up  and I said to myself, ‘Ken.
This isn't a bit of good for you.
Get out of the rat race.’
We bought our property here in seventy-three.’
‘Ken misses the rat race.
If you want to know the truth.
Settled in, have you now, up at ‘La Felicità’?’
‘Of course I don't miss the rat race.
I'd be a fool to miss it.’
Ken looked at his wife with sudden hatred.
‘In the winter months,’ Mrs Corduroy said with smiling determination, ‘he misses the rat race.
You know you do, Kenneth!’
‘Well, I do keep up an entrepreneurial connection with the local pool interests,’ Ken admitted.
‘Not enough to play up my ulcer, of course, but I do just tick over.
I act in a consultative capacity to the Brits, when it comes to pools and patio windows.
Yours all right at ‘La Felicità’, is it?’
‘Of course, it's all right ,’ Louise Corduroy answered on Molly's behalf.
‘Sandra Kettering wouldn't allow it to be anything but all right.
That woman has a genius for organization.’
‘And paperwork.’
Ken smiled at Molly, retracting his top lip so that his teeth seemed to be aimed directly at her.
‘Sandra apparently bombards her tenants with paperwork.’
‘Written instructions.
That's what we heard.’
Louise was laughing.
‘Quite frankly, Ken and I couldn't be bothered to let our place and give out all those orders.’
‘Be careful not to use the toilet and the hair-drier at the same time,’ Ken joined in the laughter.
‘Sandra Kettering is an Iron Lady when it comes to issuing commands.’
‘Sandra?’
Molly looked from one Corduroy to another.
The words, spoken casually, had given another shake to the kaleidoscope, entirely altering the pattern her mind had grown used to.
Whoever was manoeuvring her, it had now occurred to her that it might be a wife.
She felt angry and disappointed at being robbed of her remote contact with her landlord  through the letters.
She heard herself say, ‘So she's S. Kettering?’
‘Is that how she signs her letters?
How very formal.’
Louise looked as though it was typical and Ken said, ‘That'd be Sandra.
Here's your old man.’
Hugh approached and they sat down together, the Corduroys and the Pargeters, and Molly felt that her husband's almost invisible disposal of his food was a criticism of her lack of delicacy and the extent to which she had to open her mouth to accommodate her bun.
The tomato ketchup stained her fingers and fell as uncompromisingly on her dress as blood, but her brain was racing.
Mrs Kettering had composed the notes.
Mrs Kettering wanted three girls and a fortyish couple so that they could sit by candlelight on their terrace, so that she could be taken for Sandra and Hugh for…but what was Mr Kettering's Christian name?
If he were to be an ‘S.’ also, a Stephen or a Sam, then how was she to know which of them had given her orders?
‘Then what's his name?’
Molly asked Louise when the men were talking, so far as she could hear, about the rat race.
‘What's whose name?’
‘My landlord's.’
‘Buck Kettering.’
‘Is that his Christian name?’
‘I suppose so.
Everyone here calls him Buck.’
To Molly the name seemed ridiculous, a cowboy actor's or the name of an American millionaire.
‘A nickname?’
Something invented perhaps, to hide the ‘S.’?
‘No, it's real.’
Ken turned to her and knew all about it.
‘He gave me a cheque once, after we'd done some work on the pool at ‘La Felicità’.
I remember how he signed it because it sounded so impressive: ‘T. Buckland Kettering’.’
Molly looked round at the party.
Leaning against a  recumbent Henry Moore, a group of English Sloanes, lanky people, all wearing old men's panama hats regardless of sex, shared out the single bottle of champagne they had bought at the Duty Free and laughed loudly.
The Baronessa was out in the garden now, a white cardigan slung over her shoulders, talking to a line of young Italians who were sitting on a wall in varying postures of exhaustion.
A man with a bald head, brown as a walnut, with a sweater knotted round his neck, was dancing with a fair-haired woman whose face Molly couldn't see, but whose sunburnt arms moved mechanically, like a doll's arms, in time with the music.
And then, as she sat watching the dancers, Molly thought of something which made her shiver, so that Ken Corduroy, noticing it, thought she felt cold in the dark garden and offered her the sweater which, like so many of the older guests, he wore knotted about his neck.
B .
is for Buck, she thought.
So who had written the note in, opposite ‘The Flagellation’?
Was that another of Sandra's productions, and did she want her husband B. lost and gone forever , and was his existence her Current Liability ?
Did Mrs Kettering want Buck to leave her or was she considering a more extreme solution?
Because of the story the Baronessa had just told her, Molly thought immediately of death.
‘Molly!’
Her husband was calling to her, as it seemed, from a long way off.
‘Mr Corduroy was asking you something.’
She turned to Ken, feeling it very unlikely that she'd know the answer.
‘We were wondering about that charming old gentleman we've seen you with in Mondano.’
‘My father,’ Molly had to admit.
‘We've seen him around with the Padre too.
Is he a very religious type of person?’
‘I think he'd like to be Pope,’ she told them with a sort of weary insight.
‘Only he doesn't at all believe in God.’
Molly spent more time with the Corduroys and was introduced to the Tapscotts, a white-haired couple: Nicholas, who had been the British Consul in Florence, and his wife Connie.
They had settled in ‘Toscana’, they told her, finishing each other 's sentences, ‘to take a pot-shot at painting and…jeepers, isn't painting difficult!
Honest injun, it's a dashed sight harder than the consular service.
Nicholas bashes away at the landscape and I did…
Yes, the missus did the child you may have noticed in the sitting-room at ‘La Felicità’…
Pretty terrible really…
Nonsense, old girl.
You knock my landscapes for six.’
Molly remembered the child in pantaloons and decided that it must have been bought by Sandra and not Buck Kettering.
They also met two elderly men, introduced as Tim and Gavin from San Pietro, who ignored Molly and proposed a ‘boys’ night out in our local ‘trat’if Hughie wanted a rest from the little ones'.
It was to avoid this last couple that Hugh unexpectedly asked her to dance, which they did unsuccessfully, their bodies unused to performing together, and Molly keeping to the shadows in case the children should spot them and never be able to forgive the embarrassment they had been caused.
Towards midnight she went to tell Henrietta and Samantha that it was far past their bedtime.
For some time she looked round the garden for them and then went into the house.
The lights were off in the big drawing-room but someone had lit the logs which had been piled in the fireplace.
The young people were draped about the furniture or lay in couples on the floor in utter silence whilst the firelight flickered.
Sitting on a carved stool on the hearthrug, holding forth like the Ancient Mariner, Haverford was bringing some long anecdote to a conclusion.
From the expressions on the faces of his audience, which included the two Pargeter girls, it was impossible to tell whether they were listening to him or not.
‘There was this Andrea, lived somewhere down Oakley  Street, danced for a time with the Ballet Rambert.
Anyway,]used to call on her, quite unexpectedly, once in every month or two perhaps, and she used to entertain me most hospitably.
Well, I dropped in one evening, a summer evening it was, as I recall it, after I'd been to dinner at the Chelsea Arts Club and I felt in urgent need of a little female company.
Well, it was only a bedsitter and Andrea and I sat on the one divan having a smoke and a glass of the fizzy stuff I always brought her, and I said, ‘What about slipping between the sheets’?’
‘Henrietta!
Samantha!’
Molly called from the doorway, and then, ‘We're going now.’
Her voice had no effect on the audience or on her father's story.
‘But she put me off!
Unusually, she prevaricated.
Not tonight, she said.
Tonight wouldn't be very convenient.
And do you know what?
I felt a sort of stirring beneath me, the faintest possible movement.
And then, damn me, it was clear that I was sitting on someone!
Do you know who it was?
It was a little husband who'd been sleeping under the covers.’
Haverford was laughing and some of his audience nodded solemnly, as though they understood.
‘Come on,’ said Molly to the children.
‘You really must come on.
We're going now.’
‘Going?
And we've never had a chance to get together all the evening.’
 Molly turned.
It was the woman with sun-browned arms and the white dress who had been dancing.
Now she was smiling, accompanied by a very young Italian who might have been one of the waiters her old school-friend saved for the last.
‘Don't say you don't remember met Rosie Fortinbras.’
Of course she remembered when they first saw Siena together.
Before she could think of an appropriate greeting, Rosie said, ‘Welcome back to Italy.
Better luck this time.’
‘I'm not quite sure what you mean.’
‘Well, you didn't do all that well on our grizzly school trip, did you?
Not if you were on the look-out for adventure.’
On the sixth day of their holiday, the water ran out.
Nancy Leadbetter's party had ended late on Wednesday night.
Rosie Fortinbras had proved to be of minimal use as a source of information.
She had known Nancy for years, of course.
She and Carlo were staying a night, possibly two nights, because Carlo hadn't felt up to snuff all the summer (here young Carlo groaned wearily and leant against a wall in confirmation of his feeling considerably below snuff).
Had she met Mr Kettering?
Well, of course, absolutely everyone knew Buck.
Charming?
What a question to ask!
I suppose it depended on whether you went for the older man, which, speaking for herself, Rosie didn't and never had done and was, anyway, leaving to stay with the Spratlings at Porto Ercole and then, perhaps, driving down to Rome to see poor old Jack Gerontius, who hadn't long to go, and after that, who knew?
Positano, perhaps, or Capri?
She, Rosie, was game for anything, but poor Carlo hadn't been feeling exactly chipper.
In the car Henrietta said sleepily, ‘That girl was frightfully snooty and superior.’
‘Which girl?’
‘The girl talking to us.’
‘She gave us nougat,’ Samantha said.
‘It was disgusting.’
‘Why was she so snooty and superior?’
‘Because she said we were in her house.’
In the dark front of the car Molly felt another tingle of excitement, as though, in her childhood fantasies of detection she had found, at the scene of a crime, a clue which was going to unlock the whole mystery.
‘Her house?
Whatever did she mean by that?’
‘Her parents’ house.’
‘Parents?
Who is she?’
‘Chrissie Kettering.’
Molly had gone round the party trying to pick up information, listening for hints dropped during casual conversations and there, talking to her own children and eating nougat, was the girl who might have told her almost everything.
‘Do you know’— she did her best to sound unconcerned —‘this Chrissie Kettering at all?’
‘Oh, yes.
She's always in the Muckrakers Club.’
Henrietta's tone was accusing.
The Muckrakers, a teenage disco which occupied, on Friday nights only, premises in the Charing Cross Road, was the Mecca of that young teenage set which those who had reached seventeen called ‘the squeakies’ and who were prepared, according to their older critics, to take over the world.
On the two or three occasions when Henrietta had been allowed to go there, Molly had insisted on collecting her.
She had waited long after midnight in the empty street until the Muckrakers doors were thrown open and ‘the squeakies’ filled the street with shouts of resentment at being fetched from their pleasures so early and the sound of long, passionate, gossiping farewells until school on Monday morning.
And among that crowd, while she waited, might well have been Chrissie.
‘So she lives in London?’
‘Oh, yes.
Well, she must do if she's always in the Muckrakers.’
‘Nowhere in England.
We've severed all connections.
People like me and the Ketterings, we're the ex-pats.’
Molly  remembered what Fosdyke had told her.
Once again she would have to review her ideas.
‘She lives in England, with her mother and father?’
‘Honestly, Mum.
Well, I mean it's not the sort of thing you ask people.’
‘She did say her father hated letting his house to strangers during the summer.’
‘He said that, did he?’
Molly was wounded.
‘Oh, apparently he doesn't mind letting it to you.’
Samantha, a tired but considerate voice, comforted her mother from the back of the car.
‘Why me in particular?’
‘He said you sounded as if you were really fond of pictures.’
‘He thought you'd appreciate it, that's why.’
‘We would?’
Hugh was driving fast along the bumpy, stone-skittering road, longing for sleep.
‘No.
Mummy in particular,’ Henrietta told him.
At which moment their car headlights lit the stone walls of ‘La Felicità’ so that they appeared golden against the black velvet of the sky.
Forgetting all her questions, Molly could only feel a secret satisfaction.
Inside the domestic fortress all was well.
Giovanna, smiling as she left, said that the bambina had never stirred and she had taken the opportunity to do a pile of ironing.
‘Plays funny tricks on you, does the mind,’ Haverford said as he poured out a final nightcap of Chianti.
‘I never thought old Nancy Leadbetter would forget that I rogered her.
Over a longish period, too.’
That was all the talk of ‘rogering’ Molly heard that night.
Hugh lay on his separate pillow; it was strange, she often thought, how he managed to sleep without getting his hair untidy and his inert body showed no interest in her.
She lay awake for a long time, looking at a pattern of moonlight on  the stone floor of the bedroom and listening to the distant complaints of the chained dog she now knew to belong to Buck Kettering.
Buck, the man who was possibly in danger, the man whose wife wanted him lost and gone forever , the man who might perhaps already…
‘But you don't know that,’ she told herself, ‘you don't really know anything.’
At last she fell asleep, but it seemed to her that she woke up some time in the night.
She was lying on her side and Hugh was on his side also, clinging to her back, as though for protection.
And then, somewhere in the house, she heard a sound which gave her a dry, tingling sensation in the mouth like a small, electric shock.
It was the feeling she had had as a child when she frightened herself with a detective story.
It now hardly entered her life except for the time when, in the dark patch of garden below the bedroom window, she had seen the snake.
Somewhere in the house she was sure a handle was turned quietly, a door was opened and then closed again with care.
She would not, of course, have been surprised to hear her father making one of his many nocturnal pilgrimages, but he would have taken his stick, banged doors, bumped against furniture, turned on lights, even sung an old pop song from the sixties if he could have been sure of waking the children.
This door was closed too carefully, perhaps too stealthily, for it to have been any of Haverford's doing.
The bedroom was on the same level as the terrace, the small sitting-room and the kitchen, and so she waited for the sound of another door or footsteps on the stone staircase down to the entrance hall.
But, hearing nothing more, she decided that she must have been mistaken and went back to sleep.
The next morning, alone in the small sitting-room, Molly took out the Piero della Francesca book, as a scholar might take a work from the shelves to check a reference.
Molly's special subject was the Ketterings; but when she turned to the  reproduction of ‘The Flagellation’ the book was empty, the list gone.
Puzzled at first, she turned every page, then she held up the book by its spine and let the pages flutter; no sheet of paper fell out.
And yet she knew it had been there when she closed the book and put it back on the shelf.
Someone had taken it, someone, presumably, who knew where to find it.
‘You should have come with us.
The pool's wonderful.’
Hugh with his hair wet, carrying Jacqueline and leading his two other daughters, all of them making wet footmarks on the stone floor, came in from the terrace.
He looked very young and, she was surprised how irritated it made her feel, innocent.
She thought of telling him that a note from their landlady, contemplating the disappearance of her husband forever , had gone, vanished, and just who, did he think, was likely to have taken it?
But she could imagine his tolerant lawyer's smile as he demolished her fears and speculations.
He would cast doubt on the words of the note for which there was now only ‘secondary evidence, as we lawyers would say’.
What fears she had, and even cherished, she decided to keep to herself.
‘Only one thing about that pool,’ Hugh said, depositing Jacqueline wrapped in a damp towel like a warm parcel in his wife's arms, ‘the tide's gone down a bit.
Perhaps it's leaking.’
‘I'll see about it.’
‘All right.
Call on me if you have any trouble.
I thought we might have a treat and drive into Siena.’
Hugh went away to get dressed.
Molly rang the house which Signor Fixit was guarding but there was no reply.
The house-sitter was sitting somewhere else and the phone echoed in an empty hallway.
Then she rang Nancy Leadbetter who was fetched by a servant and, after a long interval, answered sleepily.
‘Whoever is it?’
‘It's Molly Pargeter.’
‘Molly who ?’
‘Pargeter.
We came to your party.
It was so kind of you….’
‘I can't remember.’
‘I thought I should drive over and thank you personally.’
‘No need for that.’
‘And my children would love to meet all those young people again.
Apparently Chrissie Kettering was there….’
‘Chrissie who?’
‘Kettering.
You know’— she almost had to force herself to use the strange name —‘Buck Kettering's daughter.’
‘No.
He's away.
Travelling.’
‘Who?’
‘Buck.
He's not here.
He's let his house to some English people.’
‘Yes, I know.
That's us.’
‘Who are you?’
‘Molly.
Molly Pargeter.’
‘And you say your children were here last night?’
‘Yes.
That's right.’
She tried to sound as bright as possible.
‘Two young girls.’
‘Well, they're not here now.
They've all cleared off.
Vamoosed.
Moved on at dawn to Athens or Antibes or somewhere or other.
I'm sorry I can't help.
They left no phone numbers.
Your two girls will probably be sending you a postcard.’
‘My two girls are here.’
‘Where's here?’
‘The Ketterings’ house.’
‘You know the people he's let it to?
Do tell me, what're they like?
More boring English?’
‘Is Chrissie Kettering still with you?’
Molly raised her voice slightly as though speaking to a foreigner and tried to get to the heart of the matter.
‘No.
I told you.
They've all gone.
All the young people.
And they've left the most terrible mess in their bedrooms.
Do let's chat again some time and you can tell me all the gossip about Buck's new tenants.’
And Nancy Leadbetter rang off.
‘The thing about the Sienese,’ Haverford said, voicing a thought he intended to use in one of his ‘Jottings’, ‘is that they always want somebody else to do their dirty work for them.
I mean, take the time when Cardinal Alfonso of Siena wanted to murder Pope Leo the Tenth.
Niente fotografie per favore .’
However, the waiter in the Piazza del Campo had taken Hugh's camera off their table and was waving to them to sit closer.
‘Oh God,’ said Henrietta and pulled her hat over her eyes.
Hugh moved his profile a little towards his family, conscious of the fact that he always looked his best in a snap whereas the sight of a lens made his wife flustered.
‘I mean, he didn't go and strangle Leo himself.
He corrupted the surgeon Battista da Vercelli, who was to treat a fistula just below the Pontiff's left buttock….’
They had arrived in Siena when the recently washed streets smelled fresh and metallic.
They had parked by the stadium and walked down towards the Campo.
On the way the children straggled behind them or dived down lanes where archways blocked out the steadily mounting sun.
They inquired the price of medieval patterned paper diaries and portfolios for the girls, and bought them small address books as a concession to their shrill demands.
They gave Jacqueline a bright parish flag to flap and trail along the ground.
In the Palazzo Pubblico they saw Martini's cavalier, dressed in the same golden, diamond-patterned cloak as his horse.
The landscape he rode through was as white as a desert.
‘Bloody dry, the hills around here,’ Hugh had said.
‘No wonder the pool looked empty.’
And then they had sat in the line of cafés and restaurants  on the northern side of the cockle-shaped square, behind the fountain carved with women and wolves and dragons, opposite the tall, pink bell-tower.
Samantha led Jacqueline out to buy a paper bag of corn to feed the portly, over-privileged pigeons and Haverford Downs gave them a taste of his ‘Jottings’.
‘The Sienese Cardinal persuaded this surgeon to poison his patient, you see.
Well, of course, the whole plot was found out and the unhappy doctor drawn and quartered or whatever.
Can't remember what happened to the Cardinal.
Did he get beatified or secretly strangled?
Can't you tell me that, Henry?
I suppose not.
Schools never hand out any useful information.’
‘Who's coming,’ said Molly, collecting her bits of shopping and standing up, ‘to the picture gallery?’
‘I'm dying for a swim,’ Henrietta panted.
‘When are we going back to ‘La Felicità’?’
‘We've seen pictures.’
Samantha returned with the youngest Pargeter, leaving a flurry of disappointed pigeons.
‘Oh, honestly, need we?’
‘Isn't it rather a long walk?’
‘Anyway we haven't had an ice-cream.
You promised.’
‘I must confess I'd rather sit on and view the passing scene.’
Haverford, his head cocked on one side, was casting an eye over blonde girls from Sweden, Guildford or Saskatoon, quite undiscouraged when they didn't return his smile but merely quickened their pace towards the souvenir stalls.
‘At my time of life there's more pleasure to be had from the rear view of a pair of Levis than in all the Martinis the old rascal ever painted.
Wouldn't you agree with that, Hughie?’
Hugh looked into his glass of white wine.
It was hard to tell if he was more discomforted at being accused of being as lecherous or as old as his father-in-law.
So Molly walked alone and ended up in front of another Martini painting in the Pinacoteca.
The tall and helpful Saint  Agostino stood surrounded by disasters, someone was attacked by a wolf, a child fell from a window, a horse fell into a ravine.
As soon as a flying angel whispered news of these events into his ear, the Saint put down his book and flew, like Batman, to the rescue.
So he swooped to catch the falling child, drive away the wolf or restore the horse — all these miracles being depicted in small panels round the central figure of the Saint.
‘Signor Fixit,’ a voice behind her spoke her thoughts.
She turned to see Nicholas Tapscott the ex-consul and painter.
Dressed in a white shirt and trousers, and with his white hair and a face apparently never submitted to the sunshine, he looked as though he had been rolled in flour preparatory to cooking.
‘Doesn't that remind you of old Fosdyke?’
‘I was thinking that,’ Molly agreed.
‘He seems to be fixing everything.’
‘Wonderful painting.’
‘Yes.’
‘Full of life, of course.’
‘It seems to be.’
‘Neither Connie nor I could touch it.
That's what we can't seem to get into our pictures.
Life….’
‘I suppose it's hard.’
‘Not that we expect to be Martini.
Nothing like it.
But all the years we've been trying.
Might have been able to capture ‘life’.
Can't think why not, in fact.’
‘I'm sorry.’
Molly hardly knew what to say.
‘Dedicated painters, both of us.
A.1 light out here.
Old masters to study.
Long winter days with nothing else to do.
One problem.
We're so jolly rotten at it.
Know what you're going to say.
Why not give it up?’
‘No.
Of course not.’
Molly had, at least, thought it.
‘Dedicated, you see.
All the great ones dedicated.
Van Gogh, Raphael, even old Martini.
Easy to be dedicated if you're a  blooming genius.
But to go on being dedicated when you're a rotten painter!
I tell you.
That calls for heroic devotion.’
He smiled at her, revealing strong, yellowish teeth.
It didn't seem to her as though he were joking.
‘Gift of ubiquity,’ he went on, looking at the picture.
‘All the saints had it.
They could turn up wherever they liked.
Several places at the same time.
Only not everyone wants all that helping, do they?
It's a bit disconcerting to be minding your own business.
Just getting on with things.
Then having a blooming great saint swooping down.
Interfering with everything.
People resent that.
Why didn't Nancy ask old Fosdyke to that excellent party?’
‘I don't know.’
‘Not universally popular, Signor Fixit.’
When they got back from Siena, the pool was three quarters empty.
Deprived of a swim, Henrietta decided to wash her hair but the bathroom tap could only be persuaded to emit a trickle of dark brown water, after which it coughed, spluttered and ran dry.
By six o'clock there was no water in the loos.
Molly rang the blessed Saint Fixit for the fourth time but there was still no reply.
Then she rang Nancy Leadbetter again.
‘I'm sorry to disturb you.
This is Molly Pargeter.
I rang this morning…’
‘About your child.
Of course, I remember quite clearly.
You won't have got a postcard yet.’
‘No.
It's about the water at ‘La Felicità’.
We seem to have been cut off.’
‘You can't keep them at home forever, you know.
You've got to let go.’
‘I mean all the water's gone.
In the taps and everything.
It's terribly inconvenient.
Do you know who I ought to ring?
The plumbers?’
‘Never heard of them.’
‘What?’
‘They must be new here.’
‘Who?’
‘The Plummers.
Where do they live?’
‘I just wondered if you knew…’
‘Anyway, if there's no water in the Ketterings’ house I don't think you should take it.
Not if you've got children who'll need a regular wash.’
Molly gave it up and drove into Mondano.
She now knew where Giovanna lived, in a surprisingly large house opposite the café.
The windows were dark and she got no answer to her repeated knocking on the front door.
She went into Lucca's shop but he had no idea where Giovanna and her family had got to.
And when she tried to interest him in niente acqua , he laughed as he limped round his shelves serving several customers at once and, shrugging his high shoulders, said, ‘Non c'è pioggia, non c'è acqua .’
It was all very well for him to talk, Molly thought, as she saw Signora Lucca washing a lettuce under a running tap in the kitchen.
In the café the sullen girl in glasses merely muttered, ‘Fuori ,’ when she asked where Giovanna and her family were.
She wrote a note on a postcard she had bought in Siena about the acqua and slid it through Giovanna's letter-box.
She still felt, in some calm and detached part of her mind, that Buck Kettering was alive and wouldn't want their holiday ruined.
When she got home she had to boil spaghetti in acqua minerale .
She was determined to appear unworried in front of her dispirited family.
‘There's something wrong with this house,’ Hugh said when they sat at their muted dinner.
‘I always felt it.’
‘There's nothing wrong.
It's just been a dry summer.
Lucca in the shop was saying that.
Non c'è pioggia, non c'è acqua .’
She drank a quick second glass of wine and did her best to smile round the table.
‘If we bath in mineral water,’ Samantha said, ‘I'd like to try the fizzy sort.’
Only Haverford encouraged his daughter.
‘A man can live without water,’ he said.
‘Hughie, you'll join me in a bottle of duty-free gin, purely for shaving purposes?’
‘Giovanna'll be here in the morning,’ Molly said with determined brightness.
‘I'm sure she'll do something about it.’
‘And Noah said to his wife as they sat down to dine, ‘I don't care where the water goes as long as it doesn't get into the wine’,’ Haverford quoted gleefully.
‘Splendid writer, old Chesterton, even if he wasn't all that expert in the sex department.’
Before they went to bed they had filled buckets with what was left of the pool to use in the lavatories.
The children became excited, as though they were preparing to withstand a siege.
The next day the sun woke them early, beating down from a clear sky, baking those tiles it could reach on the terrace so that the children hopped over them, nimble as cats on hot bricks.
The distant hills were burnt to the ashen colour of the landscape Martini's horseman rode through, each crowned by its sweltering farmhouse, now turned into a holiday home.
Jacqueline ran naked, pulled at skirts and trousers, whining at the heat, but no one was prepared to take a hot and heavy child in their arms.
Hugh wore a pair of neat white shorts which made him look ready for tennis.
Haverford fanned himself with his panama hat and wheezed like a rusty concertina.
Molly stood on the battlements of the terrace and kept a look-out.
At last she was rewarded.
A cloud of dust appeared on the horizon, the air was again torn by the sound of a high-pitched buzz and Giovanna rode, as Molly hoped, to the rescue.
The powerful maid didn't seem to take the situation seriously.
She turned on taps that emitted nothing but a despairing sigh and she laughed.
Then, as though it were the most natural thing in the world, she heated up a kettle of pool water to do the washing up.
At last a pick-up truck came bumping up the track, containing Giovanna's fat and apparently unsatisfactory husband and a detachment of villagers, including the old men, Molly was sure, who had sat on the  wall by the petrol pumps mocking her.
Other villagers came straggling over by bicycle and motor bike as though the disappearance of ‘La Felicità's water were a kind of annual festival at which prizes would be given and refreshments served.
Finally Don Marco came rattling down the track in his battered Fiat and shook Haverford enthusiastically by the hand, ignoring the rest of the family.
The pool was now empty; only a few rapidly drying puddles stained the bottom.
The villagers looked down at it with the satisfaction of those who couldn't swim and certainly wouldn't want to try.
In time they were joined by a certain Valentino, an elderly man with spectacles and a purple birthmark, who unlocked a shed beside the pool, turned taps and wheels, and announced, in his role as the Ketterings’ regular pool attendant, ‘Va bene adesso .’
He then went off to cut the nettles under the straggling roses, satisfied that water, should it ever reappear, would no longer escape from the pool.
Meanwhile Giovanna's immense husband had waddled off to a patch of rough grass in which he hunted until he found a small metal square.
He began to pull at it, stooping, sweating and shouting, ‘Il pozzo !’
‘Pozzo ,’ Haverford translated for the benefit of the English present.
‘The stout party's found the well!’
It was at this juncture that Molly was distracted by Jacqueline, who had to be taken back to the house into one of the lavatories sluiced only by a bucket of old chlorinated pool water.
Meanwhile the villagers crowded to peer down the open manhole as though it were an interesting accident.
What they saw by the further light of a bicycle lamp was a chamber about six feet square and the opening of two pipes, half in and half out of the water-level on opposite walls.
If the liquid was meant to flow into the chamber from some high point on the hillside and then out to the tank supplying the house, it had given up in the hot weather and was no longer doing so.
Giovanna's husband acquired a long garden cane, which had been supporting a tottering mallow, and with it established the depth.
He poked the stick hopelessly towards the mouth of the pipe and grunted, ‘Bloccato .’
‘Blocked,’ Haverford explained.
‘He says it's blocked.’
‘Qualcuno deve scendere .’
The huge man whose belly flowed over his belt and seemed to cascade down the front of his trousers pointed with the cane.
They all looked at the dark square and saw that it was hardly a manhole, more of a childhole.
Even Hugh, although able to look like a jeune premier from time to time, had filled out as a result of an under-demanding marriage and a sedentary occupation, and would have been a round peg for such a small square hole.
The other villagers, eyeing each other speculatively, saw that they were all too full of pasta for the adventure.
Henrietta, tall for her age and spectacularly thin, stood by them in the bikini she had put on for the sunshine and the wand, hovering round the crowd, finally pointed at her.
‘La ragazza.’
‘No,’ said Hugh.
‘Quite definitely no.’
‘I don't see why,’ Henrietta said.
‘It'd be something to do.’
‘It'd be a bit of fun!’
Haverford, too old and far too tubby to be lowered down any manholes, was enjoying a vicarious adventure.
‘Sì ?’
Giovanna's husband raised his eyebrows at Henrietta.
‘Why ever not sì ?’
So the voluminous man held her wrists and lowered the girl's body, small-breasted with protruding hip bones and long legs which, when stretched out together, still showed light between them, into the dark square where she stood with water up to her thighs.
He handed down the cane and the bicycle lamp and she waded away into the shadows as the curious faces of the villagers, the anxious face of her father, peered down at her.
Molly had buttoned up the braces on Jacqueline's trousers and found her youngest child a biscuit when she heard the screams.
They were high-pitched, terrified and rent the silence of the house.
Going to the kitchen window, the biscuit tin still in her hands, she saw an extraordinary sight.
The crowd of villagers seemed to be standing round a patch of earth from which the thin, naked arms of a young girl were desperately waving as the screams continued.
She picked up Jacqueline and ran out into the garden.
Hugh was coming towards her carrying their tall eldest, whose arms and legs fell haphazardly like a doll's while a long strip of green weed circled her ankle.
The sobs still racked her.
‘She's all right.
Nothing's broken.’
‘Hetty!
What is it, Hetty?
Darling…’
‘She just panicked, that's all.
She must have panicked in the dark.’
‘Darling.
What did you see?
Did you see anything?’
The sobs were less frequent now.
But there was still a terrified child's face on a body almost a woman's.
‘I thought she'd enjoy it.’
Haverford was trotting beside them.
‘It was perfectly safe.’
Hugh knew that his wife would blame him although he shouldn't be blamed.
‘It was quite shallow.
They only wanted her to clean out the drain with a stick.’
‘And she was the only one thin enough to get down the hole.
You'd've stuck there, Molly Coddle.
Wouldn't she, Henry?
Your mother would have been stuck just like Pooh Bear.’
In saying which old Haverford, as usual, brought no help or comfort to anyone.
‘What did you see?’
Molly asked the question again when she was alone with her daughter in her tower bedroom.
Henrietta lay wrapped in a blanket, her teeth chattering, pale in spite of the tan she had been cultivating so carefully.
‘I told you.
I didn't see anything.’
‘Why were you frightened then?’
‘I…
I don't know.’
Molly thought she must have seen something .
‘There was nothing there?
Nothing peculiar at all?’
‘I suppose I was stupid, really.’
‘But you're not stupid, darling.
You know that.’
‘I suddenly thought they'd shut me in there.
I thought I'd never get out.
It was stupid.’
‘You know Daddy wouldn't let them do that.’
‘I know.’
‘So wasn't there anything else?’
‘Not really.’
What did that mean, that ‘not really’?
‘They shouldn't have put you down!
They should never.’
Molly put her arms round the girl in an unusual demonstration.
She had brought them to a place with snakes, although none had appeared to alarm the children, snakes or secrets.
She felt guilty as she held her daughter until the shivering and the teeth chattering stopped.
And yet she didn't mean to leave ‘La Felicità’.
She meant to find out more, as much as possible.
In the hallway she found Giovanna telephoning.
It sounded as though she were talking to someone she knew well, or at least had dealt with previously, because she called her interlocutor ‘Tonio’ and smiled continuously as though engaged in invisible wooing and sometimes she laughed.
‘Acqua .’
Molly used the word, unable to make a joke, or a tragedy or even, for the moment, a sentence of it.
And Giovanna stood with her hand on the telephone which she had put down and spoke slowly, loudly, as though to an imbecile.
Molly understood that water would come by lorry during the  afternoon or at least by the evening.
Tonio at the Water Board had given her his promise.
That should have been arranged before.
The ragazza should never have been put down the well, that was the fault of her husband who didn't fully understand the house and was ignorant of its ways.
…
The purchase of water by the lorry load may strain the budget of even the best-heeled family .
She remembered the warning in the letter written, it now seemed, by Mrs Kettering.
Well, Mrs Kettering would have to pay, the woman who wished Buck Kettering lost and gone forever would eventually, Molly decided, be responsible for the intake of water.
Giovanna left.
Henrietta came down to lunch, still shivering slightly, in a sweater and jeans, and refused to discuss her experience, telling Jacqueline not to be bloody silly when she asked if she'd seen crocodiles.
All that afternoon they waited for the water to come.
Molly and Hugh sat on the terrace unable to concentrate on anything else.
At the distant sound of a lorry on the Mondano road he would start up, shade his eyes, and then sink back in his chair, disappointed.
‘Bloody disaster,’ Hugh said, ‘this holiday's turning out to be.’
‘I don't see why.’
‘If it's your idea of fun to sit here…waiting for water.
We might as well have gone on holiday to the Sahara Desert.’
‘It's interesting when things go wrong.
That's the way you find out about a place.’
‘Find out how much they charge for water.
Probably a fortune.’
‘We've never bought water by the lorry load before.
It's rather an adventure.’
‘Well, I don't see why I should pay for it.’
‘You won't have to.’
But Molly knew he would say when they got home, ‘For what I shelled out for the water we might as well have filled the loos up with Chianti.’
He stood up again at what he thought was the sound of a lorry, which also might have been an aeroplane or a dry gust of wind in the trees behind the house.
When he sat down he said, because he felt guilty, ‘I thought it'd be an adventure for Henrietta.’
‘Is that why you let her do it?’
‘Of course that's why.
Being let down an Italian well, by a crowd of villagers.
I thought, that's something she'll remember all her life.’
‘Perhaps it will be.’
‘But of course she didn't enjoy it.
That's the trouble with adventures.
People start out on them and then they go wrong.
A bit like taking this house for instance.’
‘What upset her?’
‘Was that a lorry?’
‘No.
What do you suppose upset her?’
‘It was cold and dark down there, I imagine.
Perhaps she wondered if she'd ever get out.’
‘That's all?’
‘What else do you think?’
‘I don't know.
Anyway, nothing she wants to talk about.’
By six o'clock the water hadn't arrived and Haverford, looking at their despondent faces, said, ‘It's like a death in the family.’
Being, as he said, temporarily flush, he took them all for a plate of spaghetti in a ‘trat’ in Mondano.
In fact he had telegraphed the Informer for some expenses ‘to entertaining priest’, and, bewildered by this unusual demand, the editor had wired back money.
‘This is the little spot where the locals eat,’ he told the family as they took their places under the umbrellas in the small Piazza Emanuele.
The locals consisted of the party of Sloanes Molly had seen at Nancy Leadbetter's and another English family with two teenage sons whom Haverford, loudly and explicitly, urged his eldest grand-daughter  to ‘get off with’ or ‘drag away to the disco’, although he didn't suggest where a disco might be found in Mondano.
These invitations made Henrietta feel that she would do anything, even return to the well, to avoid the company of the two youths one of whom bore across his chest the legend MY MOTHER WENT TO ISRAEL AND ONLY BROUGHT ME BACK THIS LOUSY T-SHIRT.
After some confusion over the ordering, Haverford gave them a lengthy account of his love affair with one of a pair of identical twins whom he'd met at a Red Mole party in 1965.
‘And it was only when we were tucked up in her freezing room in Charlotte Street that I got this strange feeling and I said, ‘But you're not Janet, are you?’
And she gave me the immortal reply, ‘No, I'm Heather, but won't I do?’
I made a short story of the business and sent it up to Encounter , but the puritanical buggers in charge sent me a rejection slip!
Do you find that believable?
Even Haverford Downs receives the occasional rejection slip!
It was ever thus with genius.
Thomas Hardy always included a stamped, addressed envelope with his contributions.
Magnificent title that, don't you think, Hughie —I'm Heather, but Won't I Do ?
The whole problem of identity raised in a single sentence.
And still the buggers rejected me.’
Of all the family Jacqueline had received the warmest welcome by the waiter, was always asked what she wanted first, and called Bellissima .
Now she was asleep, her fists clenched and her hair half-way into a quarter-eaten plate of spaghetti, so Haverford called for il doloroso and to his daughter's surprise pulled money out of a back pocket, new ten thousand lire notes.
‘I told you, I'm flush at the moment.
Flush and eager to show a little hospitality to the best daughter an old man ever had to comfort his declining years,’ he added with patent insincerity.
And then, on the way home, something happened which raised their spirits almost to the point of singing.
On the dirt  road from the castle, headlights blinded them, great tyres crunched to a standstill and Hugh backed on to the bramble bushes.
What he made way for was the long cylindrical body of a lorry.
A dark giant of a man, possibly Tonio, leaned out of the lorry's cabin to thank them for pulling out of the way.
‘Acqua?’
‘Sì, acqua.’
‘Grazie, grazie tanto .’
‘Thank God.’
‘Grazie mille .’
The cries of gratitude sounded from the car and heartfelt from Haverford, ‘You're a better man than I am, Gunga Din.’
Even the child in Molly's arms smiled sleepily when her sisters told her that the water had come at last.
As soon as she got into the house, Molly ran up the stone stairs to the kitchen tap before she switched on the light.
There was a cough, a splutter in the darkness, but no water.
Hugh called from the loo to tell her that pulling the chain produced a cascade of silence.
Depressed and disappointed, she went to the square of kitchen window and looked out on to the pool, which glittered in the moonlight, now flowing with the precious and expensive liquid which should have filled their most urgent needs.
‘Oh, Italy!’ she said to herself, on the verge of tears, ‘whatever are you up to now?’
‘I don't suppose you paid the almighty lire, did you?’
Hugh had gone into San Pietro in an effort to find the Daily Telegraph which had disappeared from their lives with Signor Fixit.
Giovanna was in the house, banging the washing up unhappily into a bowl of chlorinated water.
The rest of the family sat huddled round the pool, rather as rose bushes, shallots and date palms will crowd thirstily round an oasis in the desert.
Haverford was writing his ‘Jottings’, young Jacqueline was splashing in her arm-bands while her two older sisters tried to further define the watch marks on their wrists.
Molly stood looking at the lapping water with Ken Corduroy, expert on garden pools and pergolas, who had arrived quite unexpectedly in his Volvo estate.
‘We couldn't have paid them.
We went out to eat in Mondano and they just dumped all the water in here.’
‘Well, there you are, you see.
They do like to be paid.’
‘But they came at night .
Under cover of darkness.
They came when we couldn't possibly have expected them.’
‘That's what they tend to do.’
‘But why ?’
‘Please don't ask me to explain what goes on in the mind of an Italian Water Board.
It's been a complete mystery to me ever since I arrived here.
It's like their attitude to religion and their bloody Communist Party.
Totally confusing, to say the least.
It comes as a shock, I have to tell you, to anyone who's spent a lifetime dealing with the perfectly decent chaps you run into at Thames Water.’
‘I suppose I don't know exactly what Giovanna told them.’
‘Of course you don't.
And you don't know what their game is exactly.’
‘Their game?’
‘Might it be, I'm only hazarding a guess, you realize that, but might it be that they want you to get them out here again?’
‘Will they come?’
‘Who knows?
Unless you pay them.’
‘What would they do?’
‘You mean where would they put the water next time?
Maybe on the sitting-room carpet.
Your guess is as good as mine, Mrs Pargeter.’
Molly imagined a dehydrated house turned into a swamp and said hastily, ‘Of course I'd pay them.
But they never left a bill.’
‘Like their taxi drivers.
Haven't you had that at the end of a journey.
‘What's the fare?’
‘What you like!’
With an ever so charming shrug of the shoulders.
They trust you to get into a panic and err wildly on the side of generosity.’
‘The Water Board would behave like that?’
‘Especially the Water Board.’
Molly fell silent.
The sun lulled her brain.
Henrietta dived into the pool and her head emerged, neat and glossy as a seal's.
It was too hot to argue.
‘How much,’ she said, ‘do you think would be reasonable?’
He had, after all, some experience of pools.
‘Five hundred and thirty grand.
In lire.’
‘Two hundred and fifty pounds?’
Molly's mathematics were instantaneous.
The Ketterings would have to pay in the end, but it was a sizeable chunk of their holiday money.
‘All right, if that's what it costs.’
‘I should think it costs at least that.’
‘I'll send it.’
‘In the post?
How long do you imagine that's going to take?
You'd next clean your teeth back in England.
Look, I happen to be calling at the office this afternoon.
Pool business.’
He had little difficulty in persuading Mrs Pargeter to run into Mondano with him and cash some traveller's cheques.
When she left the pool side, she said to her father, ‘I'm just popping into the bank with Mr Corduroy.’
‘Oh, yes,’ said Haverford, ‘of course you are,’and didn't look up from his ‘Jottings’.
So, shortly before noon, Molly trusted Mr Corduroy with her money and at six o'clock when she was in the kitchen opening a packet of cornflakes for Jacqueline's supper the tap, left on, coughed discreetly and loosed off a generous gush of what looked to her like particularly clean and upmarket water.
She gave Jacqueline a hot bath and later, with a feeling of gratitude for some sort of deliverance, she laid dinner out on the terrace.
They ate by candlelight, with highlights from Turandot playing, but received no visitors of any sort.
After dinner Molly, who had taken to reading there in the afternoons, went into the big downstairs sitting-room to find her book.
She saw it, a paperback Margery Allingham, on the  shadowy sofa and moved towards it.
Outside the tall windows the darkness came suddenly, unexpectedly, without any long twilight.
Then she felt a breath of air and the creak of the door she hadn't altogether shut and which led out to the courtyard.
The visitor, whoever it was, came in silently, and looking round, not knowing who or what to expect, Molly saw the tall sad-looking dog, its eyes wet and its pink tongue lolling, which Buck had apparently abandoned to the Castello Crocetto.
It moved uncertainly towards her, its uncut claws rattling on the tiles, and gave her hand a soft, wet greeting.
At that moment the telephone rang.
She waited for three rings, but she knew that Hugh wouldn't pick up a machine that might buzz and shout ‘Pronto !’ at him.
Then she lifted the receiver while still holding out her other hand for the dog to lick.
‘Vittoria Dulcibene,’ the telephone announced.
‘I am missing that horrible dog.
Has it gone off to look for Buck?’
‘Yes, it's here.’
‘It should be kept chained.
My gardener is too soft-hearted.
Shall I come and pick it up or will it do in the morning?’
Molly thought it would do in the morning, and then she said, ‘Was it Mr Kettering who left the dog with you?’
‘Well, no.
It was Sandra, actually.
She dumped Manrico here, with compliments of Buck.’
‘I expect you know how to get in touch with her, in case of trouble, I mean.
Is she in London?’
‘London?
I don't know about London.
There or in Rome, perhaps.
It's hard to know where they get to.
Why do you ask who left the dog with me?’
‘I don't know.
Mr Kettering going off without the dog and his wife bringing it round to you — it all seems a bit odd if it's so devoted to him.’
‘People may be devoted to us and we're not so devoted to them.
Haven't you found that?’
‘Not really.’
‘Then you are lucky, Mrs Pargeter.
Shut that appalling Manrico up in a shed somewhere.
I'll send the gardener in the morning.’
The line went dead and, unfolding itself from the mat, the dog gave a single, peremptory bark that might have been the result of an interrupted dream.
The sudden sound brought down the children and Hugh, who looked nervously at the Borzoi.
‘What's that?
The Hound of the Baskervilles?’
‘I think it's the Ketterings’ dog.
It seems to have come home.’
‘Well, we can't be expected to look after it.
Not on top of everything else.’
However the girls took the dog upstairs where it wolfed all that was left of the lasagne and went to sleep in front of the hearth, quieter than it ever had been at the Castello Crocetto.
JOTTINGS FROM TUSCANY by Haverford Downs
As I told my faithful readers last week, this particular old gent was transported by an extremely uncomfortable magic carpet (B.A. steerage, Apex ticket, with all the delights of plastic food and stewardesses trained by the Obergrüppenführer at Heathrow) to Chiantishire, that old-established suburb of Wimbledon, which can't have changed much since Britannia ruled the waves and wogs stopped at Calais.
It's true that there are a few natives here (known as ‘Eyeties’ to the British colonials), who are useful to serve as maids, waiters or ‘chaps to look after the swimming-pool’.
Speaking of which, when one such status symbol ran dry here the other day, a child was lowered into a pit to clean out the drains, so the nineteenth-century tradition of infant chimney-sweeps is alive and well and living in Tuscany.
Is there,Informer readers may well ask, no underground movement, no Maquis, no risorgimento fighting British Imperialism?
Well, the wartime resistance movement was run by the Communists, who stood almost single-handed against the Nazi menace, and suffered heroically for it.
The ‘maid’ in the villa in which I am lodged for the purposes of research (she is a statuesquely beautiful and highly intelligent woman who is called ‘maid’, rather in the way the South Africans call elderly black servants ‘boy’) suffered the horror of seeing both her parents shot  by the Germans whilst the aristocrats from the local castle entertained the S.S. officers to black market dinners of wild boar and chocolate sauce.
At this point in his writing a white pigeon which had been fluttering round the swimming-pool alighted on the table, took two steps forward and excreted on the ‘Jottings’, no doubt in the interests of historical accuracy.
Haverford took a new sheet of paper and continued to compose, undeterred.
By and large, of course , your average Euro-Communist is about as far to the left as an English liberal, but here, among these dry Tuscan hills, they have a tougher breed, who hark back to the guerrilla fighters of 1943.
Typical of them is our local priest, Don Marco.
In many ways, the good arciprete is nostalgic for the days of Stalin and he regards Russian glasnost rather as he would the Vatican bank investing heavily in Durex.
‘If you English tourists get too powerful around here,’ he told me over a glass of grappa, and with a particularly charming smile, ‘I think I can remember where the old machine-guns are buried.’
Footnote.
I happened to meet a former girlfriend while out for a constitutional among these perfumed hills and blow me if; much to her chagrin, I couldn't remember ever having slid between the sheets with her.
Half-way through the conversation, of course, the penny dropped but how was I then to say, in the words of that potent piece of cheap music, ‘Ah, yes, I remember it well’?
A bottle of Chianti Classico for the reader who suggests the most tactful way out of this conversational senso unico before next Saturday.
Haverford wrote in a small, meticulously neat hand.
He would telephone in his copy but didn't want to be overheard by the family who might be critical, so he decided to call on Fosdyke the next day and use the telephone in the house his fan was guarding.
He watched the slim body of Samantha  dive into the pool and thought that by the time she came of an age for love he would no doubt be drifting round eternity in the unwelcome company of his wife with all rogering out of the question.
In the hot sunshine his body stirred uselessly to life and he fell asleep.
But Haverford's daughter found sleep that night hard to come by.
It was very hot and she lay under the single sheet staring up at the high moonlit ceiling and thinking about T. Buckland Kettering.
Her mind vacillated between laughing at her fears and suspecting a terrible mystery.
Surely, she told herself, there was nothing unusual about a family who let their house and left no address.
Had she not wildly exaggerated the significance of the advertisement?
Might not the Ketterings specify girl children only as reasonably as ‘no pets’ or ‘using the premises for business purposes forbidden’?
Perhaps the dinner on the terrace by candlelight was no more than a helpful suggestion intended to add to their pleasure in ‘La Felicità’, as was the idea of a trip across the Mountains of the Moon to Urbino.
All that seemed to her to be like a man writing, a foreigner to Italy, advising other foreigners, a teacher displaying his wisdom to likely pupils.
And yet…
(Far away now she heard the dog Manrico, chained up once more, lamenting its departed master.)
And yet, the letters were signed ‘S.’ for Sandra Kettering, and Sandra must have left the typed note of her most private intentions in the Piero book opposite ‘The Flagellation’.
Had she been wrong in all her first impressions?
And ‘B.’, she thought, what did that mean B., lost and gone forever ?
Surely no more than that the Ketterings were splitting up, like so many of their acquaintances, as even the Pargeters might have done, had it not been for the late, unexpected, unplanned arrival of Jacqueline.
The Ketterings also had a young child, Signor Fixit had told her, little Violetta, who  came ‘as a bit of an afterthought’; but that wouldn't prevent a separation, even a divorce, which, it seemed, Sandra Kettering welcomed.
So Buck had gone off somewhere.
No doubt, he had found another woman, and to Sandra and to Molly, he was gone for ever .
Then she remembered the car that had interrupted their dinner on the terrace.
She had walked down the stairs and for a moment been taken for, and almost become, Kettering's wife.
She couldn't guess why Sandra Kettering in her detailed instructions had arranged for her to be there and for that mistake to be made.
And then she thought of how she might find an answer to some of her questions.
When the envelope had arrived she had put it on the mantelpiece in the small sitting-room, but almost at once she had decided to take it more closely into her possession.
She told herself that it must be kept carefully, to be left out for Mrs Kettering when their stay was over, so she had put it in a compartment of her handbag.
It had remained there, she was sure, even after the note in the Piero book had vanished.
So now she got up carefully, her nightdress clinging damply to her body, and laid the sheet back over her sleeping husband with as much respect as if he had been dead.
Then she lifted her bag from the chair, turned the door handle with exaggerated care and made for the kitchen.
Safely there, she lit the gas, with one of the solid and reliable wooden matches Signor Fixit had been able to find for her, and put on the kettle.
She made herself a cup of English breakfast tea and then, with the kettle still boiling, steamed open the envelope.
When the gum was melted she opened it and slid out a single sheet of unheaded paper on which a short message was written in Italian.
She took it into the sitting-room where the dictionaries were kept and did her best to translate:It is excellent news that the whole business has been done successfully.
Now we can enjoy the future without anxiety.
We will meet very soon, I hope.
For  the moment I send this messenger.
Distinti saluti.
Claudio .
Molly turned the paper over and found a list of figures prefixed with lire signs and equipped with what seemed to her to be generous allowances of noughts.
This list was headed with the letters, A.I.C., which meant nothing to her.
She remembered a tube of gum Samantha had bought to stick postcards and photographs into her project ('My Italian Holiday'), and refixed the envelope, returning it to her handbag.
Then she went back to the kitchen, poured herself another cup of tea, and crossed to the window.
She looked out at the moonlight in the well-filled pool and her brain was racing.
The business that had been done successfully was undoubtedly the business of seeing Buck lost and gone forever .
Might he have been despatched by those means, other than useless lawyers, which were considered by Sandra when she wrote the list?
So now Mrs Kettering could enjoy the future with her Claudio, whom she would meet again after a decent interval.
That was the message Molly had received when she had come down the stairs and left her husband at the dinner table.
And as she stood at the window she seemed to hear again, as clearly as she had heard it two days before, the sound of Henrietta screaming.
The remembered sound had an extraordinary effect on Molly.
She ran down the stairs, unbolted the heavy wooden door and was off, running in her nightdress, barefoot across the garden, holding the torch which she had snatched from the chest in the entrance hall.
Through all this Hugh slept.
Had he woken up and looked out of one of the bedroom windows he would have seen his wife in the moonlight pulling desperately at the handle on a manhole cover.
When she had lifted it, she prostrated herself on the ground and peered into the blackness below with the help of the well-provided villa's torch.
She saw the water at a higher level than it had been when Henrietta had been lowered into it and the mouths of the two pipes were almost submerged.
And then she saw that there was a narrow, open doorway in the wall opposite her, which opened on to another chamber.
There was nothing the big, anxious woman could do to investigate the matter further and although she played the beam of the torch on every inch visible to her, she couldn't see whatever it was that might have made her daughter scream other than the damp and secret darkness of the place.
After a while she felt exhausted and walked slowly back to the house, shutting the front door carefully behind her.
Hugh didn't wake as she lay down on top of the sheet beside him and before dawn she fell into the heaviest sleep she had enjoyed that holiday.
In the morning she wondered if her inspection of the villa's water-works might not have been part of a dream and looked carefully to confirm that the letter to Signora Kettering was still in her handbag.
Later she locked it away in her own empty suitcase, a place where she was sure even Giovanna would never find it.
The house from which Haverford Downs intended to telephone his ‘Jottings’ belonged to the Harrisons, an elderly couple who had set off to visit their daughter in Toronto.
They had arranged a tenant but been let down, and Signor Fixit had promised to go and sit in their villa, having let his own house.
The arrangement suited him well.
The Harrisons' home was perfectly kept, equipped with all the latest devices, with its cream carpets and matching walls, with its rotisserie and dishwashing machine and its large television set on which the Harrisons played videos of their favourite movies which they swapped with a group of friends who lived around Siena.
So, in the winter evenings, they would draw the curtains and watch The Sound of Music or Bridge over the River Kwai and feel as though they had never moved out of Twickenham.
Mrs Harrison had always been a keen gardener and they had built a rockery, down which a small stream flowed with  the aid of an electric pump.
Their pool was oval-shaped and illuminated at night by carriage-lamps, fixed to the posts of the pergola which surrounded it.
Their poolside chairs had plastic covers patterned with bright flowers and their poolside barbecue was electric because Mrs Harrison didn't like the mess made by charcoal.
Everything the Harrisons had was well ordered and extremely neat.
In the middle of all this tidiness Fosdyke created his own particular mess.
His jackets were hung on the backs of chairs, his triumphantly acquired groceries were stacked in the sitting-room, his cigar butts filled the ashtrays and his glasses had made rings on the surface of the poolside table.
He spent a great deal of time on the telephone and he was often out of the house on various missions, not returning until late at night.
It was at the Harrisons' villa, named by them ‘Sole Mio’, that Fosdyke had entertained his hero and admired writer, Haverford Downs, on the night before Nancy Leadbetter's party.
Having managed to come by a decent bit of steak and kidney, he stood over the young maid, who came in once a week, until she had managed to produce a pie, later warmed up for dinner in the microwave.
There were potted shrimps to start (a collector's piece anywhere past Calais) and apple crumble, Stilton cheese, charcoal biscuits, Bath Olivers and a bottle of Warre's port.
Bald and pink, with his face peering above the white folds of the napkin stuck into his collar, Haverford looked like a particularly contented baby at feeding-time.
‘The continentals have never understood the delights of nursery food.’
He tried out a possible ‘Jotting’ on Fosdyke.
‘Come to think of it, they've probably never had nurseries.
They've never known the delights of being shut in a cupboard and smacked with a hairbrush by a Nanny whose starched apron crackled across her bosom like approaching thunder.
That's why Mrs Thatcher could never become Prime Minister of Italy.’
‘I thought it right to feed you, sir,’ said Fosdyke, ‘in the style of an English gentleman.
They're not particularly thick on the ground around Mondano-in-Chianti.’
‘Am I a gentleman?’
Haverford wondered as he dug into the steak and kidney.
‘I suppose I have some of the right characteristics.
I have always owed money.
I usually stand up when a lady enters the room (if the lady in question is one of those battling Berthas from Bermondsey who staff the Informer office, her subsequent confusion delights me), and I have always been anxious to place my education and superior talents at the service of the Radical Left.
My grievance against our present masters is that, quite frankly, I find most of them rather common.
I dress myself untidily, my family despair of me, and I have absolutely no sympathy with any technological advance since the invention of the shoehorn.
I suppose you might call me a gent.’
‘Or a genius?’
‘Well, that,’ Haverford was forced to admit, ‘of a sort, yes.
We may not be in the First Eleven, but we are a pretty strong team, Hazlitt, Charles Lamb, Beerbohm, Chesterton and Haverford Downs.
We who do battle with the weekly deadline.’
‘I believe I've told you how much pleasure your writing gives me.’
‘I believe you have.
I must say it gives me a certain amount of pleasure too.’
‘Beautiful prose style.
Not that I'm an expert.’
‘Kind of you to say so.
I believe I was born with a certain ear.
The gift God gave to Mozart.’
‘Mozart?’
Fosdyke looked confused.
‘Of course he wrote music,’ Haverford explained patiently, ‘but it's much the same thing.
One has to hear one's paragraph.
One word cut and hark, what discord follows!
It's something I can't make my Pictish editor understand.
The fellow makes marks on my copy like the abominable snowman.’
‘Whatever you say, of course, I'm no judge of these things.
You always seem pretty wise to me.’
‘One has lived a certain amount of life,’ Haverford admitted, swigging the Guinness Fosdyke served with the steak and kidney ('no particular point in just opening another bottle of Chianti in Chiantishire').
‘But tell me, dear boy, I don't see you as a regular Informer reader?’
‘Well, I wasn't until I managed to put my hands on a source for old Lord Pottleton, the Labour peer who had the castle outside San Pietro.
Hell of a fellow for crystallized fruits and waiters.
Well, when Paddy Pottleton snuffed it, I still got the rag, entirely for your articles.
I can't say much for the rest of the paper.’
‘Quite honestly’— Haverford was wiping his mouth with the napkin still festooned about his neck —‘neither can I.’
‘I always thought, if I were in a hole, you'd be the sort of chap I might turn to.
Much sooner than any of the politicians —’
‘Poets,’ said Haverford, who wasn't one, ‘are the acknowledged legislators of mankind.
And of course,’ he added hastily, ‘certain prose writers also.’
‘— Or sooner than, well, a priest for instance.’
‘Don Marco's a remarkable fellow.
Red as a watermelon.
One of the old-fashioned sort.’
‘Well, there now!
That's exactly what I mean.’
‘Are you?’
Haverford looked curiously at Fosdyke, who was changing the plates, stacking the dirty ones for the moment on the Harrisons' video recorder.
‘In a hole, I mean?’
‘Not so much a hole —’ Fosdyke poured cream on his visitor's apple crumble.
‘Let's say, more at a crossroads.’
‘Ah.’
Haverford ate his pudding tactfully and with some respect.
People had rarely asked for his advice and he found the idea of playing the role of Signor Fixit's confessor novel and strangely flattering.
‘A crossroads, did you say?’
‘It seems to me, do correct me if I'm wrong, but reading  the weekly ‘Jottings’ one would say you've had a certain amount of experience with women.’
‘Over the years’— Haverford did his best to sound modest —‘you might speak of me as one who has loved not wisely but too well.’
‘Love!
Well, that was what I wanted to ask about.
I don't just mean the other stuff.’
‘What other stuff?’
Haverford got going again with the cream jug.
‘What are you referring to exactly?’
‘Well, you know.
The below the belt.
All that side of the business.’
‘My dear Fosdyke.
You can't be quite so English.
You can't live by the Queensberry rules, you know.
Most of what's most interesting in life goes on below the belt.’
He absorbed another spoonful of nursery food, thinking that he had said something rather good which could be used in next week's article.
‘I'm not referring to what is available for fifty thousand lire in the back streets of Siena.’
‘Really?’
Haverford did his best not to look interested.
‘Which back streets are those exactly?’
‘This is a country,’ Fosdyke said, ‘where you can get most things if you know where to look for them.’
‘Can you really?’
‘Oh, yes.
If I told you what you can lay your hands on, if you're prepared to pay the price, you'd be astonished.’
‘In the words of Diaghilev to the young Jean Cocteau, astonish me, Fosdyke.’
‘Well, I mean, you can always find someone who'll do it for money.’
‘And I imagine you always have been able to from the dawn of time.’
‘Not that anyone should avail themselves of it, of course.’
‘Well, I don't know.
Provided you take reasonable precautions.’
Haverford smiled tolerantly.
‘But if you have any particular quarrel with anybody.
I mean if there's anyone you find standing in your way.’
‘A quarrel?’
Haverford gave himself the credit for being reasonably quick-witted, but now the old ex-pat's meaning had eluded him.
‘They usually do it, you know.
With lorries.’
‘Lorries?’
Haverford's mind began to boggle.
Did you do it in the cabin or was there a bed made up in the back?
And what about the driver?
Was there a man at the wheel who would be present throughout?
Or was Italy full of slender, available girls driving ten-ton trucks.
‘A fellow can't live out here, winter and summer both, without getting to know the ropes,’ Fosdyke told him.
‘I've heard about a chap who's in close touch with a fellow who can always manage it.
It could happen crossing the street in Mondano, and you know what a menace those lorries can be.
Well, it might be a big one with a misleading number-plate which simply doesn't stop that gets your mortal enemy.
Pure accident, that's the name of the game.’
Having delivered himself of this, his longest speech, Fosdyke sat apparently shrouded in gloom.
‘I thought,’ Haverford said, puzzled by the turn the conversation was taking, ‘that we were talking about love.’
‘Love —’ Fosdyke adjusted himself to the change of subject.
‘I thought I'd got over it completely.
My lady wife behaved exceptionally badly, as I think I may have told you.
Scarpered, not to put too fine a point upon it.’
‘Love isn't a thing you get over, Fosdyke.
It's not influenza.’
‘I realize that now.’
‘It's not something I shall get over, I'm afraid, this side of the Styx.’
‘Even at your age?’
‘I don't quite know what you mean by even at my age.’
Haverford looked miffed.
‘It's always the same person of course, although over the years she has had different names and come in various shapes and sizes.
Fundamentally she is a slightly delinquent page-boy with small buttocks and an upturned nose.
She is the archetype of the imagination.
The obsession that never dies’— Haverford drank Guinness —‘whilst there is a spark of life in this old carcass.’
‘Small buttocks…’
Fosdyke was thoughtful.
‘Well, I suppose it takes all sorts to make a world.’
‘Unfortunately that's true.’
‘But that's not what's brought me to the crossroads.’
‘No?’
‘Not that at all.
I suppose you might say it's the real thing.’
For an unusual moment Haverford was silent, looking, when it came to the real thing, a little out of his depth.
‘Quite honestly, it's rather thrown me.’
Fosdyke got up and cleared the pudding plates, stacking them also on top of the video.
He put Stilton, biscuits and port at the disposal of his guest.
As he did so he moved in the dreamy way of a man in a state of shock.
‘Is it the unrequited sort, this love?’
Haverford felt he should ask for more particulars.
‘Does the person concerned…’
‘Whom I will not name, if it's all the same to you, Mr Downs.’
‘Or does, whoever the person in question is — of course, I'm not expecting a name — reciprocate the passion?’
‘Fully reciprocated,’ Fosdyke said with some gloom.
‘Mutual in every way.
I'm telling you this in the strictest confidence of course.’
‘Oh, of course.
But what, dare one ask, is the problem?’
‘I'm worried, quite frankly, about the responsibility I might be taking on.’
‘Oh, responsibility.’
Haverford was clear on the answer to  that one; he had mentioned it in several of his ‘Jottings’.
‘Responsibility is like income tax, VAT, string vests, open-toed sandals worn with socks, tights and grubby bra straps — one of the great anti-aphrodisiacs.
Breathe the word ‘responsibility’ and the most dauntless cock-stand collapses.
Responsibility detumesces.’
‘I do feel’— Fosdyke didn't seem to have been listening —‘a strong sense of responsibility.’
‘Because you and this lady…’
‘Who shall be nameless.’
‘Of course.
Because you and Miss Nameless happen to fancy each other?’
‘Coming into someone's life is a bit like taking over their house,’ Fosdyke said.
‘It may land you in something you didn't bargain for.
I'm not boring you, am I?’
‘Not at all.
No, my dear fellow, of course not.’
But whether it was because of the conversation or the nursery food, Haverford's eyelids were beginning to droop.
‘So what would your advice be, speaking from experience?’
‘Taking over other people's lives?
Not on, if you want my opinion.
I've always had quite enough to do taking over my own.’
‘I'll have to think it over,’ Fosdyke said.
‘But I'm enormously grateful to you for your time.
I say, I do hope I haven't embarrassed you, talking like this?’
‘Think nothing of it,’ Haverford told him.
‘I don't get embarrassed easily.’
Eventually, Haverford was driven back in the Metro the Harrisons had left at Fosdyke's disposal.
It was the night a driver had put a letter into Molly's hands and called her Signora Kettering.
Haverford had got home after the children had gone to bed, earning Molly's frowns for slamming the car door, shouting good-night to Fosdyke and singing ‘Lydia, the tattooed lady’ all the way upstairs.
Second Week
Ken Corduroy drove round to the Harrisons' with an ingenious pool-cleaning device, a mechanical object that swam round scrubbing at the walls, he had ordered for them from England.
He walked up to the front door and pushed a button but the chimes went unanswered.
So he went round to the pool and noticed, at first, how the neat tables were littered with old newspapers and the ashtrays loaded with cigar ends.
A couple of chairs, plastic with the appearance of cast-iron painted white, had been knocked over, a glass had been broken and an empty whisky bottle lay on what he would call, with his expertise, ‘the pooldeck’.
He saw that the little waterfall in the Harrisons' rockery had run dry.
Then he noticed that the level of water was low.
Stepping nearer he saw that it was, in fact, non-existent and that the pool had only a few rapidly drying puddles.
It was not until he was standing on the very edge that he saw Signor Fixit.
He was lying face downwards in the shadow of the short diving-board, fully dressed in a blazer and white linen trousers.
Blood from his head discoloured the blue tiling pattern of the plastic liner around him.
The terrace door was open and when he went into the house Ken Corduroy found further disorder; another chair knocked over, dirty glasses and a smell of spilled whisky.
He telephoned the police in Mondano.
‘What dramas!’
Haverford came home in a state of nervous excitement.
‘Don Marco drove me over so I could telephone my ‘Jottings’ and the house was crawling with carabinieri .
There was a doctor there, the whole works.
They'd fished poor old Fosdyke out and the ambulance was just leaving.’
‘Dead.
Did you say dead?’
Molly had been laying out the lunch on the terrace.
The sun sparkled on the plates and, wet-haired from the pool, the children were being unusually helpful in the kitchen.
Nothing that day had seemed threatening at ‘La Felicità’, until her father came panting up the stairs with his news.
The old priest came steadily up after him; his car, small and dusty, parked under their thatched shade.
‘Not sure.
Wouldn't give much for his chances, though.’
‘Morto.
Forse morto….’
‘I invited Don Marco to lunch.
You won't mind.
He's had a terrible shock.’
‘Of course not.
Father, do please sit down here.
We're honoured.’
Hugh, who never went to church, adopted a tone of peculiar reverence when faced with the old man whose cassock showed traces of tomato sauce.
‘Grazie.
Non ho fame .
No hunger.’
But the priest allowed himself to be seated and to have a glass of wine poured for him.
Haverford also sat, lifting his panama to mop his flushed forehead with a red and white spotted handkerchief.
Molly went on laying the table, placing knives and forks neatly as though her sanity depended on it.
It was true she hadn't entirely trusted Fixit.
Sometimes she'd found it difficult to believe a word he said, but he had been there to meet her when she'd arrived as a stranger.
He had shown her round and helped with her shopping.
Now he had vanished with no reasonable explanation whatever.
She felt bewildered and suddenly lost.
‘It all seems quite obvious.
Fosdyke was all alone, had been for a few days since I had dinner with him in fact.’
‘He drove you home on that night?’
Molly started to investigate.
‘You saw him?’
‘Yes.
When you got out of the car.’
‘Ubriaco ,’ said Don Marco sadly.
He raised his glass with a dirty-nailed little finger cocked and drank disapprovingly.
‘Drunk.’
‘Ubriaco as a newt.
I'm afraid so.
He must have been staggering a bit out there by the pool.
Just his luck it didn't have any water in it.’
‘Had it?’
Molly asked her father.
‘Had it what?’
‘Water in it.
When you went there to dinner?’
‘Oh yes, I'm sure it did.
We had a drink out there before we got stuck into that amazing menu.
Yes, I'm sure I remember I saw water lapping.’
‘Pools can empty pretty unexpectedly round here,’ Hugh said.
‘As we know to our cost.’
‘Old Fosdyke certainly didn't expect it.’
The children had finished laying out prosciutto and cheese and hard-boiled eggs.
Molly brought out a big bowl of salad and sat looking at it, eating nothing.
‘What's wrong with Mr Fosdyke?’
Samantha said.
‘He had an accident.
He dived into the pool with no water in it.’
Henrietta had heard more of the conversation.
‘Silly thing to do,’ said Jacqueline, her teeth stained yellow with hard-boiled egg.
‘He didn't dive.
He fell.
So you must all be very careful.’
Hugh looked round at his family nervously.
It had turned out to be a strange sort of holiday.
Now they were all sitting round discussing a fatal accident in muted voices, with an old priest who smelled of garlic beside them, cutting a piece of cheese into wafer-thin slices.
On top of it all, the remorseless heat was becoming too much for Hugh, his sunburn itched  and he felt sick.
At that moment his dearest wish was to be back at work and having lunch with Mrs Tobias.
‘We had a long talk when we had dinner together,’ Haverford said out of a silence in respect of the dead.
‘He confided in me.
It was a sort of confessional.’
‘Confessionale ,’ the priest smiled at Molly and took another genteel sip of wine and surprised her.
‘Your father is naturally religious.’
‘He seemed to be worried about taking over someone's life.
He said it was like taking over their house,’ Haverford remembered.
‘That's what worried him.’
The next day Giovanna came to work and couldn't stop herself weeping.
Her small crushed handkerchief was quite inadequate to contain the huge tears that welled from her eyes after she had heard of the death of Signor Fixit.
JOTTINGS FROM TUSCANY by Haverford Downs
The sack of Rome, when the brute and lascivious soldiery of the Emperor Charles V raped the women, robbed the churches, and broke open a long-dead Pope's tomb to steal the ring from his finger, was only one of the invasions of this long-suffering land.
It was followed by the deprivations of greedy Swiss, repressive Austrians, revolutionary French, barbaric Germans and the huge, unpaid army of tourists and expatriates who live off the land and commit their own atrocities.
They're not, it's true, much given to murdering old men and children; they don't force Cardinals to ride facing the tails of donkeys through the streets.
They have not, as yet, imprisoned Pope John Paul II.
However they do desecrate the holiest places with their flash-bulbs and hand-held video cameras; they invade peaceful monasteries and sleep on the outskirts of towns in their evil-smelling ‘campers’.
They display their scarlet, sunburnt shoulders and huge backsides flaunting shiny ‘jogging shorts’ round the Piazza del Campo in Siena.
They do their best to make even our delightful local trattoria in Mondano sound like a Berni Inn in Basingstoke as they call raucously for prawn cocktail and steak and chips, having to settle with obvious disgust for the pure poetry of Signora Sparanti's risotto con funghi .
Ever since the Marquis of Mantua failed to defeat the French at Fornovo in the 1490s (a period which must  have been almost as barbaric and unpleasant as the 1980s), this sunsoaked land has had to endure invasion and rely on the assassin's knife or the patriot's bullet to even the score.
In the context of such a history, how are we to interpret our local sensation, the death of an obscure Englishman, who acted as house agent, courier, travel guide, purveyor of groceries in short supply, house-sitter and, it has been daringly suggested, pimp to the English army of occupation in Chiantishire?
He was a man of considerable literary taste (I must report, in all modesty, that he subscribed to the Informer and never missed these ‘jottings’) who died, so the authorities would have us believe, by falling into an empty swimming-pool when drunk on hard-to-come-by malt whisky.
I attended Fosdyke's funeral.
The English masters he served so well, and to whom he was universally known as ‘Signor Fixit’, were conspicuous by their absence.
My own family stayed away.
My son-in-law, being a solicitor, said it was too much like work, as he is constantly attending the funerals of clients in England.
My daughter, although clearly distressed at the tragedy, preferred to stay at home with the children.
In the local cimitero , opposite the old Mondano church, I was, at first, the only mourner.
The graves around us on a stifling hot morning (funerals here are not long postponed for obvious reasons) were decorated with wilting flowers and photographs of deceased mamas and departed children.
As my old friend, the Communist priest, performed the last rites, did I see a half smile on those weatherbeaten features?
How many fascists did he bury with public grief and deep private satisfaction in the last year of the German Occupation?
Did Fosdyke die, I wondered as I stood by that hastily dug grave, to avenge the humiliation of Fornovo?
Remember this is the country, as Signor Fixit himself told me, where a lorry can be hired not only to move your furniture but to run over an unpopular citizen.
And if Fosdyke had been popular, it's strange that his funeral was so poorly attended.
However, I was not alone at the graveside.
A little later a car drove up and two women in veils got out and joined me.
One I recognized, the local Baronessa, whose family has always been friendly with the occupying forces.
The other was a middle-aged woman, also Italian, who seemed to be her friend.
I intended to ask the Baronessa Dulcibene why she had come to pay her last respects to this mysterious Englishman but she gave me a glassy look of non-recognition and moved rapidly away with her companion.
As my old girlfriend Nancy Leadbetter used to say, ‘There's no snob like a foreign snob.’
A reader has suggested that the belated realization that you're talking to an ex-lover is best expressed by the old Tallulah Bankhead crack: ‘I didn't recognize you with your clothes on.’
Well done, Mr A.B.
of Bromley.
A bottle of Chianti Classico will be winging its way in your direction with the Informer 's compliments.