

ATHENS IMPOSES HER WILL
The new Athenian alliance had little to fear from the Persians in the years immediately after its formation.
The initiative passed to Athens.
Her first naval success was to expel Pausanias from Byzantium (he had avoided conviction after his recall to Sparta, and had returned to Byzantium).
The Athenian campaigns which follow — the capture of Eion in northern Greece, on the River Strymon, and of the island of Skyros, north-east of Euboia, both in 476/5 — were the work of Kimon, son of Miltiades the victor of Marathon.
Miltiades' last operation (in 489) against the island of Paros, in the Cyclades, can be seen as an attempt to move on to the offensive against Persia after the defensive stand at Marathon.
Paros had been a failure; but Miltiades' son Kimon pursued a similar line in the 470s and 460s, showing that he saw himself as the heir to his father's policies as well as his debts (for which see Plut.
Kim .
iv).
But the similarity goes further: Miltiades had been a great figure in the early colonial days of Athens: his pocket principality in the Chersonese was in the van of Pisistratid expansion (for good relations between the tyrants and Miltiades in the 520s see the archon-list ML 6 = Fornara 23, belying Herodotus: Miltiades had held high office under the tyrants).
In a sense, such sixth-century conquests are the beginning of Athenian imperialism.
So Kimon's campaigns, which culminated in the victory over Persia at the River Eurymedon in Pamphylia, show continuity not just with Miltiades the enemy of Persia but with Miltiades the founder of an overseas Athenian Empire.
This was very self-conscious imitation, as is proved by the peculiarities of some epigrams which celebrate the family's achievements: a surviving pair commemorates the Persian victories in the strange order Salamis-Marathon; it was perhaps Kimon himself who thus sought to remain Athenians, in verse, of his father's great battle, just as painters were to remind them of it by their Marathon in the Painted Stoa built in the middle of the fifth century: Oinoe, a deme close to Marathon, was the title of one of the subsidiary  hoplite engagements depicted.
Not that Kimon was the only Athenian statesman who sought to recall Marathon specifically: the 192 horsemen of the Parthenon frieze, begun after Kimon's death and completed as late as the 430s, may depict the Marathon dead, who numbered just 192, and who were given heroic honours.
That would justify the presence of horses on the frieze, since cavalry competitions were a feature of funerals for heroes.
Kimon's attack on Skyros was done on orders from the oracle of Apollo at Delphi; and Kimon perhaps put up a thank-offering in the sanctuary there (see Plut.
Theseus xxxvi and the inscription at Revue Belge , xxxiv, 1956,542).
Athenian interest in Delphi meant interest in central Greece, and control of land as well as sea.
Themistokles, as well as Kimon, perceived the political value of a friendly or at least neutral Delphi: in about 478, when Sparta tried to expel the medising majority from the Delphic Amphictyony (the federal organization which decided the sanctuary's affairs), it was Themistokles who opposed them, arguing that to get rid of the medisers would make the Amphictyony unrepresentative of Greece: more bluntly, it would make a present of Delphi to Sparta (Plut.
Themistokles xx).
On that occasion Themistokles carried his view; but (Plutarch says) the Spartans took against him from that moment, preferring to advance Kimon instead.
This is simplified and implausible (how could the Spartans exercise influence over Athenian politics?) but the grain of truth is that Themistokles was indeed out of favour at Athens by the end of the 470s, when he was ostracized (Diod. xi.54).
Perhaps we should not look for too deep a political explanation: ostracism was for the man whose leadership had been rejected — which might happen for reasons of style rather than content — and whose disapproving presence was an obstruction and a reproach.
Shortly before Themistokles fell, Aeschylus (in 472) produced a play, the Persians , which reminded the audience of how Themistokles had deceived King Xerxes at the time of the battle of Salamis.
From a poet whose plays elsewhere show sympathy with Themistoklean policies (p. 37 ), this must be a topical not nostalgic allusion — a contribution to a debate about whether Themistokles should stay or go.
The play was financed (see Syll. 1078) by the young politician Pericles, who cannot have been indifferent to its pro-Themistoklean content.
That Pericles' maternal relatives, the noble family of the Alkmaionidai, were enemies of Themistokles (as they certainly were is no objection to this view: Pericles' father had already distanced  himself from the Alkmaionidai by the time of his ostracism in 484 (Ath.
Pol .
xxii, where his politics are distinguished from those of his Alkmaionid kinsman Megakles).
Themistokles' friends were, however, either too young (like Pericles) or too powerless (like Aeschylus, who, as a poet, had to put his points obliquely), and he was ostracized.
His activities in the Peloponnese may have been provocatively anti-Spartan (p. 25); in any event, he was forced to look for a permanent home in the king's Asia.
He was condemned to death in his absence (469) and arrived in Persia as late as 465, eluding en route an Athenian fleet which was besieging Naxos.
It will not do to paint Themistokles as Kimon's opponent on the issue of foreign policy principles — that is, as a medising Sparta-hater — and thereby to seek to explain his ostracism in 471: it is now certain that very many ostraka were cast against him in the early 480s when his patriotism was not in question.
And the logic of Themistoklean imperialism was perfectly compatible with the expansion of Athenian power in the Aegean for which Kimon was responsible, and which ultimately roused Kimon's friends the Spartans to make war on Athens, in 431.
That expansion had continued, alter Eion and Skyros, with the coercion of Karystos on Euboia, and the suppression of the revolt of Naxos, the largest island of the Cyclades, which attempted to revolt in the early 460s.
Individual Athenians felt no compunction at this tightening of the screws: an Athenian father of about this time called his son Karystonikos, shamelessly exulting in the ‘Victory over Karystos’, and the name Naxiades, which occurs in the same inscribed casualty-list (ML 48) can be similarly explained.
The Athenians did not, however, lose sight of the Persian War which, in accordance with the propaganda of 478, was still going on throughout the 470s.
Soon after Naxos, Athens undertook a big aggressive campaign in the south-eastern Aegean, under Kimon's leadership; this was perhaps in response to allied discontent at the way the league was turning into a machine for policing its own members.
The Persian fleet put out from Cyprus and was defeated in Pamphylia (southern Asia Minor) at the battle of the River Eurymedon.
This brought in new allies, particularly from inland Karia, and new revenue.
Returning from this success, Kimon was obliged to deal with a major allied revolt, that of Thasos, an island in the north Aegean, rich in minerals.
It may indeed have been the news from Thasos which  turned Kimon back from seeking further conquests after the Eurymedon victory.
Ancient states did not much practise ‘economic policies’ in our sense, but they liked to control their own sources of corn, and of silver for the purpose of coining.
So, because of the silver mines which it controlled, Thasos was — considerations of league discipline apart — too important to be allowed to slip the leash (465).
At last Sparta began to stir.
When Thasos, under siege by Kimon, appealed to her for help, she offered ‘secretly’(but the offer was evidently everybody's secret at Athens) to invade Attica and thereby to relieve Thasos indirectly: Thuc. i. 101.
(Thuc. i. 99–117 is the main source for the years 479–440.)
This was a clumsy piece of diplomacy: the offer was not implemented, though Thucydides is sure that it was sincere.
It cannot have pleased Kimon, the Spartans' friend, any more than it pleased politicians of more obviously radical complexion.
But the same year, 465, saw the biter bit: instead of forcing Athens to abandon an overseas operation to deal with a problem nearer home, that is, a Spartan army menacing the Attic border, Sparta was herself forced to welch on the Thasos offer, because she had to deal with a revolt of the helots at Ithome in Messenia.
This coincided with an earthquake — for a superstitious Spartan, a sign of divine disapproval, which might well make the helots, who were surely experts in the psychology of their oppressors, hope that Spartan nerve might give.
Unable to cope alone, the Spartans called on Athens for help.
The inconsistency is striking: unwilling to see Athens put down Thasos, a rebel subject, Sparta nevertheless calls on the Athenians to join her in putting down her own rebel subjects.
Kimon's prestige was still enough to get help voted, though he had first to beat back a prosecution for bribery over Thasos by Pericles.
What happens next is a cardinal moment in fifth-century Greek history.
The Athenians, 4000 hoplites (Aristophanes,Lysistrata 1143) and their commander Kimon were sent home by the Spartans, who feared what Thucydides, echoed by Plutarch, calls their neoteropiïa , their subversive tendencies.
This rebuff led to a shift in Athenian domestic policies — the ostracism of Kimon — and to a switch to an audaciously anti-Spartan stance in foreign affairs — alliances with Argos and Thessaly and the acceptance of the adhesion of Megara.
During Kimon's absence, the democratization of the Athenian constitution was taken a stage further: the Areopagus, the upper council in the Athenian state, composed of ex-archons, was deprived  of its political and legal functions, other than those which concerned a few cases of homicide.
These powers, which the reformers Ephialtes and Pericles tendentiously represented as ‘usurped privileges’, were given to the council of 500 and to the People i.e. the Assembly and the law-courts.
Just what was redistributed in this way is obscure, but the Areopagus almost certainly lost its prospective control of magistrates through the dokimasia (testing of qualifications for office) and its retrospective control of magistrates through the system of euthuna (examination of accounts after their year of office).
Also, the nine archons lost their first-instance jurisdiction to the popular law-courts.
Finally, the punitive powers of the ‘Kleisthenic’ council of 500 were defined for the first time.
(Ath.
Pol .
xxvf.; archons: see index.)
In Plutarch (Kim .
xv) Kimon tried to reverse these changes on his return from Ithome.
This has created a temptation to explain the passing of the radical reforms by pointing to the absence of the ‘conservative’ Kimon and his 4000 ‘conservative’hoplites.
But this is wrong, for several reasons.
First, the Athenians who were dismissed from Ithome for ‘subversive tendencies’ were not the Athenians who were at that moment overturning the Areopagus but precisely Kimon and ‘his’hoplites (but we have no right to assume that he chose them personally; four thousand are a lot of people to know by name).
So they were not conservatives at all.
Second, a related point, the class of hoplites (technically, the ‘zeugite’ class) and the class of thetes (the lowest of the four census-ratings introduced by Solon in 594) were not opposed groups: on the contrary, both classes stood to gain from the demotion of the Areopagus.
(It is relevant that the archonship was not open to the zeugites till 457, to the thetes informally some time after that date,formally , never.
Both, then, were politically underprivileged groups in 462.)
Third, we should ask who ostracized Kimon?
He was ostracized after his return by an ‘electorate’ which certainly included the 4000 hoplites he had brought back from Ithome, who went on to fight the Spartans hard over thy next decade and a half of warfare (the First Peloponnesian War, see further p. 39).
Kimon, therefore, was dumped by (among others) his own troops of a few months before — he was, after all, the man who had got them into the Ithome mess.
Kimon (remember Thasos after all) may not have been very well pleased with the way his Spartan friends had treated him, but that did not save him.
Fourth, and finally, the rejection of the Athenians by the Spartans makes more sense if the Ephialtic reforms are seen as part of a process rather than as an event, that is, if the  qualities which the Spartans feared were gradually manifesting themselves over the whole thirty-year period, 487–457.
The process begins with a reform of 487, the introduction of the lot instead of election for the archonship.
This must instantly have lowered the prestige of the archonship, and therefore of the Areopagus, which was recruited from former archons.
No oligarchy ever reforms itself willingly from within, and almost the only Areopagite with the necessary combination of prestige and radical views to have brought about such a reform is Themistokles.
Hence the Ath.Pol. 's statement that Themistokles helped Ephialtes overthrow the Areopagus, which is crudely impossible on the dates, may not be completely valueless.
It could be an abridged version of an intelligent original discussion of the Ephialtic changes, which went ‘Themistokles, by introducing the use of the lot for the archonship in 487, prepared the ground [actually; not necessarily by far-sighted intention]for Ephialtes’ attack on the Areopagus in 462'.
Incidentally Aeschylus, who supported Themistokles in the Persians of 472, and supported the reform of the Areopagus in the surely topical Eumenides of 458, a play which also praises the new Argive alliance of 460, is thus consistent in his politics.
Finally, the new limitation on the first-instance jurisdiction of the archons is not likely to have replaced the old system at a stroke; a decree for Phaselis (ML 31 —Fornara 68) in which an archon still has substantive powers could thus date from a little after 462 — but not much.
To return to Plutarch's account, we must still explain why Kimon's opponents waited, as they evidently did, till the cat was away.
The answer is not difficult, if we remember that each meeting of the Assembly was different in composition from all others; personal oratory and ascendancy, not party organization, decided the issues, and that is why the absence of Kimon mattered so much: he would have given his usual speech on the ‘special relationship’ with Sparta, urging that nothing be done to the Athenian constitution to which oligarchic Sparta would take mortal offence.
Again, this makes sense only if it is allowed that Kimon had, for several years already, had his rivals: Pericles had prosecuted him for bribery, though the charge was withdrawn.
That looks like a young man's demagogy (cp.
Julius Caesar's prosecution of Dolabella, or the way Cicero avoided taking prosecution briefs after his youthful attack on Verres).
Pericles' next logical step was to get a power-base.
So, to outdo Kimon, who threw his orchards open to the Athenian public, Pericles introduced pay for  juries.
The final step was the Ephialtic reforms.
So Kimon's rivals, Pericles and Ephialtes, were not political newcomers in 462.
Here, as elsewhere in Greek history, the temptation to have one politician off the stage before his ‘successor’ arrives, as in a well-constructed old-fashioned play, is delusive.
Pericles overlapped with Ephialtes, and both with Kimon; and for a while it may have seemed feasible to operate Kimonian politics alongside those of his more radical competitors.
By making an alliance with Megara, Athens was clearly seeking to secure herself from a lightning invasion from the west — the threat which had been made at the time of Thasos.
The alliance with Megara did not, however, automatically produce a state of war between Athens and Sparta; on the contrary, the polis which really suffered from Megara's change of loyalties was Corinth: Thucydides dates from this moment the emphatic hatred,sphodron misos , which Corinth felt for Athens.
This was a new factor in Greek politics; previously Corinth had been friendly towards Athens, partly for the standard reason that Greeks tended to a friends with their neighbours' enemies (p. 16).
Thus the quarrel between Megara and Corinth, which drove the former to detach herself from the Peloponnesian League in 461 and join Athens, was originally over boundary land.
That was a quarrel which went back to at least 720 BC, when the athlete Orsippos of Megara, more famous as the first man to run nude in the Olympic Games, ‘freed’ some borderland from the Corinthians (Hicks and Hill, no. 1).
Corinthian friendliness towards Athens lasted, as we have seen (p. 16), throughout the archaic period and into the classical, i.e. as long as Megara was an independent power, capable of causing trouble for both Corinth to the west and Athens to the east: Megara's tyrant Theagenes helped Kylon try to become tyrant of Athens in the late seventh century and, in the early sixth, Megara fought Athens hard for possession of Salamis.
Fellow-feeling between Athens and Corinth, occasioned by Megara, is traceable as far back as the time of the Cypselid tyrant of Corinth, Periander: called on to arbitrate between Athens and Lesbos over the possession of Sigeion on the Hellespont, he awarded it to Athens.
That cannot have pleased the Megarians or their daughter-cities in the region, like Byzantium.
Then it was a Corinthian who, in the late sixth century made a speech (Hdt. v.92) which saved Athens from invasion by Spartans who wanted to reinstate the Pisistratid tyrant Hippias.
Finally, Corinth  lent Athens twenty ships for her war against Aigina (vi.
89).
Here we have a maritime application of the same principle which, by land, determined Corinth's attitude to Athens and Megara; Corinth's policy was to strengthen whichever of Athens or Aigina looked the weaker, so as to prevent the stronger from controlling the Saronic Gulf.
Stories in Herodotus of Corinthian-Athenian rivalry in the Persian Wars go back, not to 480, but to the 450s, when Herodotus was gathering his material and when the First Peloponnesian War was on.
So Corinth tended to favour Athens against Megara by land and Aigina by sea.
That all changed when Athens threatened to absorb Megara and Aigina — which was the position at the end of the 460s: Athens subjected Aigina in 458/7.
Incidentally the pattern was to be repeated thirty years later: when under the Thirty Years Peace (446) Megara returned to the Peloponnesian League, and Aigina regained some kind of autonomy, Corinthian hostility towards Athens abated, only to revive in the mid-430s when Athens once again began to pressurize Megara, by the ‘Megarian Decrees’, and to infringe the autonomy of Aigina (Thuc. i.67).
Corinth, then, not Sparta, was most nearly affected by the rapprochement between Athens and Megara in 460 and, consistently with this, it was Corinth rather than Sparta who fought Athens hardest in the war which now broke out, the First Peloponnesian War, of 460–446.
The first engagement of the war, that at Halieis, a port in the Argolic Gulf, was certainly fought between Athens and Corinth, plus Epidaurus, alone.
Moreover a sea-battle which followed, off Kekryphaleia, a small island between Aigina and Epidaurus, and some fighting on Aigina itself and in the Megarid, were conducted by ‘the Peloponnesians’, who are mentioned several times.
Nowhere in Thucydides' account is it safe to think that this expression includes the Spartans, and in the operations in the Megarid the Corinthians, and only the Corinthians, are mentioned by name on the Peloponnesian side.
A newly discovered fifth-century inscription (recording an alliance between Sparta and a people called the Erxadieis in Aitolia: ML 67 bis) suggests that Sparta normally had the obligation to help her league allies if they were attacked (‘if anyone marches against the Erxadieis with warlike intent, Sparta is to help with all possible force’); that she did not intervene to help Aigina is the measure of her lack of will to fight.
(For another occasion when Sparta put her league obligations second to self-interest, in 425 BC, see p. 133.)
In all these engagements Athens was conspicuously successful, the more remarkably so since she was involved, from perhaps 459, in a distant adventure requiring much manpower, an Egyptian revolt from Persia.
The violence and confusion which Diodorus (xi.7 1) says marked the end of Xerxes (465) and the accession of Artaxerxes, who acquired the throne by murdering his elder brother, led Egypt in the south of the empire and Baktria in the east to revolt in the hope of freedom.
Of the Baktrian revolt nothing is known except that the satrapy was recovered by aid of a providential wind, presumably a sandstorm blowing from the Turkish steppes.
In Egypt the rebel leader was Inaros, a Libyan chieftain, who applied (? 460) to Athens for help.
He was doing quite well even without it: he had already defeated and killed the satrap Achaimenes, Xerxes' brother (Hdt. iii.
12; vii.7).
When the message arrived, Thucydides says, the Athenians ‘were just then engaged in an expedition against Cyprus with two hundred ships of their own and of their allies’.
But they let themselves be diverted to the Nile Delta and there holed up the Persians in the ‘White Castle’.
The mention of Cyprus is interesting because it shows that Egypt was not mere opportunism: the decision to attack Persia in strength on Cyprus had already been made.
A tribal casualty-list (ML 33 = Fornara 78) confirms this: it starts with Cyprus and Egypt, in that order.
The Cyprus expedition shows that, even after ostracizing Kimon, the Athenians were happy to follow up Kimon's Eurymedon victory.
In other words, the ‘Themistoklean’ policy of aggression towards Sparta did not exclude ‘Kimonian’war on Persia.
What Athens wanted from Egypt is not stated by the sources, which are very bad; but Egypt was a supplier of corn to other states, from biblical times to the Roman Empire.
This landed wealth of Egypt was, later in the fifth century, exploited by rentier Iranian landowners who screwed all they could out of the local peasants: their demands are preserved in Aramaic on leather documents bought in Egypt in 1943–4 and now in the Bodleian Library in Oxford.
That quoted below, p. 64, refers to the rent paid on Egyptian domain land to a Persian absentee overlord.
To cut the Persian nobility off from such sources of revenue would be a good way of avenging the Persian attempt to satrapize Greece in 480, and to farm Attica and Euboia as royal estates.
But the negative motive is not the whole of it; Athens was anxious about her own supplies of grain in the mid-fifth century, and benefited in 445/4 from a massive gift of corn — 30,000  medimnoi, or a million and a half daily rations — from an Egyptian prince ‘Psammetichos’(Philochorus F 119 = Fornara 86).
It may be right to guess that Athens' ambitious foreign policy of this period, which includes diplomacy with a non-Greek town far in the interior of Sicily (ML 37 = Fornara 81, an alliance with Segesta in 457), was forced on her by the need to seek alternative supplies of corn, because her usual overseas sources had for some reason become precarious.
They were the Black Sea and Thrace.
Now in the Black Sea region the dynasty, which had come to power after the Persian Wars, ruled a principality centred on Pantikapaion until 438, when they were succeeded by a new one founded by one Spartokos (Diod. xi.31).
Unfortunately we know nothing about the predecessors of Spartokos, nor can archaeology help much, and we cannot say whether dynastic troubles in the 450s might have caused shortages on the Athenian grain market; the seizure of power by the Spartokids is too late to be relevant.
Thrace looks more plausible: there, the new kingdom of Teres and his son Sitalkes was in being by mid-century.
Such new sources of political energy may well have made the Athenians look hungrily away from their old markets to Sicily and Egypt.
That is not a complete explanation for Athens' continuing preoccupation with Sicily, which culminated in the great expedition of 415, but may be relevant to the first contacts.
Nor, to argue from the other end, was the Sicilian alliance of 457 without precedent in Athenian thinking: Themistokles called two of his children Italia and Sybaris, and had special ties with the island of Corcyra, very important for Sicilian communications (see esp.
Thuc. i.36).
It has recently been suggested that another major motive for fifth-century Athenian interest in the west was the desire for the abundant shipbuilding timber of southern Italy (cp.
Thuc. vi.90.3 and p. 57 below).
At first the Athenians and Inaros were brilliantly successful, as revolts from Persia often were, initially — before the Great King had had time to mobilize a feudal force from nothing.
At first he tried bribery, sending his agent Megabazos to Sparta to get them to create a diversion in Greece by invading Attica.
Though nothing came of this it is of interest because it anticipates the ‘Cold War’ methods by which Persia sought to infiltrate Greece in the second half of the century.
When the full Persian army did arrive, perhaps no earlier than 456, Lower Egypt was still in the control of the rebels, though Upper Egypt, with its garrison of Jewish colonists at Elephantine, held out.
The numerical imbalance was not too great, even with the large Greek  contingent: the Persians swept up Greeks and Egyptians into a small island in the Nile Delta called Prosopitis.
The entire Athenian fleet of 200 ships, plus a relieving squadron of 50, was annihilated (454).
This poorly documented affair does not come within the scope of Thucydides' detailed narrative, but his summing up, ‘few out of many returned home’(i. 110), specifically anticipates the use of that precise phrase about the disaster in Sicily (vii.87).
Such a shattering of great imperial hopes was the material from which ‘tragic’ history could be written (though Athenian recovery after both Egypt and Sicily was quick); but Thucydides, who never explores the same theme twice, reserves the full treatment for books vi — vii.
The few survivors got home via the friendly Greek state of Cyrene to the west.
Though there is no reason to think that the kings of Cyrene had actually helped Inaros at the beginning of the revolt, the fall of the Persian-backed Cyrenaean monarchy at about this period can be attributed to the infectious restlessness of Egypt next door, cp. below, p. 61.
Meanwhile the war in Greece was more evenly matched and fought.
As long as Corinth led the Peloponnesians, Athens had the best of it, though she was sufficiently alarmed to build the Long Walls, which secured communications between Athens and her harbour city of Piraeus: in future, Spartan invasions would not cut Athens off from the sea (Thuc. i. 107).
But in 458/7 a large Spartan army crossed into central Greece, ostensibly against Phokis in support of Doris, Sparta's ‘mother-city’.
(That is an allusion to the Dorian Invasions, in the period after the collapse of the Mycenaean states; the newcomers were supposed to have entered the Peloponnese after a stay in the central Greek region known in historical times as Doris.)
The Spartan force, 1500 of ‘their own’ hoplites, was strikingly big, even if‘their own’included an element of, say, half drawn from the ‘perioikic’communities, that is , the Peloponnesian areas which were under Spartan control but not actually enslaved as was Messenia.
If the rebel helots at Ithome were still maintaining their siege (465–455 are the dates Thucydides implies) this use of manpower was reckless indeed; so perhaps the text is wrong and the Ithome dates are really 465–460.
In any case, Sparta was evidently up to something big; unable, after disciplining Phokis, to return overland — the Athenians now possessed Megara, it must be remembered, also Pegai, a strategically useful port on the Corinthian Gulf — they decided to wait in Boiotia for a while.
The Athenians came out and fought them at Tanagra  (457); the Spartans first won but then Athens retrieved this defeat under Myronides at Oinophyta two months later.
What was happening, and why did the super-powers collide just here and just now?
The full story is given by Diodorus: the Spartans' hope was to establish Thebes as a counterweight (antipalon , xi.81.3) to Athens.
Athens, for her part, could not allow a strong, centralized and hostile Boiotia to the north of her.
(The position can be compared to that in 404, when the Spartans hoped to make Attica, this time, a docile satellite, Xen.
Hell .
ii.4.30,oikeia kai piste ; Thebes and Corinth wanted Athens to be utterly destroyed sooner than see her turned into a Spartan puppet.
Or we might compare the way Philip II kept Phokis intact in 346 rather than make a present of it to Thebes.
Such considerations constantly determine policy in Greek history.)
If this means attributing to Athens an uncharacteristic desire for land empire, we should not hesitate to do so — Thucydides (i. 111) after all records an expedition to Thessaly as well; and if any individual was responsible it was surely Pericles, whom Aristotle (Rhetoric 1407) quotes as saying that the Boiotians tended to ‘cut each other down’ —that is, they were weak because internally divided.
This was surely an argument for getting involved in Boiotia, because it was too weak to resist effectively , rather than an argument for leaving Boiotia alone, because it was too weak to make trouble for Athens .
A recent land survey of Boiotia reveals a much higher density of settlement and population than had previously been suspected, cp. below p. 84 for this; why not help ourselves, the Athenians must have said, to some of that good soil — cheaper and less dangerous than planting colonies in Thrace where they might be and sometimes were overwhelmed by the natives.
With the free hand in Boiotia given her by Myronides' victory at Oinophyta, Athens, exceptionally, is said to have supported the oligarchs there (Old Oligarch = Ps.Xen.
Ath.
Pol .
iii.11).
This is probably not quite the ideological paradox it sounds: it just means that she supported the politicians and parties in fragmented Boiotia who would tend to keep Boiotia fragmented, that is, the Thebes-haters, the local men who wanted to be big frogs in small and separate Boiotian ponds.
That such people could be called oligarchs is not surprising, since their aim was to keep power in their own irresponsible fingers.
Athens, then, was not doctrinaire in the methods she used to further her interests on the mainland.
Religious propaganda could also be exploited: an inscription (IGi 3 9) shows that Athens, probably in the  450s, made an alliance with the Amphictyonic League, in other words, she was continuing Themistokles' policy of trying to win influence at Delphi.
Delphi by land was to be what Delos already was by sea, a religious focus for Athenian imperialism.
By sea Athens had forced the submission of Aigina, and the general Tolmides sailed in triumph round the Peloponnese (both 456).
Then came the Egyptian catastrophe.
But the rapid sequence of the events which follow proves that Athens' morale remained buoyant even though 250 of her ships were at the bottom of the Nile Delta.
One lesson Athens had learnt, not to overreach herself with warfare in two theatres.
So a truce was made with the Spartans (451) which, as Thucydides describes it (i.112), need not have been motivated by more than Athens' commonsense desire to deal with her enemies one by one.
A big expedition was sent to the eastern Mediterranean, the direct cause of which was the return from ostracism of Kimon, shortly before 451.
Such an expedition takes time to mount, and there cannot have been much of a gap between the Egyptian failure and the decision (? 453/2) to return to Cyprus.
Moreover, Athens showed no loss of grip when dealing with refractory league members in the east Aegean in 452.
(See ML 40, 43 for her intervention against medisers in Miletus and Erythrai.)
But Kimon's death on Cyprus, after some glorious victories, ended that phase of aggressive Athenian activity, and the Athenian Kallias arranged a peace with Persia.
The end of the Persian War did not bring to an end the Athenian Empire, though the existence of the confederacy was now harder to justify.
There were also other reasons why resentment of Athens should have intensified in the late 450s: for instance, this was the period of the first cleruchies (settlements of Athenians on allied territory abroad).
Thus a cleruchy was imposed on Andros in 450, perhaps on Euboia too, since tribute from these islands drops after 450, one sign of a cleruchy: loss of land brought mitigation of tribute.
Only Athenian citizens could profit by allotments of land as ‘cleruchs’(literally, ‘allotment-holders’) and it may be more than chance that the qualifications for Athenian citizenship are more closely defined at just this moment (451): citizen descent was now required on both sides (Ath.
Pol .
xxvi; Philochorus F 119 = Fornara 86).
The intention of this law is in doubt; the idea that it was specifically directed against Kimon, whose mother was Thracian, fails because Kimon is now thought to have died as early as 451, too early for the law to have touched him.
Part of the idea may have been a  selfish desire to limit citizenship to as few people as possible, now that it brought greater material advantages.
The ideological disillusionment after the Peace of Kallias, inside an empire that had lost its raison d'être , is noticeable even in our desperately thin historical record.
The great rectangular block on which are inscribed the one-sixtieth fractions of the allied tribute which were ‘paid’ to the goddess Athena has room for one fewer annual list than the available years, and the most likely solution from a technical point of view is that no one-sixtieth was paid to Athena in 449.
Some unusual explanation is called for.
The idea that Athens actually remitted all tribute that year can be dismissed — there is no other good evidence for an easing up in the way the empire was run.
Either the money was earmarked for some special project like the building of the temple to Athena Nike, goddess of victory, a way of saying ‘we have won the war against Persia’ or else Athena was refused her one-sixtieth part, for symbolic reasons, the other fifty-nine sixtieths being paid in the usual way.
The payment to Athena was the aparche , the ‘firstfruits’ in a religious sense.
By not giving this to Athena, the Athenians were tactfully declining to cream off the best for the national goddess, thereby showing that all tribute that was collected was needed for utilitarian purposes.
Though there were grumblings in the league, Athens was now formally at peace, for the first time since the Persian Wars, having settled her differences both with Sparta, provisionally, and with the Great King.
Her only clash with Sparta was indirect, at Delphi (448).
Sparta had taken Delphi out of Phokian control; Athens intervened to give it back to the Phokians, and that was that.
In other words, Athens was still holding to the idea of a central Greek, religiously based land empire.
This would need diplomatic adjustment soon.
The immediate cause of the Thirty Years Peace with Sparta was Athens' extreme vulnerability in 446.
First, Athens lost Boiotia in a rising which ended in an Athenian defeat at Coronea.
The rebels were helped by exiles from Euboia, which may imply a concerted plan, because Euboia revolted next, encouraged by the Athenian reverse in Boiotia.
Also, the Euboian cleruchy may actually and ironically have accelerated the revolt it was designed to prevent — because cleruchiea had a garrison function; but if the cleruchy was installed as early as 450 it cannot have been an immediate grievance.
Finally, during Pericles' absence on a punitive expedition to Euboia, Megara revolted, and the Spartans invaded Attica, reaching Eleusis and the  Thriasian plain.
Pericles returned from Euboia, and then marched straight to the Megarid (as an inscription, supplementing Thucydides, reveals: ML 51 = Fornara 101).
Mysteriously the Spartan king Pleistoanax now withdrew, thereby puzzling and enraging his compatriots, who fined him (Thuc. ii.21): he went into voluntary exile in Arkadia.
The Athenians could now return to Euboia, which they subdued (katestrepsanto , a strong word).
‘Not long after, the Athenians made a peace with the Spartans and their allies for thirty years, giving up Nisaia, Pegai, Troizen and Achaia, their possessions in the Peloponnese’(Thuc. i.115.1).
The unrecorded item in this narrative must be that the terms of the final peace were agreed in principle by Pleistoanax and the Athenians when the former was still at Eleusis.
(See too Fornara 104: bribery of Pleistoanax.)
The Thirty Years Peace meant, for Athens, the end of the central Greek land empire, the end of the plan to control Delphi through the Amphictyony, the end of the Athenian outposts in the Peloponnese.
Nevertheless, the peace was an Athenian triumph because it effectively acknowledged Athens' empire by sea.
The proof of this can be seen only by anticipating the events of the next ten years, during which she sent colonies to the west — to Thurii in Italy (Diod. xii.
10ff.) but for this venture see p. 57 below:not simple ‘imperialism’— and to the north, to Brea in Thrace (ML 49 = Fornara 100;? 446) and to Amphipolis in 437 (Σ Aischin. ii.31).
Pericles also led an expedition to the Black Sea (early 430s?), a display of Athenian power to make the corn-route safer (p. 41).
Most important, Athens enjoyed a free hand in the east: Kolophon on the Asiatic mainland was coerced in c .
440 (ML 47 = Fornara 99).
And when Samos revolted in 440, the Peloponnesian League let Athens get away with savage reprisals.
Sparta voted for war against Athens on this occasion in her own chamber, thereby getting Samos on to the Peloponnesian League agenda; the Corinthians voted for peace in the second, decisive meeting, composed of the whole league (Thuc. i.40).
Corinth could afford to be indifferent to the vengeance Athens took against Samos; Megara was what mattered to Corinth, and Megara was now back in the Peloponnesian camp.
As for Sparta, perhaps her first vote was merely a warning shot, and her second was for peace; she was publicizing her own resolve to abide scrupulously by the terms of the Thirty Years Peace: Samos was ‘possessed’ by Athens in 446 and so she had a right to keep it.
Another point of view would be that the  peace guaranteed autonomy for both sides' allies (Thuc. i.67.2), an autonomy which Athens was infringing on Samos.
With Samos, Thucydides ends his account of the pentekontaetia , before the fifty years were up, and ignoring the early 430s.
This is deliberate, an emphatic full close to the story of Athenian growth and the fear it inspired in Sparta.
Samos was the last major violation of autonomy which Athens was to get away with.
ITALY AND SICILY IN THE ‘FIFTY YEARS'
In 479 BC Gelon, tyrant of Syracuse, displayed himself unarmed before his people and made a speech in justification of his career (Diod. xi.26).
The crowd hailed him, Diodorus says, as ‘benefactor, saviour and king’.
The interest of this triple acclamation is that it sounds emphatically and oddly hellenistic (cp.
OGIS 239,301, etc., inscriptions of the Seleucid and Pergamene kingdoms).
Now Diodorus' Sicilian narrative here is taken from the third-century BC historian Timaios of Tauromenium (Diodorus also used the fourth-century Ephorus, and his extensive use of these two writers makes Diodorus the main source for west Greek political history in the classical period.)
But Diodorus himself probably added the titles used of Gelon; in the same way he regularly gives his early Egyptian pharaohs the hellenistic royal virtues.
Diodorus' information then was possibly false; but his insight is correct.
The tyrants of classical Sicily did indeed behave like the kings of hellenistic Greek history, intermarrying (with a vengeance: they practised polygamy), shifting populations around (Gelon's transfer of capital and population to Syracuse), and building on a heroic scale.
They anticipated the hellenistic taste for theatre: Dionysius I brought his bride from Italian Lokri in a warship decorated with gold and silver; Plutarch's Life of Demetrius has a splendid account of the cortège in which the third-century king Antigonos Gonatas brought back by sea to Macedon the funeral casket of his father Demetrius.
The Sicilian tyrants also look backwards to the archaic age of mainland Greece: Gelon's appeal to the Syracusan populace is demagogy of a kind that recalls Pisistratus, as does Dionysius' demand for a bodyguard.
So Plato, who wrote about both the Athenian family of Pisistratus and the tyranny in fourth-century Sicily, spoke (Rep .
566b) of the ‘tired old tune’, the tyrannical demand for a bodyguard; for the relevance of this to Sicily see p. 187.
Aristotle too (Pol .
1305) mentions Pisistratus and Dionysius I in the  same breath.
And intermarriage is something which had characterized the age of the tyrants, epitomized by the party given by Kleisthenes of Sikyon for his daughter Agariste's suitors (Hdt. vi.
126ff)— but there are also marriage links between the Kypselids of Corinth and both the families of Miltiades of Athens and of the Egyptian king Psammetichos.
The Sicilian tyrant Hiero married the daughter of Anaxilas of Rhegion; and Gelon and Theron of Akragas married each other 's daughters.
These parallel developments in east and west were not quite independent: Herodotus says (vi.
13 1) that a man from Sybaris and another from Siris, both Italian towns, were among Agariste's suitors at Sikyon; and some of the poets patronized by the western Greeks had experience of mainland monarchy —Pindar and Simonides both wrote for Sicilian patrons: Pindar composed the Tenth Pythian, his earliest poem, for the Thessalian Thorax of Larisa, and Simonides had been patronized by Polykrates of Samos and Pisistratus of Athens in turn.
Plato wanted tragedians banned because they were ‘singers of the praises of tyranny’(Rep .
568b).
The Sicilian tyrants did not, however, take the personality cult as far as the successors of Alexander.
Their dedications are no less assertive; but like Kypselos, whose name originally stood on the Corinthian treasury at Delphi (Plut.
Mor .
400e), they identified themselves with the state, or put themselves on a level with it: they did not openly claim to rule it.
So Gelon's thank-offering after the battle of Himera, in which he defeated the Carthaginians, just reads ‘Gelon son of Deinomenes the Syracusan’; similarly the bronze helmet found at Olympia, dedicated by Hiero after his victory at Kyme —‘Hiero son of Deinomenes and the Syracusans’(ML 28–9 = Fornara 54, 64).
And none of the Sicilian tyrants before Agathokles (end of the fourth century; he was also the first Sicilian to call himself basileus , king) put his own name on his coinage — contrast the HIΠ-issue of Hippias of Athens (B. V. Head (1911)Historia numorum , Oxford, edn 2, p. 377), admittedly a coinage struck in exile at Sigeion, c.500 BC, but one which shows that the idea of a coin with an individual's name on it was at least thinkable that early.
Gelon of Syracuse had left his younger brother Hiero in charge of Gela.
On Gelon's death in 478 Hiero took over Syracuse, and another brother called Polyzalus married Gelo's widow Damareta, who was a daughter of Theron the tyrant of Akragas, cp. above.
(It was Polyzalus who dedicated the famous ‘Charioteer’, a bronze statue    celebrating a victory at the Pythian games of 474 at Delphi.)
Theron's son Thrasydaios, who ruled Himera as his father's ‘proclinsul’, and the disgruntled Polyzalus, formed a brief alliance against Hiero.
The alliance between Hiero and Theron looked like breaking up, but by 476 friendship was renewed, Polyzalus pardoned and Pindar was able to write victory odes (Olympians i and ii) for both Theron and Hiero in the Olympic Games of 476.
This moment is perhaps the high point of the Sicilian tyrannies, judged by what Greeks regarded as glorious.
Theron died in 472 and his son Thrasydaios did not keep the power long.
The Syracusan tyranny lasted for a few more years; Hiero was even able to install his son Deinomenes as ruler of a new city of Etna, built to house the population of Katane and Naxos, ousted some time in the 470s (cp.
Diod. xi.49).
Pindar wrote the Third Pythian in 474 and referred in it to Hiero ‘of Etna’, to flatter the tyrant's pride in the new foundation.
By 467 Hiero was dead, and his son Deinomenes' rule, like that of Thrasydaios, was brief.
External policy was equally brilliant: in 480 Gelon defeated Carthage off Sicilian Himera, and in 474 Hiero defeated the Etruscans at Kyme (ML 28,29).
The crude facts about the tyrannies are easily stated; it is harder to get at the truth about what the tyrannies were like.
The archaic tyrants of old Greece and of classical Sicily, the hellenistic kings and the Roman emperors, attracted the same kinds of stories.
Herodotus' Samian tyrant Polykrates was brought a present of an enormous fish by a fisherman and a good story was attached — but Suetonius' Tiberius and Juvenal's Domitian were also brought large fish to which good stories were attached; again Tarquin in Livy and Herodotus' Thrasybulus of Miletus both recommend ‘pruning the tallest poppies’, i.e. eliminating noble dissidents.
This kind of thing, what has been called the ‘roving anecdote’, makes it easy to recognize the tyrannical or other type , hard to get at the truth about an individual.
Nor are such stories necessarily false: life may deliberately imitate literature (cp. p. 268 on Alexander and the Homeric heroes), and life may imitate life — Domitian reading Tiberius' notebooks to get ideas.
But by looking back at the archaic phase of Greek history and forward to later autocrats, as we have done with the Sicilian tyrants, we can remind ourselves that the democratic interludes of Greek history were not merely short but untypical — in Syracuse, Macedon, Cyrene and satrapal Asia Minor one-man rule was normal for much of the period 479–323 BC.
In Syracuse, however, as in some other of the Greek states of the west, tyranny alternated with periods of self-determination.
(The word ‘democracy’ should perhaps be avoided because the kind of demos or people who did the ruling is often precisely what we need to know, and do not.)
The history of the Greek west cannot, however, be written like that of truly democratic Athens; for one thing, there are virtually no politically informative inscriptions.
(And the western Greeks tended to make their dedications at the nearest of the Greek sanctuaries of the mainland, Olympia, rather than creating or patronizing a big cult centre of their own,) Fifth-century Italy and Sicily did produce historians, like Hippys of Rhegion, or Antiochus and Philistus of Syracuse, the ‘Sicilian Herodotus and the Sicilian Thucydides’; even Dionysius I, tyrant of Syracuse from the late fifth century to 367, wrote history as well as the tragedies and comedies for which he was, as we shall see, more famous.
But of Hippys' work on Italy only a few quotations survive, and these are about foundation myths of places, or physical curiosities.
Antiochus was used by Thucydides for Sicilian antiquities at the beginning of hi; book vi, but not for fifth-century history, though he went down to 424.
Philistus was rated high in antiquity, but forty-one of the seventy-seven surviving quotations are all from the same late geographical dictionary.
The important surviving narrative, as we have noticed already, was written by Diodorus, himself a Sicilian, writing in the Roman period.
He came from Agyrium in the inferior, not far from Etna.
(Diodorus' universal history is weighted towards Sicily in the classical period, conspicuously so in book xiv which covers 404387;, this is no doubt partly because he was Sicilian himself.)
Philistus may have influenced the tradition which survives in Diodorus more than is now obvious; he was an adviser of Dionysius I and, later, of that tyrant's son Dionysius II.
No later writer could afford to ignore so well-placed a source.
Diodorus' account of Gelon is not hostile; but he treats the fall of the tyrannies at Syracuse (467) and Akragas (472) as welcome events, the beginning of ‘democracy’.
He saves himself from inconsistency by criticism, in each case, of the harsh rule of a son and successor (Thrasydaios at Akragas and Deinomenes at Syracuse); but as with the fall of the tyrannies of old Greece there are deeper causes.
Deinomenid policy at Syracuse had been successful in creating wealth and with it a prosperous agricultural class, which could not be excluded from office forever.
Things were similar in other or the big  cities of Sicily.
Diodorus' narrative of Sicily at this time is in a way superior to that of Thucydides, who in his introduction to the Athenian expedition against Sicily in 415–413 undertakes to explain his view that Athens was biting off more than she could chew.
We expect some account of Sicilian civilization and resources, some description of the fortifications of Syracuse, the temples (an index of prosperity) of Akragas, or the revenues derived from the subjugated interior; something, in fact, like Herodotus book ii, about Egypt, which introduced the invasion by the Persian king Kambyses.
Instead we get from Thucydides a dry list of founders and foundation-dates for the various Sicilian cities.
Diodorus, by contrast, gives a fine idea of the size and wealth of the Sicilian cities.
Of Akragas, which put up more temples in the fifth century than any other Mediterranean city except Athens, Diodorus says (xi.25; cp. xiii –.81)‘her revenue was derived originally from the large indemnities levied against Carthage after Himera.
She subsequently derived much revenue from exporting goods from her hinterland to Carthage.’
(He goes on to describe how swans came to settle in the public lakes of the city.)
There is an important point here: ancient accounts of Greek relations with Carthage often treat her as a barbarian power whose dealings with the Greeks were uniformly hostile.
This passage of Diodorus rightly emphasizes that in times of peace there were benefits in having a rich neighbour like Carthage.
But our sources do not for the most part interest themselves in times of peace — the impression from Diodorus' own narrative is that Dionysius did little but fight wars against Carthage; but Carthaginian aggressiveness, like Persian, was exaggerated by ‘crusading’ Greek historiography and poetry.
The other (modern) extreme, that of denying that there was such a thing as Carthaginian imperialism, is equally unsatisfying: from Plato onwards, Greeks spoke of Carthaginian eparcheia , a compound of arche = rule or empire, in Sicily; and (he Carthaginians imposed tribute,phoros , on Greek cities which fell into their power (e.g. Diod. xiii.59: Selinus).
But for most of the fifth century Carthage's relations with the Sicilian Greeks were co-operative and good; and her fourth-century quiescence in the reign of Dionysius II, who did not provoke her, is striking.
Democracy, then, in Syracuse, Akragas and elsewhere, meant the rule of a prosperous agricultural class, which did not necessarily regard Carthage as an enemy, or benevolent co-existence with Carthage as a sin.
One might compare the position of Anatolian  ‘medisers’(p. 19).
In about the middle of the fifth century Syracuse introduced the radical-seeming device of petalism (which like Athenian ostracism was a way of getting rid of prominent enemies, except that olive ‘petals’ i.e. leaves, not sherds,ostraka , were used); but we should not be deceived.
This had no very radical consequences: it was dropped after a few years, Diodorus says (xi.87), because too many of the prominent citizens were thereby discouraged from engaging in political life.
Syracuse was not a naval empire but relied like Akragas on the exploitation of an agricultural interior, worked by the subjugated natives, the Sikels.
The conditions for establishing and consolidating Athenian-style democracy were absent.
But there were present all the ingredients of stasis , civil strife.
Athenagoras, the Syracusan demagogue, is made by Thucydides (vi.38) to say that Syracuse ‘is only rarely in a state of internal peace’.
This was because Syracuse was a multi-racial society.
Constant immigration to this relatively new country (cp. p. 57 on Thurii) and population transfers meant that the citizen body of many west Greek communities was more fluid than the states of old Greece: this is the ‘mixed rabble’ of which Thucydides speaks (vi.17, in the mouth of Alcibiades).
But the old Gamoroi , the ‘land-holders’, at Syracuse kept up their Dorian loyalties, occasionally sending numerically small but often in the event significant contributions to Sparta in her struggles at home in the fifth and fourth centuries (see too p. 187 for the way the favour was returned).
And outside in the chora or hinterland, and virtually ignored by Thucydides, were the ‘true blacks’, the Sikel peasants or serfs.
The Athenian expedition against Syracuse was thus, as we shall see, not altogether hopeless in its aims, which certainly included the manipulation of the hatred of these groups for each other.
(A later writer, Polyainus i.43, speaks of a slave uprising at Syracuse during the Athenian operations of 415–413, cp. p. 141.)
We should imagine similar conditions at other places for which we have no such extended literary record as exists for Syracuse or even Akragas.
At Kamarina, Psaumis, a private citizen, used his money to help rebuild the city, refounded in c.460 after its destruction by Gelon in 484.
(West Greek cities oscillate between prosperity and obliteration, justifying all Pindar's insistence on the mobility of fortune: Olympian xii is his frankest hymn to Fortune,Tyche , and is addressed to a Sicilian victor, Ergoteles of Himera.)
The fifth Olympian praises Psaumis who ‘builds well-founded houses, grown with speed like the tall branches of a forest, bringing his city's people from the harsh  bonds of their distress into the light of day’.
These few lines, written probably in the 450s, illustrate how much of Sicily's wealth was in private ownership and how much was expected of its possessors.
(For parallels one must wait till the hellenistic age, when again citizens step in to underwrite their impoverished cities.)
Elsewhere there is not even the clue of a sentence in Pindar to show who was behind some great construction: Segesta, for instance, a long way over in the interior of the west of the island, had a fine fifth-century temple, the expenses of whose construction can only have been met (given the position of the city) from agricultural wealth, that is , from the product of the labour of the native Sikels.
Not that Segesta was itself a Greek community: the Segestans were Elymiots , that is, natives, of some kind not yet understood, although the scribblings from their vases are in Greek letters,Kokalos , 1967, pp. 233ff. and their architecture was Greek.
Cp.
Arch.
Reps , 1981–2, p. 105 for Attic pottery penetrating between 580 and 420.
The resulting wealth made possible the issue of splendid coinages (K. Jenkins (1976)Coins of Greek Sicily , edn 2, for illustrations): the coinage of Segesta copies some famous Syracusan types such as the river-nymph Arethusa, but also depicts the local goddess Segesta (Arch.
Reps , 198 1–2, p. 105).
If Segesta was a Greek-barbarian hybrid, so too was Selinus, whose architecture includes a mixing of the ‘Doric’ and ‘Ionic’architectural orders (Arch.
Reps , ibid., p. 102).
This would have been disapproved by purists.
The same thing is found at fourth-century Labraunda in Karia, where culture is equally hybrid.
In about the middle of the fifth century the Sikels found a leader, Duketios.
He established himself in the heart of Sicily, near Etna, about 449, and it took several years and several expeditions by Syracuse to dislodge him.
He was finally taken prisoner but got away from Sicily by pleading the status of a suppliant; later he returned and was killed.
This curious story is of interest because it is rare in classical (as opposed to hellenistic or Roman) Greece for an oppressed group to find a leader with the capacity to defy organized city-state forces.
The Duketios episode is a measure of the submerged resources of the native Sikels (Diod. xi.76xii. 29 passim ).
Sicilian wealth and power was coveted both by outside powers and by Syracuse, the greatest polis of Sicily down to Roman times.
Of the outsiders, Carthage established herself permanently in the west of the island; the classical wars were fought about where to draw the line of  boundary.
The other outside power was Athens, whose interest in the west allegedly began with Themistokles, who called one of his daughters Italia.
In 457, when she was already fighting on two fronts, in Egypt and in the first Peloponnesian War, Athens made an alliance with Segesta (ML 37).
Later orators were to castigate the Athenian Assembly for making alliances with any state which offered itself, and it is hard to see what good Athens hoped for from Segesta in 457.
But this alliance was followed by others, with more accessible cities, Leontini on the east coast of Sicily, and Rhegion on the straits between Italy and Sicily, on the Italian side (ML 63–4), probably in about 443.
By this time the other power with ambitions of hegemony in Sicily, Syracuse herself, had probably begun to coerce her neighbours in an organized way.
Diodorus (xii.30) speaks of her massing troops and resources with a view to conquering all Sicily: it was not only under her tyrants that Syracuse's foreign policy was expansive.
Whether Athenian involvement in Sicily and support of the Ionian, or rather non-Dorian, cities there was the cause of Syracusan expansion, or whether the Athenians were reacting in alarm to Syracusan aggressions against Athenian friends, is hard to say, so gappy is the narrative.
(And such questions are always among the hardest to answer even where evidence is full.)
But though Athens' diplomatic interest in the west goes back so early, it seems that Syracuse's aims of conquest long preceded and are independent of any serious commitment of men or money by Athens.
Of filth-century Italy, no consecutive history can be written.
Diodorus' sources were less interested in it than in Sicily, as was Diodorus himself: he gives the Roman consuls and even some episodes of Roman history like the Decemvirate, but does not help much with the Greek cities which are our present concern.
Some later biographies survive of the Pythagoreans who settled in Italy, and these describe the oligarchic governments and even federations of cities which they established, but the details cannot be trusted: ‘saint literature’ is notoriously fanciful, and these are hellenistic treatises whose authors had ideas of their own about the theory of kingship; these have probably contaminated the biographical material beyond salvage.
In the extreme south Italy's history follows, naturally, a Sicilian pattern: we saw that Anaxilas of Rhegion married into the Syracusan tyrannical house, and he practised the same kind of aggression against the neighbouring Greek states as his Sicilian contemporaries.
An  attempt to annex nearby Epizephyrian Lokri was put a stop to by Hiero in 478.
Lokri too has a Sicilian rather than an Italian flavour in the fifth century: a Lokrian, Agesidamos, was the only Italian to receive a victory ode from Pindar (Olympian x).
One event in Greek Italy, however, is fully described, in the early chapters of Diodorus' book xii: the foundation of Thurii, on the exceptionally fertile site of the former Sybaris in southern Italy.
Sybaris had been destroyed by its neighbours the men of Kroton in 510 BC; the mid-fifth-century recovery, organized by Athens, coincides with a attested corn-shortage in mainland Greece: an Egyptian pharaoh, in revolt from Persia, gave Athens 40,000 sacks of corn in the 440s.
It looks then as if Thurii, which contained colonists from states other than Athens, including some Dorian ones, was an overseas enterprise of an archaic type — a response to a temporary food crisis.
Thurii was thus not a straightforward piece of Athenian imperialism.
However, there was certainly an imperialist aspect: as we have seen (p. 41) one of Athens' motives for western involvement was the abundant shipbuilding timber of southern Italy, and timbers from, precisely, Thurii are mentioned in an Attic inventory of the late fifth century (IG i 3 386 1.
100).
But Thurii, as a mixed foundation, was a victim of her own mixed loyalties, and contained both pro- and anti-Athenian elements (for an expulsion of the latter group see Thuc. vii.33).
Accordingly, we find Thurians helping now Athens, now Sparta, in the Peloponnesian War (ib. vii.57. 11; viii.35. 1.
Local tensions: ML 57).
Elsewhere in Italy colonization continued in the fifth century: Siris was refounded by Tarentum in the 430s, under the name Herakleia (Diod. xii.36.4).
The Italian states advertise their prosperity in buildings like the fifth-century temples at Paestum (Posidonia), which are comparable in size to those at Akragas, but are on a higher artistic and technical level.
The main independent cultural contribution of southern Italy in this period lay, however, in the sphere of philosophy: fifth-century followers of Pythagoras of Kroton, the mathematical and metaphysical theorist, formed themselves into ascetic cult-communities and became involved — sometimes violently — in the politics of the Italian poleis .
Among these Pythagoreans was Lysis of Tarentum, who was to be the teacher of the Theban statesman Epaminondas, but attempts to link Theban politics with Pythagorean philosophy are not convincing.
Another, more austerely intellectual, centre was Elea, which gave its name to the Eleatic school whose most famous representatives (Zeno, who is not  the same Zeno as the fourth-century founder of Stoicism; and Parmenides) addressed themselves to philosophical problems of being and identity.
In conclusion, Italy and Sicily suffered from the same divisions and neighbourly jealousies as Old Greece, jealousies made more dangerous by racial friction and the threat of native risings (cranky philosophical activists did not help).
And yet (p. 16) the geography of Italy and Sicily did not, as it did in mainland Greece, impose these divisions — there was, for instance, no shortage of good land for corn and cattle as the ears-of-corn coinages of Metapontum and Siris in southern Italy, or the Thurii bull, remind us.
But the colonial Greeks of the west, like colonials in all periods, inherited and exaggerated the classic attitudes of their race; in particular, the governing feeling that as Pindar put it ‘it is better to be envied than pitied’(Pyth. i.85).
Pindar's poetry, celebrating the values of old aristocratic Greece, did not have to be adapted much for west Greek consumption.
CYRENE, AFRICA AND EGYPT IN THE FIFTH CENTURY
In the year 474 BC, Polyzalos, brother of Pindar's patron Hiero, won the four-horse chariot-race in the Pythian games at Delphi.
In the same year Telesikrates of Cyrene in north Africa, another colonial Greek city, won the foot-race in the same stadium (Σ Pindar Pyth. —vol. ii, p. 220 for the dates).
Pindar celebrated that victory in his Ninth Pythian ode.
These are more than coincidences: there was much that Greek Sicily and Greek Cyrene had in common, patronage of Pindar being only the most obvious and symbolic link.
Pindar wrote two more odes for victors from Cyrene, the Fourth and Fifth Pythians (462); both were for Arkesilas IV, hereditary ‘Battiad’ king of Cyrene (descended from Battos, the original founder in c.630).
And here is another link: at Cyrene, as at the Syracuse of Gelon, Hiero and Polyzalos, monarchy survived from the sixth century, when most of the cities of old Greece got rid of their tyrants, into the fifth.
Again like Syracuse (which co-existed with Carthage), Cyrene co-existed happily and for decades with a great non-Greek power, Persia.
The conquest of Egypt and Cyrenaica as far west as Euesperides (not far from Benghazi) by the Persian Kambyses did not entail the overthrow of the Battiads, nor did it interrupt the cultural traffic of Dorian Cyrene with Ionian Attica.
This leads to the final area of resemblance to the great cities of the west, namely social structure.
Cyrene, like Syracuse, was culturally cosmopolitan, so that for instance its art owes a clear debt to Athens, witness the bronze head from the mid-fifth century, in the style of Phidias (Chamoux,Cyrene , plate xxiv, 3–4); it was multi-racial, so that the sixth-century reformer Demonax allowed one tribe for the native ‘dwellers round about’, as well as one for the old Greek settlers and one for new arrivals (Hdt. iv.161, cp. 159.4).
Moreover, native names like Alazeir occur at Cyrene (Hdt. iv.164  with Sammlung Gr.
Dialekt. -Inschr .,
4859); Bakal is another native name, attested in a late fourth-century decree of Ptolemy I from which we derive much of our knowledge about the early hellenistic city (SEG ix.1, line 81; M. Austin (1981)The Hellenistic World , no.264 for translation, but omitting the names at the end).
So there was intermarriage with natives, something also implied by Pindar (Pythian ix), who describes how Telesikrates' ancestors competed for the daughter of Antaios the Libyan giant (and cp.
Callimachus Hymn 2.85ff.)
(These natives, however, probably did not usurp citizenship in any numbers.)
And the population, like Syracuse, had a backbone of old-established Dorian Greek farming families (Rhodians and Spartans as well as the original Therans).
Neither at Syracuse nor at Cyrene did the native element, which consisted partly of nomads (JRS , 1978, p. 224), much influence the quality of Greek culture, except that the need to impress the Libyan locals may have had something to do with the long survival of the Battiad kingship.
Things were very different in, say, Anatolian Ephesus or Halikarnassus (pp. 18f.).
Cultural cosmopolitanism at Cyrene meant that its connections ran across to the rest of the Greek world, not down to the natives whom the Greek colonists had displaced or overrun.
(The georgoi at Josephus,Jewish Antiquities,xiv, 115 may be native serfs.
If so, they would correspond to the native serf labourers of Persian Asia Minor, and Bakal and Alazeir would correspond to the far fewer privileged Anatolians who achieved honour and office under the Achaemenid satraps.)
Nor did Egypt, which is after all a long way to the east of Cyrene (Athens being nearer to Cyrene than is the Nile) make much impact except in a few points of ritual.
Thus the women of Cyrene abstained from veal (Hdt. iv.
186) in deference to the rules of Isis worship.
(See too p. 62 on Ammon.)
In Cyrenaica, then, the social and economic pattern was agricultural, and to a degree which was thought remarkable even in a world not familiar with alternatives to agricultural economies (p. 13).
Like Thurii or Metapontum, Cyrene issued coinage which depicted the riches of its soil, in the form of the plant Silphium.
This mysterious drug has not been identified by botanists, but from the time of Solon to that of Caesar it was to Cyrene what sherry is to Spain.
Silphium was used as a vegetable in cooking, as fodder for cattle and, most important, it was supposed to be a cure-all, for infection, indigestion and so on, rather like comfrey in the modern herbarium.
It was a royal monopoly, and an earlier King Arkesilas is depicted on a Spartan vase of the mid-sixth century supervising his officials as they weighed it on  a man-size balance (Chamoux,Cyrene , plate vi.
But one theory says the substance here depicted is not Silphium but wool).
For Pindar, Cyrene was the place of many sheep (Pyth. ix.6), and the equestrian successes of Arkesilas and Timokrates were won on the famous bay horses of Cyrene.
(For a virtuoso charioteer from Cyrene who showed off before Plato, see Lucian Dem 23.)
By the third quarter of the fourth century the cavalry commanders of the ‘solo horsemen’ and ‘four horsemen’form an officer class with political privileges (SEG ix.1).
(See, however, further p. 62 on the political vicissitudes of the fourth-century city.)
The landowners, like the land-holders or Gamoroi of Syracuse, were a feudal nobility who were not always on easy terms with their kings.
In the fourth Pythian (293ff.)
Pindar pleads with Arkesilas for one of these nobles who is out of favour, a ‘pollarded oak-tree’— cp. the tyrant's maxim about ‘pruning the tallest poppies’ on p. 51; and in the late sixth century when the balance of strength was the other way, Arkesilas III had been forced out of the country to Samos.
The lifestyle of a Cyrenaean aristocrat was centred on his pyrgos (Hdt. iv.
164; Strabo 836), a word found in Asia Minor and Attica (Xen.
Anab .
vii.8;JHS , 1947, 68ff., cp. chapter 11, n.11) to describe a fortified estate, which in Asia Minor and no doubt in Cyrene was run in irresponsible baronial fashion.
These aspects of Cyrene — a monarchic government supported or occasionally subverted by horsebreeding aristocrats —recall two other places whose hospitality Pindar sampled early in his career, Thessaly and Macedon.
In the fifth century there were only two kings of Cyrene before the monarchy fell some time before c.450, Battos IV ‘The Fair’ and Arkesilas IV; in about the middle of the century, Cyrene freed itself from the never very oppressive control of Persia, perhaps following the lead of the Egyptian revolt.
Perhaps, too, there is a link between the internal revolution and the rejection of Persia.
(End of Persian control: Thuc. i. 110, help given without reprisals to Athenian refugees from Egypt; end of monarchy: Σ Pind.
Pyth. = vol.ii, p.93; Aristotle F 611.17 = Hill Sources p.42.)
When Arkesilas IV had succeeded Battos IV is unknown, but Pindar addresses him as a young man in 462.
In 460, two years after his success at the Pythia, Arkesilas achieved the crown of human ambition by winning the chariot-race at Olympia, fulfilling Pindar's prayer at the end of the Fifth Pythian.
By the middle of the century Arkesilas was himself on the run, fleeing from Cyrene via Euesperides to the west, where he was assassinated.
Pindar knew (none better) how to celebrate a victorious horse in the  literal sense, but rarely backed a political winner: clients of his, or their families or their states, came to misfortune in Athens, Sicily, Aigina and Cyrene.
The monarchy in Cyrene had been a splendid and successful anachronism; the ‘democracy’ which ousted it (Arist. loc.cit.) made no such splash in the world beyond Africa.
That ‘democracy’ was probably an oligarchy of a narrow enough type.
Thereafter till the end of the century Cyrene virtually disappears from the record except that a Cyrenaean individual helped Athenian survivors of the Sicilian disaster of 413 (IGi 3 125; Dem.
xx.42; p.143; but see Thuc. vii.50.2 for state help by Cyrene to Sparta in 413).
Political disorders in 401 (Diod. xiv.34) forced the oligarchs at Cyrene to compromise with their opponents (i.e. set up a ‘mixed’ constitution and share power more widely).
A real ‘Kleisthenic’ democracy, i.e. one modelled on Athens, was established in perhaps 375 (Arist.
Pol .
1319b).
In this period the coinage improves in quality and increases in volume; and the Treasury of Cyrene at Delphi was built.
But the cavalry class was back in power by the third quarter of the fourth century (SEG ix.1), after overthrowing the Kleisthenic democracy as Aristotle says.
It was this regime which sent a gift of 300 horses and five four-horse chariots to Alexander the Great (Diod. xvii.49), and sold off Cyrene's corn to the Greek world in time of shortage (Tod 196).
This inscription names Athens, Corinth, Thebes and Alexander the Great's mother Olympias as recipients.
Cyrenaean generosity on this occasion was still being recalled in the Emperor Hadrian's time, in the second century AD (JRS, 1978, p.113,1.19 with p.117).
Arkesilas IV is called king of many cities by Pindar.
These certainly included Euesperides, near but not identical with Benghazi, Barke and Taucheira (Tocra), both to the west; and Antipyrgos (Tobruk) to the east: Barke certainly issued coinage modelled on Cyrene's after 480 (British Museum,Catalogue of the Coins of Cyrenaica , p.clxviii).
Only at Tocra has archaeology confirmed a substantial Greek presence in the fifth century, but even here the Persian period is impoverished compared to what went before.
One consequence of the Persian presence in Cyrenaica was to bring the Egyptian oasis of Siwah, with its oracle of Ammon, into closer touch with Cyrene; Zeus Ammon, as Pindar calls him, features on the reverse of Cyrenaean coins issued after 480.
The great period of the spread of new, especially Egyptian, oriental and Thracian cults was the fourth century (chapter 13), but it is worth  remembering that Kroisos (Hdt. i. 146) in the sixth century, and the Athenian Kimon in the fifth (Plut.
Kim .
xviii), had already consulted the Ammon oracle.
Egypt itself had been penetrated by Greeks as early as the seventh century, when Ionian and Karian mercenaries were hired by the Saite pharaohs.
Egyptian knowledge of Anatolia went back much further: the Greco-Karian city of Pedasa, just north of Halikarnassus, is mentioned in the Gazetteer of Amenhope (twelfth century BC).
After Egypt was conquered by the Persian king Kambyses in 525 BC the Greeks and Karians lost their old employers; but it is certain from several pieces of evidence that they stayed on under the new management, as distinct ethnic groups, surviving until and beyond the Macedonian takeover in 331.
In the first place, Herodotus (ii.61), discussing Egyptian customs, specifically mentions ‘the Karians who are in Egypt’: the historian wrote this in the mid-fifth century.
Second, recent excavations at Saqqara, the burial-place of Egyptian Memphis, have produced Karian graffiti of the classical as well as the archaic period.
Third, Greeks in the fourth century and later are described in written sources and inscriptions as coming from Naukratis, which was the old port of trade between the Greeks, with their silver to sell, and the xenophobic Egyptians with their more stagnant economy — but a surplus of wheat.
(For money of Jawan, i.e. Ionia = Greece in Egypt at the end of the fifth century, see Brooklyn Aramaic Papyri , no. 12.)
Over the centuries these Greeks and Karians intermarried with the natives, so that in hellenistic times people called ‘Karomemphites’ and ‘Hellenomemphites’, obvious results of miscegenation, are attested in Memphis.
These Greeks and Karians had garrisoning jobs in the Persian period, the enemy being presumably the native Egyptians.
Another well-documented foreign garrison in Egypt (this time directed against trouble from the south as well as subversion from inside) was made up of contingents of Jews stationed in Upper Egypt at Edfu (Elephantine), at the Third Cataract of the Nile.
The evidence for this group is a set of letters on papyri (A. Cowley (1923)Aramaic Papyri , Oxford).
The most interesting of these is from the Persian king himself, regulating the details of the Jewish passover.
It dates from 419 BC (Cowley, no.21): it stipulates the days of unleavened bread and gives instructions for abstinence from beer and work.
This document is astonishing proof of the religious tolerance, and attention to detail, shown by the kings of Persia.
Egypt revolted from Persia three times in the fifth century, proving that these Greek and Jewish garrisons were needed.
A revolt in 486 was put down straight away.
The third and most successful revolt began in 404 and gave Egypt independence till the 340s (there was a brief final revolt in the 330s).
In between fell the revolt of Inaros, a Libyan prince, 462–452, whose final defeat entailed the defeat of an Athenian force of 200 ships, sent to help Inaros during recover Egypt are in proportion to what was at stake.
From the fifth-century period of Persian control between c.450 and 404 there survive leather documents (G. Driver (1957)Aramaic Documents of the Fifth Century BC ) which show that much of the best land in Egypt was parcelled out among absentee Persian landlords.
Here is an extract from a letter written by an indignant rentier to his bailiff (Driver, no. x): When in the next century Alexander the Great, after winning the battle of Issos in Cilicia, turned south against Egypt rather than going immediately east towards the Iranian centre of the Persian Empire, his decision, as we shall see, was strategically sensible; what is surprising is that the Persians surrendered so quickly, not trying to defend Egypt at all, although economically Egypt probably mattered more to the Persian upper class than any other satrapy.
In the late 330s, after Alexander had entered and taken over Egypt, his officer Peukestas son of Makartatos put up what is the earliest Greek documentary papyrus from Egypt.
It was published in 1974 and is cited on p. 277.
It is the first drop of a deluge of such material, which makes social life in Egypt in the centuries after Alexander better known to us than any other part of the ancient world.
But Greek knowledge of Egypt, and the Greek presence there, already had a 300-year history when Peukestas put up his notice.
It is not surprising that in the mid-fourth century the shape of the Pyramids should have influenced the architecture of an  otherwise Greek building like the Mausoleum at Halikarnassus; or that the cult of the Egyptian Isis should have had worshippers at fourth-century Athens (Tod 189, line 44 and p. 178).
PERSIA AND ASIA MINOR
The Jewish garrison at Elephantine (p. 63) exemplifies the mixed racial and cultural character of the Persian Empire: it was a garrison of Jews, stationed in Egypt, commanded by Iranians, owing allegiance to Persia, recording its business in Aramaic, on a site whose name is Greek (the ‘place of ivory’); finally, among the names identified in its papyri is a Chorasmian from north of the River Oxus in Afghanistan.
Ease of travel Was one of the benefits brought by an empire as large and stable as the Persian, which after the conquests of Cyrus, Kambyses and Darius I in the second half of the sixth century extended from Thrace to modern Afghanistan and from the Caspian Sea to the Persian Gulf and the Third Cataract of the Nile.
The eastern travels of Herodotus, who moved freely across the two thousand miles separating Babylon from Cyrene, were made possible by Persian indulgence and protection, in much the way that the evangelism of St Paul was facilitated by the Roman Peace.
Some Greeks admired Persian methods (p. 18); even Plato, who thought that Persians suffered, as from a disease, from an excess of tyranny which made them congenitally weak, could call their empire a ‘solidly based system’(Laws 685 where the reference is to Persia).
Herodotus' History can be seen as a sermon on the text that Spartans and Persians, even in their great period of conflict, gradually came to value each other 's qualities:2 at first(Hdt. i.153) Cyrus the Great scoffs at the Greeks who come together in a market-place to cheat each other ; by the end, the exiled Spartan king Demaratos is shown (vii.104) lecturing a clearly impressed Xerxes on the subject of Spartan deference to law.
The Persian Empire, then, was not uniformly hated or despised by Greek writers.
Nor did Greek interest in Persia cease after the fifth century: a apart from Plato, several fourth-century commentators had good things to say, like the Oxyrhynchus Historian (xix Bartoletti), who comments on the way Persian commanders deliberately withheld  payments from (Greek) mercenaries; this would put them more in their power.
The two most interesting items, in view of recent archaeological finds, are, first, a remark of a fourth-century historian, Herakleides of Kyme (FGrHist .
689F 2), who says that the Persian king pays his soldiers in food, dividing the meat and bread equally, and that this corresponded to the money which Greek employers paid to their mercenaries.
Herakleides goes on to speak of them as the king's ‘fellow-diners’.
And, second, there is a sentence in Plutarch's Life of Artaxerxes (chapter iv) about the revolt of the younger Cyrus (for which see p. 184): ‘some say that he revolted because he was not given enough rations.’
The publication in 1969 of the Persepolis Fortification Tablets makes all this intelligible: the tablets record payments of large quantities of food — grain, sheep and so forth— to Persian grandees like ‘Parnaka’, the Pharnakes who is named by Herodotus (e.g. viii.126).
Thus (PF 6581): ‘10 sheep, entrusted to Harbezza, Parnaka received for rations.
At Persepolis and Tenukku.
Third month, for a period of 5 days, in the 19th year.
Basaza wrote (the text).
Mannunda communicated its message.’
Now to eat ten sheep in five days a man needs a lot of help.
The rations given to Parnaka were surely intended to support a large household, of a feudal type; in fact a household of what Herakleides called ‘fellow-diners’.
That satraps as well as the king had their entourage of fellow-diners is proved by Xenophon's Anabasis (i.8.25) which says that Cyrus the Younger had his ‘table-sharers’, and by Diodorus' description (xvii.20) of the ‘kinsmen’ of the satrap Spithrobates, who fought with him at the battle of the Granikos in 334.
(This item comes from Kleitarchos, who was interested in Persian institutions, cp.
F 5; not surprisingly since he probably grew up in Persian-held Ionia, which as with Herodotus, Ephorus and Herakleides must have helped determine his literary bent.)
Feudalism is a system of loyalty in return for benefits, usually land.
In that general sense Achaemenid Persia was feudal.
The satraps often revolted from the Great King, but when Alexander invaded, they fought to repel him.
Greeks found these attitudes hard to understand; accustomed to connect one-man rule with harsh policing, they imagined that the Persian Empire must have been held down by a system of institutionalized controls — garrisons and garrison-commanders — and touring royal armies and officials, King's Eyes and King's Ears, and so on(Xen.
Oec .
iv.6; Isok. iv.
145).
These (it was thought) watched for signs of revolt among satraps.
There is some evidence for all of this; but a recently discovered inscription from Xanthos in Lycia (SEG xxvii.942 = Mausolus M9) shows the satrap, Pixodaros, not the king, appointing a garrison-commander.
The benefits received by the satraps were too great for any of these checks to be necessary.
What were those benefits?
For the immediate entourage, the kinsmen or table-sharers of the king, splendid maintenance was one benefit.
These were the feudal followers whom Herakleides had in mind.
There is not much other evidence for any kind of standing army: the classic historians of the fifth century speak of the Ten Thousand ‘Immortals’, but that word is now thought to be a mistranslation of an Old Persian word meaning ‘followers’, which takes one straight back to feudalism.
But for most of the king's vassals, who did not inhabit the Iranian heartland, the benefit took the form of gifts of land like medieval fiefs, in return for which the man ‘enfeoffed’ was expected to maintain a levy of troops.
Such were the troops who fought Alexander at the Granikos.
In the late fifth-century Babylonian satrapy ‘bow land’ and ‘chariot land’were given away on condition that the owners for the time being paid for soldiers or cavalry.
The system goes back to the sixth century, when the founder of the Persian Empire, the great Cyrus, presented seven cities in northern Anatolia to Pytharchos (see p. 18;FGrHist .
472.
F 6 for the grant); and Persian ‘gift-giving’, commented on by Thucydides (ii.97), continued through the time of Themistokles (i.138) down to the eve of Alexander's arrival.
Arrian (Anabasis i.17.8) mentions ‘Memnon's Land’ in the Troad, whose possessor was a Persian general (and see further p. 71 for Persians or Persian favourites settled in Anatolia).
Such generosity was at the expense of the Greek cities of the coast, and helps to explain why they revolted from Persia again in 479 (Hdt. ix.105, treating their adhesion to the new Delian League as a second ‘Ionian Revolt’), as before in the Ionian Revolt of 499.
The Ionian cities were however less prosperous as a result of choosing Athens not Persia; monumental building there declines in the fifth century.
There is not much evidence for active hellenization outside old Greek centres like Halikarnassus, Smyrna and Ephesus; though some progress is made at inland Anatolian sites like Etrim (the Syangela of the Athenian Tribute Lists, later hellenized as ‘Theangela’): objects like a Panathenaic amphora made in Athens c.420, and red-figure pottery, attest the same penetration of Greek influence.
But this kind of thing does not speed up till the time of the fourth-century satraps.
The explanation of Greek discontent under Persian rule is not, then, economic.
(Miletus, which had led the original 490s revolt, is said by Herodotus to have been at her greatest prosperity then.)
Instead a psychological cause is needed.
That cause is simply a preference for freedom,eleutheria .
In other words, those Greeks who did not profit, as did Pytharchos, Themistokles or Memnon, from the Persian presence, preferred self-government to good but alien government.
It would be wrong to be too sentimental about what ‘freedom’ meant to Greeks; Thucydides (iii.45.6) makes a speaker use the phrase ‘freedom, or rule over others’, and similar uses can be found in Greek authors from Herodotus (i.210) to Polybius (v.106).
In modern times Sir Isaiah Berlin has distinguished between two ‘kinds of freedom’, freedom from something and freedom to do something.
Greeks valued the second kind, which included freedom to oppress and dominate, at least as much as the first.
In what ways did the Persian Empire restrict the freedom of its subjects?
The two most obvious and irksome are subjection to satraps and extortion of tribute, including personal military service.
First, what was a satrap?
He was a Persian provincial governor, whose powers had few limits provided he stayed loyal.
Satraps led contingents from their satrapies in the great battles against Greeks or Macedonians of which we hear in Herodotus or the Alexander-historians; they also levied troops for less grand operations.
Thus we hear of ‘those who muster in the plain of Kastollos’(Xen.
Anab .
i.1.2; 9.7).
Satraps usually had the military authority where the satrapal authority was divided, as it sometimes was (see p. 281); and such divided commands could enable the king to keep an eye on the ambitious.
In diplomacy with subject or foreign peoples, satraps were supposed to refer everything (o the Great King (Diod. xv.41.5), but there is nothing to imply deference to the king in inscriptions like Mausolus' treaty with the Pamphylian city of Phaselis, or his grant of political privileges to the Kretan city of Knossos (H. Bengtson (1975)Die Staatsverträge des Altertums , edn 2, vol. ii, 260, J. Crampa (1972)Inscriptions of Labraunda 40 = Mausolus M 7, 10).
In the sphere of finance, satraps were supposed to forward tribute (Thuc. viii.5).
The presence of such a satrap, then, was the first affront to local freedom.
How oppressive the satraps were in reality is a question which can be answered only by looking at the second area in which Persia impinged, tribute and military service.
Personal service, and the obligation to lead one's own retainers, is essential to a military system like the Persian.
Herodotus says that a rich Lydian called Pythios tried to get his son exempted from the draft by entertaining the king magnificently; but the king had the young man sliced in half and made the army march between the pieces (Hdt. vii.27f.).
The punishment oddly resembles the Roman way of purifying an army after some pollution: did the Achaemenids, who, as Darius' Behistun inscription proclaims, ruled by the grace of Ahura Mazda, regard military conscription as a religious duty?
Later, it was possible to pay for Somebody else to carry a pike for you; like the Athenian Empire and the Peloponnesian League, the Persians found such a system more convenient and perhaps, in dissident satrapies, more secure.
But the result was, by the fourth century, an excessive use of Greek mercenaries, which weakened every part of the Persian army except the cavalry arm: see p. 280 for the performance of Iranian cavalry at Issos and Gaugamela.
In finance, the crude picture in Herodotus' list of the Tributes (iii.89ff.) and depicted on the reliefs at Persepolis — huge quantities of bullion brought by subject peoples — must be modified by the fourth century.
By then the satraps in Asia Minor (which is the best-attested cluster of satrapies) allow the poleis to grant citizenship and tax exemption on their own initiative, provided the Great King gets his tribute (Mausolus M 5, 8, 13, with formulae anticipating hellenistic grants).
Whether Asia Minor is untypically sophisticated, we cannot be sure; the picture there at least is that Persia did not suppress local autonomy (see further pp. 199f.).
And the tendency towards appointing natives rather than Iranians as satraps after 400 gave a chance to humbler men who could rise as their masters rose;Mausolus M 9 shows the satrap appointing two Karians to office in Xanthos.
Much of this evidence is from the satrapy of Karia, and though the satraps (here certainly enjoy unusual latitude, there is no denying them their full status as satraps as a new, erroneous, theory has it: the matter is put beyond doubt by the Aramaic text of the great trilingual inscription found in 1974 (see the full text in Fouilles de Xanthos , vi, 1979) which refers to Dixodaros as satrap in Karia; moreover a scholion on Demosthenes Peace , which may go back to Theopompus (who was certainly the source of other Hekatomnid material in the Demosthenes scholia, cp.
F 299), calls Mausolus satrap of Karia, quite simply.
That one language of the Xanthos trilingual inscription of 1974 is Aramaic, the Persian bureaucratic script, is a reminder that there were Persians in numbers settled in classical Anatolia.
The new, native-born administrators did not displace these Iranian settlers but imitated and co-operated with them.
A strong Iranian presence throughout the period 479 — 334 is indicated by chance literary references, such as Herodotus, who refers not only to Persian individuals at Sardis before the Ionian Revolt from Persia of the 490s, but also to Persians being given the land round Miletus after the revolt (v. 101; vi.20).
Or there is Xenophon, who describes (Anabasis vii.8) the rich feudal estate of the Persian Asidates in north-west Asia Minor at the beginning of the fourth century.
The ‘territory’ of Tithraustes, a Persian name, in Hellespontine Phrygia, is mentioned by a papyrus dealing with the events of the Social War of the 350s (FGrHist .
105, cp. p. 243).
But here it is epigraphy which has added most strikingly to our knowledge: as early as Herodotus' day there had been Persians with names like Megabates at Halikarnassus (ML 32), and new inscriptions from fourth-century Labraunda, a sanctuary in Persian-held Karia, attest the Iranian proper names Phrathethnes and Ariarames (Inscriptions of Labraunda 77; 28).
In the late fourth century Bagadates and Ariaramnes, two more, obvious, Persians, are honoured at another Karian sanctuary, Amyzon (J. and L. Robert, 1983,Amyzon , i. p. 97).
As late as the Roman period we find a man with the splendid name Marcus Antonius Bagoas (Keil and Premerstein,Zweite Reise in Lydien no. 10; this man must have got the Roman citizenship from Mark Antony, but Bagoas is a Persian name).
Further north there are Persian names in the Pontic region (Studia Pontica iii, 1910, nos 1; 98).
Another inscription, published in 1975 (Comptes Rendus, Académie des Inscriptions (CRAI ), 1975, p. 308) regulates points of Zoroastrian ritual, and stands in the name of Droaphernes the (Persian) governor: it is interesting evidence of religious syncretism, i.e. fusion, that a religious text of this kind should be promulgated in Greek , i.e. there were Greek-speaking Zoroastrian converts at fourth-century Sardis.
That may also be the implication of the phrase ‘Gods of the Greeks and Persians’ at hellenistic Tabai in Karia (CRAI , 1978, p. 28 1).
Persian values also made themselves felt at native satrapal courts: a recently published Greek verse inscription from Lycian Xanthos, put up by a local dynast, echoes Persian educational ideals (‘riding, shooting and speaking the truth’, Hdt. i. 136) when it speaks of: The dynast in question is called Arbinas: he is certainly a Lycian but it is thought that the form of the name is Persian.
Such Persian names survive in local nomenclature till Roman times: the priests of Artemis at Ephesus went on being called Megabyxoi for centuries after 330; or we might compare the place-name Maibozani, recently attested (JRS , 1975, p. 65, line 10, with p. 73: a Roman inscription from Ephesus of the first century AD).
This same place Maibozani, which is an Iranian name, has recently yielded a dedication to ‘Persian Artemis’, i.e. Anahita (Bulletin de correspondance hellénique —BCH (1982) p. 372).
And cp. the new early hellenistic attestation of a ‘Median Artemis’, S. Sherwin-White (1982)ZPE xlix, p. 30; Persian Artemis/Anahita is well-attested in hellenistic Lydia, cp.
Keil and Premerstein Erste Reise in Lydien , pp. 25, 43, 52;Dritte Reise , p. 64; and especially K. Buresch,Aus Lydien , pp. 66ff., cp. 117ff.
Archaeology confirms the picture: the so-called ‘pyramid tomb’ at Sardis is in fact certainly the monument of a Persian; ‘pyramidal stamp seals’of Persian type have been found in Asia Minor (Iran , 1970, pp. 19ff.); at Sardis excavations have uncovered a relief depicting both Cybele and Artemis/Anahita (G. Hanfmann and N. Ramage,Sculpture from Sardis , 1978, no. 20); and Greco-Iranian stelai (funerary pillars) from the satrapal capital of Daskyleion in north-west Anatolia are sometimes carved in Aramaic, indicating the Persian nationality of the customers for whom they were executed (Rev. Arch .,
1969, 17ff., 195ff.).
From the same site, Daskyleion, come bullae (seals) also inscribed in Aramaic (Anadolu , 1959, pp. 123ff.
For excavations at the ‘fine hunting and fishing country’ —cp.
Xen.
Hell .
iv.
1.
15f. — of Daskyleion see Arch.
Reps , 1959/60, 34f.).
But it must be repeated that this extensive social penetration by Iranians does not seem to have destroyed local autonomy or opportunities for office-holding by locals: thus the Amyzon inscription mentioned above certainly honours Iranians, but one of the archontes (magistrates), has a Karian name (Panamyes) and so does Hyssollos the ‘Treasurer of the Gods’ and the ‘mountain guard’Paes sun of Panamyes.
(See additional note, p. 322.)
This was the Persian Empire with which the Greeks dealt — large, catholic and not mountainously tyrannical towards the local communities, at least in its later phases.
The internal history of Persia and its kings is harder to reconstruct, because there is no native Persian historiography.
Xerxes, the invader of Greece in 480, died in 465 and the long reign of Artaxerxes I began, lasting till 425.
It was he who ended the war with Athens, or perhaps turned the hot war into a cold one (because satraps continued to subvert Athenian-supported democracies in Anatolia): after the Persian recovery of Egypt in the 450s Athenian aggression against Persia was checked, except for a brief campaign in Cyprus at the end of the 450s.
The resulting Peace of Kallias of 449 did not, however, affect the diplomatic position of Sparta , and it is easy to be misled by the Athens-centred character of the written sources and forget that Sparta and Persia were technically at war right down to 412 BC.
This is not just an historical curiosity, although for much of the fifth century Sparta and Persia had no attested dealings.
The word ‘attested’ is important: there was certainly more to-ing and fro-ing between Persia and Greek states than is recorded, especially on a change of ruler.
For instance, Argos, in perhaps the later 460s, needing protection against Sparta after concluding an alliance with Athens, sent to Persia for reassurance of friendship from the new king, and got it (Hdt. vii.
151).
Sparta wanted help in the Peloponnesian War, and sent more than one delegation (Thuc. iv.50); the difficulty was that Persia insisted that Sparta recognize that Asia Minor was Persian property, and this Sparta, for domestic reasons to do with the Peloponnesian League, could not do (pp. 102, 127).
Artaxerxes I was succeeded in 424 by Darius II after an anarchic interval.
Under Darius the Lydian satrap Pissouthnes revolted, and the Athenians supported this revolt which was continued by his bastard son Amorges (see p. 139).
That support ended the Peace of Kallias, and Persian intervention in Greek affairs is now stepped up (413).
Support of Amorges and its ultimate consequence, the defeat of Athens in the Peloponnesian War, is however a story we shall resume later.
MACEDON, THESSALY AND BOIOTA
At Vergina in 1977 the Greek archaeologist Manolis Andronikos, excavating the royal Macedonian graves of the fourth century BC at Vergina, found a bronze tripod dating from the mid-fifth century.
This was an heirloom from the time of King Alexander 1 ‘Philhellene’ as he was later called; it was a prize won at the Argive Games to Hera (SEG xxix 652, cp. xi 330 = xxx 52).
It recalls the earlier athletic successes of Alexander at Olympia, as described by Herodotus (v.22).
Alexander had to argue with the authorities before they would let him compete, but he convinced them that he was descended from the royal house of Argos.
He came first equal in the foot-race This incident raises for the first time a question which is still being debated two and a half thousand years later: were the Macedonians Greeks? the orators and propagandists of the fifth and fourth centuries do not help for they contradict each other.
For the fifty-century sophist Thrasymachus Archelaos was a barbarian, and Demosthenes could call the Macedonians ‘barbarians as at xiv.3, where Philip is the ‘common enemy of the Greeks’.
It has also been acutely pointed out that the title ‘philhellene’, which was perhaps first given to Alexander I by writers of the fourth century, actually implies a denial that he was Greek.
But the Macedonian kings could be regarded as more Greek than their Macedonian subjects.
Isokrates (v. 139) clearly implies that Philip, as a descendant of Herakles, is Greek.
The argument is the same as that used 150 years before by Alexander I — and just as impossible for us to test.
What is clear that Macedonians wanted to be thought Greek.
When Philip in 346 settled the Third Sacred War, he was (personally; not the Macedonians as a race) admitted to the Delphic Amphictyony, the body which managed the prestige sanctuary at Delphi; and so he gained admission to the Greek fraternity.
Alexander the Great also found Greek culture valuable if only as a way of patronizing his Macedonian peers: he remarked to a Greek fellow-feaster (Plutarch Alex .
li) that the Greeks seemed to walk among Macedonians as demigods among wild beasts.
Language and inscriptions help more.
Greek was to the language of the Macedonians as cultivated speech to a boorish patois.
Unlike the Illyrians (Polyb. xxviii.8.9 on the Illyrian dialektos ), Greeks were intelligible to Macedonians without an interpreter, though a Macedonian commander who wanted his troops to understand him immediately would speak ‘in Macedonian’(Plut.
Alex .
li, papyrus in GRBS , 1978, 227ff.).
Little is known about how Macedonian Greek was spoken, except that for instance Philip was pronounced Bilip.
No Greek-Macedonian interpreters are recorded for Alexander's expedition, though hardly any interpreters of any kind are, so this is not significant; but Alexander's education, at the hands of Aristotle, and his reading — Xenophon, Euripides, and especially Homer — shows him thoroughly imbued with hellenism at the cultural level.
(For more on this see chapter 18.
Bilip: Etymologicum Magnum 179.)
There is much less evidence for the fifth century than for the fourth, when Philip and Alexander attracted attention to Macedon, but recently discovered gravestones show that by 400–350 Macedonians had good Greek names (which they were given in the fifth century, of course) like Xenokrates, Pierion and Kleonymos (M. B. Hatzopoulos and L. D. Loukopoulos (1980)Philip of Macedon , plates 109–10 on pp. 206–7).
Classical Macedon was however organized in a manner unlike that of the Greek states who dominate the history of the period — that is, Sparta, Athens and the cluster of poleis round the Isthmus of Corinth.
In Macedon the ethnos or tribe was what mattered; there was not much urbanization before the Peloponnesian War.
There were Greek cities in the north Aegean but many were colonies from seventh-century Euboia and Corinth.
(This meant that till Philip II's time Macedon was short of good harbours.)
The organization by ethnos not polis was not completely foreign to Greeks: Thucydides (iii.94) calls the Aitolians ‘a large ethnos living in unwalled villages’.
From at least the middle of the seventh century the Macedonians had been ruled by kings, whose relationship to their subjects was basically feudal, resting on loyalty and consent: they ruled ‘by law and not by force’, as Arrian says (Anab .
iv.
11.6); and from Amyntas' early fourth-century alliance with the Chalcidians (Tod 111, quoted in full at p. 205) we see that ‘the Macedonians’ are interchangeable with ‘Amyntas’, and this shows that the Macedonian monarchy was not an unlimited autocracy.
As to feudalism, an inscription (Syll.a 332) shows Philip 11 giving away a hereditary lease, and Greek city land at Amphipolis was  doled out to Macedonians (Arrian Indike xviii, cp.
Tod 150).
As with the Persian kings, military service was expected in return.
Arrian (Anab .
i. 16.5) mentions grants of freedom from ‘land tax, personal service, and other dues’, all probably very old institutions, though the phraseology of Arrian's source looks early hellenistic.
The fifth-century kings of Macedon, and indeed those of the fourth century till Philip acceded in 359, imported Greek culture — Pindar wrote a poem for Alexander I in the 490s — while keeping at spear's length the Greeks who were actually manufacturing that culture.
Alexander I Philhellene had medised (below) in the Persian Wars; philhellenism, not for the last time, does not imply letting Greeks have their way politically.
The Macedonian royal house was deeply involved with Persia: Gygaia, the sister of Alexander I, was given in marriage to a Persian called Boubares, and they lived off the revenues of a Phrygian city given them by the Persian king (Hdt. viii.
136).
This must have happened about the middle of the fifth century.
When Xerxes invaded, Herodotus has nothing to say about resistance by Macedon, and this is one of the strongest arguments for thinking they medised.
In the 470s Alexander gave refuge to Themistokles when he was on the run to Persia, a tangibly anti-Athenian act.
Alexander was probably right to think, as he evidently did, that he would be better off if Persia rather than Athens ruled the Aegean: within a decade of the establishment of the Delian League, Athens began the expansion in the north, and the attempt to settle Amphipolis, on the River Strymon, which at certain times in the next century and a half dominated her foreign policy to the exclusion of all else (Thuc. iv.102; Σ Aischin. ii.31).
In perhaps 478 Alexander had captured the so-called Nine Ways near Amphipolis, perhaps in anticipation of the Athenian conquest of Eion, also near the mouth of the Strymon (p. 32).
But Alexander could not hold it against the Edoni, local tribesmen, which may have given the Athenians the idea that they could move in and plant a colony (465).
The Athenian attempt was a fiasco, 10,000 colonists were killed and Athens turned to Egypt and Sicily where she was sure of at least some local support.
Not till the early 430s, at the acme of her power, did she manage to establish a presence at Amphipolis, and its capture by the Spartan Brasidas in 424 was one of her most damaging losses in the Archidamian War, the responsibility, if not the fault, lying at the door of the historian Thucydides, who was commanding in the area.
Why did the place matter so much?
One reason was timber; triremes need many different kinds of wood, and plenty of it (for Greek anxiety on this score see Tod 111, quoted on p. 205).
Attica could not satisfy the needs of a standing navy, and inscriptions show that Athens got cypresses from Knidos in Asia and Karpathos in the Dodecanese (Tod 110, now known to be fifth-century not fourth).
But Thucydides (iv.108) also mentions ‘other sources of revenue’ from Amphipolis, which may include corn as well as money.
Thucydides also underlines the strategic importance of the place: an enemy like Sparta, if she held Amphipolis, could strike at Athens' north Aegean allies, provided that Thessaly allowed a safe passage to the Strymon area.
And if the north Aegean panel of tribute-paying allies succumbed to attack or subversion, the Hellespontine corn-route would be at risk.
Alexander's interests and those of Athens were thus opposed (which did not stop him from minting copiously in coinage designed for easy trade with Athens), and the opposition was inherited by every Macedonian king till Philip, who ended it by seizing Amphipolis for good.
But no king of Macedon before Philip could afford to provoke Athens to outright invasion.
That meant that Macedon had to flirt from time to time with Sparta or whoever looked the strongest counterweight to Athens after Persia had recoiled from the Aegean in the mid-fifth century.
But Sparta needed Amphipolis too, as the doorway to the north Aegean, Thrace and eventually the Hellespont, cp. above.
And Sparta, who normally had no fleet of her own and no naval tradition, could not attack any other Athenian tribute-district except the ‘Thraceward Region’.
So Spartans at Amphipolis were not much more attractive from the Macedonian angle than Athenians.
Therefore Athens and Sparta must be played against each other, and their troops preferably used, not against each other (which might end in a definite result), but against Macedon's frontier enemies.
For it is a prime fact about classical Macedon, and one that explains why so large and rich a country counted for so little until so late, that she was a frontier province of the Greek world; beyond lay Illyrians, Dardanians and Thracians, and beyond them the drifting pre-Celtic populations of central Europe, undisciplined fighters but unlimited in manpower.
There is some justice in the way Macedon, who had thanklessly insulated Greek culture from these destructive outsiders  and nomads for so long, should finally, in the persons of Philip and Alexander, have taken over that culture by diplomacy and conquest.
The great practitioner of the ‘balancing strategy’ was Alexander I's successor Perdikkas, who ruled c.452–413.
He changed sides nine times in his reign.
His attitudes are best illustrated by this typical passage from Thucydides (iv.83: 424 BC; the details of the diplomacy are irrelevant): Perdikkas' diplomacy was subtler than just pitting Athens against Sparta and conversely: before the great Peloponnesian War broke out he shrewdly persuaded the Greek cities near Olynthus to coalesce into a federation; this was an act designed to weaken the greater confederacy of the Delian League, since Athens' policy (Thuc. iii.
10–11) was always to keep her subject allies disunited.
(See i.58 for Olynthus.)
Near the end of his reign Perdikkas may even have made an alliance with Argos, who after the Peace of Nikias in 421 again starts to take an individual line on foreign policy.
The Macedonian king during the second half of the Peloponnesian War was Archelaos, 413–399.
Thucydides praises him highly in general terms (ii.
100), but Macedon was only a secondary theatre in the Decelean and Ionian Wars, so that he does not figure very much in the narratives of Thucydides or his continuator Xenophon.
In 410 Athens under Theramenes helped him to capture Pydna (p. 175); and for his part Archelaos allowed Athens to export timber and oars from his kingdom (ML 91).
The old balancing strategy of Perdikkas could, it seems, be shelved now that Athens was so much weaker: Archelaos could afford to give and receive real benefits.
Thucydides' praise of Archelaos, written not long before the latter's death in 399, tells how he built forts and straight roads, and reorganized the army, both infantry and cavalry arms, doing more for  it than all his eight predecessors put together.
This is a rare example of Thucydides adopting the criterion of physical erga or constructions to measure a king's greatness, something Herodotus had done regularly (cp., for example, iii.60 on Samos).
Archelaos' court indeed recalled some of the archaic tyrants, strong men and patrons of the arts like Polykrates himself.
Archelaos gave a home to the Athenian poets Euripides and Agathon, and the painter Zeuxis decorated the palace at Pella, the new capital.
Athenian pottery has also been found at Pella, for instance(Arch.
Reps , 1981–2, p. 36) a vase depicting a contest between Athena and Poseidon.
(The move from Aigai to the more central Pella looks forward to hellenistic times: cp. p. 211; also p. 48 on the way Sicily too simultaneously shows ‘archaic’ and ‘hellenistic’features.
It might be better to call the ‘democratic’, classical period of Greek history the anomaly.)
At Vergina, later in the fourth century, the quality of recently discovered fresco-painting suggests an established tradition which might go back to Archelaos' time; and continuity is also suggested by Pliny's statement (Natural History xxxv.62) that Zeuxis gave Archelaos a painting of Pan, who was to be patron deity of the third-century Macedonian king Antigonos Gonatas (see the coin illustrated as frontispiece to W. Tarn (1913)Antigonos Gonatas ).
When Archelaos died he had begun an intervention in Thessaly which, had it been carried through, might have pre-empted Philip's operations in the 350s.
As it was, Macedon was to endure, after 399, one of its most anarchic phases, a story which will be resumed in a later chapter.
Pindar wrote the first poem of his career (Pythian x) for a Thessalian patron in 498: This opening places Thessaly straight away in the centre of Dorian Greek culture; the Aleuad dynasty in Thessaly is treated as a branch of the house of Herakles, that is, it is grafted on to the Dorian Peloponnesian tree.
By the order of words the poet even hints that Thessaly is more fortunate than her sister Sparta.
The rulers of Thessaly, then, resembled the Macedonians in  considered as Greek was racially no worse than Macedon's; Simonides had performed there before Pindar, and in 460 Thessaly was to produce an Olympic victor called Agias.
Polis life was further advanced there — Pindar speaks of ‘the cities’ of the Aleuads — and Greek inscriptions go back to earlier dates (extant ones start c .550, L. H. Jeffery (1961)Local Scripts of Archaic Greece , p. 98, no. 1, a sacred law; and Pausanias (x. 16) says that a statue dedicated by a Thessalian called Echekratidas was the first dedication ever made at Delphi).
But, like Macedon, Thessaly was ruled ‘dynastically’; a fourth-century monument to Daochos, ruler of Thessalian Pharsalos, says that he ruled ‘by law not force’(Syll.3 274), a claim echoed exactly by Arrian about the kings of Macedon (see p. 75).
There were, however, important differences: there was always a king, or claimant king, of Macedon; but there was not always a tagos of Thessaly (their word for ruler over the four great districts or tetrarchies of Thessaly.).
Thus a fifth-century Thessalian inscription uses the phrase ‘whether under a tagia or in an atagia ’, that is, whether there is or is not a tagos (Syll. 55 and ZPE , 1980, p. 272).
At other times the great houses of the cities of Thessaly, the Echekratids of Pharsalos, the Skopads of Krannon, the Aleuads of Larisa, co-existed, feuded and intermarried: thus a sixth-century Skopas had a mother called Echekrateia, and Pausanias' Echekratidas (above) was from Larisa not Pharsalos.
It is even arguable that we should just speak of a clannish ‘Heraklid aristocracy’ and not subdivide further.
At the bottom of the scale were the penestai , serfs.
(But it has recently been pointed out that occasional use of these as cavalrymen means they cannot have been a wholly depressed class.)
In between was the cavalry-owning class proper, who took slowly but eventually to ideas which could be described as democracy (p. 83).
A demos in the Athenian sense hardly existed.
Again and again in the fifth and fourth centuries the other Greek states tried to get a hold on Thessaly.
Thessaly was important for several reasons.
First, there is Thessaly's enormous fertility and wealth (Xen.
Hell .
vi.
1 is the key text).
Thessaly always struck visitors as awesomely rustic, an impression confirmed by small items like the title of the eponymous magistrate in Syll. 55, the ‘warden of the forests’.
Second, a related point, Thessalian cavalry was the best in Greece: Xerxes had heard this (Hdt. vii.196) and held a gymkhana there to see for himself (actually the Thessalian horses were defeated by Xerxes' own).
And from a fourth-century Athenian alliance (Tod  147) we see that ‘cavalry’(hippeis ) was the name of a class of Thessalian magistrate.
(See further p. 266 for Thessalian cavalry in Alexander's time.)
Third, control of Thessaly was a valuable asset strategically — it opened the way to the north and thus eventually the Hellespont, cp. p. 77 on Amphipolis; Xenophon (Hell .
vi.
1.11) shows awareness of the connection between Thessaly and Macedonian timber.
Fourth, central Greece, and in particular Boiotia, was not well off for harbours, but Thessaly had Pagasai, the ancestor of the modern Volos, still a port of economic importance.
Fifth, for historical reasons, whoever controlled Thessaly controlled the Delphic Amphictyony, an international committee which could impose fines for religious offences, usually trumped up, and generally exert a practical moral ascendancy of an enjoyable kind over the Greek community.
Moreover, the Thessalians by tradition held the presidency of the Amphictyonic Council (Syll. 175) which could be useful when it came to putting a motion.
Sparta's designs on Thessaly and central Greece date from the time of Kleomenes I of Sparta (in the late sixth and early fifth centuries): Pindar's bracketing of Sparta and Thessaly is not random, but may celebrate a deal between Kleomenes and the Thessalian Aleuads.
Soon after the Persian Wars, as we saw on p. 23, King Leotychidas of Sparta led an expedition to Thessaly, and ended the tageia of the Aleuads; at about the same time, Plutarch says, there was a Greek, perhaps a Spartan, fleet at Pagasai, whose strategic importance we have just noticed, and the Spartans tried to get control of the Amphictyony (see p. 33; Plut.
Them .
xx).
Then in 461 (p. 35), a year of decisive foreign policy choices all over Greece, Thessaly allied with Athens (Kimon called a son Thettalos, so perhaps he was responsible, though note Plut.
Kim .
xiv.4: Kimon says that he has never toadied to the Thessalians).
Who if anyone was tagos in Thessaly in these years?
Probably as a result of Leotychidas' intervention of 476 the tageia had passed from the Aleuads, Pindar's hosts.
The next tagos was probably Echekratidas of Pharsalos (see Thuc. i. 111).
But in between we should imagine a gap in the tageia: Plutarch (On the Malice of Herodotus, xxi ) says that Leotychidas ‘ended the tyranny’(temporarily); and if Echekratidas was a Spartan nominee whose tageia went right back to 476 his Athenian alliance is harder to explain.
Echekratidas' son Orestes (note the name Orestes, assertively anti-Dorian — it was the name or Agamemnon's son in a famous myth about pre-Dorian Greece — and  perhaps a hit at Aleuad pretensions) was thrown out by 454 by an anti-Athenian (or simply anti-Echekratid, or even more simply anti-Orestes) party; Athens failed to restore him (Thuc. i. 111).
There was certainly plenty of anti-Athenian feeling, for some Thessalians fighting for Athens at the battle of Tanagra in 457 (p. 42) changed sides (Thuc. i. 107; Diod. xi.79).
But the alliance with Athens must have been renewed before the beginning of the Peloponnesian War when Thessalians fought on the Athenian side again (Thuc. ii.22).
Sparta did not abandon her aims in Thessaly; in 426 the Spartans founded a colony at Herakleia in Trachis, which commanded the Thessalian border (p. 131); and later in this book we shall follow this thread of Spartan policy further still (see p. 153 and chapter 14, p. 186).
In the twenty-seven years c.440 to 413 the tagos was Daochos of Pharsalos.
But this was not a period of straightforward centralized rule.
As we shall see, one of the effects of the Peloponnesian War was to intensify political activity and pamphleteering.
We hear of a visit to late fifth-century Thessaly by Gorgias of Leontini, the celebrated orator and sophist, and of actual interference by Kritias (p. 83).
Gorgias is quoted by Aristotle (Pol .
1275b) as sneering at ‘manufactured Larisans’, which implies that citizenship and power was being further extended.
In 404 Xenophon (Hell .
ii.3.4) records a defeat of the Larisans by Lykophron of Pherai, who ‘wanted to rule all Thessaly’.
This man is in fact what the archaic Greek world would have called a tyrannos .
Thessaly had now reached the stage of development that the Isthmus states — Corinth, Megara, Sikyon —were at in about 650 BC.
At that time Thessaly, like Boiotia and Sparta-Messenia, had an abundance of agricultural land, plenty of horses and few towns, that is, little opportunity for peasants to exchange grumbles and for subversive foreign notions to penetrate.
Urbanization and tyranny are connected, and both are consequences of trade (which spreads ideas and causes dissatisfaction among the rich but politically excluded).
Herodes (p. 305, n. 1) shows Thessaly exporting corn to her neighbours (xvi).
Recent archaeological finds (see e.g. Arch.
Reps , 1979–1980, p. 40: city defences at Pharsalos) show that the Thessalian wealth commented on by Plato (Meno ) and Xenophon (Hell .
vi.
1), was being used by the fourth century to modernize Thessaly, and especially its towns .
So the old-fashioned horse-rearing aristocrats, in their baronial castles at places like Amphana, had their rivals.
Jason of Pherai, a descendant of  Lykophron (and called tyrant by Diodorus (xv.60. 1) without equivocation) was certainly rich (Polyain. vi.
1.2ff.).
Lykophron s tyranny had a popular base; Xenophon (Hell .
ii.3.36) relates how shortly before Lykophron came to power the Athenian Kritias tried to establish democracy and arm the penestai.
The unrest looks like the precursor to Lykophron's seizure of power.
Urbanization was the cause: the Thessalian cities do not start to mint coins till the fifth century and this implies the beginnings of political self-consciousness after prolonged backwardness.
This incident of late fifth-century history is not trivial: Lykophron's own tyranny did not last long; he was opposed by an old-style dynastes (Diod. xiv.82), Medius of Larisa.
Lykophron turned to Sparta for help.
But Medius and the anti-Spartan coalition in the Corinthian War of the 390s checked him (cp. chapter 14 for these events, specifically p. 187 for the expulsion of Spartan influence from Pharsalos, a Spartan garrison-point in the early 390s).
But Jason, as we shall see, was a statesman of stature in the Greece of the 370s, dealing on equal terms with the Athens of the Second Athenian Confederacy and the Thebes of Epaminondas.
He failed too, removed by assassination; but the failure goes deeper: Macedon succeeded where the tyrants of Thessaly did not, precisely because the polis life in Thessaly, which on the economic level made possible the rise of a tyranny, prevented one man from imposing his authority permanently like an Archelaos or a Philip; that was because on the political level the word polis implied what it had not implied in 650 BC: self-determination.
The geography of Boiotia might to a shallow observer seem to suit her for naval hegemony.
That was the view of Ephorus at least, who said (F 119) that Boiotia, situated on three seas (probably he meant the Corinthian Gulf and the Euboian straits north and south of Chalkis) was made by nature for thalassokratia , rule of the sea.
But a contour map will show how hard that would have been: the Corinthian Gulf ports, at the ends of deep valleys, have no mutual communication, and the eastern harbours are not much more accessible.
Mycenaean Boiotia had indeed been open to the greater world, much more so than in classical times: in the Thebes Museum there are stirrup jars proving commerce with Minoan Krete, and there is even some lapis lazuli from Afghanistan, evidence of a Hittite connection.
Dark Age  Boiotian emigrants to Anatolia are responsible for Boiotian-type place-names like Erythrai and Mykale in Asia Minor (though the red,erythros , soil of Boiotian Erythrai and the red stone of the Ionian city make the name physically appropriate for both).
In the historical period Hesiod's ancestors, emigrants from Boiotia, settled in Kyme in the Asiatic Aeolid.
But Boiotia was not a major colonizing state because — and this is the fundamental fact about her — her soil was good, something which strikes any traveller who crosses Mt Kithairon into Boiotia from Attica, and there was plenty of it, especially in the two plains to north and south controlled by Orchomenos and Thebes respectively.
The Oxyrhynchus Historian says that classical Boiotia could put out paper forces of 11,000 infantry and 1100 cavalry, and the high density of population which this implies for the fourth century gets some confirmation from a recent Boiotian land survey round the Teneric plain west of Thebes (Arch.
Reps , 1981–2, p. 27).
Polybius' comment on the low birth rate in late third -century Boiotia (xx.6) is in strong contrast.
The character of Boiotian political and social life was the consequence of these agricultural riches: insularity.
However amenable to overseas influence Boiotia may have been in the prehistoric period (p. 83), classical, fourth-century and hellenistic Boiotia was in many respects deeply conservative and introverted.
This is well-illustrated by the plentiful funerary monuments of hellenistic Boiotia, which retain features, such as the simple naming of the dead man without patronymic, which in other parts of the Greek world had long given way to more sophisticated formulae; and Boiotia retained her local script till the age of Epaminondas in the fourth century.
A similar conservatism marks the techniques used by Theban vase-painters, who avoid foreshortening and make no attempt to achieve three-dimensional realism, thus lagging behind Attic rivals.
It is also perhaps a sign of Boiotian isolation that there were no tyrants in archaic Boiotia, and that by the Persian Wars Thebes, then the first city of Boiotia, was controlled by a dynasteia , an irresponsible family government (Thuc. iii.62).
Plataia, however, the main state south of the River Asopos, always looked towards Athens and her democracy: the connection actually went back to 519 BC when Kleomenes of Sparta told Plataia to attach herself to Athens (p. 20, and cp. p. 19 on Thespiai and attikismos ).
With oligarchy went federalism (though the connection was not a necessary one, since in the fourth-century league we find democratic institutions).
Federalism was Boiotia's great contribution to politics.
Boiotia's reputation for philistinism was a joke with which other Greeks never got bored, but neither in the visual arts nor in literature (Hesiod, Pindar) does the reality match the label ‘Boiotian swine’, a gibe recorded by Pindar himself.
(One suspects that Boiotia's real misfortune in this respect was mere proximity to Athens.)
And there were fine Boiotian historians: Anaxis and Daimachos of Plataia are only names, but the Oxyrhynchos Historian, who was perhaps a Boiotian, deserves in some ways to be put beside the Athenian Thucydides, whose continuator he was.
Finally, in the late fifth century Epaminondas was a pupil of the Pythagorean Lysis of Tarentum.
Federal Boiotia probably began in the sixth century (there are Boiotarchs at Hdt. ix.
15 — 479 BC — whom there is no special reason to write off as an anachronism by the historian) and the league was never dissolved in the fifth, despite the disgrace and demoralization caused by Theban medism in the Persian Wars, and despite a decade's loss of independence to Athens, in Boiotia as a whole, between 457 and 446.
In the Persian Wars, however, the Boiotian League had evidently not ordered a general policy, because Plataia and Thespiai fought for the Greeks whereas Thebes medised, a stain she was never to wipe out.
In 367 Pelopidas at Susa, asking for a peace treaty from Artaxerxes II, even reminded him of Thebes' traditional friendship with Persia.
Boiotian history from 479 till the First Peloponnesian War of 460–446 is not recoverable, though something can be done with the coins.
Tanagra tried to replace Thebes as informal hegemon of the league in mid-century, but it was on Thebes that Sparta's plans centred in the First Peloponnesian War.
The central Greek states, Doris and 1 Boiotia probably had nothing to do.
Sparta disciplined the Phukians, but found herself in a trap.
The Spartan army moved into Bointia, crossing to Tanagra in the east, dangerously near to Oropus and Attic territory.
Athens could not ignore this, and an indecisive battle (Tanagra) followed by a decisive one (Oinophyta) gave Athens control of Boiotia till 446 (see p. 43 for her ‘land empire’ ambitions, and for Sparta's desire to set up Thebes as a counterweight to Athens).
Athens was expelled from Boiotia in 446, and the Boiotian League was perhaps reorganized now; in a valuable description the Oxyrhynchus Historian (chapter xvi) gives the system essentially as it was in the 440s, though for instance he takes account of Plataia's destruction in  427, after which Thebes took her votes.
There were four councils in each of the constituent cities, membership of which was oligarchic in the sense that there was a property qualification (Ar.
Pol .
1278a25), although the members got expenses for attending, something usually found in ‘democratic’ states.
There were also four federal councils of 165 members, which were themselves sub-councils of a big federal council of 660; one of these sub-councils prepared the business for the others, a job which probably rotated.
A citizen of, say, Thespiai was also a citizen of federal Boiotia, in something of the way that in Attica demesmen of, say, Sounion were also Athenians.
Both systems gave a kind of proportional representation: the number of councillors which each Attic deme sent yearly to the Council of Five Hundred depended on its population (p. 112); and the number of federal councillors in Boiotia supplied by the cities depended on the size of the city and its territory.
The allocation was achieved by a sophisticated system of groups or units comprising one or more cities.
So, Tanagra provided one Boiotarch or federal magistrate, and 60 councillors, Orchomenos two Boiotarchs and 120 federal councillors.
After Thebes swallowed up Plataia in 427 she controlled four Boiotarchs and 240 councillors.
Orchomenos was the only state in Boiotia other than Thebes which had any natural claim to rule all Boiotia; Tanagra's brief attempt was possible only in an unusual period when Thebes after her medism was in temporary discredit.
The reasons for Orchomenos' special role were geographical: she controlled the northern plain and Thebes the southern; and also historical: Mycenaean Orchomenos had counted for at least as much as Thebes, and Orchomenos still had pretensions to lead Boiotia in the eighth century.
But though Orchomenos was favoured in the 447 arrangements, it was Thebes and Thebes alone who issued coinage (an indication of political leadership within Boiotia) from then till the King's Peace of 386.
Despite some similarities with Kleisthenic Attica, Boiotia differed in that there was no great popular assembly made up of thousands; still more important, Theban control of Boiotia was not as obvious and inevitable as Athenian control of Attica.
The Theban citadel, the Kadmeia, does not master or menace the Boiotian skyline like the Athenian Acropolis; and there were always places like Orchomenos and even Tanagra which envied Thebes' leadership.
Equally, there were others such as Plataia or Thespiai which looked to Athens instead.
Since the end of Athens' archaic war with Eleusis it would have been absurd for any deme of Attica to think of rivalling Athens.
Thebes, by contrast, even in the time of her hegemony, would have to destroy her rivals in order to claim to speak for Boiotia.
However, it was precisely the lack of consensus about Thebes' — or anybody else's — leadership which in the fifth century led to federalism of so unusual and developed a kind, and which gave Boiotia the cohesion, and the manpower, to defeat Sparta at Leuktra in 371.
THE EVE OF WAR
Control of Boiotia, and the central Greek land empire generally, was lost to Athens in 446 as part of Pericles' deal with Pleistoanax.
But her command of the eastern seas was unimpaired, as is proved by the free hand she enjoyed in suppressing revolt on Samos in 440/39.
Thucydides narrates the events of the next decade not as part of the ‘Fifty Years’, to which they strictly belong, but as part of the sequence of events which immediately caused the great Peloponnesian War.
The Fifty Years, in the historian's causal scheme, were the underlying cause of the war, which Thucydides saw as the process of Athenian aggrandizement which struck fear into Sparta.
This is the ‘truest cause’ of Thuc. i.23, a famous and deeply original statement which is the first conscious attempt to develop a theory of historical causation: ‘The truest cause’, he says, ‘was one not much admitted at the time: it was the growth of Athenian power, which frightened the Spartans and forced them to war.
But the publicly alleged reasons were as follows…’ and Thucydides goes on to give them: quarrels between Athens and Corinth over Corcyra and Potidaia.
Elsewhere in book i (chapter 118) Thucydides closes the Fifty Years by speaking of Athens' power ‘rising to a peak plain for all to see’, and of Athens ‘encroaching on Sparta's allies’.
Even if we accept, as we should, that Thucydides is right about the ‘truest cause’(and in the passage last quoted he comes near to running together true cause and alleged reasons, so we should not try to separate them too sharply), there is still a major problem: what weight should we give to the various instances of encroachment?
Historians have quarrelled about that since Thucydides and perhaps before (for there is some reason to think that he was writing to correct what he saw as error, notably about the Megarian decree, for which see p. 91).
First, there is an episode which Thucydides mentions neither in the Fifty Years nor as an ‘alleged reason’ in book i; but it has a claim to be mentioned, because it is clear interference with the colonial empire of  Sparta's ally Corinth.
It is the alliance made with Akarnania by the Athenian general Phormio, mentioned (though not dated: see p. 6) by Thucydides in a backward-looking reference (ii.68).
Now Akarnania was neighbour to Ambracia, and Ambracia, in north-west Greece, was a Corinthian colony which kept close links with the mother city: the Ambraciots put the winged horse Pegasus, the emblem of Corinth, on their coins in the fifth century.
Phormio's alliance was hardly, given the distance of Akarnania from Athens, the considered policy of the Athenian Assembly — the general just made it on the spot — and may have been mere opportunism, for Athens made many alliances which never came to anything and were not expected to.
But it would be useful when Athens next got involved in Italy or Sicily, where another Corinthian colony, Syracuse, was growing richer and stronger.
(It is also relevant to Athenian fears that, as Livy tells us under the year 431, Carthage now encroached in Sicily for the first time, iv.29.8 with R. M. Ogilvie (1965)Commentary on Livy i-v , Oxford.)
So Phormio's action in making the alliance, though only a pawn penetration, was an offensive move against Corinth deep in her own, Adriatic, side of the colonial chess-board; and it was perhaps defensively conceived with an eye to a further-flung Corinthian colony, Syracuse.
All this makes it unlikely that the alliance ante-dated 440, when Corinth, for whatever reason, voted against war with Athens over Samos (p. 46), i.e. when surface relations were still good.
But equally, the alliance should nut be dated too late in the 430s, because then it would have cried out fur mention at some point in the book i narrative, where the immediate ‘alleged reasons’ for the war are rehearsed at length.
A date c.439 or 438 is best.
Later in the 430s Athens renewed alliances with two other western cities, Leontini and Rhegion (ML 63 and 64 = Fornara 124- 5, cp. p. 56 for the original alliances).
Thucydides was right (ii.7 and ML, p. 173) to imply that in the west, sides had already been taken when the war broke out.
Corinth's north-western interests were threatened more directly by the affair of Corcyra, which is one of the two ‘alleged reasons’ which Thucydides does describe fully.
A quarrel between Corcyra, a daughter-city of Corinth, and Epidamnos, a daughter-city of Corcyra herself, led to the first open clash, the battle of Sybota, between Athenian and Peloponnesian League ships (433): Epidamnos had appealed over the head of Corcyra to the ‘grandmother’ Corinth, while Corcyra asked for, and got, help from Athens.
The Corinthians  sent a delegation to Athens to try to prevent the second of these appeals from succeeding.
One of their complaints against Corcyra is specially revealing: the Corcyreans, they say, ‘do not pay us appropriate respect as their mother-city’.
This theme, the ties between city and colony, and the ways they were reinforced, weakened or broken in the great war, is important to Thucydides, and it is not accidental that it occurs thus early.
The second and other ‘alleged reason’ was to do with Potidaia, another Corinthian colony, this time in northern Greece, on the westernmost claw of the crab-like Chalcidic peninsula.
Again, Corinthian control was tight: Corinth sent out magistrates annually to govern Potidaia,epidemiourgoi (Thuc. i.56).
(This very Roman-looking institution has another Dorian parallel, the man sent by Sparta every year to govern the offshore island of Kythera.
The office was called Kytherodikes .)
Despite this, Potidaia paid tribute to Athens, who in 433/2 demanded that Potidaia should send home the Corinthian magistrates and pull down part of her walls.
Corinth sent help to Potidaia, the Athenians sent a besieging force, and so Corinth and Athens clashed for the second time.
Thucydides does not tell us all we need to know about these encroachments on Peloponnesian League allies, and there are other encroachments which he scarcely mentions at all.
(We have seen one, the Akarnanian alliance.
Others are discussed below.)
Still on the first of these two categories, more can be said about Potidaia from the Athenian Tribute Lists.
Athens raised Potidaia's tribute from six to fifteen talents as early as the period 438–434, which means that she was pressurizing Potidaia (‘encroaching’ on allies of the Peloponnesians) much earlier than Thucydides implies.
Then, in the category of encroachments which Thucydides barely mentions, there is Aigina.
One of the complaints against Athens was that Aigina ‘was not autonomous as the treaty required’(Thuc. i.67.2).
What treaty was this?
Perhaps it was the Thirty Years Peace of 446; or perhaps there was a special arrangement with Aigina, who may have had her autonomy guaranteed individually, though she certainly paid tribute to Athens.
Tribute payment could be compatible with autonomy, because ‘autonomous but tribute-paying’ is to be the status of some cities in the north after the Peace of Nikias (Thuc. v. 18).
The infringement of Aiginetan autonomy perhaps affected their legal rights — they may have been forced to bring cases to be heard at Athens.
But anyway this looks like a grievance of standing.
Most important was Megara.
Thucydides' reticence about the decrees passed against Megara in the 430s, perhaps early in the decade, is one of his most famous silences, comparable to his omission of the peace of Kallias.
His silence about Megara is not complete: Pericles is described as telling the Athenians that they will not be going to war over a trifle, if they refuse to rescind the Megarian decree as the Spartans demand.
It is, he says, a ‘test of your resolution’(i. 140).
Again, the Corinthians (i.42) urge the Athenians to remove the ‘previously existing suspicion on account of the Megarians’, where ‘previously, is more likely to refer to the early 430s than to Megarian behaviour c.460, which was not something Athens could do much about now.
(See also the passages cited below.)
The Megarian decree, passed in ostensible punishment for the cultivation of some sacred land, barred the Megarians from the agora (the social, political and commercial meeting place of Athens) and from the harbours of the Athenian Empire (Plut.
Per .
xxix; Thuc. i.67; 139).
This punishment has an obvious appropriateness to the crime, because Plato in the Laws (871a) recommends that murderers, another category of ‘polluted’ offender, be excluded from the ‘harbour and the agora’.
and in Athens itself boundary stones saying ‘I am the boundary of the agora’ demarcate the area not to be entered by the polluted.
This does not, however, prove that the exclusive or even the main purpose of the decree was religious, i.e. not political or economic.
First, there is a point of logic: sanctions may take a religious form but have a political or economic purpose and effect.
Second, the Plato analogy needs looking at more closely.
True, the occurrence of the phrase about ‘harbours and agora’ is striking, but what Plato says is that the murderers should not be allowed to pollute the temples or the agora or harbours, etc.
That is, the religious aspect is specifically stressed by Plato, much more so than any version of the Megarian decree; if the Megarian exclusion was primarily religious, it is very strange that the exclusion does not extend to the obvious religious meeting-places and events, that is temples and sacrifices.
(As in inscriptions, e.g. Syll. 1016 from fourth-century BC Iasos in Karia: ‘let him be excluded from the sacred place’.)
Third, though the agora certainly has a religious aspect — Kleisthenes probably purified it and banned burials there when he gave it new political importance — it also, and equally certainly, was a place where ordinary commerce was carried on, thus Demosthenes (xviii.169) mentions the wicker booths set up for trading there.
Fourth, the evidence from  Aristophanes' play the Acharnians , performed in 425 (lines 515ff.) is overwhelming: an elaborate parody of the Megarian decree is immediately followed by the statement that the Megarians were starving slowly.
It is perverse to dissociate the two passages conceptually and insist that the starvation refers to routine annual invasions of the Megarid.
Finally, it is no use trying to escape by saying that ancient trade was not carried out by the nationals of ancient states but by non-citizens, so the Megarian decree cannot have injured Megarian trade: the generalization about ancient trade should be corrected to read ‘ancient Athenian trade’, which is what nearly all our information is about.
Nor can we say that Megarians could have got nationals of other states to act as middlemen.
Who would wish to carry, or to buy, polluted goods?
Certainly not the pious Spartans.
So the Megarian decrees had economic effects, and were surely intended to.
Of course the Athenians took good care not to be wrongfooted morally: hence a religious aspect was needed for the punishment of an ostensibly religious offence.
After all spondai , meaning literally libations, was the Greek word for treaties, like the Thirty Years Peace, which would have been broken by unprovoked coercion of Megara.
But the Megarian decrees were seen, with justification, as Athenian aggression, and Corinth, remembering the 460s, must have thought Athens was up to her old intrigues.
What Athens presumably wanted, for pollution could be got rid of, was for the Megarians to vow an expensive building or pay some humiliatingly large fine (thus acknowledging Athenian ascendancy), for the ‘chief malefactors’, i.e. the anti-Athenians, to be hounded out, and for Megara to be quietly absorbed into Athens' sphere of influence.
The final items indicating Athenian warlike preparations rather earlier than Thucydides implies are the Athenian decrees moved by Kallias (ML 58) which show that temple treasures in some demes were moved from exposed positions in Attica to the Athenian Acropolis; the decree is as early as 434.
It seems then that for much of the 430s war looked imminent, and to that extent Thucydides, who under-reports the earlier stirrings and expansion, should be corrected.
But his general picture of Athenian expansion, forcing the Spartans to war, stands.
The Spartans subsequently felt guilt at having started the war: there is a revealing sentence in Thucydides (vii.18) which says that they came to think they had lost the war of 431–421 because ‘they themselves had sinned’ when the Thebans attacked Plataia when the  ‘libations’were still in force.
Certainly the Athenians were technically justified in accepting the neutral Corcyra as an ally, despite Corinthian claims that the Thirty Years Peace provisions about neutrals did not envisage their being enrolled by one side to the intended detriment of the other (as if international treaties usually have anything to say about the future state of mind of the signatories!
See i.35, 40).
To express the awkwardness of the Spartan position Thucydides uses awkward language (i.88): the Spartans voted, he says, that the ‘libations’ had been broken and took a decision for war not so much because they were persuaded by the arguments of their allies as because they were afraid of the growth of Athenian power.
This is strictly illogical: the growth of Athenian power could never be a reason why the ‘libations’ had been broken.
What Thucydides means is that the Spartans were immediately responsible for the breaking of the treaty/libations — but that Athenian dynamism was behind it all.
CORINTH
When Thucydides spoke of the allies who urged Sparta to go to war, he was thinking of Corinth above all.
Our evidence for the organization and internal politics of classical Corinth is meagre, and out of proportion to the city's importance.
There are good reasons for this: first, Corinth was an oligarchy, and in oligarchies, unlike democracies such as Athens after 462, magistrates are not accountable to the same extent and there is less need to put up inscriptions.
Second, Corinth was sacked by Lucius Mummius in 146 BC with Roman thoroughness, not to rise again for a century.
Perhaps inscriptions were among the casualties.
(It may also be relevant that Corinth, as recent finds show, used lead for public inscriptions at early dates:Arch.
Reps , 1975–6, p.8.
Lead is more easily reused than stone, and texts more easily effaced.)
Third, and less depressing than the first two, Corinth is not completely excavated (most of what the modern visitor sees is Roman) and there is still hope that the classical agora may produce evidence of the kind we want; though to get it, the excavators (the American School in Athens) will need permission to dig under the main square of the modern town.
For the moment, classical Corinth, like archaic Chalkis and for the same reasons, has much to say but stays silent.
Fourth and last, Corinth inspired little history-writing: Aristotle's Constitution of the Corinthians does not survive, nor does Theopompus' Korinthiakos (T 48); apart from that there are only hellenistic prose versions of the archaic Corinthian poetry of Eumelos, and hellenistic treatises on the Isthmian games, which were held nearby.
If Pindar in the Thirteenth Olympian meant anything at all by saying that the Muses breathed sweetly over Corinth, he was not referring to his own day but perhaps to that of the Corinthian Arion who invented the dithyramb.
Corinthian philistinism, more real though less notorious than Theban, is part of something deeper and more disturbing: she had no ideology to offer, nothing that is like Athenian paideia or Spartan agoge, ‘culture’ and ‘discipline’respectively.
Actually the charge of lacking those two  qualities was levelled against Thebes (by Ephorus: see F 119), but even Thebes had a decade of hegemony; Corinth never.
This is not fortuitous.
Corinth was always, however, important.
This importance was partly strategic: by walling off the Isthmus (land narrows) of Corinth, as was done in the Persian Wars and again in the hellenistic period, the Peloponnese could be turned into an island, or a tortoise with its head tucked in, as the Roman commander Flamininus put it.
Polybius (xviii.
11) called Corinth and Chalkis the handcuffs of Greece, and the importance of Corinth to Macedon, which this comparison indicates, goes back to 338 when Philip II made Corinth the physical centre of his new Greek league (though whether the meeting-chamber has been identified on the ground is disputed).
There were military reasons, too, for Julius Caesar's choice of refounded Corinth as the site of a colony and the Roman capital of Greece,colonia laus Julia Corinthi : even in Caesar's day, the Roman colonies had military or policing functions.
Corinth controlled both the north-south route joining the Peloponnese to central Greece and the east-west haulage passage on the site of the modern Corinthian Canal.
Corinth's peculiar position created two prosperous harbours, Lechaion in the west- and Kenchreai in the east.
A further strategic asset was the colossal citadel, the Akrokorinth, which is very hard to take by storm: its most famous capture, by Aratos of Sikyon in the third century, involved treachery.
The Akrokorinth dominates the Isthmus region, and it is one reason why Aratos' home city of Sikyon just west of Corinth was never more than a second-rate power.
As Plutarch says (Aratos xvi) of the Akrokorinth: ‘it hinders and cuts off all the country south of the Isthmus from intercourse, transits, and the carrying on of military expeditions by land and sea, and makes him who controls the place with a garrison sole lord of Greece.’
The Akrokorinth has its own water supply, the Peirene spring, which meant that the inhabitants could stand long sieges.
All this makes it hard to see why Mycenaean Corinth was of no consequence; the answer is probably just that, unlike Attica and the Argolid, it lay off the main routes of Mycenaean penetration.
But by Homeric, i.e. Dark Age, times its natural epithet was already ‘the wealthy’, as Thucydides noticed (i.13).
Partly this was the result of Corinthian trade and craftsmanship; Heroilotus (ii.
167) says that the Corinthians despised craftsmen less than did other Greeks (note the negative formulation) and a recent survey of Corinthian territory  confirms the exceptional variety of goods manufactured there.
Corinth was also famously cosmopolitan: its prostitutes gave it a reputation somewhere between nineteenth-century Paris and Post-Second World War Saigon: ‘not everybody has the wealth to go to Corinth’ the proverb said, and those who did go there might be unlucky and take away more than pleasant memories, judging from the terracotta penises still visible along with models of other parts of the body in the Corinth Museum — dedications by sufferers from venereal disease (see also AJA , 1941, 442f.).
It is, however, a mistake to pigeon-hole Corinth as just a city of traders, craftsmen and luxury.
On the contrary Corinth was very rich in agricultural land, as no one who has climbed to the top of the Akrokorinth can doubt.
The old quarrel between Corinth and Megara was about borders; by the end of the archaic period Corinth had absorbed most of this frontier zone of good arable land, so that Strabo (380) can say of Krommyon, which is halfway to Megara, that it ‘was once Megarian but is now Corinthian’.
Nor was this a purely archaic problem: the border trouble with Megara in the 460s may reflect population pressure in the Corinthia.
A further sign of the importance of agriculture to Corinth is the quantity of fertility offerings to Demeter the corn-goddess — again these can be seen in the Corinth Museum.
The most fertile land lay towards Sikyon.
The politics of Corinth reflect the prosperity of its agriculture and commerce.
The Corinthias celebrated the fall of the Bacchiad tyrants in the sixth century by building the great temple of Apollo — and also by reorganizing and strengthening their tribal system.
The Corinthia, the territory of Corinth, was by now large: it included the lonely cul-de-sac of Perachora in the north, as well as the territory towards Megara in the north-east, towards Sikyon in the west and Kleonai to the south.
The new system is a blend of tribal and geographical: there are now eight tribes and three geographical groupings (perhaps Corinth city, the northern districts of Perachora and the Megarian border, and the southward extension towards Kleonai and Argos).
In Kleisthenic Athens and in the Cyrene of Demonax (see p. 59), as also in the Rome of Servius Tullius, such tribal changes, compromises between the criteria of family descent and physical residence, were a way of coping with new claimants to citizenship; and perhaps the same is true of Corinth, which needed to enfranchise immigrant craftsmen and the population of freshly incorporated and conquered  areas, thus strengthening the citizen body.
(The military aspect of Kleisthenic-type changes should never be forgotten.)
It is remarkable that this reform, which is so like that at democratic Athens, was the work of oligarchs , showing that there is nothing distinctively democratic about Kleisthenes' tribal changes, although Herodotus says Kleisthenes introduced the tribes and the democracy, in that order (vi.131).
What Athens and Corinth had in common was perhaps the immigrant craftsmen who had been drawn to the cities in the salad days of their respective tyrannies.
But Corinth went oligarchic, Athens democratic.
Why was this?
Perhaps Sparta, who helped to eject the Cypselids, and tended to favour oligarchies, was better able to influence Corinth, which was closer than Athens; or perhaps the explanation is just that 506 is much later than 585 when the Cypselids fell.
Classical Corinth possessed some of the ingredients of Athenian-type democracy: she had what for Athens was a great catalyst of naval democracy, a colonial empire (in the north-west and north-east), comparable to Athens' possessions before 500 at Sigeion, the Chersonese and on Euboia at Chalkis.
Her geographical position, like Athens', was accessible to outside influences and radical thinking.
She even had, by the classical period, Long Walls running down to Lechaion harbour, like those which joined Athens to Piraeus; and she had a decent-sized navy: the Corinthians lent twenty ships to Athens before the Persian Wars and contributed forty in the Persian Wars themselves, and they had ninety ships at the battle of Sybota (p. 89).
But by the mid-fifth century the oligarchs' grip was tight.
That did not change till the Peloponnesian War, one effect of which was to erode the Corinthian middle class.
A recent archaeological find is illuminating: one Corinthian fishmonger, whose Carthaginian amphoras and exotic western Mediterranean merchandise (the scales of the fish can be identified) show that his was a high-grade shop, went out of business in the early years of the Peloponnesian War, perhaps as a result of the Athenian blockade of the Corinthian gulf (Arch.
Reps , 1978–9, p.10).
Corinth suffered badly from the war: in a naval building programme in 413 BC she provides only fifteen ships (to which should perhaps be added another twenty-five operating in the Corinthian Gulf).
The political result was longer delayed, but equally startling: in the 390s, by an amalgamation unthinkable half a century before, Corinth merged with Argos to form a single,democratic , anti-Spartan state.
Corinth, which had done so much to bring on the war by urging on Sparta, was more damaged by it, and more permanently, than any other city.
SPARTA
At the beginning of the Peloponnesian War the Greek world looked to Sparta as liberator (Thuc. ii.8).
Sparta, a small city on the River Eurotas (see map 1), at this time controlled a larger continuous stretch of land than any other single Greek city: in fact, most of the southern Peloponnese.
Lakonia proper, the territory of the city of ‘Lakedaimon’, i.e. Sparta, included the large and fertile district between the Parnon mountain range to the east and that of Taygetos to the west.
But since the eighth century the Spartans had also ruled Messenia, the western half of the southern Peloponnese, beyond Taygetos, an even larger and more fertile district.
The subjugated population of Messenia tilled the land as serfs,helots .
The helots are directly responsible for Spartan military supremacy in Greece: a great revolt (the Second Messenian War) in the seventh century caused Sparta to impose on her citizens a strict military discipline, the agoge .
This gave her primacy in the Peloponnese and a reputation for invincibility beyond: in Diodorus of Sicily's universal history, only three of the remarkable human phenomena of Greek history are regularly called invincible,aniketos .
They are Alexander the Great; the Silver Shields (a Macedonian corps d'élite of the early hellenistic period); and the Spartans up to the date of their defeat at the hands of the Thebans at Leuktra in 371.
The other word habitually used by Diodorus (reflecting Ephorus; cp.
ML 95 and Lys. xxxiii.7) for pre-Leuktra Sparta as a physical entity is aporthetos , unravaged, and that was true (and most unusual for a Greek polis ).
This was partly thanks to Sparta's protected geographical position.
Invincible and unravaged, Sparta was the natural power to be invoked by the Greek world as liberator in 431.
‘Liberator’ was a role familiar to her: in the sixth century she had posed as a political giant-killer, putting down tyrannies in mainland Greece and even on the islands.
She did not abandon this policy even after the debacle at Athens, when her deposition of the anti-Spartan  Pisistratids in 510 resulted in a regime even more vigorously hostile to herself, which she tried and failed to overthrow in its turn.
The evidence for the continuance of the policy into the fifth century comes from Thessaly, where Leotychidas had put down the tagos in the 470s (p. 81).
The interventions of Sparta outside her borders after the 470s were erratic: she seems not to be able to make her mind up whether to be an imperialist power or to be Little Sparta.
One reason for this was the fear of revolt by her helots (p. 21), who certainly outnumbered full Spartan citizens many times over.
Thucydides, an acute social historian when he wants to be, remarks that ‘most of the dealings between the Spartans and their helots were of a precautionary character’(iv.80), and tells a suitably laconic story of two thousand specially manly helots who were garlanded and led round the temples as if they were about to be given their freedom;they were never seen again and nobody knew what happened to them .
Xenophon's story of the revolt of Kinadon (Hell .
iii.3) is more detailed but hardly more chilling.
He describes a conspiracy in the early 390s of helots, who together with the other inferior classes outnumber the full Spartan citizens, at a casual count in the agora, by four thousand to forty.
This revolt was suppressed with total ruthlessness.
One phrase of Xenophon's, about the helots wanting to ‘eat the Spartiates raw’, is no less memorable for being an echo of Homer (Iliad iv.35).
The link between cautiousness in foreign policy and fear of helots is manpower, dealt with more fully on pp. 219ff.
Adventurous Spartan generals — Kleomenes, Pausanias the Regent, Brasidas, Lysander — tried to get extra soldiers from the nearest source, their own country's helots.
But the home government always resisted this simple but dangerous solution, passing up chances to expand territorially if that meant the helots could stab them in the back — or eat them raw.
Roman experience suggests that these fears were rational: one cause of the Social War of 91–88 BC was Roman military dependence on her allies; this dependence was not recognized and rewarded by extra privileges such as citizenship, so the allies turned their fighting experience against Rome herself.
Sparta did, theoretically, have categories of enfranchised helots,neodamodeis (and there were other halfway groups, p. 221).
But they were few.
Anyway such selective enfranchisement was itself no more than a cynical way of heading off despair, what modern political scientists call ‘repressive tolerance’.
Rome, it has been said, suffered from a ‘neurosis of fear’ in her external relations.
The same could be said of Sparta and her internal relations (which as we saw affected external relations too).
One form this took was xenophobia.
This should not be exaggerated: the Spartan Lichas (Thuc. viii.39) has the Cyrenaean patronymic Arkesilas (cp. too p. 189f. for Pharax and Lysander); and a remarkable passage in Herodotus (ix.76f.) makes Fausanias the Regent in 479 BC acknowledge a xenia (guest-friendship) with a man from Kos in the Dodecanese.
What Pausanias actually says is that Hegetorides, the xenos in question, ‘is bound to me by closer ties of friendship than anyone else in that part of the world’.
This implies that Pausanias had other such xeniai .
(This xenia directly anticipates that between the early fourth-century Spartan king Agesilaus and the Persian satrap Mausolus, not to mention the fusion policies of Alexander: see p. 193.)
It is odd, and neatly illustrative of the contradiction in Spartan attitudes, that Herodotus can say of the Spartan-led Greeks in the same period that Samos ‘seemed to them as far away as the Rock of Gibraltar’, while telling elsewhere in his book of a Spartan, son of Archias, who was called Samios because of his father's Samian links (viii.
132; iii.55).
But by comparison with Athens, Sparta was certainly xenophobic.
An excellent comparison of Athenian and Spartan habits and philosophy is given by Thucydides, in the mouth of Pericles (ii.39): ‘our city is open to the world, and we have no periodical deportations in order to Trevent people observing or finding out secrets which might be of military advantage to the enemy.’
Thucydides writes with feeling: he complains in his own person in book v (68) of the secrecy with which the Spartans conduct their affairs, which meant that no one knew how many Spartans there were at the first battle of Mantinea in 418.
Whether to use or repress helots, then, was one Spartan dilemma, which helps explain the vicissitudes of Spartan foreign policy.
But the Peloponnesian War, and the propaganda of liberation, created another more special dilemma.
‘Liberation’ meant taking the initiative, breaking up the Athenian Empire.
But that would cost money.
Spartan finances look pathetically primitive: an inscription (ML 67 = Forn, 132:? 390s), recording contributions to the Spartan war fund, includes gifts of raisins : no six-thousand-talent reserve, or regular allied tribute such as Pericles boasts of in Thucydides' narrative (ii.
13).
Moreover, since Sparta depended on personal service from her allies, she had to consult them constantly, whereas  Athens had a freer hand, because she had stopped holding congresses of her allies well before the beginning of the war.
That Spartan deference to allied feeling was indeed a matter of necessity not sentiment is shown by her peace proposals to Athens in 425: in Thucydides' account (iv.20) the Spartans say that if Athens and Sparta do a deal the rest of Greece will do them honour.
This is diplomatic language for joint hegemony and a proposed sellout of the Peloponnesian League.
Eventually (Xen.
Hell .
v.2.21) the Spartans did copy Athens and go over to a system of contributions of money not men; but that was in the 370s.
In the fifth century there was for a Greek state only one major source of income apart from taxing one's own citizens or allies: Persia.
And this is where the special dilemma comes in: Persian finance might be available for the defeating of Athens, but not for the ‘liberation’ which Sparta's allies wanted, because the liberation envisaged included the freedom of the Greeks in the Persian king's Asia.
This explains the Persian king's response to Spartan requests for financial help in the 420s, that he could not understand what they wanted.
He understood perfectly well, but was waiting for them to make up their minds whether they wanted money or a claim to Asia Minor.
They could not have both.
So Sparta could not please both her allies and Persia, yet she needed them both.
Eventually she plumped for Persian help, but at a time (412) when her potential critics inside the league were less effective (cp. p. 97 on Corinth).
Even so, she returned to Asia in the 390s, proving Alcibiades right (viii.46) when he told the satrap Tissaphernes that Sparta would be a less convenient ally than Athens if and when the war ended, because Sparta comes as a liberator.
Athens by contrast was an unblushing imperialist and would respect Persia's imperialist ambitions.
It is hard to believe that Thucydides when he wrote these words had not lived to see at least the Spartan Thibron's Asian expedition of 400.
Here then were two of the disabilities, helot problems and money problems, produced by the Spartan system.
A third disability lay in her constitution: Sparta had no satisfactory apparatus for decision-making and the formulation of strategy.
The government of classical Sparta had most of the disadvantages of monarchy, oligarchy and democracy.
The kings (there were two of them) were exposed to the standard temptations of autocratic power without the constitutional invulnerability which such power generally confers: men like Kleomenes I and Pausanias the Regent were statesmen of stature, and  the hostile literary tradition should be adjusted accordingly; but their private tastes and temperaments certainly helped cause their fall, if only by giving ammunition to their critics.
Nor did the kingship make for singleminded action on the battlefield: Sparta found ways of getting round the more obvious difficulties of dual command, but a king could always be brought to book by the oligarchic element (the gerousia or council of elders, which was responsible for political trials) or by the democratic — the Assembly, which could fine a king and limit his powers (cp. p. 161 for Agis in 418).
The gerousia had the oligarchic failing that it was accountable to nobody, and its supposedly judicial decisions were sometimes (as e.g. over King Pausanias in 403, p. 183) politically warped.
The Assembly, which was a kind of democracy, though a rather small, special and elite one, was liable to the bad democratic habit of rapidly overturning its own or its advisers' decisions: so for instance Thucydides (vi.89ff.) implies that a single speech by Alcibiades was enough to make the Assembly reverse a decision not to help Syracuse in 414.
The right to hear ambassadors, and other foreign speakers like Alcibiades, was an important prerogative of the Assembly, and it is here that Spartan foreign policy must have taken some of the dramatic about-turns attested in the classical period — though technically the Assembly could only decide and not debate (Ar.
Pol .
1273); debate was supposed to be reserved for the gerousia which very occasionally is found actually debating, as in the Hetoimaridas Debate of the 470s (seep.23).
The five ephors , magistrates, gave a preliminary hearing to ambassadors too, and had some powers of euthuna (review of conduct engaged in by officers of state).
But being annual they would be open to reprisals if they threw their weight around too much.
From all this it should he clear that the conduct of war and foreign policy left too much to chance and personal axe-grinding.
Aristotle called the kings ‘hereditary generals’ and an incompetent or even average king could do a lot of damage in a short while — like Kleombrotos who lost the decisive battle of Leuktra in 371 but was not catastrophically inept.
Kings who showed independence risked the fate of Pleistoanax, exiled in 446 — most unfairly, because Sparta ratified his provisional settlement with Athens, which became the Thirty Years Peace (p. 46).
The number of kings who came to grief in the fifth century is staggeringly high, and this must have had a deterrent effect on kings who contemplated taking initiatives.
(The  two most famous Spartan ‘initiatives’ of the fourth century, Phoebidas' capture of the Theban citadel the Kadmeia, and Sphodrias' raid on the Piraeus, were both the work of competitively minded private individuals: pp. 207, 209.
King Agesilaus' reaction in both cases was roughly ‘Spartan interests, which are all that matters, mean that we need soldiers like that’: Xen.
Hell .
v.2.32; 4.32.
A very Spartan remark in its insular nationalism, but also a good comment on the conformity which was evidently far more usual than such reckless behaviour.)
As we shall see in chapter 13 the Greeks, even the militarily professional Spartans, did not develop a system comparable to the Roman imperium militiae or the dictatorship, which are both ways of relieving a commander from the normal political constraints on decisive action.
Nor was the agoge , or rigid training system, a good way for generals, or anybody else, to learn initiative; great Spartan successes like the first battle of Mantinea (41 8) are put down to Spartan gnome , ‘resolution’, almost ‘guts’— rather than leadership.
There is little sign of experimentation in these spheres: Lysander's radical solution of an elective kingship got nowhere (p. 156) and the system of harmosts, young Spartan ‘proconsuls’ first heard of in 423 (Thuc. iv.
132) when they are sent to govern cities in the north, became the most hated of Spartan institutions.
As for war policy, Spartan censorship and secrecy could not conceal the rivalries and back-biting: jealousy,phthonos , felt for Brasidas by the ‘leading men’ of Sparta caused him to be starved of supplies (iv.
108), and Pleistoanax's supporters waited twenty-six years to get him recalled in 420, which they did by bribing the oracle in the best archaic tradition.
And Thucydides describes no sharper conflict than that between the aggressive Spartan Sthenelaidas (i.86) and the more cautious King Archidamus; for the supposedly more ‘open’ society of Athens he records only the views of Pericles and an anonymous delegation which does not contradict him.
It is not, then, surprising that Spartan indecision, so manifest in 446 and again in 440 over Samos (p. 46) should persist through the 430s.
At the beginning of book in, when describing the revolt of Lesbos in 427, Thucydides says that the Lesbians ‘had been wanting to revolt even before the war, but the Spartans had been unwilling to receive them into alliance’.
This shows a Spartan caution which is at variance with their previous bellicosity over Samos.
Sparta, for all these structural shortcomings, was a great power, and calculations about the outcome of the war, as well as delight that she was prepared to play the liberator, must have caused the Greek world  generally to favour her over Athens (p. 99).
Delphi is a good barometer: the oracle said (Thuc. i. 118) that Apollo would fight on the side of the Spartans whether they invoked him or not.
Discerning Greeks like Thucydides (i. 10) knew that the relative splendour of the physical remains of Sparta and Athens was no index of their real strengths: suppose, he says, that the city of Sparta were to become deserted, future generations would find it hard to believe that the place, an old-fashioned, higgledy-piggledy collection of villages, was really as powerful as it was represented to be; whereas if the same were to happen to Athens, one would think that she was twice as powerful as she really was.
The central fact about Sparta was indeed, as Xenophon saw (Lakedaimonion Politeia i. 1), her way of life, her epitedeumata .
Pericles in the Funeral Oration was to try to meet this appeal head on, by drawing damaging contrasts with Athenian epitedeumata .
Nevertheless we shall see that it is even more obviously true of Attica than of Sparta that it is her physical environment which determines her history.
ATHENS
When a city rules an empire, a historian with any curiosity will ask whether the imperial city was specially geographically favoured from the first.
Rome, for instance, was sited on the first crossing of the River Tiber, controlling the route from Latium to Etruria; Corinth was a colonial power in the archaic period thanks largely to her position on the Isthmus (p. 95); and explanations of the greatness of Byzantium, from Polybius book iv to Gibbon, have begun with geography.
Sparta, as we saw, is an exception (in that human factors — the agoge — were even more important than geographical), but Athens is not.
Her natural advantages were enormous.
In the first paragraph of the first chapter of his Description of Greece , Pausanias mentions the silver mines of Attica, at Laurion in the south-east.
And Xenophon, at the beginning of his Revenues , lists Attic silver — alongside Attica's natural produce and her central position by land and sea — as one of her three great advantages.
That silver had helped to finance the fleet which won the battle of Salamis, but it was important under the empire too: the building accounts of the Propylaia, the ceremonial gateway to the Acropolis, dated 434/3, record payments from the treasurers of a Laurion silver mine as well as from the Hellenotamiai , the treasurers of the Delian League (ML 60 — Fornara 118B).
This neatly sums up the sources of wealth, external and internal, which paid for the great Acropolis building programme.
Still later, the Laurion mines surely helped to subsidize the Peloponnesian War: they are neglected by Thucydides in his statement of Athenian finances (ii.
13), but they feature in an inscription (IG i 3 90) of 424/3.
The Peloponnesians ravaged the mine district in 430 (Thuc. ii.55), but it is hard to destroy a mine without explosives, and it was not till the Spartans envisaged setting up a fort on Attic territory at Decelea (p. 142) that there could be talk of seriously damaging Athens' mining revenues (vi.91).
The other product native to Attica, and important for her economy, was the olive, Athena's tree in religion and myth.
From the  olive-branch, modern languages have derived a synonym for ‘peace’; the reason is that the olive is the product par excellence of peaceful cultivation, because it takes fifteen to twenty years to mature, and the destruction of olives was always the first task of an invading army.
The great olive oil benefactions of the hellenistic age, when the oil was used to lubricate the skins of participants in the gymnasia of the eastern Greek cities, are an index of profound peace.
It was remarkable that in the Archidamian War the Peloponnesians abstained from destroying those Attic olive trees which were regarded as sacred to Athena (Androtion F 39).
All Greek states needed olive oil, not just to do the work of modern soap and artificial light, but as the equivalent of fat in the cooking and preparation of food (butter was for barbarians).
In ‘thin-soiled’ Attica (Thuc. i.2) the olive was unusually important: its deep roots could penetrate the subsoil and get into the rocks, enabling the tree to thrive where other plants could not.
Grain and orchards do flourish in, for example, the Marathon plain, the market garden of modern Athens, but the inability of Attica as a whole to feed a large population gave the olive an additional role as an export, to be sent to south Russia to pay for Ukrainian corn.
All this concerns Athens' produce, not her position.
But the geography more than the geology or the botany of Attica were to determine Athens' future.
Her geographical advantages were not as obvious as those of Corinth, Rome or Byzantium, but Athens owed to them much of her success and sometimes her survival.
Xenophon was right to insist on them.
First, Athens is surrounded by a barrier of mountains, her first line of defence: working clockwise from Eleusis in the west, Mts Aigaleos, Parnes, Pentelikon and Hymettos run round the city, imagined at the centre of the dial (the best place to get an impression of this is from near the Philopappos Monument on the Hill of the Muses).
Parnes, to the north, turns into Kithairon, which guards north-west Attica.
With some artificial help — the old Pisistratid strong point at Eleusis (p. 110), the fortresses planted along the Kithairon-Parnes range (p. 128), and the fourth-century ‘Dema Wall’ which closes the Aigaleos-Parnes gap — this was massive natural insulation from land attack.
These fortifications deserve a word: much of what survives is of fourth-century date, for a good reason: in the fifth century Athens had her fleet, and that was the chief instrument of her classical  imperialism.
But the common assumption that Pericles' war strategy meant the total evacuation of Attica neglects the evidence for fortifications in his time, not all of which, surely, were abandoned in 431 (see further p. 128).
With that qualification it is true that Attica, from dates earlier than Themistokles, looked to the ‘wooden walls’ of a famous oracle delivered to Athens in the Persian War: the phrase referred to the fleet (Hdt. vii.
141).
The second, then, of Athens' geographical blessings is her prime naval position (which is really what Xenophon had in mind).
Athenian activity by sea was nothing new in the fifth century.
In Mycenaean times, Thorikos on the east Attic coast was importing the black volcanic glass called obsidian from the island of Melos, a reminder that there was and is a good little harbour nearby at Laurion; Attic submycenaean and geometric pottery has been found as far away as western Asia Minor; and the archaic Athenian colonies at Sigeum and the Chersonese, and the sixth-century cleruchies on Salamis and Euboia, foreshadow the fifth-century empire.
In part it was geography which made this possible.
The carrot-shaped Attic peninsula dangles into the Aegean towards the Cyclades islands; there are more than a hundred miles of hospitable Attic coastline, with plenty of good harbours from Skala Oropou in the north-east, past Laurion, just mentioned, round Sounion with its dockyards.
Those which survive are hellenistic, but classical Sounion was fortified too (Thuc. viii.4).
Then comes Phaleron, and the best harbour of all, the three-bayed Piraeus, safe to use only after Athens had taken Salamis, opposite, from Megara in the days of Solon.
Third, the Acropolis of Athens — a feature which, like some other masterpieces of nature or art, is so familiar that it is hard to see it with fresh eyes — was an inevitable centre for the rynoikism or concentration of Attica from a plurality of villages into a mia polis , ‘one city’.
(‘Athens’ is a plural noun in Greek; one might compare other such synoikised places, like Philippi.)
The Athenian Acropolis, defensible, symbolically overbearing, and provided with its own water supply, goes far to explain why Dark Age Attica did not remain like Keos or Euboia, a coalition of small states.
Instead, Athens became a mia polis , and the political life of Attica was dominated by Athens.
Dominated, not monopolized: the obvious physical impressiveness of the remains in the city, and its consequent attraction for archaeologists, can easily lead, and has led in the past, to a neglect of the deme , the local population centre.
This has been  changing, as more work is done on the Athenian Council (Boule ) of 500 members, lists of whom have been turning up since the Americans began to excavate the agora in the 1930s.
The Council of 500 was drawn from the demes in proportion to their population (see p. 112) and it is now known (for instance) that in the time of Kleisthenes no more than one-quarter of known Athenians can be attributed to city demes.
We would have expected the fraction to be approximately one-third, because Kleisthenes divided Attica into three, not four: city, coast and inland.
Thucydides (ii.
14–16) was right to say that it was only with the Peloponnesian War that the real migration from country to city took place.
It does not follow from this that country voters in the Periclean Assembly outnumbered city voters 3: 1 because, as Aristotle noted (Politics 1318), farmers tended to stay away.
But it does prove, and this is important, that many citizens of Attica may have looked to their deme first and their city second.
Thus Thucydides says (ii.
16) of the evacuation of Attica that the Athenians took it so badly because it was like leaving one's polis ; this is on the face of it a paradox because they were going from their country demes to the polis.
Another reason why the relation of demes to city is now seen differently, and why demes now seem more important, is simply that more archaeological work has been done on deme sites.
In general, the further from Athens you go, the more impressive the remains become.
This surely suggests that in the more distant demes —Eleusis with its great sanctuary and fortifications, or Rhamnous and Sounion with their temples of Nemesis and Poseidon (ML 53 = Fornara 90B for the treasury accounts of Rhamnousian Nemesis) —the city's magnetic pull was less strong than in a deme close to the city, like, say, Kolonos.
A deme like Sounion or Thorikos had many of the attributes of a city-state: there were deme liturgies: Michel Recueil d'inscriptions grecques no. 15 1, from Aixoneis (liturgies were the arrangements by which individuals financed the cultural life, and even the military defence, of their communities — a blend of self-advertisement and taxation).
The city deme Kollytos put on a play by Sophocles, namely the Oinomaos (Dem.
xviii.
180); Lamptrai (IG ii21204) politely inscribes its gratitude to a man of Acharnai, only thirty kilometres away across Mt Hymettos.
Yet the man is treated like a man from another polis .
From Sounion comes a splendidly illuminating decree of the demesmen, which reads: ‘It seemed good to the men of Sounion: since Leukios has given the demesmen land to  build an agora , three men are to be chosen straight away to measure an area not less than 2 plethra by 1, so that there shall be broad space for the men of Sounion to agorazein ’…(the last word is untranslatable: ‘carry on all the activities usual in an agora’ is accurate but too prosaic; there is also the sense of ‘promenading oneself: Syll. 925).
The formulae (‘it seemed good’, ‘straight away’) are aped from ‘city’ terminology (and note the deme agora , something normally characteristic of a polis , cp. p. 66)— or should we say that the city aped the demes?
After all,euthunai , compulsory accounts presented by magistrates, are an institution known from deme government (IG i 244, Skambonidai) before they appear in the city.
Rich deme evidence comes from Eleusis, one of the proudest and most important of the deme sites, partly because of its sanctuary to Demeter and Kore where the cults of the great Eleusinian mystery religion were performed, partly because of a too often forgotten feature of the place: its defences.
The Pisistratids, who as we saw (p. 99) were on uneasy terms with Sparta, had blocked off the main land route from the Megarid and the Peloponnese by enclosing Eleusis with a mudbrick wall.
In the fourth century, as we learn from inscriptions (e.g. Syll. 957), the ‘defence of Eleusis’ was the charge of detachments of the young conscripts called epheboi ; and Eleusis, Panakton and Phyle are mentioned together as the main fortresses of Attica in a hellenistic text (Syll. 485).
(Dem.
liv.,Against Conon , gives in its opening paragraphs a brilliant snapshot of the vexations of life under canvas in such a frontier posting — actually Panakton —including hooligans from the next door tent emptying chamber-pots over you.)
Eleusis' importance is reflected in the honours she confers, like a miniature polis: in Syll 1094 (cp.
Hdt ix 73: Sparta honours Decelea) two foreigners, Thebans, are granted preferential seats at the sanctuary spectacles and — a very interesting phrase —‘freedom from the taxes over which the Eleusinians have control’.
The phrase quoted is hardly attested elsewhere except as a fourth-century and hellenistic Asia Minor formula, used by the cities under the Persian and Seleucid kings and satraps.
‘Taxes over which the city has control’ implies a contrast with royal taxes, which the city is not competent to remit; the phrase thus signifies and asserts autonomy, albeit limited, in fiscal affairs, enjoyed by indulgence of a sovereign.
In the fourth-century east, the sovereign is the satrap; for Eleusis, the sovereign is the city of Athens.
Classical Eleusis, then, though only a deme of Attica, behaves something like a hellenistic polis, with amour  propre but curtailed freedom.
Another deme with more than purely parochial status was Piraeus, whose demarch was a state appointment (Ath.
Pol .
1viii).
Today likewise Piraeus' importance makes it much more than a mere annex of Athens and it has its own political traditions, regularly voting communist.
Again, the visitor to Thorikos, if taken there blindfold from the real city-state of Euboian Eretria, might well find it hard to tell the two apart, and might think that he was in another place with the same independent status: there is a fortified acropolis, a theatre and a temple — just as at Eretria.
But Eretria was a polis which could wage war on Xerxes of Persia if it chose, and it did.
Recent excavations at Thorikos have added to the total of known deme inscriptions: a sacred calendar (L'Antiquité Classique 1983, 150 ff.) shows what a remarkably full religious life the deme enjoyed; the inscription lists no fewer than forty-two separate gods or heroes, including the local deme ‘hero’ called Thorikos.
Another such religious calendar, from the deme of Erchia, is headed ‘the greater demarchia’(SEG xxi.541 = Sabben-Clare and Warman,Culture of Athens , LACTOR no. 234), and these words probably refer to the duties of the deme magistrate or mayor, the demarch .
This man combined many of the jobs of parish priest, village policeman, eponymous magistrate (Fornara 90B, the Rharmous accounts) and even collector for the inland revenue: the debtor Strepsiades in Aristophanes' Clouds is bitten by a ‘demarch under the bedclothes’(line 37), and demarchs collected the eisphora , a capital tax.
For the citizens of Attica (at least in classical tunes: it is remarkable, and sad in its implications for the vitality of deme life, that deme decrees are rare after the fourth century) deme routine was more immediate, though no doubt objectively less important, than what happened on the Pnyx.
One interesting section of the new Thorikos text is the reference at the end, just before the stone breaks off (as so often with Greek inscriptions, at the most interesting point) to elections at deme level, something we should like to know more about (p. 119).
Deme elections at Athens : SEG xxviii 103.27 f., Eleusis.
On the most miniature scale of all, smaller even than the demes, were the Attic komai or villages; even these had their komarchs , though about these officials virtually nothing is known.
Some inhabitants of Attica perhaps did not bother much with either deme or polis politics: the country house below the cave of Pan at Vari (the ancient deme of Anagyruus), whose remains were cleared and  studied by the British School at Athens and published in 1973, gives an impression of self-sufficiency — there is copious archaeological evidence for bee-keeping at the Vari villa — and peace, a long way from the speechmakers of the Pnyx.
That peace might be disturbed Las in Dem.
xlvii,Against Euergos ) by pirates, local rowdies or litigants seeking what is nowadays politely called a ‘remedy by self-help’; in which case the answer was to take refuge inside the fortified central pyrgos or tower, whose foundations are still a feature of the Vari site.
All this shows that Attica was far from being just a city with territory round it, but was a compromise between a centralized state and a federal one.
The compromise is symbolized by Lysias' mention (xxiii.3) of ‘the barber's shop by the Herms in the Athenian agora where the demesmen of Decelea congregate’— an evocative phrase which evidently described a well-known social phenomenon, since it is almost exactly reproduced in an inscription from Decelea (Syll. 921, lines 63–4).
That need for compromise arose from a feature shared by much of the Greco-Roman world: ancient states, being reliant on agriculture, faced a permanent struggle to prevent civic assemblies from being dominated by the urban population; Rome solved this by eventually allowing dual citizenship — that is, citizenship both of Rome and of the home community whose constitution would be modelled, in a municipal way, on that of often faraway Rome.
Attica after Kleisthenes, which allowed a man to be loyal to and to participate in the affairs of his deme, and also to join in making the city's decisions, was another such attempt to reconcile city and countryside.
The main bridge between the two was the Council of 500 members, appointed annually from the demes in proportion to their population — so for instance Eleusis was allowed to send eleven councillors to the city, and the great deme of Acharnai sent twenty-two, while some tiny demes like Pambotadai and Syhridai took it in turn to send a single councillor, each sending one every other year.
(After 43 1, rural demes were less ‘representative’: p. 109.)
The demes were organized into three groups (or trittyes ), coastal, in land and city, and these were artificially aggregated into bigger units called tribes,phylai: a trittys of coastal, a trittys of inland and a trittys of city demes went to make up one of the ten tribes of Attica, each of which sent fifty councillors to Athens.
In each tribe, as we have seen, there were a number of coastal, a number of inland and a number of city demes, about sixteen councillors from each type going to make  up a trittys (only in the tribe to which Acharnai belonged was this system modified, because twenty-two out of fifty councillors is already well over a third).
This system was devised not just with political but with military arrangements in view, and this is another way in which city and countryside were brought together: the demes and trittyes were often arranged along, and clustered at the ends of, the strategic highways of Attica, thereby making for easy mobilization, with the agora of Athens as the place of muster.
An example is the string of demes from Tribe Five, Akamantis, which run Thorikos-Kephale-Prospalta-Sphettos and thence to the city; the section from Thomkos to Sphettos is along an arterial road, which by Kleisthenes' dispositions was enclosed first within the coastal, then within the in land trittys of Akamantis.
The road-building of the Pisistratids in the sixth century was what made this possible.
Roman Italy again provides an analogy: the roads built by people like Aemilius Lepidus in the first half of the second century physically facilitated the political and cultural unification of Italy in the course of the next 150 years.
Finally, the ‘deme judges’(again an originally Pisistratid invention) dispensed a justice which was uniform for all Attica, but they travelled round the demes on a kind of assize circuit; they too must have been agents of unification.
(They had been suspended after the fall of the tyranny in 510, but for their re-creation in the year 453 see Ath.
Pol .
26.3.)
Symbolic of the unification of Attica — but also of the importance of the demes — was the commissioning of the same architect, a top man, to design temples of Nemesis at Rhamnous, of Poseidon at Sounion, of Ares at Acharnai and of Hephaistos at Athens.
Nemesis was suggestive of vengeance, specifically for the assaults on Greece and its temples by Persia (cp.
Fornara 90A: Pausanias), and the site was geographically appropriate because the Persians had landed in 490 not far away at Marathon; Poseidon meant rule of the sea, and a temple to him at Sounion was a fitting piece of arrogance, visible far out in the Aegean; Ares was the god of war and Acharnai was the most warlike deme and the one with the most manpower (Thuc. ii.
19); while Athens herself, with her five-figure total of metics, is audaciously presented as the smithy of Hephaistos.
This huge fourfold piece of political iconography, comparable as imperial propaganda to the Great Exhibition in London of 1851, was executed we should remember by a single hand and was therefore surely centrally    commissioned; but it is equally significant of the proud standing of the demes that they were chosen as the vehicle for this glorious Attica-wide religious boasting.
Centralization, and a recognition of local centres as objects of loyalty, affection and even cult (witness deme ‘heroes’ like ‘Thorikos’), goes back to Pisistratus, who started the worship of Artemis of Brauron on the Athenian Acropolis, but without suppressing her cult at Brauron itself.
Fifth-century Athens followed Pisistratus' example consciously: he had swivelled the Eleusis Hall of Mysteries round so as to face the city of Athens; in the 420s Athens inscribed a great decree regulating the offering of first-fruits to Eleusis by her own demes, by the cities of the empire, and by others of the Greeks (ML 73 = Fornara 140).
Pisistratus had made Eleusis a symbol of the unity of Attica; for the fifth-century Athenians it was that, and a symbol of Athens' rule over a united Aegean as well.
In the same spirit Athens purified Delos in 426 — as Pisistratus had done in the previous century: control of Delos, the birthplace of Apollo the father of Ion, helped to justify control of Ionia .
Kleisthenic and post-Kleisthenic Athens, then, owed to Pisistratus the idea of centralizing Attica without draining away deme autonomy; but in the Kleisthenic arrangements, which lasted until the Macedonians suppressed Athenian democracy in 322, that principle was used not just in the sphere of religion, but formally and politically, in the arrangements for selecting the 500-strong Council by lot (for more on this see p. 119).
The Council (Boule ) was not, however, the sovereign body:that was, or was supposed to be, the Assembly (Ekklesia ), open to all Athenians — or rather to all free, male, adult citizens.
(Any discussion of Athenian democracy should quickly define the word ‘democracy’: the voting demos was an elite group from which slaves, women and the allies were all excluded.)
Pay was given after c .
403:Ath.
Pol .
xli.
The following paragraphs will try to test whether or not the Assembly was sovereign.
Attendances of c .
6000, not of a male population in 431 of about 40,000, could he accommodated on the Pnyx, the open-air meeting-place, and that total was regularly reached in the fourth century, as we know from the very many attested grants of citizenship, for which a quorum of 6000 was required.
Recorded debates are sophisticated (naturally: much of our evidence is from a sophisticated historian.
namely Thucydides), but voting techniques were not: there was no counting of votes  at all(something which would have taken several hours when the agenda was as crowded as that given at the beginning of Demosthenes' fiftieth speech of 362 BC), and the ‘consensus’ was determined by a show of hands, which tellers then adjudicated, in a fashion no more precise than that of a modern shop-steward who ‘counts’a sea of hands at a trade union mass meeting.
(This should be remembered when we read Thucydides and Aristotle on what the latter called the ‘childish’ Spartan way of taking decisions, ‘by shouting not voting’.)
What perhaps helped to keep things relatively orderly and even solemn was the custom of offering prayers at the beginning of the meeting.
Attending the Assembly was, like most things the ancient Greeks did, a partly religious act.
That the Assembly was sovereign over the Council is true enough as a generalization, but it represents the conclusion of most modern interpretation, rather than the ancient theory.
At the trial of the generals after the sea-battle of Arginusai (p. 150), who were tried collectively and thus in defiance of the constitution for failing to save survivors, the mass of the people shouted (Xen.
Hell .
i.7.12) that ‘it would be monstrous if the people could not do what it wanted’.
But a thinking participant like Socrates (with a following in the Assembly) found this incident difficult to stomach, and so far as the passage contains a statement of constitutional principle, it ought not to be pressed.
Again, the orators (as at Dem.
1ix.88) imply the sovereignty of the demos , but oratory is not reflective political science.
A celebrated passage of Aristotle's Politics (1313b38) proves less than is sometimes assumed.
What Aristotle says there is that the demos would like to be a monarchos , an autocrat, he does not quite say that it is.
Nor does the Athenaion Politeia say more than that on certain matters the Boule does not have the final decision (xlv), which is less than a direct and triumphant assertion of the Assembly's sovereignty.
Fur a speaker in Herodotus (iii.82) the trouble with democracy is, not that the demos is itself the monarchos , but that democracy leads to real monarchy, the ascendancy of one man.
Which need not refer only to Pericles, though the historian cannot have forgotten him.
The practical workings and relations of Council and Assembly will be a better guide.
The surprising conclusion they suggest is that the Council was more of a brake on the sovereignty of the Assembly than is usually supposed.
First, did the Council stick to its main constitutional job, which was to prepare business for the assembly (Ath.
Poll .
xlv)?
Two inscriptions  from the early fourth century show that it did not always do so (Tod 103, 108 = WV 7, HD 20): they have the unusual opening formula ‘it seemed good to the Council’.
The normal formula is ‘it seemed good to the Council and People’, indicating that the decree had been prepared for the Assembly (‘the people’) by the Council, and was then voted on by the Assembly.
The two unusual inscriptions, just referred to, were evidently passed by the Council on its own sole initiative, and did not reach the Assembly: they record an alliance with Eretria, and honours for Dionysius I of Syracuse.
The Eretrian alliance arranges for the Council to choose ten men to go to Eretria, and there is a similar provision in a document from the year 367 (Tod 137 = HD 54):the Council is to choose a herald to make a protest to the Aitolian League (cp. also Aisch. ii.19).
Again, a story in Thucydides (v.45) shows that the Council hears foreign ambassadors before the Assembly does (Alcibiades persuades a Spartan delegation, after their first audience, which was with the Council, to deny at their later audience with the Assembly that they had full powers to treat with Athens).
So the Council had control both of outgoing and of incoming diplomatic traffic.
Finally, the Council even negotiated in secret from the Assembly: Demosthenes (ii.6, with Theopompus F 30a) mentions a secret pact made in the 350s between the Athenian Council and Philip II of Macedon to exchange Pydna, which Athens held, for Amphipolis; and the continuous text of the Oxyrhynchus Historian begins with the sailing of a trireme under one Demainetos to the south-east Aegean ‘not on the instructions of the people’, but after Demainetos had unveiled his plans in secret to the Council.
Second, the judicial powers of the Council were greater in practice than the official limit, a five-hundred-drachma fine: Aristophanes speaks as if the proposal to execute the poet Euripides was a Council matter (Thesmophoriazusai 1.79), and in the 360s the Council put to death a political assassin on the island of Keos (Tod 142 = HD 55).
As a member of an allied community he perhaps deserved no consideration.
Third, the power of any ‘probouleutic’ body (that is, one which prepares business for a larger sovereign meeting) will be enhanced the more often it, and the less often the sovereign body, meets.
The Council was exempted from meeting on the sixty or so annual festival days, but not on the monthly ones; this adds up to a large number of meetings (c.300) held per year.
The Assembly on the other hand met only four times in each prytany (tenth part of the year, i.e. a bit longer  than a month); extra meetings could no doubt be called (though the word usually taken to refer to such meetings,sunkletos , may just mean a meeting called at short notice).
This imbalance, in the number of sessions held by the Council compared to the Assembly, must have made it easier for the Council to usurp executive powers.
Finally, if the generals had the authority to summon, or to prevent the summoning of, the Assembly, that was a further limitation on the Assembly (see further p. 120).
Fourth and finally, the social composition of the Council — which had a tendency to be more upper class than the Assembly, and to be drawn more from the traditionally, almost professionally political families — must have inclined it to play the master not the servant.
Theoretically, the Council should have been a cross-section of the people socially (as we have seen it was geographically): its members were appointed by lot, they served only for a year at a time, so that the Councillors should not have felt themselves to be a cohesive hereditary body like the old Areopagus or the (semi-hereditary) Roman Senate, and they could not serve more than twice in their lives.
In fact, however, the Council's composition was not random, as two kinds of evidence show: evidence for the high social class of individual members, and evidence that it was possible to get on to the Council in a given year if you wanted to.
As to the first, it is not surprising that poorer citizens, especially those from more distant demes, found it hard to walk in to the frequent meetings of the Council (though the argument from distance should not be overstated: Andokides (i.38) mentions an early morning walk of twenty miles from Laurion to Athens as nothing special).
In the developed democracy there was pay for attending the Council, but ironically it is not attested before Thucydides' account of how the oligarchs of 411 (temporarily) brought it to an end (viii.69).
Perhaps it started about the mid-fifth century.
As to the second kind of evidence, which shows you could intrigue your way onto the Council, this is a puzzle: was the lot then ineffective?
The facts though are clear: Kleon in the fifth century and Demosthenes in the fourth are found tin the Council in specially exciting years for foreign affairs, 427 and 346, the years of the Mytilene Debate and the Peace of Philokrates respectively (pp. 130, 253).
And father and son teams are found serving together, presumably by arrangement.
Somehow, then, the operation of the lot could be evaded.
Here, as with Council pay, the date of the introduction of the lot is relevant: the first attestation is again  surprisingly late, and is anyway indirect.
It is the regulations imposed on the Asia Minor city of Erythrai in c.450 BC (ML 40 = Fornara 71) which included a Council appointed by lot; Athens would hardly have exported such an institution before she had one herself.
The change from an elected Council at Athens to one appointed by lot was perhaps part of the ‘Ephialtic’ set of reforms (pp. 35ff.).
So for its first half-century, after Weisthenes, the Athenian Council was an unpaid elected body, something which gave it an elite character which it may never wholly have lost.
But it is from after the change that we have evidence for Councillors like Kleon and the fourth-century Athenian Demosthenes whose year on the Council fell at improbably convenient moments for their political careers; this makes one suspect corruption, a suspicion strengthened by Aischines' direct accusation that Demosthenes bribed his way onto the Council in 346 (iii.62).
Unless this means actual ballot-rigging, it must refer to bribing people not to put their names forward at deme level for the ballot for the Council; the candidate who ‘eagerly put his name forward’ according to Lysias (xxxi. 33) is evidence that this stage of the process was voluntary.
(That there were actual preliminary deme elections to determine which names went forward to the ballot is unlikely given that fourth-century Attic oratory, of which a great deal survives, is wholly silent about such elections — although the new Thorikos text, for instance(p. 111), shows that there were some elections at deme level.)
Alternatively Aischines' charge of ‘bribery’ could refer to vaguer but still politically valuable arrangements whereby the habitués of the ancient equivalent of the left-wing coffee-shop in a deme agreed to put forward no candidates in one year provided the right-wing coffee-shop held back the following year.
There is no evidence for precisely that kind of deal, but a little imagination will show how the system could be ‘worked’ in favour of individuals, and such working of the system could certainly be described as ‘bribery’in the elastic vocabulary of Athenian political abuse.
The final way of getting on to the Council in a given year was by being an ypilachó0n or stand-in, and that may explain some instances of ‘carpet-baggers’, i.e. political adventurers who offered themselves as Councillors for demes other than their home deme.
But Aischines expressly excludes that explanation for Demosthenes.
The Council then was not quite a ‘cross-section’ of Athenians, but contained disproportionately many rich, determined politicians; and lobbies, political dynasties or mafias could perpetuate themselves over  the years despite the restrictions on re-election (so the contrast with, for example, the Roman Senate is not after all total).
Little explicit literary evidence confirms this view of the Council; there is for instance nothing in the pamphlet we call the Old Oligarch , written in c.425, although in other contexts it does comment on the influence at Athens enjoyed by the wealthy and well-born.
There is only a remark in Plutarch's Alcibiades , where he is recounting the story of the double-crossing of the Spartan ambassadors (p. 117): Alcibiades (xiv.8) urges the Spartans to go before the Council because it is more ‘moderate and kindly’ than the People, that is the Assembly.
(But since Plutarch is, in this section of the Life of Alcibiades , so heavily dependent on Thucydides, who omits that item, it may represent Plutarch's own addition rather than an independent fifth-century source.
In Plutarch's day, tension between Council and Assembly was a fact of Greek city life.)
On the other hand there is a remark of Lysias (xxx.22) who says that when times are hard the Council listens more readily to prosecutions of the rich; this suggests class solidarity between the Council and the poor on the one hand against the rich on the other.
So much for the Council.
There were other restraints on the right, or ability, of the Assembly to ‘do what it wished’.
The most important was the panel of the ten generals.
The generals were the only important magistrates to be elected, normally one from each of the ten tribes, elected by the people as a whole.
There were no limits on re-election.
That the Assembly could depose and fine them at no notice, as happened to Pericles himself towards the end of his life, shows that the Assembly was theoretically and actually master.
But, as with the Council, that generalization must be qualified.
Thucydides (ii.22) says that Pericles, as general in 431, ‘did not summon the Assembly’, and though this may have been just an exercise of personal authority, there is another passage (iv.
118. 14), from a faithful transcript of an Athenian decree, which gives the generals power to summon, and perhaps by implication the power to prevent the summoning of, the Assembly.
Certainly the generals had direct access to the Assembly, and could propose motions: one inscription (Syll.132) opens with the formula ‘by the motion of the generals’.
Even if such inscriptions were non-existent rather than just rare, it would be no more than commonsense to guess that generals in the field must have enjoyed great executive latitude, especially in wartime — more latitude than was compatible with the exercise of detailed  control, and so of full sovereignty, by the Assembly.
For instance when in c.438 (p. 89) Phormio made an alliance with the Akarnanians in north-west Greece (Thuc. ii.68) it is inconceivable that he awaited approval from Athens.
Of course if he made the wrong decision he could pay for it by loss of his command, as we have seen, or even with his life, as happened to Timagoras, the ambassador who accepted humiliating terms at a peace conference in 367 (Xen.
Hell .
vii.1.38; p, 229).
But often a general must have been left to his initiative.
This was partly because of difficulties of communications: ancient Greek diplomacy was conducted on foot for the most part, and runners rather than mounted dispatch-riders were used for urgent messages.
As for naval campaigning, much of it was done at a great distance.
So Demosthenes (Thuc. iv.2.4: this man is a fifth-century soldier, not the famous fourth-century politician) is explicitly told to use his fleet round the Peloponnese ‘as he thought fit’; he took Pylos with it (p. 132), an act which Thucydides implies was more extempore than it really was, but which was nevertheless not something specifically authorized by the Assembly.
And most striking of all, the three generals in Sicily in 415 (Thuc. vi.47ff.) debate strategy as if all the options are wide open.
Only Nikias mentions their specific brief from the People to proceed against Selinus, and his views do not prevail.
There was anyway ambiguity about that brief, because (vii.11) the same Nikias alludes in a letter to the Assembly to a brief to proceed against Syracuse: same phrase, different object.
The other part of the explanation for the initiative tacitly granted to generals is the need for confidentiality and secret co-ordination between geographically separated forces.
Thucydides, unusually, mentions a security breach (iv.42): advance intelligence about an Athenian attack had reached Corinth via Argos.
If that kind of thing had happened very often, Athens would have lost the war much sooner than she did.
An example of the kind of executive pre-arrangement, which must have happened more often than we are told, is the way in which Demosthenes (iv.
89) with the fleet went to Siphai, Hippokrates was to march on Delion.
(It went wrong, but that is not the point.)
Or there is Nikias who (iii.91) sails from Melos to Oropos on the Boiotian border, thence to Boiotian Tanagra, to meet Hipponikos coming from Athens.
(In none of this do the geographical or military details matter, which is why the background has not here been explained: what matters is the constitutional issues  raised.)
Finally, iv 90 shows that generals called out troops off their own bat.
We should like to know how much of this kind of thing was discussed openly on the Pnyx by the Assembly, and how much or how little communication between generals was centrally re-routed from the strategeion , the generals' office, in the agora .
But it is noticeable that such information is commoner in those sections of Thucydides' narrative (books iii and iv) which date from years when he himself was a general and had privileged access to the deliberations in the strategeion .
This might imply that Thucydides knew more than the Assembly did.
It might also imply (what in wartime is plausible at any period of history) that the executive, in the shape of the panel of the generals, a tight group of only ten at maximum allowing for absentees, gained power at the expense of its larger and more unwieldy constitutional master, the Assembly.
And though the Archidamian War accelerated this process no doubt, Athens was at war, or Athenians were on campaign, like Phormio in Akarnania, virtually every year of the pentekontaetea.
We must now consider the role of the ‘demagogues’, and the way their rhetorical and other skills enabled them to manipulate the Assembly and so detract from its sovereignty.
The generals were not the only officials or individuals, the extension of whose power tended to erode that of the Assembly.
In the fifth century, the complex business of running an empire threw up the ‘demagogues’, to us a word of political disparagement but not much specific content.
By contrast, the Athenian demagogues, the ‘leaders of the people’, had definite and valuable, though not constitutionally recognized, functions within the Athenian state.
First, there was no public prosecutor at Athens, so like the Roman informers, the delatores , men like the demagogue Kleon took it on themselves to bring prosecutions for such offences as peculation of public money.
More important, it was necessary that somebody should he acquainted with the details of imperial finance, and the Athenian constitution, like that of Rome in the republic, had no provision for a civil service, and like the Roman Senate, the Athenians governed and legislated as amateurs.
Rome eventually, under the empire, looked to a newly and specially created bureaucracy from former slaves of the Emperor and from free men of sufficient rank; Athenian public slaves never progressed beyond low-grade secretarial jobs.
Instead, much detailed work was done by demagogues.
There was surely nothing very new about these more professional-looking politicians, though they scarcely feature-in the sources before Pericles' death in 429.
The nature of those sources is part of the explanation: no comic play survives in anything like complete form earlier than the beginning of the Peloponnesian War, and Thucydides for artistic reasons (like Tacitus delaying the introduction of Sejanus until the opening of the second half of his six ‘Tiberian’ books), delays the introduction of the arch-demagogue Kleon until Pericles is off the stage for good.
Yet we know that Kleon was not only a vocal opponent of Pericles' war strategy, i.e. was politically active in Pericles' lifetime (Plut.
Per .
xxxiii), but may have contracted an advantageous political marriage as early as the year 440.
(This makes it hard to draw any line between old and ‘new’, i.e. post-Periclean, politicians in terms of social standing; similarly we now know that the later and much-vilified demagogue Kleophon was the son of a man high enough up the social ladder to have served as a general: ML 21.)
Nor are the political techniques of the politicians of the 420s specially new.
Kleon, in Aristophanes' Knights , is represented as a ‘lover of the demos’, but Philodemos occurs as a proper name in an Athenian casualty-list of as early as c.460 (ML 33); more important, Kleisthenes in the sixth century had taken the demos into partnership, as Herodotus puts it, and Pericles in the 460s had won over the people with jury pay.
(Thucydides never saw Pericles at his demagogic debut, or he might have felt less dismay at the look of the great man's successors: ii.65.)
A strange story in Plutarch (Moralia 806), about Kleon, at the beginning of his career, summoning his friends, his philoi , and renouncing their friendship, has been taken to show that Kleon took his role as ‘people's friend’ more seriously than his predecessors; but this embarrassing-sounding scene is hard to visualize, and is of doubtful historicity, being attributed to no source, reputable or disreputable.
Worse, the story is provably false: the decree (ML 69 = Fornara 136) which enacted the raising of the tribute in 425 was moved by Thoudippos — who we know from Isaios (ix) was Kleon's own son-in-law and so a philos .
So much for abandoning philoi .
As for oratorical technique,Ath.
Pol .
(xxviii) says that Kleon was the first to raise his voice and use theatrical gestures — as it all politicians earlier than Kleon spoke in a monotone with their arms rigidly at their sides!
But there are anyway other anecdotes which for what they are worth trace the origin of political professionalism to dates earlier than Kleon: a Byzantine lexicon called the Suda, for instance, makes Pericles the first to take a written speech into court, while for Aristotle (Cic.
Brut .
46) oratory developed in the 460s, a result of the fall of the tyrants in Sicily, an event which prompted litigation about landownership.
Something , however, must lie behind the feeling in the literary sources that politicians like Kleon were different, and perhaps the difference should be sought in the new and larger audiences assembled on the Pnyx as a result of the evacuation of Attica in 431.
Faced with an audience which included Dikaiopolis, the main character in Aristophanes' Acharnians (see lines 1ff.), farting and grumbling as he watched the Spartan; put a match to the combustible parts of Attica, a speaker might well need to invent cruder techniques.
But there was crudity in Athenian politics before Kleon.
On the positive side though, these politicians got things done, and got them done in detail (the use by Kleon, then absent from Athens, of his son-in-law Thoudippos to move the complex reassessment decree of 425 implies efficiency and a refusal to trust to luck.
For Kleon's connection with the decree — Thoudippos is not the only evidence — see p. 137).
Not only Kleon but the equally detested figure of Hyperbolus (detested, that is, by Thucydides and Aristophanes) looks a little different and more respectable when tested against documentary evidence, just as radio broadcasts of puerile exchanges in the House of Commons ignore the work on Select Committees on which most MPs spend most of their time.
For instance there is a long, sober and sensible-looking decree about the cult of Hephaistos, moved by Hyperbolus (IG 182); ostraka show that Hyperbolus' father had the good Greek name Antiphanes (ML p. 46), which refutes ancient charges of slave origin; and serious policy issues lay behind his ostracism (p. 139).
Hyperbolus was a failure but not a fool.
These men, like the generals, were at the mercy of the Assembly — whose composition changed with every meeting — but knowledge is power, and their skills, and factual grasp of routine information, could not be overthrown except by superior skill and superior grasp, though they were unusually vulnerable by reason of their prominence to the irrational weapon of ostracism, which destroyed Hyperbolus.
Only once does Aristophanes play on the  possibility that the demagogues, for all their ‘philodemos’ pretensions, were actually an undemocratic force: in the Wasps (715ff.)‘they (the demagogues) insincerely promise to give you, that is the people, corn doles, and even to hand over Euboia to  you’.
Nowhere else is an ‘us-them’ mentality so clearly expressed; but their technical proficiency and factual command of state business must have enabled such men to acquire great and even lasting power — again, at the Assembly's expense, despite their need to pose as agents of the popular, that is of the Assembly's, will.
For Plato in a marvellous metaphor (Republic 488)Demos was a huge, deaf old sea-captain, drugged and overpowered by ignorant riff-raff who take over the wheel themselves — true, except for the word ‘ignorant’.
Ignorance was not a fault of Kleon, or Hyperbolus.
In the fourth century, Athenian democracy was curtailed in ways harder to resist than a Hyperbolus, who could simply be got rid of: the institutionalized power of the men who administered the various state funds grew in the course of the fourth century, and as such people got above themselves Athens became a less democratic place than it had been in the fifth century.
The most important fund was the theoric , from which pay was given for attendance at festivals.
This move towards efficiency and specialization affected most departments of state; thus five of the ten generals have distinct functions by about 350: general in charge of overseas hoplite expeditions, general appointed for the defence of Attica, general for the Piraeus and so on.
And we hear for the first time of permanent salaried architects.
(But note that, despite what has been said in this paragraph concerning the administration of funds, the fact that there was less political pay in the fourth century also helped to dilute the democracy.)
But these fourth-century ‘apparatchiks’, the men of the age of Eubulus (p. 245), were not the first Athenians to gain power by boring work on committees.
And this leads to the last and perhaps greatest check on popular sovereignty in the age of Pericles, namely Pericles himself.
Pericles' position is (almost everywhere: see p. 126 on finance) described by Thucydides as if his authority depended solely on charismatic qualities of leadership, but this cannot have been the whole of it.
We know, for instance, that he was president of the commission for the building of the great statue of Athena by Phidias, and of that fur the Lyceum (Philuchoros F 121 and 37), that he was on the Parthenon commission (Strabo 395), and that he was responsible in an elected capacity for the Odeum (Plut.
Per .
xiii).
All of that is relevant to Thucydides' description of Athens under his regime as ‘ostensibly a democracy, but actually one-man rule.
Pericles, no less than Kleon, was proof that knowledge, even or especially routine knowledge, is power, and it is that which makes Pericles the greatest  demagogue of them all.
Only Pericles, of all the speakers in Thucydides, is allowed a speech about anything so detailed and unethereal as war finance, namely at ii.
13, where Pericles, self-imputed capacity to ‘understand what was needed and to expound it’(ii.60) is better illustrated than anywhere else in Thucydides.
The confidence of Pericles' exposition is magnificent; but did he after all ‘understand what was needed’?
The first ten years of the Peloponnesian War, to which we now turn, were to show that he did not, and that Periclean democracy — which was based on the power of money (‘hail in due apportionment of wealth ’ say the chorus of Aeschylus' Eumenides to Athens, line 996) and on the admiration of that power —was more precarious than Pericles had allowed.
In more concrete terms, Pericles' confidence in Athenian resources was superb but misplaced: his war policy put Athens into the red, and it was the demagogues, with their ‘undemocratic’ technical expertise, who got her out of it.
Thucydides must have perceived this, without necessarily endorsing the extreme views which he gives two of his speakers: Alcibiades who said that democracy was acknowledged folly; and Kleon who said that a democracy was incapable of running an empire (vi.89; iii.
37).