

Inductivism: Science as Knowledge Derived from the Facts of Experience
A widely held common-sense view of science
Scientific knowledge is proven knowledge.
Scientific theories are derived in some rigorous way from the facts of experience acquired by observation and experiment.
Science is based on what we can see and hear and touch, etc.
Personal opinion or preferences and speculative imaginings have no place in science.
Science is objective.
Scientific knowledge is reliable knowledge because it is objectively proven knowledge.
I suggest that statements of the foregoing kind sum up what in modern times is a popular view of the kind of thing that scientific knowledge is.
This view first became popular during and as a consequence of the Scientific Revolution that took place mainly during the seventeenth century and that was brought about by such great pioneering scientists as Galileo and Newton.
The philosopher Francis Bacon and many of his contemporaries summed up the scientific attitude of the times when they insisted that if we want to understand nature we must consult nature and not the writings of Aristotle.
The progressive forces of the seventeenth century came to see as mistaken the preoccupation of mediaeval natural philosophers with the works of the ancients, especially Aristotle, and also with the Bible, as the sources of scientific knowledge.
Spurred on by the successes of ‘great experimenters’ like Galileo, they came more and more to regard experience as the source of knowledge.
This assessment has only been enhanced since then by the spectacular achievements of experimental science.
‘Science is a structure built upon facts’, writes J.J. Davies in his book On The Scientific Method .
And here is a modern assessment of Galileo's achievement, due to H.D. Anthony:
It was not so much the observations and experiments which Galileo made that caused the break with tradition as his attitude to them.
For him, the facts based on them were treated as facts, and not related to some preconceived idea….
The facts of observation might, or might not, fit into an acknowledged scheme of the universe, but the important thing, in Galileo's opinion, was to accept the facts and build the theory to fit them.
The naive inductivist account of science, which I will outline in the following sections, can be looked on as an attempt to formalize this popular picture of science.
I have called it inductivist because it is based on inductive reasoning, as will be explained shortly.
In later chapters, I will argue that this view of science, together with the popular account that it resembles, is quite mistaken and even dangerously misleading.
I hope that by then it will be apparent why the adjective ‘naive’ is appropriate for the description of many inductivists.
Naive inductivism
According to the naive inductivist, science starts with observation.
The scientific observer should have normal, unimpaired sense organs and should faithfully record what he can see, hear, etc. to be the case with respect to the situation he is observing, and he should do this with an unprejudiced mind.
Statements about the state of the world, or some part of it, can be justified or established as true in a direct way by an unprejudiced observer's use of his senses.
The statements so arrived at (I will call them observation statements) then form the basis from which the laws and theories that make up scientific knowledge are to be derived.
Here are some examples of some not very exciting observation statements.
At twelve midnight on 1 January 1975, Mars appeared at such and such a position in the sky.
That stick, partially immersed in water, appears bent.
Mr Smith struck his wife.
The litmus paper turned red when immersed in the liquid.
The truth of such statements is to be established by careful observation.
Any observer can establish or check their truth by direct use of his or her senses.
Observers can see for themselves.
Statements of the kind cited above fall in the class of so-called  singular statements .
Singular statements, unlike a second class of statements that we will meet shortly, refer to a particular occurrence or state of affairs at a particular place at a particular time.
The first statement refers to a particular appearance of Mars at a particular place in the sky at a specified time, the second to a particular observation of a particular stick, and so on.
It is clear that all observation statements will be singular statements.
They result from an observer's use of his or her senses at a particular place and time.
Next, we look at some simple examples that might form part of scientific knowledge.
From astronomy : Planets move in ellipses around their sun.
From physics : When a ray of light passes from one medium to another, it changes direction in such a way that the sine of the angle of incidence divided by the sine of the angle of refraction is a constant characteristic of the pair of media.
From  psychology  : Animals in general have an inherent need for some kind of aggressive outlet.
From chemistry : Acids turn litmus red.
These are general statements that make claims about the properties or behaviour of some aspect of the universe.
Unlike singular statements, they refer to all events of a particular kind at all places and at all times.
All planets, wherever they are situated, always move in ellipses around their sun.
Whenever refraction takes place it always takes place according to the law of refraction stated above.
The laws and theories that make up scientific knowledge all make general assertions of that kind, and such statements are called universal statements .
The following question can now be posed.
If science is based on experience, then by what means is it possible to get from the singular statements that result from observation to the universal statements that make up scientific knowledge?
How can the very general, unrestricted claims that constitute our theories be justified on the basis of limited evidence comprised of a limited number of observation statements?
The inductivist answer is that, provided certain conditions are satisfied, it is legitimate to generalize from a finite list of singular observation statements to a universal law.
For instance, it may be legitimate to generalize from a finite list of observation statements  referring to litmus paper turning red on being immersed in acid to the universal law, ‘Acids turn litmus red’, or to generalize from a list of observations referring to heated metals to the law, ‘Metals expand when heated’.
The conditions that must be satisfied for such generalizations to be considered legitimate by the inductivist can be listed thus:
1
The number of observation statements forming the basis of a generalization must be large.
2
The observations must be repeated under a wide variety of conditions.
3
No accepted observation statement should conflict with the derived universal law.
Condition (1) is regarded as necessary because it is clearly not legitimate to conclude that all metals expand when heated on the basis of just one observation of a metal bar's expansion, say, any more than it is legitimate to conclude that all Australians are drunkards on the basis of one observation of an intoxicated Australian.
A large number of independent observations will be necessary before either generalization can be justified.
The inductivist insists that we should not jump to conclusions.
One way of increasing the number of observations in the examples mentioned would be to repeatedly heat a single bar of metal, or to continually observe a particular Australian getting drunk night after night, and perhaps morning after morning.
Clearly, a list of observation statements acquired in such a way would form a very unsatisfactory basis for the respective generalizations.
That is why condition (2) is necessary.
‘All metals expand when heated’ will only be a legitimate generalization if the observations of expansion on which it is based range over a wide variety of conditions.
Various kinds of metals should be heated, long iron bars, short iron bars, silver bars, copper bars, etc. should be heated at high pressure and low pressure, high temperatures and low temperatures, and so on.
If, on all such occasions, the heated samples of metal all expand, then and only then is it legitimate to generalize from the resulting list of observation statements to the general law.
Further, it is evident that if a particular sample of metal is observed not to expand when heated, then the universal generalization will not be justified.
Condition (3) is essential.
The kind of reasoning that we have discussed, which takes us from a finite list of singular statements to the justification of a  universal statement, which takes us from some to all, is called inductive reasoning and the process is called induction.
We might sum up the naive inductivist position by saying that, according to it, science is based on the principle of induction , which we can write:
If a large number of As have been observed under a wide variety of conditions, and if all those observed As without exception possessed the property B, then all As have the property B.
According to the naive inductivist, then, the body of scientific knowledge is built by induction from the secure basis provided by observation.
As the number of facts established by observation and experiment grows, and as the facts become more refined and esoteric due to improvements in our observational and experimental skills, so more and more laws and theories of ever more generality and scope are constructed by careful inductive reasoning.
The growth of science is continuous, ever onward and upward, as the fund of observational data is increased.
The analysis so far constitutes only a partial account of science.
For surely a major feature of science is its ability to explain and predict .
It is scientific knowledge that enables an astronomer to predict when the next eclipse of the sun will occur or a physicist to explain why the boiling-point of water is lower than normal at high altitudes.
Figure 1 depicts, in schematic form, a summary of the complete inductivist story of science.
The left-handed side of the figure refers to the derivation of scientific laws and theories from observation that we have already discussed.
It remains to discuss the right-hand side.
Before doing so, a little will be said of the character of logic and deductive reasoning.
Logic and deductive reasoning
Once a scientist has universal laws and theories at his disposal, it is possible for him to derive from them various consequences that serve as explanations and predictions.
For instance, given the fact that metals expand when heated, it is possible to derive the fact that continuous railway tracks not interrupted by small gaps will become distorted in the hot sun.
The kind of reasoning involved in derivations of this kind is called deductive reasoning.
Deduction is distinct from the induction discussed in the previous section.
A study of deductive reasoning constitutes the discipline of  logic.
No attempt will be made to give a detailed account and appraisal of logic here.
Rather, some of its important features relevant to our analysis of science will be illustrated by means of trivial examples.
Here is an example of a logical deduction.
Example 1 :
1
All books on philosophy are boring.
2
This book is a book on philosophy.
3
This book is boring.
In this argument,(1) and (2) are the premises and (3) is the conclusion.
It is self-evident, I take it, that if (1) and (2) are true, then (3) is bound to be true.
It is not possible for (3) to be false once it is given that(1) and (2) are true.
For (1) and (2) to be true and (3) to be false would involve a contradiction.
This is the key feature of a logically valid deduction.
If the premises of a logically valid deduction are true, then the conclusion must be true.
A slight modification of the above example will give us an instance of a deduction that is not valid.
Example 2 :
1
Many books on philosophy are boring.
2
This book is a book on philosophy.
3
This book is boring.
In this example,(3) does not follow of necessity from (1) and (2).
It is possible for (1) and (2) to be true and yet for (3) to be false.
Even if(1) and (2) are true, then this book may yet turn out to be one of the minority of books on philosophy that is not boring.
Asserting (1) and (2) as true and (3) as false does not involve a contradiction.
The argument is invalid.
The reader may by now be feeling bored.
Experiences of that kind certainly have a bearing on the truth of statements (1) and (3), in examples (I) and (2).
But a point that needs to be stressed here is that logic and deduction alone cannot establish the truth of factual statements of the kind figuring in our examples.
All that logic can offer in this connection is that if the premises are true then the conclusion must be true.
But whether the premises are true or not is not a question that can be settled by an appeal to logic.
An argument can be a perfectly logical deduction even if it involves a premise that is in fact false.
Here is an example.
Example 3 :
1
All cats have five legs.
2
Bugs Pussy is my cat.
3
Bugs Pussy has five legs.
This is a perfectly valid deduction.
It is the case that if (1) and (2) are true, then (3) must be true.
It so happens that in this example,(1) and (3) are false.
But this does not affect the status of the argument as a valid deduction.
Deductive logic alone, then, does not act as a source of true statements about the world.
Deduction is concerned with the derivation of statements from other given statements.
Prediction and explanation in the inductivist account
We are now in a position to understand in a simple way the functioning of laws and theories as predictive and explanatory devices in science.
Once again, I will start with a trivial example to illustrate the point.
Consider the following argument:
1
Fairly pure water freezes at about 0°C (if given sufficient time).
2
My car radiator contains fairly pure water.
3
If the temperature falls below 0°C, the water in my car radiator will freeze (if given sufficient time).
Here we have an example of a valid logical argument to deduce the prediction (3) from the scientific knowledge contained in premise (1).
If (1) and (2) are true,(3) must be true.
However, the truth of (1),(2) or (3) is not established by this or any other deduction.
For an inductivist, the source of truth is not logic but experience.
On that view,(1) will be ascertained by direct observation of freezing water.
Once (I) and (2) have been established by observation and induction then the prediction (3) can be deduced from them.
Less trivial examples will be more complicated, but the roles played by observation, induction and deduction remain essentially the same.
As a final example, I will consider the inductivist account of how physical science is able to explain the rainbow.
The simple premise (1) of the previous example is here replaced by a number of laws governing the behaviour of light, namely the laws of reflection and refraction of light and assertions about the dependence of the degree of refraction on colour.
These general principles are derived from experience by induction.
A large number of laboratory experiments are performed, reflecting rays of light from mirrors and water surfaces, measuring angles of incidence and refraction for rays of light passing from air to water, water to air, etc., under a wide variety of conditions, repeating the experiments with light of various colours, and so on, until the conditions that need to be met to legitimate the inductive generalization to the laws of optics are satisfied.
Premise (2) of the previous example will also be replaced by a more complex array of statements.
These will include assertions to the effect that the sun is situated at some specified position in the sky with respect to an observer on earth, and that raindrops are falling from a cloud situated in some specified region relative to the observer.
Sets of statements like these, which describe the details of the set-up under investigation, will be referred to as initial conditions .
Descriptions of experimental set-ups will be typical examples of initial conditions.
Given the laws of optics and the initial conditions, it is now possible to perform deductions yielding an explanation of the formation of a rainbow visible to the observer.
These deductions will no longer be as self-evident as in our previous examples and will involve mathematical as well as verbal arguments.
The argument  will run roughly as follows.
If we assume a raindrop to be roughly spherical, then the path of a ray of light through a raindrop will be roughly as depicted in Figure 2.
If a ray of white light is incident on a raindrop at a , then, if the law of refraction is true, the red ray will travel along ab , and the blue ray will travel along ab' .
Again, if the laws governing reflection are true, then ab , must be reflected along bc , and ab' along b'c' .
Refraction at c and c' will again be determined by the law of refraction, so that an observer viewing the raindrop will see the red and blue components of the white light separated (and also all the other colours of the spectrum).
The same separation of colours will also be made visible to our observer for any raindrop that is situated in a region of the sky such that the line joining the raindrop to the sun makes an angle D with the line joining the raindrop to the observer.
Geometrical considerations then yield the conclusion that a coloured arc will be visible to the observer provided the rain cloud is sufficiently extended.
I have only sketched the explanation of the rainbow here, but what is offered should suffice to illustrate the general form of the reasoning involving.
Given that the laws of optics are true (and for the naive inductivist, this can be established from observation by induction), and given that the initial conditions are accurately described, then the explanation of the rainbow necessarily follows.
The general form of all scientific explanations and predictions can be summarized thus:
1
Laws and theories
2
Initial conditions
3
Predictions and explanations
This is the step depicted on the right-hand side of Figure 1.
The following description of the scientific method by a twentieth-century economist conforms closely to the naive inductivist account of science as I have described it, and indicates that it is not a position that I have invented solely for the purpose of criticizing it.
If we try to imagine how a mind of superhuman power and reach, but normal so far as the logical processes of its thought are concerned,…would use the scientific method, the process would be as follows: First, all facts would be observed and recorded,without selection or a priori guess as to their relative importance.
Secondly, the observed and recorded facts would be analysed, compared, and classified, without hypothesis or postulates , other than those necessarily involved in the logic of thought.
Third, from this analysis of the facts, generalizations would be inductively drawn as to the relations, classificatory or casual, between them.
Fourth, further research would be deductive as well as inductive, employing inferences from previously established generalizations.
The appeal of naive inductivism
The naive inductivist account of science does have some apparent merits.
Its attraction would seem to lie in the fact that it gives a formalized account of some of the popularly held impressions concerning the character of science, its explanatory and predictive power, its objectivity and its superior reliability compared with other forms of knowledge.
We have already seen how the naive inductivist accounts for the explanatory and predictive power of science.
The objectivity of inductivist science derives from the fact that both observation and inductive reasoning are themselves objective.
Observation statements can be ascertained by any observer by normal use of the senses.
No personal, subjective elements should be permitted to intrude.
The validity of the observation statements when correctly acquired will not depend on the taste, opinion, hopes or expectations of the observer.
The same goes for the inductive reasoning by means of which scientific knowledge is derived from the observation statements.
Either the inductions satisfy the  prescribed conditions or they do not.
It is not a subjective matter of opinion.
The reliability of science follows from the inductivist's claims about observation and induction.
The observation statements that form the basis of science are secure and reliable because their truth can be ascertained by direct use of the senses.
Further, the reliability of observation statements will be transmitted to the laws and theories derived from them, provided the conditions for legitimate inductions are satisfied.
This is guaranteed by the principle of induction that forms the basis of science according to the naive inductivist.
I have already mentioned that I regard the naive inductivist account of science to be very wrong and dangerously misleading.
In the next two chapters, I will begin to say why.
However, I should perhaps make it clear that the position I have outlined is a very extreme form of inductivism.
Many more sophisticated inductivists would not wish to be associated with some of the characteristics of my naive inductivism.
Nevertheless, all inductivists would claim that in so far as scientific theories can be justified, they are justified by supporting them inductively on the basis of some more-or-less secure basis provided by experience.
Subsequent chapters of this book will provide us with plenty of reasons for doubting that claim.
The Problem of Induction
Can the principle of induction be justified?
According to the naive inductivist, science starts with observation, observation supplies a secure basis upon which scientific knowledge can be built, and scientific knowledge is derived from observation statements by induction.
In this chapter, the inductivist account of science will be criticized by casting doubt on the third of these assumptions.
Doubt will be cast on the validity and justifiability of the principle of induction.
Afterwards, in Chapter 3, the first two assumptions will be challenged and refuted.
My rendering of the principle of induction reads: ‘If a large number of A s have been observed under a wide variety of conditions, and if all those observed A s without exception have possessed the property B , then all A s possess the property B ’.
This principle, or something very much like it, is the basic principle on which science is founded, if the naive inductivist position is accepted.
In the light of this, an obvious question with which to confront the inductivist is, ‘How can the principle of induction be justified?’
That is, if observation provides us with a secure set of observation statements as our starting-point (an assumption that we have granted for the sake of the argument of this chapter), why is it that inductive reasoning leads to reliable and perhaps even true scientific knowledge?
There are two lines of approach open to the inductivist in attempting to answer this question.
He might try to justify the principle by appealing to logic, a recourse that we freely grant him, or he might attempt to justify the principle by appealing to experience, a recourse that lies at the basis of his whole approach to science.
Let us examine these two lines of approach in turn.
Valid logical arguments are characterized by the fact that, if the  premise of the argument is true, then the conclusion must be true.
Deductive arguments possess that character.
The principle of induction would certainly be justified if inductive arguments also possessed it.
But they do not.
Inductive arguments are not logically valid arguments.
It is not the case that, if the premises of an inductive inference are true, then the conclusion must be true.
It is possible for the conclusion of an inductive argument to be false and for the premises to be true and yet for no contradiction to be involved.
Suppose, for example, that up until today I have observed a large number of ravens under a wide variety of circumstances and have observed all of them to have been black and that, on that basis, I conclude, ‘All ravens are black’.
This is a perfectly legitimate inductive inference.
The premises of the inference are a large number of statements of the kind, ‘Raven x was observed to be black at time t ’, and all these we take to be true.
But there is no logical guarantee that the next raven I observe will not be pink.
If this proved to be the case, then ‘All ravens are black’ would be false.
That is, the initial inductive inference, which was legitimate insofar as it satisfied the criteria specified by the principle of induction, would have led to a false conclusion, in spite of the fact that all premises of the inference were true.
No logical contradiction is involved in claiming that all observed ravens have proved to be black and also that not all ravens are black.
Induction cannot be justified purely on logical grounds.
A more interesting if rather gruesome example of the point is an elaboration of Bertrand Russell's story of the inductivist turkey.
This turkey found that, on his first morning at the turkey farm, he was fed at 9 a.m.
However, being a good inductivist, he did not jump to conclusions.
He waited until he had collected a large number of observations of the fact that he was fed at 9 a.m., and he made these observations under a wide variety of circumstances, on Wednesdays and Thursdays, on warm days and cold days, on rainy days and dry days.
Each day, he added another observation statement to his list.
Finally, his inductivist conscience was satisfied and he carried out an inductive inference to conclude, ‘I am always fed at 9 a.m.’.
Alas, this conclusion was shown to be false in no uncertain manner when, on Christmas eve, instead of being fed, he had his throat cut.
An inductive inference with true premises has led to a false conclusion.
The principle of induction cannot be justified merely by an appeal to logic.
Given this result, it would seem that the inductivist, according to his own standpoint, is now obliged to indicate how the  principle of induction can be derived from experience.
What would such a derivation be like?
Presumably, it would go something like this.
Induction has been observed to work on a large number of occasions.
For example, the laws of optics, derived by induction from the results of laboratory experiments, have been used on numerous occasions in the design of optical instruments and these instruments have functioned satisfactorily.
Again, the laws of planetary motion, derived from observations of planetary positions etc., have been successfully employed to predict the occurrence of eclipses.
This list could be greatly extended with accounts of successful predictions and explanations made possible by inductively derived scientific laws and theories.
In this way, the principle of induction is justified.
The foregoing justification of induction is quite unacceptable, as David Hume conclusively demonstrated as long ago as the mid-eighteenth century.
The argument purporting to justify induction is circular because it employs the very kind of inductive argument the validity of which is supposed to be in need of justification.
The form of the justificatory argument is as follows:
The principle of induction worked successfully on occasion x 1  ,.
The principle of induction worked successfully on occasion x 2  etc.
The principle of induction always works.
A universal statement asserting the validity of the principle of induction is here inferred from a number of singular statements recording past successful applications of the principle.
The argument is therefore an inductive one and so cannot be used to justify the principle of induction.
We cannot use induction to justify induction.
This difficulty associated with the justification of induction has traditionally been called ‘the problem of induction’.
It would seem, then, that the unrepentant naive inductivist is in trouble.
The extreme demand that all knowledge should be derived from experience by induction rules out the principle of induction basic to the inductivist position.
 In addition to the circularity involved in attempts to justify the principle of induction, the principle as I have stated it suffers from other shortcomings.
These shortcomings stem from the vagueness and dubiousness of the demand that a ‘large number’ of observations be made under a ‘wide variety’of circumstances.
How many observations make up a large number?
Should a metal bar be heated ten times, a hundred times, or how many times before we can conclude that it always expands when heated?
Whatever the answer to such a question, examples can be produced that cast doubt on the invariable necessity for a large number of observations.
To illustrate this, I refer to the strong public reaction against nuclear warfare that followed the dropping of the first atomic bomb on Hiroshima towards the end of the second world war.
This reaction was based on the understanding that atomic bombs cause widespread death and destruction and extreme human suffering.
And yet this generally held belief was based on just one dramatic observation.
Again, it would take a very stubborn inductivist to put his hand in a fire many times before concluding that fire burns.
In circumstances like these, the demand for a large number of observations seem inappropriate.
In other situations, the demand seems more plausible.
For instance, we would be justifiably reluctant to ascribe supernatural powers to a fortune-teller on the basis of just one correct prediction.
Nor would it be justifiable to conclude some causal connection between smoking and lung cancer on the evidence of just one heavy smoker contracting the disease.
It is clear, I think, from these examples that if the principle of induction is to be a guide to what counts as a legitimate scientific inference, then the ‘large number’ clause will need to be qualified in some detail.
The naive inductivist position is further threatened when the demand that observations be made under a wide variety of circumstances is scrutinized.
What is to count as a significant variation in the circumstances?
When investigating the boiling-point of water, for instance, is it necessary to vary the pressure, the purity of the water, the method of heating and the time of day?
The answer to the first two suggestions is ‘Yes’ and to the second two it is ‘No’.
But what are the grounds for these answers?
This question is important because the list of variations can be extended indefinitely by adding a variety of further variations such as the colour of the container, the identity of the experimenter, the geographical location, and so on.
Unless such ‘superfluous’ variations can be eliminated, the number of observations necessary to render an inductive inference legitimate will be infinitely large.
What, then, are the grounds on which a large number of variations are' deemed superfluous?
I suggest the answer is clear enough.
The variations that are significant are distinguished from those that are superfluous by appealing to our theoretical knowledge of the situation and of the kinds of physical mechanisms operative.
But, to admit this is to admit that theory plays a vital role prior to observation.
The naive inductivist cannot afford to make such an admission.
However, to pursue this would lead on to criticisms of inductivism that I have reserved for the next chapter.
Here I merely note that the ‘wide variety of circumstances’ clause in the principle of induction poses serious problems for the inductivist.
The retreat to probability
There is a fairly obvious way in which the extreme naive inductivist position criticized in the previous section can be weakened in an attempt to counter some of the criticism.
An argument in defence of a weaker position might run somewhat as follows.
We cannot be one hundred per cent sure that, just because we have observed the sun to set each day on many occasions, the sun will set every day.
(Indeed, in the Arctic and Antarctic, there are days when the sun does not set.)
We cannot be one hundred per cent sure that the next dropped stone will not ‘fall’ upwards.
Nevertheless, although generalizations arrived at by legitimate inductions cannot be guaranteed to be perfectly true, they are probably true.
In the light of the evidence, it is very probable that the sun will always set in Sydney, and that stones will fall downwards when they a, re dropped.
Scientific knowledge is not proven knowledge, but it does represent knowledge that is probably true.
The greater the number of observations forming the basis of an induction and the greater variety of conditions under which these observations are made, the greater the probability that the resulting generalizations are true.
If this modified version of induction is adopted, then the principle of induction will be replaced by a probabilistic version that will read something like, ‘If a large number of A s have been observed under a wide variety of conditions, and if all these observed A s without exception have possessed the property B , then all A s probably possess the property B ’.
This reformulation does not overcome the problem of induction.
The reformulated principle is still a universal statement.
It implies, on the basis of a finite number of successes, that all applications of the principle will lead to general conclusions that are probably true.
Attempts to justify the probabilistic version of the principle of induction by appeal to experience must suffer from the same deficiency as attempts to justify the principle in its original form.
The justification will employ an argument of the very kind that is seen as in need of justification.
Even if the principle of induction in its probabilistic version could be justified, there are further problems facing our more cautious inductivist.
The further problems are associated with difficulties that are encountered when trying to be precise about just how probable a law or theory is in the light of specified evidence.
It may seem intuitively plausible that as the observational support that a universal law receives increases, the probability that it is true also increases.
But this intuition does not stand up to inspection.
Given standard probability theory, it is very difficult to construct an account of induction that avoids the consequence that the probability of any universal statement making claims about the world is zero, whatever the observational evidence.
To make the point in a non-technical way, any observational evidence will consist of a finite number of observation statements, whereas a universal statement makes claims about an infinite number of possible situations.
The probability of the universal generalization being true is thus a finite number divided by an infinite number, which remains zero however much the finite number of observation statements constituting the evidence is increased.
This problem, associated with attempts to ascribe probabilities to scientific laws and theories in the light of given evidence, has given rise to a detailed technical research programme that has been  tenaciously pursued and developed by inductivists over the last few decades.
Artificial languages have been constructed for which it is possible to ascribe unique, non-zero probabilities to generalizations, but the languages are so restricted that they contain no universal generalizations.
They are far removed from the language of science.
Another attempt to save the inductivist programme involves giving up the idea of ascribing probabilities to scientific laws and theories.
Instead, attention is directed towards the probability of individual predictions being correct.
According to this approach, the object of science is, for instance, to gauge the probability of the sun rising tomorrow rather than the probability that it will always rise.
Science is expected to be able to provide a guarantee that a bridge of some design will withstand various stresses and not collapse, but not that all bridges of that design will be satisfactory.
Some systems have been developed along such lines that enable non-zero probabilities to be ascribed to individual predictions.
Two criticisms of them will be mentioned here.
Firstly, the notion that science is concerned with the production of a set of individual predictions rather than with the production of knowledge in the  form of a complex of general statements is, to say the least, counter-intuitive.
Secondly, even when attention is restricted to individual predictions, it can be argued that scientific theories, and hence universal statements, are inevitably involved in the estimation of the likelihood of a prediction being successful.
For instance, in some intuitive, non-technical sense of ‘probable’, we may be prepared to assert that it is to some degree probable that a very heavy smoker will die of lung cancer.
The evidence supporting the assertion would presumably be the available statistical data.
But this intuitive probability will be significantly increased if there is a plausible and well-supported theory available that entails some causal connection between smoking and lung cancer.
Similarly, estimates of the probability that the sun will rise tomorrow will be increased once the knowledge of the laws governing the behaviour of the solar system are taken into account.
But this dependence of the probability of the correctness of predictions on universal laws and theories undermines the attempt of the inductivists to ascribe non-zero probabilities to individual predictions.
Once universal statements are involved in a significant way, the probabilities of the correctness of individual predictions again threaten to be zero.
Possible responses to the problem of induction
Faced with the problem of induction and related problems, inductivists have run into one difficulty after another in their attempts to construe science as a set of statements that can be established as true or probably true in the light of given evidence.
Each manoeuvre in their rearguard action has taken them further away from intuitive notions about that exciting enterprise referred to as science.
Their technical programme has led to interesting advances within probability theory, but it has not yielded new insights into the nature of science.
Their programme has degenerated.
There are a number of possible responses to the problem of induction.
One of them is a sceptical one.
We can accept that science is based on induction and Hume's demonstration that induction cannot be justified by appeal to logic or experience, and conclude that science cannot be rationally justified.
Hume himself adopted a position of that kind.
He held that beliefs in laws and theories are nothing more than psychological habits that we acquire as a result of repetitions of the relevant observations.
A second response is to weaken the inductivist demand that all  non-logical knowledge must be derived from experience and to argue for the reasonableness of the principle of induction on some other grounds.
However, to regard the principle of induction, or something like it as ‘obvious’ is not acceptable.
What we regard as obvious is much too dependent on and relative to our education, our prejudices and our culture to be a reliable guide to what is reasonable.
To many cultures, at various stages in history, it was obvious that the earth was flat.
Before the scientific revolution of Galileo and Newton, it was obvious that if an object was to move, then it required a force or cause of some kind to make it move.
This may be obvious to some readers of this book lacking a physics education, and yet it is false.
If the principle of induction is to be defended as reasonable, then some more sophisticated argument than an appeal to its obviousness must be offered.
A third response to the problem of induction involves the denial that science is based on induction.
The problem of induction will be avoided if it can be established that science does not involve induction.
The falsificationists, most notably Karl Popper, attempt to do this.
We will discuss those attempts in some detail in Chapters 4, 5 and 6.
In this chapter, I have sounded much too much like a philosopher.
In the next chapter, I move on to a more interesting, more telling and more fruitful critique of inductivism.
The Theory-Dependence of Observation
We have seen that, according to our naive inductivist, careful and unprejudiced observation yields a secure basis from which probably true, if not true, scientific knowledge can be derived.
In the last chapter, this position was criticized by pointing to difficulties involved in any attempt to justify the inductive reasoning involved in the derivation of scientific laws and theories from observation.
Some examples suggested that there are positive grounds for suspecting the alleged reliability of inductive reasoning.
Nevertheless, these arguments do not constitute a definitive refutation of inductivism, especially as it turns out that many rival theories of science face a similar, related difficulty.
In this chapter, a more serious objection to the inductivist's position is developed that involves a criticism, not of the inductions by which scientific knowledge is supposed to be derived from observation, but of the inductivist's assumptions concerning the status and role of observation itself.
There are two important assumptions involved in the naive inductivist position with respect to observation.
One is that science starts with observation .
The other is that observation yields a secure basis from which knowledge can be derived.
In the present chapter, both of these assumptions will be criticized in a variety of ways and rejected for a variety of reasons.
But first of all, I will sketch an account of observation that I think it is fair to say is a commonly held one in modern times, and which lends plausibility to the naive inductivist position.
A popular account of observation
Partly because the sense of sight is the sense most extensively used in the practice of science, and partly for convenience, I will restrict my discussion of observation to the realm of seeing.
In most cases, it will not be difficult to see how the argument presented could be re-cast so as to be applicable to observation via the other senses.
A simple, popular account of seeing might run as follows.
Humans see by using their eyes.
The most important components of the human eye are a lens and a retina, the latter acting like a screen on which images of objects external to the eye are formed.
Rays of light from a viewed object pass from the object to the lens via the intervening medium.
These rays are refracted by the material of the lens in such a way that they are brought to a focus on the retina, so forming an image of the viewed object.
Thus far, the functioning of the eye is very much like that of a camera.
A big difference lies in the way the final image is recorded.
Optic nerves pass from the retina to the central cortex of the brain.
These carry information concerning the light falling on the various regions of the retina.
It is the recording of this information by the human brain that corresponds to the seeing of the object by the human observer.
Of course, many details could be added to this simple description, but the account offered does capture the general idea.
Two points are strongly suggested by the foregoing sketch of observation via the sense of sight, points that are key ones for the inductivist.
The first is that a human observer has more or less direct access to some properties of the external world insofar as those properties are recorded by the brain in the act of seeing.
The second is that two normal observers viewing the same object or scene from the same place will ‘see’ the same thing.
An identical combination of light rays will strike the eye of each observer, will be focused on their normal retinas by their normal eye lenses and give rise to similar images.
Similar information will then travel to the brain of each observer via their normal optic nerves, resulting in the two observers ‘seeing’ the same thing.
These two points will be attacked fairly directly in the next section.
Later sections will cast further and more consequential doubt on the adequacy of the inductivist stance on observation.
Visual experiences not determined by the images on the retina
There is a vast fund of evidence to indicate that it is just not the case that the experience that observers undergo when viewing an object is determined solely by the information, in the form of light rays, entering the observer's eyes, nor is it determined solely by the images on the retinas of an observer.
Two normal observers viewing the same object from the same place under the same physical circumstances do not necessarily have identical visual experiences, even though the images on their respective retinas may be virtually identical.
There is an important sense in which the two observers need not ‘see’ the same thing.
As N.R. Hanson has put it, ‘There is more to seeing than meets the eyeball’.
Some simple examples will illustrate the point.
Most of us, when first looking at Figure 3, see the drawing of a staircase with the upper surface of the stairs visible.
But this is not the only way it can be seen.
It can without difficulty also be seen as a staircase with the under surface of the stairs visible.
Further, if one looks at the picture for some time, one generally finds, involuntarily, that what one sees changes frequently from a  staircase viewed from above to a  staircase viewed from below and back again.
And yet it seems reasonable to suppose that, since it remains the same object viewed by the observer, the retinal images do not  change.
Whether the picture is seen as a staircase viewed from above or a staircase viewed from below seems to depend on something other than the image on the retina of the viewer.
I suspect that no reader of this book has questioned my claim that Figure 3 looks like a staircase of some kind.
However, the results of experiments on members of a number of African tribes whose culture does not include the custom of depicting three-dimensional objects by two-dimensional perspective drawings indicate that the members of those tribes would not have seen Figure 3 as a staircase but as a two-dimensional array of lines.
I presume that the nature of the images formed on the retinas of observers is relatively independent of their culture.
Again, it seems to follow that the perceptual experiences that observers have in the act of seeing is not uniquely determined by the images on their retinas.
This point has been made and illustrated with a number of examples by Hanson.
What an observer sees, that is, the visual experience that an observer has when viewing an object, depends in part on his past experience, his knowledge and his expectations.
Here are two simple examples to illustrate this particular point.
In a well-known experiment, subjects were shown playing-cards for a small duration of time and asked to identify them.
When a normal pack of cards was employed, subjects were able to accomplish this task very successfully.
But when anomalous cards were introduced, such as a red Ace of Spades, then, at first, nearly all subjects initially identified such cards incorrectly as some normal card.
They saw a red Ace of Spades as a normal Ace of Diamonds or a normal Ace of Spades.
The subjective impressions experienced by the observers were influenced by their expectations.
When, after a period of confusion, subjects began to realize, or were told, that there were anomalous cards among the pack; they then had no trouble correctly identifying all the cards shown to them, anomalous or otherwise.
The change in their knowledge and expectations was accompanied by a change in what they saw, although they were still viewing the same physical objects.
Another example is provided by a children's picture puzzle that involves finding the drawing of a human face amongst the foliage in the drawing of a tree.
Here, what is seen, that is, the subjective impression experienced by a person viewing the drawing, at first corresponds to a tree, with trunk, leaves, branches.
But this changes once the human face has been detected.
What was once seen as foliage and parts of branches is now seen as a human face.
Again, the same physical object has been viewed before and after  the solution of the puzzle, and presumably the image on the observer's retina does not change at the moment the solution is found and the face discovered.
And if the picture is viewed at some later time, the face can be easily seen again by an observer who has already solved the puzzle once.
In this example, what an observer sees is affected by his knowledge and experience.
‘What’, it might be suggested, ‘have these contrived examples got to do with science?’
In response, it is not difficult to produce examples from the practice of science that illustrate the same point, namely, that what observers see, the subjective experiences that they undergo, when viewing an object or scene is not determined solely by the images on their retinas but depends also on the experience, knowledge, expectations and general inner state of the observer.
It is necessary to learn how to see expertly through a telescope or microscope, and the unstructured array of bright and dark patches that the beginner observes is different from the detailed specimen or scene that the skilled viewer can discern.
Something of the kind must have been operative when Galileo first introduced the telescope as an instrument for exploring the heavens.
The reservations that Galileo's rivals held about accepting phenomena such as the moons of Jupiter that Galileo had learnt to see must have been in part due, not to prejudice, but to genuine difficulties encountered when learning to ‘see’ through what were, after all, very crude telescopes.
In the following passage, Michael Polanyi describes the changes in a medical student's perceptual experience when he is taught to make a diagnosis by inspecting an X-ray picture.
Think of a medical student attending a course in the X-ray diagnosis of pulmonary diseases.
He watches, in a darkened room, shadowy traces on a fluorescent screen placed against a patient's chest, and hears the radiologist commenting to his assistants, in technical language, on the significant features of these shadows.
At first, the student is completely puzzled.
For he can see in the X-ray picture of a chest only the shadows of the heart and ribs, with a few spidery blotches between them.
The experts seem to be romancing about figments of their imagination; he can see nothing that they are talking about.
Then, as he goes on listening for a few weeks, looking carefully at ever-new pictures of different cases, a tentative understanding will dawn on him; he will gradually forget about the ribs and begin to see the lungs.
And eventually, if he perseveres intelligently, a rich panorama of significant details will be revealed to him: of physiological variations and pathological changes, of scars, of chronic infections and signs of acute disease.
He has entered a new world.
He still sees only a fraction of what the experts can see, but the  pictures are definitely making sense now and so do most of the comments made on them.
A common response to the claim that I am making about observation, supported by the kinds of examples I have utilized, is that observers viewing the same scene from the same place see the same thing but interpret what they see differently.
I wish to dispute this.
As far as perception is concerned, the only thing with which an observer has direct and immediate contact are his or her experiences.
These experiences are not uniquely given and unchanging but vary with the expectations and knowledge of the observer.
What is uniquely given by the physical situation is the image on the retina of an observer, but an observer does not have direct perceptual contact with that image.
When the naive inductivist, and many other empiricists, assume that there is something unique given to us in experience that can be interpreted in various ways, they are assuming, without argument and in spite of much evidence to the contrary, some one-to-one correspondence between the images on our retinas and the subjective experiences that we have when seeing.
They are taking the camera analogy too far.
Having said this, let me try to make clear what I do not mean to be claiming in this section, lest I be taken to be arguing for more than I intend to be.
Firstly, I am certainly not claiming that the physical causes of the images on our retinas have nothing to do with what we see.
We cannot see just what we like.
However, while the images on our retinas form part of the cause of what we see, another very important part of the cause is constituted by the inner state of our minds or brains, which will clearly depend on our cultural upbringing, our knowledge, our expectations, etc. and will not be determined solely by the physical properties of our eyes and the scene observed.
Secondly, under a wide variety of circumstances, what we see in various situations remains fairly stable.
The dependence of what we see on the state of our minds or brains is not so sensitive as to make communication, and science, impossible.
Thirdly, in all the examples quoted here, there is a sense in which all observers see the same thing.
I accept, and presuppose throughout this book, that a single, unique, physical world exists independently of observers.
Hence, when a number of observers look at a picture, a piece of apparatus, a microscope slide, or whatever, there is a sense in which they are all confronted by, look at, and so, in a sense, ‘see’ the same thing.
But it does not follow from this that they have identical perceptual experiences.
There is a very important sense in which they do not see the same thing, and it  is this latter sense upon which my criticism of the inductivist position has been based.
Observation statements presuppose theory
Even if there were some unique experience given to all observers in perception, there still remain some major objections to the inductivist assumption concerning observations.
In this section, we focus attention on the observation statements based on and allegedly justified by the perceptual experiences of the observers who assert the statements.
According to the inductivist account of science, the secure basis on which the laws and theories that constitute science are built is made up of public observation statements rather than the private, subjective experiences of individual observers.
Clearly, the observations made by Darwin during his voyage on the Beagle , for example, would have been inconsequential for science had they remained Darwin's private experiences.
They became relevant for science only when they were formulated and communicated as observation statements capable of being utilized and criticized by other scientists.
The inductivist account requires the derivation of universal statements from singular statements by induction.
Inductive as well as deductive reasoning involves the relationships between various sets of statements and not relationships between statements on the one hand and perceptual experiences on the other.
We might assume that perceptual experiences of some kind are directly accessible to an observer, but observation statements certainly are not.
The latter are public entities, formulated in a public language, involving theories of various degrees of generality and sophistication.
Once attention is focused on observation statements as forming the alleged secure basis for science, it can be seen that, contrary to the inductivists' claim, theory of some kind must precede all observation statements and observation statements are as fallible as the theories they presuppose.
Observation statements must be made in the language of some theory, however vague.
Consider the simple sentence in commonsense language, ‘Look out, the wind is blowing the baby's pram over the cliff edge!’
Much low-level theory is presupposed here.
It is implied that there is such a thing as wind, which has the property of being able to cause the motion of objects such as prams, which stand in its path.
The sense of urgency conveyed by  the ‘Look out’ indicates the expectation that the pram, complete with baby, will fall over the cliff and perhaps be dashed on the rocks beneath and it is further assumed that this will be-deleterious for the baby.
Again, when an early riser in urgent need of coffee complains, ‘The gas won't light’, it is assumed that there are substances in the world that can be grouped under the concept ‘gas’, and that some of them, at least, ignite.
It is also to the point to note that the concept ‘gas’ has not always been available.
It did not exist until the mid-eighteenth century, when Joseph Black first prepared carbon dioxide.
Before that, all ‘gases’ were considered to be more or less pure samples of air.
When we move towards statements of the kind  occurring in science, the theoretical presuppositions become less commonplace and more obvious.
That there is considerable theory presupposed by the assertion, ‘The electron beam was repelled by the North Pole of the magnet’, or by a psychiatrist's talk of the withdrawal symptoms of a patient, should not need much arguing.
Observation statements, then, are always made in the language of some theory and will be as precise as the theoretical or conceptual framework that they utilize is precise.
The concept ‘force’ as used in physics is precise because it acquires its meaning from the role it plays in a precise, relatively autonomous theory, Newtonian mechanics.
The use of the same word in everyday language (the force of circumstance, gale-force-winds, the force of an argument, etc.) is imprecise just because the corresponding theories are multifarious and imprecise.
Precise, clearly formulated theories are a prerequisite for precise observation statements.
In this sense theories precede observation.
The foregoing claims about the priority of theory over observation run counter to an inductivist thesis that the meanings of many basic concepts are acquired through observation.
Let us consider the simple concept ‘red’ as an example.
An inductivist account might run roughly as follows.
From all the perceptual experiences of an observer arising from the sense of sight, a certain set of them (those corresponding to the perceptual experiences arising from sightings of red objects) will have something in common.
The observer, by inspection of the set, is somehow able to discern the common element in these perceptions, and come to understand this common element as redness.
In this way, the concept ‘red’ is arrived at through observation.
This account contains a serious flaw.
It assumes that from all the infinity of perceptual experiences undergone by an observer, the set of perceptual experiences arising  from the viewing of red things is somehow available for inspection.
But that set does not select itself.
What is the criterion according to which some perceptual experiences are included in the set and others are excluded?
The criterion, of course, is that only perceptions of red objects are included in the set.
The account presupposes the very concept, redness, the acquisition of which it is meant to explain.
It is not an adequate defence of the inductivist position to point out that parents and teachers select a set of red objects when teaching children to understand the concept ‘red’, for we are interested in how the concept first acquired its meaning.
The claim that the concept ‘red’ or any other concept is derived from experience and from nothing else is false.
So far in this section the naive inductivist account of science has been undermined largely by arguing that theories must precede observation statements, so that it is false to claim that science starts with observation.
We now come to a second way in which inductivism is undermined.
Observation statements are as fallible as the theories they presuppose and therefore do not constitute a completely secure basis on which to build scientific laws and theories.
I will first illustrate the point with some simple, somewhat contrived examples, and then proceed to indicate the relevance of the point for science by citing some examples from science and its history.
Consider the statement, ‘Here is a piece of chalk’, uttered by a teacher as he indicates a cylindrical white stick held in front of the blackboard.
Even this most basic of observation statements involves theory, and is fallible.
Some very low-level generalization, such as‘White sticks found in classrooms near blackboards are pieces of chalk’, is assumed.
And, of course, this generalization need not be true.
The teacher in our example may be wrong.
The white cylinder in question may not be a piece of chalk but a carefully contrived fake placed there by a scheming pupil in search of amusement.
The teacher, or anyone else present, could take steps to test the truth of the statement, ‘Here is a piece of chalk’, but it is significant that the more stringent the test the more theory is called upon, and further, absolute certainty is never attained.
For instance, on being challenged, the teacher might draw the white cylinder across the board, point to the resulting white trace and declare, ‘There you are, it is a piece of chalk’.
This involves the assumption, ‘Chalk leaves white traces when drawn across a blackboard’.
The teacher's demonstration might be countered by the retort that other things besides chalk leave white traces on a  blackboard.
Perhaps, after other moves by the teacher, such as crumbling the chalk, being countered in a similar way, the determined teacher might resort to chemical analysis.
Chemically, chalk is largely calcium carbonate, he argues, and so should yield carbon dioxide if immersed in an acid.
He performs the test and demonstrates that the evolving gas is carbon dioxide by showing that it turns lime water milky.
Each stage in this series of attempts to consolidate the validity of the observation statement, ‘Here is a piece of chalk’, involves an appeal not only to further observation statements but also to more theoretical generalizations.
The test that formed the stopping-point in our series involved a certain amount of chemical theory (the effect of acids on carbonates, the peculiar effect of carbon dioxide on lime water).
In order to establish the validity of an observation statement, then, it is necessary to appeal to theory, and the more firmly the validity is to be established, the more extensive will be the theoretical knowledge employed.
This is in direct contrast to what we might expect to follow according to the inductivist view, namely, that in order to establish the truth of some problematic observation statement we appeal to more secure observation statements, and perhaps laws derived inductively from them, but not to theory.
In everyday language, it is often the case that an apparently unproblematic ‘observation statement’ is found to be false when an expectation is disappointed, due to the falsity of some theory presupposed in the assertion of the observation statement.
For instance, some picnickers at the top of a high mountain, directing their glance towards the camp-fire, may observe, ‘The water is hot enough to make the tea’, and then find they were sadly wrong when tasting the resulting brew.
The theory that had wrongly been supposed is that boiling water is hot enough to make tea.
This need not be the case for water boiling under the low pressures experienced at high altitudes.
Here are some less-contrived examples more helpful for our attempt to understand the nature of science.
At the time of Copernicus (before the invention of the telescope), careful observations were made of the size of Venus.
The statement, ‘Venus, as viewed from earth, does not change size appreciably during the course of the year’, was generally accepted by all astronomers, both Copernicans and non-Copernicans, on the basis of those observations.
Andreas Osiander, a contemporary of Copernicus, referred to the prediction that Venus should appear to change size during the year as ‘a result contradicted by the  experience of every age’.
The observation was accepted in spite of its inconvenience, since the Copernican theory as well as some of its rivals predicted that Venus should appear to change size appreciably during the course of the year.
Yet the statement is now considered to be false.
It presupposes the false theory that the size of small light sources is accurately gauged by the naked eye.
Modern theory can offer some explanation of why naked-eye estimates of the size of small light sources will be misleading and why telescopic observations, which show the apparent size of Venus to vary considerably during the course of the year, are to be preferred.
This example clearly illustrates the theory dependence and hence fallibility of observation statements.
A second example concerns electrostatics.
Early experimenters in that field reported observations of electrified rods becoming sticky, as evidenced by small pieces of paper sticking to them, and of the rebounding of one electrified body from another.
From a modern point of view, those observation reports were mistaken.
The false conceptions that facilitated those observations would now be replaced by the notions of attractive and repulsive forces acting at a distance, leading to quite different observation reports.
Finally, in lighter vein, modern scientists would have no difficulty in exposing the falsity of an entry in honest Kepler's notebook, following observations through a Galilean, telescope, which reads, ‘Mars is square and intensely coloured’.
In this section, I have argued that the inductivist is wrong on two counts.
Science does not start with observation statements because theory of some kind precedes all observation statements, and observation statements do not constitute a firm basis on which scientific knowledge can be founded because they are fallible.
However, I do not wish to claim that it follows from this that observation statements should play no role in science.
I am not urging that all observation statements should be discarded because they are fallible.
I am merely arguing that the role in science attributed to observation statements by the inductivist is incorrect.
Observation and experiment are guided by theory
According to the most naive of inductivists, the basis of scientific knowledge is provided by observations made by an unprejudiced and unbiased observer.
If interpreted anything like literally, this position is absurd and untenable.
To illustrate this, let us imagine  Heinrich Hertz, in 1888, performing the electrical experiment that enabled him to produce and detect radio waves for the first time.
If he is to be totally unbiased when making his observations, then he will be obliged to record not only the readings on various meters, the presence or absence of sparks at various critical locations in the electrical circuits, the dimensions of the circuit etc. but also the colour of the meters, the dimensions of the laboratory, the state of the weather, the size of his shoes and a whole host of ‘clearly irrelevant’ details, irrelevant, that is, to the kind of theory in which Hertz was interested and which he was testing.
(In this particular case Hertz was testing Maxwell's electromagnetic theory to see if he could produce the radio waves predicted by that theory.)
As a second, hypothetical example, suppose that I was keen to make some contribution to human physiology or anatomy, and suppose I noted that very little work has been done on the weight of human earlobes.
If, on the basis of this, I were to proceed to make very careful observations of the weights of a wide variety of human earlobes, recording and categorizing the many observations, I think it is clear that I would not be making any significant contribution to science.
I would be wasting my time, unless some theory had been proposed rendering the weight of earlobes important, such as a theory connecting the size of earlobes with the incidence of cancer in some way.
The foregoing examples illustrate an important sense in which theory precedes observation in science.
Observations and experiments are carried out in order to test or shed light on some theory, and only those observations considered relevant to that task should be recorded.
However, insofar as the theories that make up our scientific knowledge are fallible and incomplete, the guidance that theories offer as to what observations are relevant to some phenomenon under investigation may be misleading, and may result in some important factors being overlooked.
Hertz's experiment referred to above provides a nice example.
One of the factors I referred to as ‘clearly irrelevant’ was in fact very relevant.
It was a consequence of the theory under test that radio waves should have a velocity equal to the velocity of light.
When Hertz measured the velocity of his radio waves, he found repeatedly that their velocity was significantly different from that of light.
He was never able to solve the problem.
It was not until after his death that the source of the problem was really understood.
Radio waves emitted from his apparatus were being reflected from the walls of his laboratory back on to the apparatus and were interfering with his  measurements.
It turned out that the dimensions of the laboratory were very relevant.
The fallible and incomplete theories that make up scientific knowledge may give false guidance to an observer, then.
But this problem is to be tackled by improving and extending our theories and not by recording an endless list of aimless observations.
Inductivism not conclusively refuted
The theory-dependence of observation discussed in this chapter certainly undermines the inductivist claim that science starts with observation.
However, only the most naive of inductivists would wish to adhere to that position.
None of the modern, more sophisticated inductivists would wish to uphold the literal version of it.
They can dispense with the claim that science must start with unbiased and unprejudiced observation by making a distinction between the way a theory is first thought of or discovered on the one hand, and the way in which it is justified or its merits assessed on the other.
According to this modified position, it is freely admitted that new theories are conceived of in a variety of ways and often by a number of routes.
They may occur to the discoverer in a flash of inspiration, as in the mythical story of Newton's discovery of the law of gravitation being triggered by his seeing an apple fall from a tree.
Alternatively, a new discovery might occur as the result of an accident, as Roentgen was led to the discovery of X-rays by the constant blackening of photographic plates stored in the vicinity of his discharge tube.
Or, again, a new discovery might be arrived at after a long series of observations and calculations, as exemplified by Kepler's discoveries of his laws of planetary motion.
Theories may be, and usually are, conceived of prior to the making of those observations necessary to test them.
Further, according to this more sophisticated inductivism, creative acts, the most novel and significant of which require genius and involving as they do the psychology of individual scientists, defy logical analysis.
Discovery and the question of the origin of new theories is excluded from the philosophy of science.
However, once new laws and theories have been arrived at, no matter by what route, there remains the question of the adequacy of those laws and theories.
Do they correspond to legitimate scientific knowledge or don't they?
This question is the concern of the sophisticated inductivists.
Their answer is roughly as I have outlined in Chapter 1.
A large number of facts relevant to a theory must be ascertained by observation under a wide variety of circumstances, and the extent to which the theory can be shown to be true or probably true in the light of those facts by some kind of inductive inference must be established.
The separation of the mode of discovery and the mode of justification does enable the inductivists to evade that part of the criticism levelled at them in this chapter which was directed at the claim that science starts with observation.
However, the legitimacy of the separation of the two modes can be questioned.
For instance, it would surely seem reasonable to suggest that a theory that anticipates and leads to the discovery of new phenomena, in the way Clerk Maxwell's theory led to the discovery of radio waves, is more worthy of merit and more justifiable than a law or theory devised to account for phenomena already known and not leading to the discovery of new ones.
It will, I hope, become increasingly clear as this book progresses that it is essential to understand science as an historically evolving body of knowledge and that a theory can only be adequately appraised if due attention is paid to its historical context.
Theory appraisal is intimately linked with the circumstances under which a theory first makes its appearance.
Even if we allow the inductivists to separate the mode of discovery and the mode of justification, their position is still threatened by the fact that observation statements are theory-laden and hence fallible.
The inductivist wishes to make a fairly sharp distinction between direct observation, which he hopes will form a secure foundation for scientific knowledge, and theories, which are to be justified by the extent to which they receive inductive support from the secure observational foundation.
Those extreme inductivists, the logical positivists, went so far as to say that theories only have meaning insofar as they can be verified by direct observation.
This position is undermined by the fact that the sharp distinction between observation and theory cannot be maintained because observation, or rather the statements resulting from observation, are permeated by theory.
Although I have severely criticized inductivist philosophies of science in this and the previous chapter, the arguments I have presented do not constitute an absolutely decisive refutation of that programme.
The problem of induction cannot be regarded as a decisive refutation because, as I have previously mentioned, most other philosophies of science suffer from a similar difficulty.
I have just indicated one way in which criticism centred on the theory  dependence of observation can be to some extent evaded by the inductivists, and I am convinced that they will be able to think of further ingenious defences.
The main reason why I think inductivism should be abandoned is that, compared with rival and more modern approaches, it has increasingly failed to throw new and interesting light on the nature of science, a fact that led Imre Lakatos to describe the programme as a degenerating one.
The increasingly more adequate, more interesting and more fruitful accounts of science developed in later chapters will constitute the strongest case against inductivism.
Introducing Falsificationism
The falsificationist freely admits that observation is guided by and presupposes theory.
He is also happy to abandon any claim implying that theories can be established as true or probably true in the light of observational evidence.
Theories are construed as speculative and tentative conjectures or guesses freely created by the human intellect in an attempt to overcome problems encountered by previous theories and to give an adequate account of the behaviour of some aspects of the world or universe.
Once proposed, speculative theories are to be rigorously and ruthlessly tested by observation and experiment.
Theories that fail to stand up to observational and experimental tests must be eliminated and replaced by further speculative conjectures.
Science progresses by trial and error, by conjectures and refutations.
Only the fittest theories survive.
While it can never be legitimately said of a theory that it is true, it can hopefully be said that it is the best available, that it is better than anything that has come before.
A logical point to support the falsificationist
According to falsificationism, some theories can be shown to be false by an appeal to the results of observation and experiment.
There is a simple, logical point that seems to support the falsificationist here.
I have already indicated in Chapter 2 that, even if we assume that true observational statements are available to us in some way, it is never possible to arrive at universal laws and theories by logical deductions on that basis alone.
On the other hand, it is possible to perform logical deductions starting from singular observation statements as premises, to arrive at the falsity  of universal laws and theories by logical deduction.
For example, if we are given the statement, ‘A raven which was not black, was observed at place x at time t ’, then it logically follows from this that ‘All ravens are black’ is false.
That is, the argument is a logically valid deduction.
If the premise is asserted and the conclusion denied, a contradiction is involved.
One or two more examples will help illustrate this fairly trivial logical point.
If it can be established by observation in some test experiment that a 10 lb. weight and a 1 lb. weight in free fall move downwards at roughly the same speed, then it can be concluded that the claim that bodies fall at speeds proportional to their weight is false.
If it can be demonstrated beyond doubt that a ray of light passing close to the sun is deflected in a curved path, then it is not the case that light necessarily travels in straight lines.
Premise A raven, which was not black, was observed at place x at time t .
Conclusion Not all ravens are black.
The falsity of universal statements can be deduced from suitable singular statements.
The falsificationist exploits this logical point to the full.
Falsifiability as a criterion for theories
The falsificationist sees science as a set of hypotheses that are tentatively proposed with the aim of accurately describing or accounting for the behaviour of some aspect of the world or universe.
However, not any hypothesis will do.
There is one fundamental condition that any hypothesis or system of hypotheses must satisfy if it is to be granted the status of a scientific law or theory.
If it is to form part of science, an hypothesis must be falsifiable .
Before proceeding any further, it is important to be clear about the falsificationist's usage of the term ‘falsifiable’.
Here are some examples of some simple assertions that are falsifiable in the sense intended.
1
It never rains on Wednesdays.
2
All substances expand when heated.
3
Heavy objects, such as a brick when released near the surface of the earth, fall straight downwards if not impeded.
4
When a ray of light is reflected from a plane mirror, the angle of incidence is equal to the angle of reflection.
Assertion (1) is falsifiable because it can be falsified by observing rain to fall on a Wednesday.
Assertion (2) is falsifiable.
It can be falsified by an observation statement to the effect that some substance,x , did not expand when heated at time t .
Water near its freezing-point would serve to falsify (2).
Both (1) and (2) are falsifiable and false.
Assertions (3) and (4) may be true, for all I know.
Nevertheless, they are falsifiable in the sense intended.
It is logically possible that the next brick to be  released will ‘fall’ upwards.
No logical contradiction is involved in the assertion, ‘The brick fell upwards when released’, although it may be that no such statement is ever supported by observation.
Assertion (4) is falsifiable because a ray of light incident on a mirror at some oblique angle could conceivably be reflected in a direction perpendicular to the mirror.
This will never happen if the law of reflection happens to be true, but no logical contradiction would be involved if it did.
Both (3) and (4) are falsifiable, even though they may be true.
An hypothesis is falsifiable if there exists a logically possible observation statement or set of observation statements that are inconsistent with it, that is, which, if established as true, would falsify the hypothesis.
Here are some examples of statements that do not satisfy this requirement and that are consequently not falsifiable.
5
Either it is raining or it is not raining.
6
All points on a Euclidean circle are equidistant from the centre.
7
Luck is possible in sporting speculation.
No logically possible observation statement could refute (5).
It is true whatever the weather is like.
Assertion (6) is necessarily true because of the definition of a Euclidean circle.
If points on a circle were not equidistant from some fixed point, then that figure would just not be a Euclidean circle.
‘All bachelors are unmarried’ is unfalsifiable for a similar reason.
Assertion (7) is quoted from a horoscope in a newspaper.
It typifies the fortune-teller's devious strategy.
The assertion is unfalsifiable.
It amounts to telling the reader that if he has a bet today, he might win, which remains true whether he bets or not, and if he does, whether he wins or not.
The falsificationist demands that scientific hypotheses be falsifiable, in the sense I have discussed.
He insists on this because it is only by ruling out a set of logically possible observation statements that a law or theory is informative.
If a statement is unfalsifiable, then the world can have any properties whatsoever, can  behave in any way whatsoever, without conflicting with the statement.
Statements (5),(6) and (7), unlike statements (1),(2),(3) and (4), tell us nothing about the world.
A scientific law or theory should ideally give us some information about how the world does in fact behave, thereby ruling out ways in which it could (logically) possibly behave but in fact does not.
The law, ‘All planets move in ellipses around the sun’, is scientific because it claims that planets in fact move in ellipses and rules out orbits that are square or oval.
Just because the law makes definite claims about planetary orbits, it has informative content and is falsifiable.
A cursory glance at some laws that might be regarded as typical components of scientific theories indicates that they satisfy the falsifiability criterion.
‘Unlike magnetic poles attract each other’, ‘An acid added to a base yields a salt plus water’ and similar laws can easily be construed as falsifiable.
However, the falsificationist maintains that some theories, while they may superficially appear to have the characteristics of good scientific theories, are in fact only posing as scientific theories because they are not falsifiable and should be rejected.
Popper has claimed that some versions at least of Marx's theory of history, Freudian psychoanalysis and Adlerian psychology suffer from this fault.
The point can be illustrated by the following caricature of Adlerian psychology.
A fundamental tenet of Adler's theory is that human actions are motivated by feelings of inferiority of some kind.
In our caricature, this is supported by the following incident.
A man is standing on the bank of a treacherous river at the instant a child falls into the river, nearby.
The man will either leap into the river in an attempt to save the child or he will not.
If he does leap in, the Adlerian responds by indicating how this supports his theory.
The man obviously needed to overcome his feeling of inferiority by demonstrating that he was brave enough to leap into the river, in spite of the danger.
If the man does not leap in, the Adlerian can again claim support for his theory.
The man was overcoming his feelings of inferiority by demonstrating that he had the strength of will to remain on the bank, unperturbed, while the child drowned.
If this caricature is typical of the way in which Adlerian theory operates, then the theory is not falsifiable.
It is consistent with any kind of human behaviour, and just because of that, it tells us nothing about human behaviour.
Of course, before Adler's theory can be rejected on these grounds, it would be necessary to investigate the details of the theory rather than a caricature.
But there are plenty of social, psychological and religious theories that give  rise to the suspicion that, in their concern to explain everything, they explain nothing.
The existence of a loving God and the occurrence of some disaster can be made compatible by interpreting the disaster as being sent to try us or to punish us, whichever seems most suited to the situation.
Many examples of animal behaviour can be seen as evidence supporting the assertion, ‘Animals are designed so as best to fulfil the function for which they were intended’.
Theorists operating in this way are guilty of the fortune-teller's evasion and are subject to the falsificationist's criticism.
If a theory is to have informative content, it must run the risk of being falsified.
Degree of falsifiability, clarity and precision
A good scientific law or theory is falsifiable just because it makes definite claims about the world.
For the falsificationist, it follows fairly readily from this that the more falsifiable a theory is the better, in some loose sense of more.
The more a theory claims, the more potential opportunities there will be for showing that the world does not in fact behave in the way laid down by the theory.
A very good theory will be one that makes very wide-ranging claims about the world, and which is consequently highly falsifiable, and is one that resists falsification whenever it is put to the test.
The point can be illustrated by means of a trivial example.
Consider the two laws:
a
Mars moves in an ellipse around the sun.
b
All planets move in ellipses around their sun.
I take it that it is clear that (b) has a higher status than (a) as a piece of scientific knowledge.
Law (b) tells us all that (a) tells us and more besides.
Law (b), the preferable law, is more falsifiable than (a).
If observations of Mars should turn out to falsify (a), then they would falsify (b) also.
Any falsification of (a) will be a falsification of (b), but the reverse is not the case.
Observation statements referring to the orbits of Venus, Jupiter, etc. that might conceivably falsify (b) are irrelevant to (a).
If we follow Popper and refer to those sets of observation statements that would serve to falsify a law or theory as potential falsifiers of that law or theory, then we can say that the potential falsifiers of (a) form a class that is a subclass of the potential falsifiers of (b).
Law (b) is more falsifiable  than law (a), which is tantamount to saying that it claims more, that it is the better law.
A less-contrived example involves the relation between Kepler's theory of the solar system and Newton's.
Kepler's theory I take to be his three laws of planetary motion.
Potential falsifiers of that theory consist of sets of statements referring to planetary positions relative to the sun at specified times.
Newton's theory, a better theory that superseded Kepler's, is more comprehensive.
It consists of Newton's laws of motion plus his law of gravitation, the latter asserting that all pairs of bodies in the universe attract each other with a force that varies inversely as the square of their separation.
Some of the potential falsifiers of Newton's theory are sets of statements of planetary positions at specified times.
But there are many others, including those referring to the behaviour of falling bodies and pendulums, the correlation between the tides and the locations of the sun and moon, and so on.
There are many more opportunities for falsifying Newton's theory than for falsifying Kepler's theory.
And yet, so the falsificationist story goes, Newton's theory was able to resist attempted falsifications, thereby establishing its superiority over Kepler's.
Highly falsifiable theories should be preferred to less falsifiable ones, then, provided they have not in fact been falsified.
The qualification is important for the falsificationist.
Theories that have been falsified must be ruthlessly rejected.
The enterprise of science consists in the proposal of highly falsifiable hypotheses, followed by deliberate and tenacious attempts to falsify them.
To quote Popper:
I can therefore gladly admit that falsificationists like myself much prefer an attempt to solve an interesting problem by a bold conjecture,even (and especially) if it soon turns out to be false , to any recital of a sequence of irrelevant truisms.
We prefer this because we believe that this is the way in which we can learn from our mistakes; and that in finding that our conjecture was false we shall have learnt much about the truth, and shall have got nearer to the truth.
We learn from our mistakes .
Science progresses by trial and error .
Because of the logical situation that renders the derivation of universal laws and theories from observation statements impossible, but the deduction of their falsity possible,falsifications become the important landmarks, the striking achievements, the major growing-points in science.
This somewhat counter-intuitive  emphasis of the more extreme falsificationists on the significance of falsifications will be criticized in later chapters.
Because science aims at theories with a large informative content, the falsificationist welcomes the proposal of bold speculative conjectures.
Rash speculations are to be encouraged, provided they are falsifiable and provided they are rejected when falsified.
This do-or-die attitude clashes with the caution advocated by the naive inductivist.
According to the latter, only those theories that can be shown to be true or probably true are to be admitted into science.
We should proceed beyond the immediate results of experience only so far as legitimate inductions will take us.
The falsificationist, by contrast, recognizes the limitation of induction and the subservience of observation to theory.
Nature's secrets can only be revealed with the aid of ingenious and penetrating theories.
The greater the number of conjectured theories that are confronted by the realities of the world, and the more speculative those conjectures are, the greater will be the chances of major advances in science.
There is no danger in the proliferation of speculative theories because any that are inadequate as descriptions of the world can be ruthlessly eliminated as the result of observational or other tests.
The demand that theories should be highly falsifiable has the attractive consequence that theories should be clearly stated and precise.
If a theory is so vaguely stated that it is not clear exactly what it is claiming, then, when tested by observation or experiment it can always be interpreted so as to be consistent with the results of those tests.
In this way, it can be defended against falsifications.
For example, Goethe wrote of electricity that
it is a nothing, a zero, a mere point, which, however, dwells in all apparent existences, and at the same time is the point of origin whence, on the slightest stimulus, a double appearance presents itself, an  appearance which only manifests itself to vanish.
The conditions under which this manifestation is excited are infinitely varied, according to the nature of particular bodies.
If we take this quotation at face value, it is very difficult to see what possible set of physical circumstances could serve to falsify it.
Just because it is so vague and indefinite (at least when taken out of context), it is unfalsifiable.
Politicians and fortune-tellers can avoid being accused of making mistakes by making their assertions so vague that they can always be construed as compatible with whatever may eventuate.
The demand for a high degree of  falsifiability rules out such manoeuvres.
The falsificationist demands that theories be stated with sufficient clarity to run the risk of falsification.
A similar situation exists with respect to precision.
The more precisely a theory is formulated the more falsifiable it becomes.
If we accept that the more falsifiable a theory is the better (provided it has not been falsified), then we must also accept that the more precise the claims of a theory are the better.
‘Planets move in ellipses around the sun’ is more precise than ‘Planets move in closed loops around the sun’, and is consequently more falsifiable.
An oval orbit would falsify the first but not the second, whereas any orbit that falsifies the second will also falsify the first.
The falsificationist is committed to preferring the first.
Similarly, the falsificationist must prefer the claim that the velocity of light in a vacuum is 299.8 × 10 6 metres per second to the less-precise claim that it is about 300 × 10 6 metres per second, just because the first is more falsifiable than the second.
The closely associated demands for precision and clarity of expression both follow naturally from the falsificationist's account of science.
Falsificationism and progress
The progress of science as the falsificationist sees it might be summed up as follows.
Science starts with problems, problems associated with the explanation of the behaviour of some aspects of the world or universe.
Falsifiable hypotheses are proposed by scientists as solutions to the problem.
The conjectured hypotheses are then criticized and tested.
Some will be quickly eliminated.
Others might prove more successful.
These must be subject to even more stringent criticism and testing.
When an hypothesis that has successfully withstood a wide range of rigorous tests is eventually falsified, a new problem, hopefully far removed from the original solved problem, has emerged.
This new problem calls for the invention of new hypotheses, followed by renewed criticism and testing.
And so the process continues indefinitely.
It can never be said of a theory that it is true, however well it has withstood rigorous tests, but it can hopefully be said that a current theory is superior to its predecessors in the sense that it is able to withstand tests that falsified those predecessors.
Before we look at some examples to illustrate this falsificationist  conception of the progress of science, a word should be said about the claim that ‘Science starts with problems’.
Here are some problems that have confronted scientists in the past.
How are bats able to fly so dexterously at night, in spite of the fact that they have very small, weak eyes?
Why is the height of a simple barometer lower at high altitudes than at low altitudes?
Why were the photographic plates in Roentgen's laboratory continually becoming blackened?
Why does the perihelion of the planet Mercury advance?
These problems arise from more or less straightforward observations .
In insisting on the fact that science starts with problems, then, is it not the case that, for the falsificationist just as for the naive inductivist, science starts from observation?
The answer to this question is a firm ‘No’.
The observations cited above as constituting problems are only problematic in the light of some theory .
The first is problematic in the light of the theory that living organisms ‘see’ with their eyes; the second was problematic for the supporters of Galileo's theories because it clashed with the ‘force of a vacuum’theory accepted by them as an explanation of why the mercury does not fall from a barometer tube; the third was problematic for Roentgen because it was tacitly assumed at the time that no radiation or emanation of any kind existed that could penetrate the container of the photographic plates and darken them; the fourth was problematic because it was incompatible with Newton's theory.
The claim that science starts with problems is perfectly compatible with the priority of theories over observation and observation statements.
Science does not start with stark observation.
After this digression, we return to the falsificationist conception of the progress of science as the progression from problems to speculative hypotheses, to their criticism and eventual falsification and thence to new problems.
Two examples will be offered, the first a simple one concerning the flight of bats, the second a more ambitious one concerning the progress of physics.
We start with a problem.
Bats are able to fly with ease and at speed, avoiding the branches of trees, telegraph wires, other bats, etc., and can catch insects.
And yet bats have weak eyes, and in any case do most of their flying at night.
This poses a problem because it apparently falsifies the plausible theory that animals, like humans, see with their eyes.
A falsificationist will attempt to solve the problem by making a conjecture or hypothesis.
Perhaps he suggests that, although bats' eyes are apparently weak, nevertheless, in some way that is not understood, they are able to see efficiently at night by use of their eyes.
This hypothesis can be tested.
A sample  of bats is released into a darkened room containing obstacles and their ability to avoid the obstacles measured in some way.
The same bats are now blindfolded and again released into the room.
Prior to the experiment, the experimenter can make the following deduction.
One premise of the deduction is his hypothesis, which made quite explicit reads, ‘Bats are able to fly avoiding obstacles by using their eyes, and cannot do so without the use of their eyes’.
The second premise is a description of the experimental set-up, including the statement, ‘This sample of bats is blindfolded so that they do not have the use of their eyes’.
From these two premises, the experimenter can derive, deductively, that the sample of bats will not be able to avoid the obstacles in the test laboratory efficiently.
The experiment is now performed and it is found that the bats avoid collisions just as efficiently as before.
The hypothesis has been falsified.
There is now a need for a fresh use of the imagination, a new conjecture or hypothesis or guess.
Perhaps a scientist suggests that in some way the bat's ears are involved in its ability to avoid obstacles.
The hypothesis can be tested, in an attempt to falsify it, by plugging the ears of bats before releasing them into the test laboratory.
This time it is found that the ability of the bats to avoid obstacles is considerably impaired.
The hypothesis has been supported.
The falsificationist must now try to make his hypothesis more precise so that it becomes more readily falsifiable.
It is suggested that the bat hears echoes of its own squeaks rebounding from solid objects.
This is tested by gagging the bats before releasing them.
Again the bats collide with obstacles and again the hypothesis is supported.
The falsificationist now appears to be reaching a tentative solution to his problem, although he does not consider himself to have proved by experiment how bats avoid collisions while flying.
Any number of factors may turn up that show him to have been mistaken.
Perhaps the bat detects echoes not with its ears but with sensitive regions close to the ears, the functioning of which was impaired when the bat's ears were plugged.
Or perhaps different kinds of bats detect obstacles in very different ways, so that the bats used in the experiment were not truly representative.
The progress of physics from Aristotle through Newton to Einstein provides an example on a larger scale.
The falsificationist account of that progression goes something like this.
Aristotelian physics was to some extent quite successful.
It could explain a wide range of phenomena.
It could explain why heavy objects fall to the ground (seeking their natural place at the centre of the universe), it  could explain the action of siphons and liftpumps (the explanation being based on the impossibility of a vacuum), and so on.
But eventually Aristotelian physics was falsified in a number of ways.
Stones dropped from the top of the mast of a uniformly moving ship fell to the deck at the foot of the mast and not some distance from the mast, as Aristotle's theory predicted.
The moons of Jupiter can be seen to orbit Jupiter and not the earth.
A host of other falsifications were accumulated during the seventeenth century.
Newton's physics, however, once it had been created and developed by way of the conjectures of the likes of Galileo and Newton, was a superior theory that superseded Aristotle's.
Newton's theory could account for falling objects, the operation of siphons and liftpumps and anything else that Aristotle's theory could explain, and could also account for the phenomena that were problematic for the Aristotelians.
In addition, Newton's theory could explain phenomena not touched on by Aristotle's theory, such as correlations between the tides and the location of the moon, and the variation in the force of gravity with height above the seabed.
For two centuries, Newton's theory was successful.
That is, attempts to falsify it by reference to the new phenomena predicted with its help was unsuccessful.
The theory even led to the discovery of a new planet, Neptune.
But in spite of its success, sustained attempts to falsify it eventually proved successful.
Newton's theory was falsified in a number of ways.
It was unable to account for the details of the orbit of the planet Mercury and was unable to account for the variable mass of fast-moving electrons in discharge tubes.
Challenging problems faced physicists, then, as the nineteenth century gave way to the twentieth, problems calling for new speculative hypotheses designed to overcome these problems in a progressive way.
Einstein was able to meet this challenge.
His relativity theory was able to account for the phenomena that falsified Newton's theory, while at the same time being able to match Newton's theory in those areas where the latter had proved successful.
In addition, Einstein's theory yielded the prediction of spectacular new phenomena.
His special theory of relativity predicted that mass should be a function of velocity and that mass and energy could be transformed into one another, and his general theory predicted that light rays should be bent by strong gravitational fields.
Attempts to refute Einstein's theory by reference to the new phenomena failed.
The falsification of Einstein's theory remains as a challenge for modern physicists.
Their success, if it  should eventuate, would mark a new step forward in the progress of physics.
So runs a typical falsification account of the progress of physics.
Later we shall have cause to doubt its accuracy and validity.
From the foregoing, it is clear that the concept of progress, of the growth of science, is a conception that is a central one in the falsificationist account of science.
This issue is pursued in more detail in the next chapter.
Sophisticated Falsificationism, Novel Predictions and the Growth of Science
Relative rather than absolute degrees of falsifiability
In the previous chapter, some conditions that an hypothesis should satisfy in order to be worthy of a scientist's consideration were mentioned.
An hypothesis should be falsifiable, the more falsifiable the better, and yet should not be falsified.
More sophisticated falsificationists realize that those conditions alone are insufficient.
A further condition is connected with the need for science to progress.
An hypothesis should be more falsifiable than the one for which it is offered as a replacement.
The sophisticated falsificationist account of science, with its emphasis on the growth of science, switches the focus of attention from the merits of a single theory to the relative merits of competing theories.
It gives a dynamic picture of science rather than the static account of the most naive falsificationists.
Instead of asking of a theory, ‘Is it falsifiable?’,
‘How falsifiable is it?’ and ‘Has it been falsified?’, it becomes more appropriate to ask, ‘Is this newly proposed theory a viable replacement for the one it challenges?’
In general, a newly proposed theory will be acceptable as worthy of the consideration of scientists if it is more falsifiable than its rival, and especially if it predicts a new kind of phenomenon not touched on by its rival.
The emphasis on the comparison of degrees of falsifiability of series of theories, which is a consequence of the emphasis on a science as a growing and evolving body of knowledge, enables a technical problem to be bypassed.
For it is very difficult to specify just how falsifiable a single theory is.
An absolute measure of falsifiability cannot be defined simply because the number of  potential falsifiers of a theory will always be infinite.
It is difficult to see how the question, ‘How falsifiable is Newton's law of gravitation?’ could be answered.
On the other hand, it is often possible to compare the degrees of falsifiability of laws or theories.
For instance, the claim, ‘All pairs of bodies attract each other with a force that varies inversely as the square of their separation’, is more falsifiable than the claim, ‘The planets in the solar system attract each other with a force that varies inversely as the square of their separation’.
The second is implied by the first.
Anything that falsifies the second will falsify the first, but the reverse is not true.
Ideally, the falsificationist would like to be able to say that the series of theories that constitute the historical evolution of a science is made up of falsifiable theories, each one in the series being more falsifiable than its predecessor.
Increasing falsifiability and ad hoc modifications
The demand that, as a science progresses, its theories should become more and more falsifiable, and consequently have more and more content and be more and more informative, rules out modifications in theories that are designed merely to protect a theory from a threatening falsification.
A modification in a theory, such as the addition of an extra postulate or a change in some existing postulate, that has no testable consequences that were not already testable consequences of the unmodified theory will be called ad hoc modifications.
The remainder of this section will consist of examples designed to clarify the notion of an ad hoc modification.
I will first consider some ad hoc modifications, which the falsificationist would reject, and afterwards these will be contrasted with some modifications that are not ad hoc and which the falsificationist would consequently welcome.
I begin with a rather trivial example.
Let us consider the generalization, ‘Bread nourishes’.
This low-level theory, if spelt out in more detail, amounts to the claim that if wheat is grown in the normal way, converted into bread in the normal way and eaten by humans in a normal way, then those humans will be nourished.
This apparently innocuous theory ran into trouble in a French village on an occasion when wheat was grown in a normal way, converted into bread in a normal way and yet most people who ate the bread became seriously ill and many died.
The theory, ‘(All) bread nourishes’, was falsified.
The theory can be modified to  avoid this falsification by adjusting it to read, ‘(All) bread, with the exception of that particular batch of bread produced in the French village in question, nourishes’.
This is an ad hoc modification.
The modified theory cannot be tested in any way that was not also a test of the original theory.
The consuming of any bread by any human constitutes a test of the original theory, whereas tests of the modified theory are restricted to the consuming of bread other than that batch of bread that led to such disastrous results in France.
The modified hypothesis is less falsifiable than the original version.
The falsificationist rejects such rearguard actions.
The next example is less gruesome and more entertaining.
It is an example based on an interchange that actually took place in the seventeenth century between Galileo and an Aristotelian adversary.
Having carefully observed the moon through his newly invented telescope, Galileo was able to report that the moon was not a smooth sphere but that its surface abounded in mountains and craters.
His Aristotelian adversary had to admit that things did appear that way when he repeated the observations for himself.
But the observations threatened a notion fundamental for many Aristotelians, namely, that all celestial bodies are perfect spheres.
Galileo's rival defended his theory in the face of the apparent falsification in a way that was blatantly ad hoc .
He suggested that there was an invisible substance on the moon, filling the craters and covering the mountains in such a way that the moon's shape was perfectly spherical.
When Galileo inquired how the presence of the invisible substance might be detected, the reply was that there was no way in which it could be detected.
There is no doubt, then, that the modified theory led to no new testable consequences and would be quite unacceptable to a falsificationist.
An exasperated Galileo was able to show up the inadequacy of his rival's position in a characteristically witty way.
He announced that he was prepared to admit that the invisible undetectable substance existed on the moon, but insisted that it was not disturbed in the way suggested by his rival but in fact was piled up on top of the mountains so that they were many times higher than they appeared through the telescope.
Galileo was able to outmanoeuvre his rival in the fruitless game of the invention of ad hoc devices for the protection of theories.
One other example of a possibly ad hoc hypothesis from the history of science will be briefly mentioned.
Prior to Lavoisier, the phlogiston theory was the standard theory of combustion.
According to that theory, phlogiston is emitted from substances when  they are burnt.
This theory was threatened when it was discovered that many substances gain weight after combustion.
One way of overcoming the apparent falsification was to suggest that phlogiston has negative weight.
If this hypothesis could be tested only by weighing substances before and after combustion, then it was ad hoc .
It led to no new tests.
Modifications of a theory in an attempt to overcome a difficulty need not be ad hoc .
Here are some examples of modifications that are not ad hoc , and which consequently are acceptable from a falsificationist point of view.
Let us return to the falsification of the claim, ‘Bread nourishes’, to see how this could be modified in an acceptable way.
An acceptable move would be to replace the original falsified theory by the claim, ‘All bread nourishes except bread made from wheat contaminated by a particular kind of fungus’(followed by a specification of the fungus and some of its characteristics).
This modified theory is not ad hoc because it leads to new tests.
It is independently testable , to use Popper's phrase.
Possible tests would include testing the wheat from which the poisonous bread was made for the presence of the fungus, cultivating the fungus on some specially prepared wheat and testing the nourishing effect of the bread produced from it, chemically  analysing the fungus for the presence of known poisons, and so on.
All these tests, many of which do not constitute tests of the original hypothesis, could result in the falsification of the modified hypothesis.
If the modified, more falsifiable, hypothesis resists falsification in the face of the new tests, then something new will have been learnt and progress will have been made.
Turning now to the history of science for a less-artificial example, we might consider the train of events that led to the discovery of the planet Neptune.
Nineteenth-century observations of the motion of the planet Uranus indicated that its orbit departed considerably from that predicted on the basis of Newton's gravitational theory, thus posing a problem for that theory.
In an attempt to overcome the difficulty, it was suggested, by Leverrier in France and by Adams in England, that there existed a previously undetected planet in the vicinity of Uranus.
The attraction between the conjectured planet and Uranus was to account for the latter's departure from its initially predicted orbit.
This suggestion was not ad hoc , as events were to show.
It was possible to estimate the approximate vicinity of the conjectural planet if it were to be of a reasonable size and to be responsible for the perturbation of  Uranus' orbit.
Once this had been done, it was possible to test the new proposal by inspecting the appropriate region of the sky through a telescope.
It was in this way that Galle came to make the first sighting of the planet now known as Neptune.
Far from being ad hoc , the move to save Newton's theory from falsification by Uranus's orbit led to a new kind of test of that theory, which it was able to pass in a dramatic and progressive way.
Confirmation in the falsificationist account of science
When falsificationism was introduced as an alternative to inductivism in the previous chapter, falsifications, that is, the failures of theories to stand up to observational and experimental tests, were portrayed as being of key importance.
It was argued that the logical situation permits the establishment of the falsity but not of the truth of theories in the light of available observation statements.
It was also urged that science should progress by the proposal of bold, highly falsifiable conjectures as attempts to solve problems, followed by ruthless attempts to falsify the new proposals.
Along with this came the suggestion that significant advances in science come about when those bold conjectures are falsified.
The self-avowed falsificationist Popper says as much in the passage quoted on p.44, where the italics are his.
However, exclusive attention to falsifying instances amounts to a misrepresentation of the more sophisticated falsificationist's position.
More than a hint of this is contained in the example with which the previous section concluded.
The independently testable attempt to save Newton's theory by a speculative hypothesis was a success because that hypothesis was confirmed by the discovery of Neptune and not because it was falsified.
It is a mistake to regard the falsification of bold, highly falsifiable conjectures as the occasions of significant advance in science.
This becomes clear when we consider the various extreme possibilities.
At one extreme, we have theories that take the form of bold, risky conjectures, while at the other, we have theories that are cautious conjectures, making claims that seem to involve no significant risks.
If either kind of conjecture fails an observational or experimental test it will be falsified, while if it passes such a test we will say it is confirmed .
Significant advances will be marked by the confirmation of bold conjectures or the falsification of cautious conjectures.
Cases of the former kind will be informative, and constitute  an important contribution to scientific knowledge, simply because they mark the discovery of something that was previously unheard of or considered unlikely.
The discovery of Neptune and of radio waves and Eddington's confirmation of Einstein's risky prediction that light rays should bend in strong  gravitational fields all constituted significant advances of this kind.
Risky predictions were confirmed.
The falsification of cautious conjectures is informative because it establishes that what was regarded as unproblematically true is in fact false.
Russell's demonstration that naive set theory, which was based on what appear to be almost self-evident propositions, is inconsistent is an example of an informative falsification of a conjecture apparently free from risk.
By contrast, little is learnt from the falsification of a bold conjecture or the confirmation of a cautious conjecture.
If a bold conjecture is falsified, then all that is learnt is that yet another crazy idea has been proved wrong.
The falsification of Kepler's speculation that the spacing of the planetary orbits could be explained by reference to Plato's five regular solids does not mark one of the significant landmarks in the progress of physics.
Similarly, the confirmation of cautious hypotheses is uninformative.
Such confirmations merely indicate that some theory that was well established and regarded as unproblematic has been successfully applied once again.
For instance, the confirmation of the conjecture that samples of iron extracted from its ore by some new process will, like other iron, expand when heated, would be of little consequence.
The falsificationist wishes to reject ad hoc hypotheses and to encourage the proposal of bold hypotheses as potential improvements on falsified theories.
Those bold hypotheses will lead to novel, testable predictions, which do not follow from the original, falsified theory.
However, while the fact that it does lead to the possibility of new tests makes an hypothesis worthy of investigation, it will not rank as an improvement on the problematic theory it is designed to replace until it has survived at least some of those tests.
This is tantamount to saying that before it can be regarded as an adequate replacement for a falsified theory, a newly and boldly proposed theory must make some novel predictions that are confirmed.
Many wild and rash speculations will not survive subsequent testing and consequently will not be rated as contributing to the growth of scientific knowledge.
The occasional wild and rash speculation that does lead to a novel, unlikely prediction, which is nevertheless confirmed by observation or experiment, will thereby become established as a highlight in the history of the growth of  science.
The confirmations of novel predictions resulting from bold conjectures are very important in the falsificationist account of the growth of science.
Boldness, novelty and background knowledge
A little more needs to be said about the adjectives ‘bold’ and ‘novel’as applied to hypotheses and predictions respectively.
They are both historically relative notions.
What rates as a bold conjecture at one stage in the history of science need no longer be bold at some later stage.
When Maxwell proposed his ‘dynamical theory of the electromagnetic field’ in 1864, it was a bold conjecture.
It was bold because it conflicted with theories generally accepted at the time, theories that included the assumption that electromagnetic systems (magnets, charged bodies, current-carrying conductors, etc.) act upon each other instantaneously across empty space and that electromagnetic effects can be propagated at a finite velocity only through material substances.
Maxwell's theory clashed with these generally accepted assumptions because it predicted that light is an electromagnetic phenomenon and also predicted, as was to be realized later, that fluctuating currents should emit a new kind of radiation, radio waves, travelling at a finite velocity through empty space.
In 1864, therefore, Maxwell's theory was bold and the subsequent prediction of radio waves was a novel prediction.
Today, the fact that Maxwell's theory can give an accurate account of the behaviour of a wide range of electromagnetic systems is a generally accepted part of scientific knowledge, and assertions about the existence and properties of radio waves will not rate as novel predictions.
If we call the complex of scientific theories generally accepted and well established at some stage in the history of science the background knowledge of the time, then we can say that a conjecture will be bold if its claims are unlikely in the light of the background knowledge of the time.
Einstein's general theory of relativity was a bold one in 1915 because at that time background knowledge included the assumption that light travels in straight lines.
This clashed with one consequence of general relativity, namely, that light rays should bend in strong gravitational fields.
Copernicus's astronomy was bold in 1543 because it clashed with the background assumption that the earth is stationery at the centre of the universe.
It would not be considered bold today.
Just as conjectures will be considered bold or otherwise by reference to the relevant background knowledge, so predictions will be judged novel if they involve some phenomenon that does not figure in, or is perhaps explicitly ruled out by, the background knowledge of the time.
The prediction of Neptune in 1846 was a novel one because the background knowledge at that time contained no reference to such a planet.
The prediction that Poisson deduced from Fresnel's wave theory of light in 1818, namely, that a bright spot should be observed at the centre of one side of an opaque disc suitably illuminated from the other, was novel because the existence of that bright spot was ruled out by the particle theory of light that formed part of the background knowledge of the time.
In the previous section, it was argued that major contributions to the growth of scientific knowledge come about either when a bold conjecture is confirmed or when a cautious conjecture is falsified.
The idea of background knowledge enables us to see that these two possibilities will occur together as the result of a single experiment.
Background knowledge consists of cautious hypotheses just because that knowledge is well established and considered to be unproblematic.
The confirmation of a bold conjecture will involve the falsification of some part of the background knowledge with respect to which the conjecture was bold.
Comparison of the inductivist and falsificationist view of confirmation
We have seen that confirmation has an important role to play in science as interpreted by the sophisticated falsificationist.
However, this does not invalidate the labelling of that position ‘falsificationism’.
It is still maintained by the sophisticated falsificationist that theories can be falsified and rejected while it is denied that theories can ever be established as true or probably true.
The aim of science is to falsify theories and to replace them by better theories, theories that demonstrate a greater ability to withstand tests.
Confirmations of new theories are important insofar as they constitute evidence that a new theory is an improvement on the theory it replaces, the theory that is falsified by the evidence unearthed with the aid of, and confirming, the new theory.
Once a newly proposed bold theory has succeeded in ousting its rival, then it in turn becomes a new target at which stringent tests should be directed, tests devised with the aid of further boldly conjectured theories.
Because of the falsificationists' emphasis on the growth of science, their account of confirmation is significantly different from that of the inductivists.
The significance of some confirming instances of a theory according to the inductivist position described in Chapter 1 is determined solely by the logical relationship between the observation statements that are confirmed and the theory that they support.
The degree of support given to Newton's theory by Galle's observation of Neptune is no different from the degree of support given by a modern observation of Neptune.
The historical context in which the evidence is acquired is irrelevant.
Confirming instances are such if they give inductive support to a theory, and the greater the number of confirming instances established, the greater the support for the theory and the more likely it is to be true.
This ahistorical theory of confirmation would seem to have the unappealing consequence that innumerable observations made on falling stones, planetary positions, etc. will constitute worthwhile scientific activity insofar as they will lead to increases in the estimate of the probability of the truth of the law of gravitation.
By contrast, in the falsificationist account, the significance of confirmations depends very much on their historical context.
A confirmation will confer some high degree of merit on a theory if that confirmation resulted from the testing of a novel prediction.
That is, a confirmation will be significant if it is estimated that it is unlikely to eventuate in the light of the background knowledge of the time.
Confirmations that are foregone conclusions are insignificant.
If today I confirm Newton's theory by dropping a stone to the ground, I contribute nothing of value to science.
On the other hand, if tomorrow I confirm a speculative theory implying that the gravitational attraction between two bodies depends on their temperature, falsifying Newton's theory in the process, I would have made a significant contribution to scientific knowledge.
Newton's theory of gravitation and some of its limitations are part of current background knowledge, whereas a temperature dependence of gravitational attraction is not.
Here is one further example in support of the historical perspective that the falsificationists introduce into confirmation.
Hertz confirmed Maxwell's theory when he detected the first radio waves.
I also confirm Maxwell's theory whenever I listen to my radio.
The logical situation is similar in the two cases.
In each case, the theory predicts that radio waves should be detected and, in each case, their successful detection lends some inductive support to the theory.
Nevertheless, Hertz is justly famous for the confirmation he achieved, whereas my frequent confirmations are rightly ignored in a scientific context.
Hertz made a significant step forward.
When I listen to my radio I am only marking time.
The historical context makes all the difference.
The Limitations of Falsificationism
Theory-dependence of observation and the fallibility of falsifications
The naive falsificationist insists that scientific activity should be concerned with attempts to falsify theories by establishing the truth of observation statements that are inconsistent with them.
The more sophisticated falsificationist realizes the inadequacy of this and recognizes the importance of the role played by confirmation of speculative theories as well as the falsification of well-established ones.
One thing that both types of falsificationist hold in common, however, is that there is an important qualitative difference in the status of confirmations and falsifications.
Theories can be conclusively falsified in the light of suitable evidence, whereas they can never be established as true or even probably true whatever the evidence.
Theory acceptance is always tentative.
Theory rejection can be decisive.
This is the factor that earns falsificationists their title.
The claims of the falsificationist are seriously undermined by the fact that observation statements are theory-dependent and fallible.
This can be seen immediately when one recalls the logical point invoked by the falsificationists in support of their case.
If true observation statements are given,then it is possible to logically deduce from them the falsity of some universal statements, whereas it is not possible to deduce from them the truth of any universal statements.
This is an unexceptional point, but it is a conditional one based on the assumption that perfectly secure observation statements are available.
But they are not, as was argued at length in Chapter 3.
All observation statements are fallible.
Consequently, if a universal statement or complex of universal statements constituting  a theory or part of a theory clashes with some observation statement, it may be the observation statement that is at fault.
Nothing in the logic of the situation requires that it should always be the theory that is rejected on the occasion of a clash with observation.
A fallible observation statement might be rejected and the fallible theory with which it clashes retained.
This is precisely what was involved when Copernicus's theory was retained and the naked-eye observation that Venus does not change size appreciably during the course of the year, which is inconsistent with the Copernican theory, was rejected.
It is also what is involved when modern descriptions of the moon's trajectory are retained and observation statements referring to the fact that the moon is much larger when it is near the horizon than when it is high in the sky are regarded as resulting from an illusion, even though the cause of the illusion is not well understood.
Science abounds with examples of the rejection of observation statements and the retention of the theories with which they clash.
However securely based on observation a statement may seem to be, the possibility that new theoretical advances will reveal inadequacies in that statement cannot be ruled out.
Consequently, straightforward, conclusive falsifications of theories are not achievable.
Popper's inadequate defence
Popper was aware of the problem discussed in section 1 right from the time he first published the German version of his book The Logic of Scientific Discovery in 1934.
In Chapter 5 of that book, entitled ‘The Problem of the Empirical Base’, he set out an account of observation and observation statements that took account of the fact that infallible observation statements are not given directly through sensory  perceptions .
In this section, I will first summarize his account, and then argue that it does not save the falsificationist from the objections of section 1.
Popper's position highlights the important distinction between public observation statements on the one hand and the private perceptual experiences of individual observers on the other.
The latter are in some sense ‘given’ to individuals in the act of observing, but there is no straightforward step from those private experiences (which will depend on factors peculiar to each individual observer such as his expectations, prior knowledge, etc.) to an observation statement that is meant to describe the observed situation.
An observation statement, formulated in a public language, will be testable and open to modification or rejection.
Individual observers may or may not accept a particular observation statement.
Their decision on the matter will be motivated in part by the relevant perceptual experiences, but no perceptual experience on the part of an individual will be sufficient to establish the validity of an observation statement.
An observer may be led to accept some observation statement on the basis of a perception and yet that observation statement may be false.
These points can be illustrated by the following examples.
‘Moons of Jupiter are visible through a telescope’ and ‘Mars is square and intensely coloured’are public observation statements.
The first might well have been uttered by Galileo or a supporter and the second was recorded in Kepler's notebook.
Both are public, in the sense that they can be entertained and criticized by anyone who has the opportunity to do so.
The Galileans' decision to defend the first was motivated by the perceptual experiences that accompanied their telescopic sightings of Jupiter, and Kepler's decision to record the second was likewise based on his perceptual experiences when directing a telescope towards Mars.
Both observation statements are testable.
Galileo's adversaries insisted that the patches that Galileo had interpreted as moons of Jupiter were aberrations attributable to the functioning of the telescope.
Galileo defended his claim about the visibility of Jupiter's moons by arguing that if the moons were aberrations, then moons should appear near the other planets also.
The public debate continued, and in this particular case, as telescopes were improved and optical theory developed, the observation statement referring to the moons of Jupiter survived the criticism levelled at it.
Most scientists eventually decided to accept the statement.
By contrast, Kepler's statement concerning the shape and colour of Mars did not survive criticism and tests.
It was soon decided to reject the statement.
The essence of Popper's position on observation statements is that their acceptability is gauged by their ability to survive tests.
Those that fail subsequent tests are rejected, while those that survive all the tests to which they are subjected are tentatively retained.
In his early work at least, Popper emphasizes the role of decisions made on the part of individuals and groups of individuals to accept or reject what I have called observation statements, and what Popper refers to as ‘basic statements’.
Thus he writes, ‘Basic statements are accepted as the result of a decision or agreement, and to that extent they are conventions’, and again,
Any empirical scientific statement can be presented (by describing experimental arrangements etc.) in such a way that anyone who has learned the relevant technique can test it.
If, as a result, he rejects the statement, then it will not satisfy us if he tells us all about his feelings of doubt or about his feelings of conviction as to his perceptions.
What he must do is to formulate an assertion which contradicts our own, and give us his instruction for testing it.
If he fails to do this, we can only ask him to take another and perhaps a more careful look at our experiment, and think again.
Popper's emphasis on the conscious decisions of individuals introduces a subjective element that clashes somewhat with Popper's later insistence on science as ‘a process without a subject’.
This matter will be discussed more fully in later chapters.
For the present, I would prefer to reformulate Popper's position on observation statements in a less subjective way, thus: An observation statement is acceptable, tentatively, at a particular stage in the development of a science, if it is able to withstand all the tests made possible by the state of development of the science in question at that stage.
According to the Popperian position, the observation statements that form the basis with respect to which the merit of a scientific theory is to be assessed are themselves fallible.
Popper emphasizes the point with a striking metaphor.
The empirical basis of objective science has thus nothing ‘absolute’ about it.
Science does not rest upon solid bedrock.
The bold structure of its theories rises, as it were above a swamp.
It is like a building erected on piles.
The piles are driven down from above into the swamp, but not down to any natural or ‘given’ base; and if we stop driving the piles deeper, it is not because we have reached firm ground.
We simply stop when we are satisfied that the piles are firm enough to carry the structure, as least for the time being.
But it is precisely the fact that observation statements are fallible, and their acceptance only tentative and open to revision, that undermines the falsificationist position.
Theories cannot be conclusively falsified because the observation statements that form the basis for the falsification may themselves prove to be false in the light of later developments.
Knowledge available at the time of Copernicus did not permit a legitimate criticism of the observation that the apparent sizes of Mars and Venus remain roughly constant, so that Copernicus's theory, taken literally, could be deemed falsified by that observation.
One hundred years later, the falsification could be revoked because of new developments in optics.
Conclusive falsifications are ruled out by the lack of a perfectly secure observational base on which they depend.
The complexity of realistic test situations
‘All swans are white’ is certainly falsified if an instance of a non-white swan can be established.
But simplified illustrations of the logic of a falsification such as this disguise a serious difficulty for falsificationism that arises from the complexity of any realistic test situation.
A realistic scientific theory will consist of a complex of universal statements rather than a single statement like ‘All swans are white’.
Further, if a theory is to be experimentally tested, then more will be involved than those statements that constitute the theory under test.
The theory will need to be augmented by auxiliary assumptions, such as laws and theories governing the use of any instruments used, for instance.
In addition, in order to deduce some prediction the validity of which is to be experimentally tested it will be necessary to add initial conditions such as a  description of the experimental set-up.
For instance, suppose an astronomical theory is to be tested by observing the position of some planet through a telescope.
The theory must predict the orientation of the telescope necessary for a sighting of the planet at some specified time.
The premises from which the prediction is derived will include the interconnected statements that constitute the theory under test, initial conditions such as previous positions of the planet and sun, auxiliary assumptions such as those enabling corrections to be made for refraction of light from the planet in the earth's atmosphere, and so on.
Now if the prediction that follows from this maze of premises turns out to be false (in our example, if the planet does not appear at the predicted location), then all that the logic of the situation permits us to conclude is that at least one of the premises must be false.
It does not enable us to identify the faulty premise.
It may be the theory under test that is at fault, but alternatively it may be an auxiliary assumption or some part of the description of the initial conditions that is responsible for the incorrect prediction.
A theory cannot be conclusively falsified, because the possibility that some part of the complex test situation, other than the theory under test, is responsible for an erroneous prediction cannot be ruled out.
Here are some examples from the history of astronomy that illustrate the point.
In an example utilized previously, we discussed how Newton's theory was apparently refuted by the orbit of the planet Uranus.
In this case, it turned out not to be the theory at fault but the description of the initial conditions, which did not include a consideration of the yet-to-be-discovered planet Neptune.
A second example involves an argument by means of which the Danish astronomer Tycho Brahé claimed to have refuted the  Copernican theory a few decades after the first publication of that theory.
If the earth orbits the sun, Brahé argued, then the direction in which a fixed star is observed from earth should vary during the course of the year as the earth moves from one side of the sun to the other.
But when Brahé tried to detect this predicted parallax with his instruments, which were the most accurate and sensitive ones in existence at the time, he failed.
This led Brahé to conclude that the Copernican theory was false.
With hindsight, it can be appreciated that it was not the Copernican theory that was responsible for the faulty prediction, but one of Brahé's auxiliary assumptions.
Brahé's estimate of the distance of the fixed stars was many times too small.
When his estimate is replaced by a more realistic one, the predicted parallax turns out to be too small to be detectable by Brahé's instruments.
A third example is a hypothetical one devised by Imre Lakatos.
It reads as follows:
The story is about an imaginary case of planetary misbehaviour.
A physicist of the pre Einsteinian era takes Newton's mechanics and his law of gravitation, N, the accepted initial conditions, I, and calculates, with their help, the path of a newly discovered small planet,p .
But the planet deviates from the calculated path.
Does our Newtonian physicist consider that the deviation was forbidden by Newton's theory and therefore that, once established, it refutes the theory N?
No.
He suggests that there must be a hitherto unknown planet p' , which perturbs the path of p .
He calculates the mass, orbit, etc. of this hypothetical planet and then asks an experimental astronomer to test his hypothesis.
The planet p' is so small that even the biggest available telescopes cannot possibly observe it; the experimental astronomer applies for a research grant to build yet a bigger one.
In three years time, the new telescope is ready.
Were the unknown planet p' to be discovered, it would be hailed as a new victory of Newtonian science.
But it is not.
Does our scientist abandon Newton's theory and his idea of the perturbing planet?
No.
He suggests that a cloud of cosmic dust hides the planet from us.
He calculates the location and properties of this cloud and asks for a research grant to send up a satellite to test his calculations.
Were the satellite's instruments (possibly new ones, based on a little-tested theory) to record the existence of the conjectural cloud, the result would be hailed as an outstanding victory for Newtonian science.
But the cloud is not found.
Does our scientist abandon Newton's theory, together with the idea of the perturbing planet and the idea of the cloud which hides it?
No.
He suggests that there is some magnetic field in that region of the universe which disturbed the instruments of the satellite.
A new satellite is sent up.
Were the magnetic field to be found, Newtonians would celebrate a sensational victory.
But it is not.
Is this regarded as a refutation of Newtonian science?
No.
Either yet another ingenious auxiliary hypothesis is proposed or…the whole story is buried in the dusty volumes of periodicals and the story never mentioned again.
If this story is regarded as a plausible one, it illustrates how a theory can always be protected from falsification by deflecting the falsification to some other part of the complex web of assumptions.
Falsificationism inadequate on historical grounds
An embarrassing historical fact for falsificationists is that if their methodology had been strictly adhered to by scientists then those theories generally regarded as being among the best examples of scientific theories would never have been developed because they would have been rejected in their infancy.
Given any example of a classic scientific theory, whether at the time of its first proposal or at a later date, it is possible to find observational claims that were generally accepted at the time and were considered to be inconsistent with the theory.
Nevertheless, those theories were not rejected, and it is fortunate for science that they were not.
Some historical examples to support my claim follow.
In the early years of its life, Newton's  gravitational theory was falsified by observations of the moon's orbit.
It took almost fifty years to deflect this falsification on to causes other than Newton's theory.
Later in its life, the same theory was known to be inconsistent with the details of the orbit of the planet Mercury, although scientists did not abandon the theory for that reason.
It turned out that it was never possible to explain away this falsification in a way that protected Newton's theory.
A second example concerns Bohr's theory of the atom, and is due to Lakatos.
Early versions of the theory were inconsistent with the observation that some matter is stable for a time that exceeds about 10 -8 seconds.
According to the theory, negatively charged electrons within atoms orbit around positively charged nuclei.
But  according to the classical electromagnetic theory presupposed by Bohr's theory, orbiting electrons should radiate.
The radiation would result in an orbiting electron losing energy and collapsing into the nucleus.
The quantitative details of classical electromagnetism yield an estimated time of about 10 -8 seconds for this collapse to occur.
Fortunately, Bohr  persevered with his theory, in spite of this falsification.
A third example concerns the kinetic theory and has the advantage that the falsification of that theory at birth was explicitly acknowledged by its originator.
When Maxwell published the first details of the kinetic theory of gases in 1859, in that very same paper he acknowledged the fact that the theory was falsified by measurements on the specific heats of gases.
Eighteen years later, commenting on the consequences of the kinetic theory, he wrote.
Some of these, no doubt, are very satisfactory to us in our present state of opinion about the constitution of bodies, but there are others which are likely to startle us out of our complacency and perhaps ultimately to drive us out of all the hypotheses in which we have hitherto found refuge into that thoroughly conscious ignorance which is a prelude to every real advance.in knowledge.
All the important developments within the kinetic theory took place after this falsification.
Once again, it is fortunate that the theory was not abandoned in the face of falsifications by measurements of the specific heats of gases, as the naive falsificationist at least would be forced to insist.
A fourth example, the Copernican Revolution, will be outlined in more detail in the following section.
This example will emphasize the difficulties that arise for the falsificationist when the complexities of major theory changes are taken into account.
The example will also set the scene for a discussion of some more recent and more adequate attempts to characterize the essence of science and its methods.
The Copernican Revolution
It was generally accepted in mediaeval Europe that the earth lies at the centre of a finite universe and that the sun, planets and stars orbit around it.
The physics and cosmology that provided the framework in which this astronomy was set was basically that developed by Aristotle in the fourth century B.C. In the second  century A.D., Ptolemy devised a detailed astronomical system that specified the orbits of the moon, the sun and all the planets.
In the early decades of the sixteenth century, Copernicus devised a new astronomy, an astronomy involving a moving earth, which challenged the Aristotelian and Ptolemaic system.
According to the Copernican view, the earth is not stationary at the centre of the universe but orbits the sun along with the planets.
By the time Copernicus's idea had been substantiated, the Aristotelian world view had been replaced by the Newtonian one.
The details of the story of this major theory change, a change that took place over one and a half centuries, do not lend support to the methodologies advocated by the inductivists and falsificationists, and indicate a need for a different, more complexly structured account of science and its growth.
When Copernicus first published the details of his new astronomy, in 1543, there were many arguments that could be, and were, levelled against it.
Relative to the scientific knowledge of the time, these arguments were sound ones and Copernicus could not satisfactorily defend his theory against them.
In order to appreciate this situation, it is necessary to be familiar with some aspects of the Aristotelian world view on which the arguments against Copernicus were based.
A very brief sketch of some of the relevant points follows.
The Aristotelian universe was divided into two distinct regions.
The sub-lunar region was the inner region, extending from the central earth to just inside the moon's orbit.
The super-lunar region was the remainder of the finite universe, extending from the moon's orbit to the sphere of the stars, which marked the outer boundary of the universe.
Nothing existed beyond the outer sphere, not even space.
Unfilled space is an impossibility in the Aristotelian system.
All celestial objects in the super-lunar region were made of an incorruptible element called aether.
Aether possessed a natural propensity to move around the centre of the universe in perfect circles.
This basic idea became modified and extended in Ptolemy's astronomy.
Since observations of planetary positions at various times could not be reconciled with circular, earth-centred orbits, Ptolemy introduced further circles, called epicycles, into the system.
Planets moved in circles, or epicycles, the centres of which moved in circles around the earth.
The orbits could be further refined by adding epicycles to epicycles etc. in such a way that the resulting system was compatible with observations of planetary positions and capable of predicting future planetary positions.
In contrast to the orderly, regular, incorruptible character of the super-lunar region, the sub-lunar region was marked by change, growth and decay, generation and corruption.
All substances in the sub-lunar region were mixtures of four elements, air, earth, fire and water, and the relative proportions of elements in a mixture determined the properties of the substance so constituted.
Each element had a natural place in the universe.
The natural place for earth was at the centre of the universe; for water, on the surface of the earth; for air, in the region immediately above the surface of the earth; and for fire, at the top of the atmosphere, close to the moon's orbit.
Consequently, each earthly object would have a natural place in the sub-lunar region depending on the relative proportion of the four elements that it contained.
Stones, being mostly earth, have a natural place near the centre of the earth, while flames, being mostly fire, have a natural place near to the moon's orbit, and so on.
All objects have a propensity to move in straight lines, upwards or downwards, towards their natural place.
Thus stones have a natural motion straight downwards, towards the centre of the earth, and flames have a natural motion straight upwards, away from the centre of the earth.
All motions other than natural motions require a cause.
For instance, arrows need to be propelled by a bow and chariots need to be drawn by horses.
These, then, are the bare bones of the Aristotelian mechanics and cosmology that were presupposed by contemporaries of Copernicus, and which were utilized in arguments against a moving earth.
Let us look at some of the forceful arguments against the Copernican system.
Perhaps the argument that constituted the most serious threat to Copernicus was the so-called tower argument.
It runs as follows.
If the earth spins on its axis, as Copernicus had it, then any point on the earth's surface will move a considerable distance in a second.
If a stone is dropped from the top of a tower erected on the moving earth, it will execute its natural motion and fall towards the centre of the earth.
While it is doing so the tower will be sharing the motion of the earth, due to its spinning.
Consequently, by the time the stone reaches the surface of the earth the tower will have moved around from the position it occupied at the beginning of the stone's downward journey.
The stone should therefore strike the ground some distance from the foot of the tower.
But this does not happen in practice.
The stones strikes the ground at the base of the tower.
It follows that the earth cannot be spinning and that Copernicus's theory is false.
Another mechanical argument against Copernicus concerns loose objects such as stones, philosophers, etc. resting on the surface of the earth.
If the earth spins, why are such objects not flung from the earth's surface, as stones would be flung from the rim of a rotating wheel?
And if the earth, as well as spinning, moves bodily around the sun, why doesn't it leave the moon behind?
Some arguments against Copernicus based on astronomical considerations have been mentioned earlier in this book.
They involved the absence of parallax in the observed positions of the stars and the fact that Mars and Venus, as viewed by the naked eye, do not change size appreciably during the course of the year.
Because of the arguments I have mentioned, and others like them, the supporters of the Copernican theory were faced with serious difficulties.
Copernicus himself was very much immersed in Aristotelian metaphysics and had no adequate response to them.
In view of the strength of the case against Copernicus, it might well be asked just what there was to be said in favour of the Copernican theory in 1543.
The answer is, ‘not very much’.
The main attraction of the Copernican theory lay in the neat way it explained a number of features of planetary motion, which could be explained in the rival Ptolemaic theory only in an unattractive, artificial way.
The features are the retrograde motion of the planets and the fact that, unlike the other planets, Mercury and Venus always remain in the proximity of the sun.
A planet at regular intervals regresses, that is, stops its westward motion among the stars (as viewed from earth) and for a short time retraces its path eastward before continuing its journey westward once again .
In the Ptolemaic system, retrograde motion was explained by the somewhat ad hoc manoeuvre of adding epicycles especially designed for the purpose.
In the Copernican system, no such artificial move is necessary.
Retrograde motion is a natural consequence of the fact that the earth and the planets together orbit the sun against the background of the fixed stars.
Similar remarks apply to the problem of the constant proximity of the sun, Mercury and Venus.
This is a natural consequence of the Copernican system once it is established that the orbits of Mercury and Venus are inside that of the earth.
In the Ptolemaic system, the orbits of the sun, Mercury and Venus have to be artificially linked together to achieve the required result.
There were some mathematical features of the Copernican theory that were in its favour, then.
Apart from these, the two rival systems were more or less on a par as far as simplicity and accord with observations of planetary positions are concerned.
Circular  sun-centred orbits cannot be reconciled with observation, so that Copernicus, like Ptolemy, needed to add epicycles, and the total number of epicycles needed to produce orbits in accord with known observations was about the same for the two systems.
In 1543, the arguments from mathematical simplicity that worked in favour of Copernicus could not be regarded as an adequate counter to the mechanical and astronomical arguments that worked against him.
Nevertheless, a number of mathematically capable natural philosophers were to be attracted to the Copernican system, and their efforts to defend it became increasingly successful over the next hundred years or so.
The person who contributed most significantly to the defence of the Copernican system was Galileo.
He did so in two ways.
Firstly, he used a telescope to observe the heavens, and in so doing he transformed the observational data that the Copernican theory was required to explain.
Secondly, he devised the beginnings of a new mechanics that was to replace Aristotelian mechanics and with reference to which the mechanical arguments against Copernicus were defused.
When, in 1609, Galileo constructed his first telescopes and trained them on the heavens, he made dramatic discoveries.
He saw that there were many stars invisible to the naked eye.
He saw that Jupiter had moons and he saw that the surface of the earth's moon was covered with mountains and craters.
He also observed that the apparent size of Mars and Venus, as viewed through the telescope, changed in the way predicted by the Copernican system.
Later, Galileo was to confirm that Venus had phases like the moon, as Copernicus had predicted but which clashed with Ptolemy's system.
The moons of Jupiter defused the Aristotelian argument against Copernicus based on the fact that the moon stays with an allegedly moving earth.
For now Aristotelians were faced with the same problem with respect to Jupiter and its moons.
The earthlike surface of the moon undermined the Aristotelian distinction between the perfect, incorruptible heavens and the changing, corruptible earth.
The discovery of the phases of Venus marked a success for the Copernicans and a new problem for the Ptolemaics.
It is undeniable that once the observations made by Galileo through his telescope are accepted, the difficulties facing the Copernican theory are diminished.
The foregoing remarks on Galileo and the telescope raise a serious epistemological problem.
Why should observations through a telescope be preferred to naked-eye observations?
One answer to  this question might utilize an optical theory of the telescope that explains its magnifying properties and that also gives an account of the various aberrations to which we can expect telescopic images to be subject.
But Galileo himself did not utilize an optical theory for that purpose.
The first optical theory capable of giving support in this direction was devised by Galileo's contemporary, Kepler, early in the sixteenth century, and this theory was improved and augmented in later decades.
A second way of facing our question concerning the superiority of telescopic to naked-eye observations is to demonstrate the effectiveness of the telescope in a practical way, by focusing it on distant towers, ships, etc. and demonstrating how the instrument magnifies and renders objects more distinctly visible.
However, there is a difficulty with this kind of justification of the use of the telescope in astronomy.
When terrestrial objects are viewed through a telescope, it is possible to separate the viewed object from aberrations contributed by the telescope because of the observer's familiarity with what a tower, a ship, etc. looks like.
This does not apply when an observer searches the heavens for he knows not what.
It is significant in this respect that Galileo's drawing of the moon's surface as he saw it through a telescope contains some craters that do not in fact exist there.
Presumably those ‘craters’ were aberrations arising from the functioning of Galileo's far-from-perfect telescopes.
Enough has been said in this paragraph to indicate that the justification of telescopic observations was no simple, straightforward matter.
Those adversaries of Galileo who queried his findings were not all stupid, stubborn reactionaries.
Justifications were forthcoming, and became more and more adequate as better and better telescopes were constructed and as optical theories of their functioning were developed.
But all this took time.
Galileo's greatest contribution to science was his work in mechanics.
He laid some of the foundations of the Newtonian mechanics that was to replace Aristotle's.
He distinguished clearly between velocity and acceleration and asserted that freely falling objects move with a constant acceleration that is independent of their weight, dropping a distance proportional to the square of the time of fall.
He denied the Aristotelian claim that all motion requires a cause and in its place proposed a circular law of inertia, according to which a moving object subject to no forces will move indefinitely in a circle around the earth at uniform speed.
He  analysed projectile motion by resolving the motion of a projectile into a horizontal component moving with a constant velocity obeying  his law of inertia, and a vertical component subject to a constant acceleration downwards.
He showed that the resulting path of a projectile was a parabola.
He developed the concept of relative motion and argued that the uniform motion of a system could not be detected by mechanical means without access to some reference point outside of the system.
These major developments were not achieved instantaneously by Galileo.
They emerged gradually over a period of half a century, culminating in his book Two New Sciences , which was first published in 1638, almost a century after the publication of Copernicus's major work.
Galileo rendered his new conceptions meaningful and increasingly more precise by means of illustrations and thought experiments.
Occasionally, Galileo described actual experiments, for instance, experiments involving the rolling of spheres down inclined planes, although just how many of these Galileo actually performed is a matter of some dispute.
Galileo's new mechanics enabled the Copernican system to be defended against some of the objections to it mentioned above.
An object held at the top of a tower and sharing with the tower a circular motion around the earth's centre will continue in that motion, along with the tower, after it is dropped and will consequently strike the ground at the foot of the tower, consistent with experience.
Galileo took the argument further and claimed that the correctness of his law of inertia could be demonstrated by dropping a stone from the top of the mast of a uniformly moving ship and noting that it strikes the deck at the foot of the mast, although Galileo did not claim to have performed the experiment.
Galileo was less successful in explaining why loose objects are not flung from the surface of a spinning earth.
With hindsight, this can be attributed to the inadequacies of his principle of inertia and of his lack of a clear conception of gravity as a force.
Although the bulk of Galileo's scientific work was designed to strengthen the Copernican theory, Galileo did not himself devise a detailed astronomy, and seemed to follow the Aristotelians in their preference for circular orbits.
It was Galileo's contemporary, Kepler, who contributed a major breakthrough in that direction when he discovered that each planetary orbit could be represented by a single ellipse, with the sun at one focus.
This eliminated the complex system of epicycles that both Copernicus and Ptolemy had found necessary.
No similar simplification is possible in the Ptolemaic, earth-centre system.
Kepler had at his disposal Tycho Brahé's recordings of planetary positions, which were more accurate  than those available to Copernicus.
After a painstaking analysis of the data, Kepler arrived at his three laws of planetary motion, that planets move in elliptical orbits around the sun, that a line joining a planet to the sun sweeps out equal areas in equal times, and that the square of the period of a planet is proportional to the cube of its mean distance from the sun.
Galileo and Kepler certainly strengthened the case in favour of the Copernican theory.
However, more developments were necessary before that theory was securely based on a comprehensive physics.
Newton was able to take advantage of the work of Galileo, Kepler and others to construct that comprehensive physics that he published in his Principia in 1687.
He spelt out a clear conception of force as the cause of acceleration rather than motion, a conception that had been present in a somewhat confused way in the writings of Galileo and Kepler.
Newton replaced Galileo's law of circular inertia with his own law of linear inertia, according to which bodies continue to move in straight lines at uniform speed unless acted on by a force.
Another major contribution by Newton was of course his law of gravitation.
This enabled Newton to explain the approximate correctness of Kepler's laws of planetary motion and Galileo's law of free fall.
In the Newtonian system, the realms of the celestial bodies and of earthly bodies were unified, each set of bodies moving under the influence of forces according to Newton's laws of motion.
Once Newton's physics had been constituted, it was possible to apply it in detail to astronomy.
It was possible, for instance, to investigate the details of the moon's orbit, taking into account its finite size, the spin of the earth, the wobble of the earth upon its axis, and so on .
It was also possible to investigate the departure of the planets from Kepler's laws due to the finite mass of the sun, interplanetary forces, etc.
Developments such as these were to occupy some of Newton's successors for the next couple of centuries.
The story I have sketched here should be sufficient to indicate that the Copernican Revolution did not take place at the drop of a hat or two from the Leaning Tower of Pisa.
It is also clear that neither the inductivists nor the falsificationists give an account of science that is compatible with it.
New concepts of force and inertia did not come about as a result of careful observation and experiment.
Nor did they come about through the falsification of bold conjectures and the continual replacement of one bold conjecture by another.
Early formulations of the new theory, involving imperfectly formulated novel conceptions, were persevered with and  developed in spite of apparent falsifications.
It was only after a new system of physics had been devised, a process that involved the intellectual labour of many scientists over several centuries, that the new theory could be successfully matched with the results of observation and experiment in a detailed way.
No account of science can be regarded as anywhere near adequate unless it can accommodate such factors.
Theories as Structures: 1.
Research Programmes
Theories should be considered as structural wholes
The sketch of the Copernican Revolution presented in the previous chapter strongly suggests that the inductivist and falsificationist accounts of science are too piecemeal.
Concentrating on the relationships between theories and individual observation statements or sets of them, they fail to take account of the complexity of major scientific theories.
Neither the naive inductivist emphasis on the inductive derivation of theories from observation, nor the falsificationist scheme of conjectures and falsifications, is capable of yielding an adequate characterization of the genesis and growth of realistically complex theories.
More adequate pictures involve the depiction of theories as structured wholes of some kind.
One reason why it is necessary to regard theories as structures stems from a study of the history of science.
Historical study reveals that the evolution and progress of major sciences exhibit a structure that is not captured by the inductivist or falsificationist accounts.
The programmatic development of the Copernican theory over more than a century has already provided us with one example.
Later in this chapter we will meet others.
However, the historical argument is not the only ground for the claim that theories are structural wholes of some kind.
Another more general philosophical argument is closely linked with the theory-dependence of observation.
It was stressed in Chapter 3 that observation statements must be formulated in the language of some theory.
Consequently, the statements, and the concepts figuring in them, will be as precise and informative as the theory in whose language they are framed is precise and informative.
For example, I think it will be agreed that the Newtonian concept of mass has a  more precise meaning than the concept of democracy, say.
I suggest that the reason for the relatively precise meaning of the former stems from the fact that the concept plays a specific, well-defined role in a precise, structured theory, Newtonian mechanics.
By contrast, the theories in which the concept ‘democracy’ occurs are notoriously vague and multifarious.
If this suggested close connection, between precision of meaning of a term or statement and the role played by that term or statement in a theory, is valid, then the need for coherently structured theories follows fairly directly from it.
The dependence of the meaning of concepts on the structure of the theory in which they occur, and the dependence of the precision of the former on the precision and degree of coherence of the latter, can be made more plausible by noting the limitations of some alternative ways in which a concept might be thought to acquire meaning.
One such alternative is the view that concepts acquire their meaning by way of a definition .
Definitions must be rejected as a fundamental procedure for establishing meanings.
Concepts can only be defined in terms of other concepts, the meanings of which are given.
If the meanings of these latter concepts are themselves established by definition, it is clear that an infinite regress will result unless the meanings of some terms are known by some other means.
A dictionary is useless unless one already knows the meanings of many words.
Newton could not define mass or force in terms of pre-Newtonian concepts.
It was necessary for him to transcend the terms of the old conceptual system by developing a new one.
A second alternative is the suggestion that the meaning of concepts is established through observation, by way of ostensive definition .
A central difficulty with this suggestion has already been discussed in connection with the concept ‘red’ on p.29.
One will not arrive at the concept ‘mass’ through observation alone, however closely one scrutinizes colliding billiard-balls, weights on springs, orbiting planets, etc., nor is it possible to teach others the meaning of mass merely by pointing to such events.
It is not irrelevant to recall here that if one attempts to teach a dog by way of ostensive definition, it invariably responds by sniffing one's finger.
The claim that concepts derive their meaning at least in part from the role they play in a theory is supported by the following historical reflections.
Contrary to the popular myth, Galileo seems to have performed few experiments in mechanics.
Many of the ‘experiments’ he refers to while articulating his theory are thought experiments.
This is a  paradoxical fact for those empiricists who think that new theories are derived from the facts in some way, but it is quite comprehensible when it is realized that precise experimentation can only be carried out if one has a precise theory capable of yielding predictions in the form of precise observation statements.
Galileo was in the process of making a major contribution to the building of a new mechanics that was to prove capable of supporting detailed experimentation at a later stage.
It need not be surprising that his efforts involved thought experiments, analogies and illustrative metaphors rather than detailed experimentation.
I suggest that the typical history of a concept, whether it be ‘chemical element’, ‘atom’, ‘the unconscious’, or whatever, involves the initial emergence of the concept as a vague idea, followed by its gradual clarification as the theory in which it plays a part takes a more precise and coherent form.
The emergence of the concept of electric field provides a particularly striking, if somewhat technical, example.
When the concept was first introduced by Faraday in the fourth decade of the nineteenth century it was very vague, and was articulated with the aid of mechanical analogies and a metaphorical use of terms such as‘tension’, ‘power’ and ‘force’.
The field concept became increasingly better defined as the relationships between the electric field and other electromagnetic quantities were more clearly specified.
Once Maxwell had introduced his displacement current it was possible to bring great coherence to the theory in the form of Maxwell's equations, which clearly established the inter-relationship between all the electromagnetic field quantities.
It was at this stage that the meaning of ‘electric field’ in classical electromagnetic theory reached a high degree of clarity and precision.
It was at this stage, too, that the fields were granted an independence of their own and the aether, which had been considered necessary for providing a mechanical basis for the fields, was dispensed with.
So far we have mentioned two reasons why theories must be seen as organized structures of some kind: the fact that historical study shows theories to possess that feature and the fact that it is only by way of a coherently structured theory that concepts acquire a precise meaning.
A third reason stems from the need for science to grow.
It is clear that science will advance more efficiently if theories are so structured as to contain within them fairly clear clues and prescriptions as to how they should be developed and extended.
They should be open-ended structures that offer a research programme .
Newton's mechanics provided such a programme for eighteenth  and nineteenth-century physicists, the programme for explaining the entire physical world in terms of mechanical systems involving various forces and governed by Newton's laws of motion.
This coherent programme might be compared with modern sociology, much of which is sufficiently concerned with empirical data to satisfy the falsificationist if not the inductivist criteria of good science and yet fails miserably to emulate the success of physics.
I suggest, following Lakatos, that the crucial difference lies in the relative coherence of the two theories.
Modern sociological theories fail to spell out a coherent programme to guide future research.
Lakatos's research programmes
The remainder of the chapter will be devoted to a summary of one notable attempt to  analyse theories as organized structures, Imre Lakatos's ‘Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes’.
Lakatos developed his picture of science in an attempt to improve on, and overcome the objections to, Popperian falsificationism.
A Lakatosian research programme is a structure that provides guidance for future research in both a positive and a negative way.
The negative heuristic of a programme involves the stipulation that the basic assumptions underlying the programme, its hard core , must not be rejected or modified.
It is protected from falsification by a protective belt of auxiliary hypotheses, initial conditions, etc.
The positive heuristic is comprised of rough guidelines indicating how the research programme might be developed.
Such development will involve supplementing the hard core with additional assumptions in an attempt to account for previously known phenomena and to predict novel phenomena.
Research programmes will be progressive or degenerating depending on whether they succeed in leading or whether they persistently fail to lead to the discovery of novel phenomena.
Lest the reader be discouraged by this barrage of new terminology, let me hasten to explain it in fairly simple terms.
The hard core of a programme is, more than anything else, the defining characteristic of a programme.
It takes the form of some very general theoretical hypotheses that form the basis from which the programme is to develop.
Here are some examples.
The hard core of Copernican astronomy would be the assumptions that the earth and the planets orbit a stationary sun and that the earth spins  on its axis once a day.
The hard core of Newtonian physics is comprised of Newton's laws of motion plus his law of  gravitational attraction.
The hard core of Marx's historical materialism would be the assumption that social change is to be explained in terms of class struggle, the nature of the classes and the details of the struggle being determined in the last instance by the economic base.
The hard core of a programme is rendered unfalsifiable by ‘the methodological decision of its protagonists’.
Any inadequacy in the match between an articulated research programme and observational data is to be attributed, not to assumptions that constitute the hard core, but to some other part of the theoretical structure.
The maze of assumptions that constitute this other part of the structure is what Lakatos refers to as the protective belt.
It consists not only of explicit auxiliary hypotheses supplementing the hard core but also assumptions underlying the description of the initial conditions and also observation statements.
For example, the hard core of the Copernican research programme needed to be augmented by adding numerous epicycles to the initially circular planetary orbits and it was also necessary to change the previously accepted estimate of the distance of the stars from earth.
If observed planetary behaviour differed from that predicted by the Copernican research programme at some stage in its development then the hard core of the programme could be protected by modifying the epicycles or adding new ones.
Eventually other, initially implicit, assumptions were to be unearthed and modified.
The hard core was protected by changing the theory underlying the observation language, so that telescopic data replaced naked-eye observations, for instance.
The initial conditions also came to be modified eventually, with the addition of new planets.
The negative heuristic of a programme is the demand that during the development of the programme the hard core is to remain unmodified and intact.
Any scientist who modifies the hard core has opted out of that particular research programme.
Tycho Brahé opted out of the Copernican research programme and initiated another when he proposed that all planets other than the earth orbit the sun, while the sun itself orbits a stationary earth.
Lakatos's emphasis on the conventional element attached to work within a research programme, on the need for scientists to decide to accept its hard core, has much in common with Popper's position with respect to observation statements, which was discussed in section 2 of the previous chapter.
The major difference is that whereas in Popper the decisions concern the acceptance of singular statements  only, in Lakatos the device is extended so as to be applicable to the universal statements that make up the hard core.
I have similar reservations about Lakatos's emphasis on the explicit decisions of individual scientists to those I mentioned in connection with Popper.
The question will be discussed more fully in later chapters.
The positive heuristic, that aspect of a research programme that indicates to scientists the kind of thing they should do rather than what they should not do, is somewhat vaguer and more difficult to characterize specifically than the negative heuristic.
The positive heuristic indicates how the hard core is to be supplemented in order for it to be capable of explaining and predicting real phenomena.
In Lakatos's own words, ‘The positive heuristic consists of a partially articulated set of suggestions or hints on how to change, develop, the ‘refutable variants’ of the research programme, how to modify, sophisticate, the ‘refutable’protective belt’.
The development of a research programme will involve not only the addition of suitable auxiliary hypotheses but also the development of adequate mathematical and experimental techniques.
For instance, from the very inception of the Copernican programme it was clear that adequate mathematical techniques for manipulating epicyclic motions, improved techniques for astronomical observations and adequate theories governing the use of a variety of instruments were necessary for the elaboration and detailed application of the programme.
Lakatos illustrated the notion of the positive heuristic with the story of Newton's early development of his gravitational theory.
Newton first arrived at the inverse square law of attraction by considering the elliptical motion of a point planet around a stationary point sun.
It was clear that if the gravitational theory was to be applied in practice to planetary motion, the programme would need to develop from this idealized model to more realistic ones.
But that development involved the solution of theoretical problems and was not to be achieved without considerable theoretical labour.
Newton himself, faced with a definite programme, that is, guided by a positive heuristic, made considerable progress.
He first took into account the fact that a sun as well as a planet moves under the influence of their mutual attraction.
Then he took account of the finite size of the planets and treated them as spheres.
After solving the mathematical problem posed by that move, Newton proceeded to allow for other complications such as those introduced by the possibility that a planet can spin, and the fact that there are gravitational forces between the individual planets as well as between each  planet and the sun.
When Newton had progressed that far in the programme, following a path that had presented itself as more or less necessary from the outset, he began to be concerned about the match between his theory and observation.
When the match was found wanting, he was able to proceed to non-spherical planets, and so on.
As well as the theoretical programme contained in the positive heuristic, a fairly definite experimental programme suggested itself.
That programme included the development of more accurate telescopes, together with auxiliary theories required for their use in astronomy such as those providing adequate means for allowing for refraction of light in the earth's atmosphere.
The initial formulation of Newton's programme also implied the desirability of constructing apparatus sensitive enough to detect  gravitational attraction on a laboratory scale (Cavendish's experiment).
The programme implicit in Newton's gravitational theory gave strong heuristic guidance.
Lakatos gives a fairly detailed account of Bohr's theory of the atom as another convincing example.
An important feature of these examples of developing research programmes is the comparatively late stage at which observational testing becomes relevant.
This is in keeping with my comments about Galileo's construction of the origins of mechanics in the previous section.
Early work on a research programme takes place without heed of or in spite of apparent falsifications by observation.
A research programme must be given a chance to realize its full potential.
A suitably sophisticated and adequate protective belt must be constructed.
In our example of the Copernican Revolution, this included the development of an adequate mechanics and optics.
When a programme has been developed to a stage where it is appropriate to subject it to observational tests it is confirmations rather than falsifications that are of paramount importance, according to Lakatos.
A research programme is required to succeed, at least intermittently, to make novel predictions that turn out to be confirmed.
The notion of a ‘novel’ prediction was discussed in section 4 of Chapter 5.
Newton's theory experienced dramatic successes of this kind when Galle first observed the planet Neptune and Cavendish first detected gravitational attraction on the laboratory scale.
Such successes were the marks of the progressive character of the programme.
By contrast, Ptolemaic astronomy had failed to predict novel phenomena throughout the Middle Ages.
By Newton's time, the Ptolemaic theory was decidedly a degenerating one.
Two ways in which the merit of a research programme is to be assessed have emerged from the foregoing outline.
Firstly, a research programme should possess a degree of coherence that involves the mapping out of a definite programme for future research.
Secondly, a research programme should lead to the discovery of novel phenomena at least occasionally.
A research programme must satisfy both conditions if it is to qualify as a scientific one.
Lakatos offers Marxism and Freudian psychology as programmes that satisfy the first criterion but do not satisfy the second, and modern sociology as a programme that perhaps satisfies the second but does not satisfy the first.
Methodology within a research programme
Within Lakatos's framework, scientific methodology must be discussed from two points of view, one concerning the work done within a single research programme, the other concerning the comparison of the merits of competing research programmes.
Work within a single research programme involves the expansion and modification of its protective belt by the addition and articulation of various hypotheses.
What kinds of additions and modifications are to be permitted by a good scientific methodology and what kinds are to be ruled out as non-scientific?
Lakatos's answer to this question is straightforward.
Any move is  permissible as long as it is not ad hoc , in the sense discussed in section 2 of Chapter 5.
Modifications or additions to the protective belt of a research programme must be independently testable.
Individual scientists or groups of scientists are invited to develop the protective belt in any way they choose, provided their moves offer the opportunity of fresh tests and hence the possibility of new discoveries.
By way of illustration, let us take an example from the development of Newton's theory that we have considered several times before, and consider the situation that confronted Leverrier and Adams when they addressed themselves to the troublesome orbit of the planet Uranus.
Those scientists chose to modify the protective belt of the programme by proposing that the initial conditions were inadequate.
Their detailed proposal was scientific because it was independently testable, and, as it eventuated, led to the discovery of the planet Neptune.
But other possible responses to the problem would be genuinely scientific on Lakatos' account.
Another scientist might have proposed a modification in the optical theory  governing the operation of the telescopes used in the investigation.
This move would have been scientific if, for example, it had involved the prediction of a new kind of aberration in such a way that the existence of the new aberration could be tested by optical experiments.
Another move might have involved challenging some assumption in the protective belt such as those concerning refraction in the earth's atmosphere.
Such a move would have been legitimate if it had offered the possibility of new kinds of experimental tests, perhaps leading to the discovery of some unexpected feature of the earth's atmosphere.
Two kinds of move are ruled out by Lakatos's methodology.
Ad hoc hypotheses, hypotheses that are not independently testable, are ruled out.
For instance, in our example, it would have been unscientific to propose that the troublesome motion of the planet Uranus was such because that was its natural motion.
The other kind of move that is ruled out is one that violates the hard core, as we have already mentioned.
A scientist who tried to cope with the orbit of Uranus by proposing that the force between Uranus and the sun obeyed something other than the inverse square law would be opting out of the Newtonian research programme.
The fact that any part of a complex theoretical maze might be responsible for an apparent falsification poses a serious problem for the falsificationist relying on an unqualified method of conjectures and refutations.
For him, the inability to locate the source of the trouble resulted in unmethodical chaos.
Lakatos's account of science is sufficiently structured to avoid that consequence.
Order is maintained by the inviolability of the hard core of a programme and by the positive heuristic that accompanies it.
The proliferation of ingenious conjectures within that framework-will lead to progress provided some of the predictions resulting from the ingenious conjectures occasionally prove successful.
Decisions to retain or reject an hypothesis are fairly straightforwardly determined by the results of experimental tests.
Those that survive experimental tests are provisionally retained and those that fail to survive them are rejected, although some decisions are open to appeal in the light of some further ingenious, independently testable hypothesis.
The bearing of observation on an hypothesis under test is relatively unproblematic within a research programme because the hard core and the positive heuristic serve to define a fairly stable observation language.
The comparison of research programmes
While the relative merits of competing hypotheses within a research programme can be determined in a relatively straightforward way, the comparison of rival research programmes is more problematic.
Roughly speaking, the relative merits of research programmes are to be judged by the extent to which they are progressing or degenerating.
A degenerating programme will give way to a more progressive rival, just as Ptolemaic astronomy eventually gave way to the Copernican theory.
A major difficulty with this criterion for the acceptance and rejection of research programmes is associated with the time factor.
How much time must elapse before it can be decided that a programme has seriously degenerated, that it is incapable of leading to the discovery of new phenomena?
Lakatos's parable about hypothetical planetary misbehaviour, reproduced on pp.65–66, indicates the difficulty.
In this imaginary development within Newtonian astronomy, it was never possible to be sure that a major success was not just around the corner.
To take a genuine historical example, it was over seventy years before Copernicus's prediction about the phases of Venus was found to be correct, and several centuries before the Copernican prediction that the fixed stars should exhibit parallax was confirmed.
Because of the uncertainty of the outcome of future attempts to develop and test a research programme, it can never be said of any programme that it has degenerated beyond all hope.
It is always possible that some ingenious modification of its protective belt will lead to some spectacular discovery that will bring the programme to life again and set it on a progressive phase.
The history of theories of electricity provides an example of the changing fortunes of rival research programmes.
One programme, which I will call the action at a distance theory, regarded electricity as a fluid or particles of some kind residing in electrically charged bodies and flowing through electrical circuits.
Separated elements of electricity were supposed to act on each other instantaneously at a distance across empty space with a force depending on the separation and the motion of the elements.
The other programme was the field theory initiated by Faraday, according to which electrical phenomena can be explained in terms of actions going on in the medium surrounding electrified bodies and electric circuits, rather than in terms of the behaviour of a substance within them.
Before Faraday's successes it was the action at a distance theory that was  progressive.
It led to the discovery of the ability of a Leyden jar to store electricity and to Cavendish's discovery of the inverse square law of attraction or repulsion between charged bodies.
However, the field approach was to surpass the action at a distance approach with Faraday's discovery of electromagnetic induction and his invention of the electric motor, the dynamo and the transformer in the 1830s.
The field theory progressed even more dramatically when, a few decades later, Hertz produced the radio waves predicted by the programme.
Nevertheless, the action at a distance theory was not finished.
It was from that programme that the notion of the electron emerged.
It had been predicted in a vague form by action at a distance theorist W. Weber in the first half of the nineteenth century, was predicted in a more precise way by H.A.
Lorentz in 1892, and was eventually detected experimentally by J.J. Thomson and others later that decade.
The development of classical electromagnetic theory would have been much impaired if the action at a distance approach had been abandoned earlier in the century because of the superior progress of the field programme.
Incidentally, the interaction between the two programmes, and the fact that classical electromagnetic theory emerged as a reconciliation of the two programmes, inheriting the fields from one and the electron from the other, suggests that research programmes are not as autonomous as the Lakatos account suggests.
Within the Lakatos account, then, one can never make the unqualified claim that one research programme is ‘better’ than a rival.
Lakatos himself admits that the relative merits of two programmes can only be decided ‘with hindsight’.
Because he has failed to offer a clear-cut criterion for the rejection of any coherent research programme, or for choosing between rival research programmes, one might wish to say, with Feyerabend, that Lakatos's methodology is ‘a verbal ornament , as a memorial to happier times when it was still thought possible to run a complex and often catastrophic business like science by following a few simple and ‘rational’ rules’.
The issue raised here will be discussed in some detail in Chapter 9.
Theories as Structures: 2.
Kuhn's Paradigms
Introductory remarks
A second view that a scientific theory is a complex structure of some kind is one that has received a great deal of attention in recent years.
I refer to the view developed by Thomas Kuhn, the first version of which appeared in his book The Structure of Scientific Revolutions , initially published in 1962.
Kuhn started his academic career as a physicist and then turned his attention to history of science.
On doing so, he found that his preconceptions about the nature of science were shattered.
He came to realize that traditional accounts of science, whether  inductivist or falsificationist, do not bear comparison with historical evidence.
Kuhn's theory of science was subsequently developed as an attempt to give a theory of science more in keeping with the historical situation as he saw it.
A key feature of his theory is the emphasis placed on the revolutionary character of scientific progress, where a revolution involves the abandonment of one theoretical structure and its replacement by another, incompatible one.
Another important feature is the important role played in Kuhn's theory by the sociological characteristics of scientific communities.
The approaches of Lakatos and Kuhn have some things in common.
In particular, both demand of their philosophical accounts that they stand up to criticism based on the history of science.
Kuhn's account predates Lakatos's methodology of scientific research programmes, and I think it is fair to say that Lakatos adapted some of Kuhn's results to his own purposes.
Lakatos's account was presented first in this book because it is best seen as a culmination of the Popperian programme and as a direct response to and an attempt to improve on the limitations of Popperian  falsificationism.
The major differences between Kuhn on the one hand and Popper and Lakatos on the other is the former's emphasis on sociological factors.
Kuhn's ‘relativism’ will be discussed and criticized later in the book.
In the present chapter, I will restrict myself to a simple summary of Kuhn's views.
Kuhn's picture of the way a science progresses can be summarized by the following open-ended scheme:
pre-science —normal science —crisis-revolution —new normal science —new crisis 
The disorganized and diverse activity that precedes the formation of a science eventually becomes structured and directed when a single paradigm becomes adhered to by a scientific community.
A paradigm is made up of the general theoretical assumptions and laws and techniques for their application that the members of a particular scientific community adopt.
Workers within a paradigm, whether it be Newtonian mechanics, wave optics, analytical chemistry or whatever, practise what Kuhn calls normal science .
Normal scientists will articulate and develop the paradigm in their attempt to account for and accommodate the behaviour of some relevant aspects of the real world as revealed through the results of experimentation.
In doing so, they will inevitably experience difficulties and encounter apparent falsifications.
If difficulties of that kind get out of hand, a crisis state develops.
A crisis is resolved when an entirely new paradigm emerges and attracts the allegiance of more and more scientists until eventually the original, problem-ridden paradigm is abandoned.
The discontinuous change constitutes a scientific revolution .
The new paradigm, full of promise and not beset by apparently insuperable difficulties, now guides new normal scientific activity until it too runs into serious trouble and a new crisis followed by a new revolution results.
With this résumé as a foretaste, let us proceed to look at the various components of Kuhn's scheme in more detail.
Paradigms and normal science
A mature science is governed by a single paradigm.
The paradigm sets the standards for legitimate work within the science it governs.
It co-ordinates and directs the ‘puzzle-solving’ activity of the groups of normal scientists that work within it.
The existence of a  paradigm capable of supporting a normal science tradition is the characteristic that distinguishes science from non-science, according to Kuhn.
Newtonian mechanics, wave optics and classical electromagnetism all constituted and perhaps constitute paradigms and qualify as sciences.
Much of modern sociology lacks a paradigm and consequently fails to qualify as science.
As will be explained below, it is of the nature of a paradigm to belie precise definition.
Nevertheless, it is possible to describe some of the typical components that go to make up a paradigm.
Among the components will be explicitly stated laws and theoretical assumptions comparable to the components of the hard core of a Lakatosian research programme.
Thus Newton's laws of motion form part of the Newtonian paradigm and Maxwell's equations form part of the paradigm that constitutes classical electromagnetic theory.
Paradigms will also include standard ways of applying the fundamental laws to a variety of types of situation.
For instance, the Newtonian paradigm will include methods of applying Newton's laws to planetary motion, pendulums, billiard-ball collisions, and so on .
Instrumentation and instrumental techniques necessary for bringing the laws of the paradigm to bear on the real world will also be included in the paradigm.
The application of the Newtonian paradigm in astronomy involves the use of a variety of approved kinds of telescope, together with techniques for their use and a variety of techniques for the correction of the data collected with their aid.
A further component of paradigms consists of some very general, metaphysical principles that guide work within a paradigm.
Throughout the nineteenth century, the Newtonian paradigm was governed by an assumption something like, ‘The whole of the physical world is to be explained as a mechanical system operating under the influence of various forces according to the dictates of Newton's laws of motion’, and the Cartesian programme in the seventeenth century involved the principle, ‘There is no void and the physical universe is a big clockwork in which all forces take the form of a push’.
Finally, all paradigms will contain some very general methodological prescriptions such as, ‘Make serious attempts to match your paradigm with nature’, or ‘Treat failures in attempts to match a paradigm with nature as serious problems’.
Normal science involves detailed attempts to articulate a paradigm with the aim of improving the match between it and nature.
A paradigm will always be sufficiently imprecise and open-ended to leave plenty of that kind of work to be done.
Kuhn portrays  normal science as a puzzle-solving activity governed by the rules of a paradigm.
The puzzles will be of both a theoretical and experimental nature.
Within the Newtonian paradigm, for instance, typical theoretical puzzles involve devising mathematical techniques for dealing with the motion of a planet subject to more than one attractive force, and developing assumptions suitable for applying Newton's laws to the motion of fluids.
Experimental puzzles included the improvement of the accuracy of telescopic observations and the development of experimental techniques capable of yielding reliable measurements of the  gravitational constant.
Normal scientists must presuppose that a paradigm provides the means for the solution of the puzzles posed within it.
A failure to solve a puzzle is seen as a failure of the scientist rather than as an inadequacy of the paradigm.
Puzzles that resist solution are seen as anomalies rather than as falsifications of a paradigm.
Kuhn recognizes that all paradigms will contain some anomalies (e.g. the Copernican theory and the apparent size of Venus or the Newtonian paradigm and the orbit of Mercury) and rejects all brands of falsificationism.
A normal scientist must be uncritical of the paradigm in which he works.
It is only by being so that he is able to concentrate his efforts on the detailed articulation of the paradigm and to perform the esoteric work necessary to probe nature in depth.
It is the lack of disagreement over fundamentals that distinguishes mature, normal science from the relatively disorganized activity of immature pre-science .
According to Kuhn, the latter is characterized by total disagreement and constant debate over fundamentals, so much so that it is impossible to get down to detailed, esoteric work.
There will be almost as many theories as there are workers in the field and each theoretician will be obliged to start afresh and justify his own particular approach.
Kuhn offers optics before Newton as an example.
There was a wide diversity of theories about the nature of light from the time of the ancients up to Newton.
No general agreement was reached and no detailed, generally accepted theory emerged before Newton proposed and defended his particle theory.
Not only did the rival theorists of the pre-science period disagree over fundamental theoretical assumptions but also over the kinds of observational phenomena that were relevant to their theories.
Insofar as Kuhn recognizes the role played by a paradigm in guiding the search for and interpretation of observable phenomena, he accommodates most of what I have described as the theory-dependence of observation in Chapter 3.
Kuhn insists that there is more to a paradigm that can be explicitly laid down in the form of explicit rules and directions.
He invokes Wittgenstein's discussion of the notion ‘game’ to illustrate some of what he means.
Wittgenstein argued that it is not possible to spell out necessary and sufficient conditions for an activity to be a game.
When one tries, one invariably finds an activity that one's definition includes but that one would not want to count as a game, or an activity that the definition excludes but that one would want to count as a game.
Kuhn claims that the same situation exists with respect to paradigms.
If one tries to give a precise and explicit characterization of some paradigm in the history of science or in present-day science, it always turns out that some work within the paradigm violates the characterization.
However, Kuhn insists that this state of affairs does not render the concept of paradigm untenable any more than the similar situation with respect to‘game’ rules out legitimate use of that concept.
Even though there is no complete, explicit characterization, individual scientists acquire knowledge of a paradigm through their scientific education.
By solving standard problems, performing standard experiments and eventually by doing a piece of research under a supervisor already a skilled practitioner within the paradigm, an aspiring scientist becomes acquainted with the methods, the techniques and the standards of that paradigm.
He will be no more able to give an explicit account of the methods and skills he has acquired than a master-carpenter will be able to fully describe what lies behind his skills.
Much of the normal scientist's knowledge will be tacit , in the sense developed by Michael Polanyi.
Because of the way he is trained, and needs to be trained if he is to work efficiently, a typical normal scientist will be unaware of and unable to articulate the precise nature of the paradigm in which he works.
However, it does not follow from this that a scientist will not be able to attempt to articulate the presuppositions involved in his paradigm, should the need arise.
Such a need will arise when a paradigm is threatened by a rival.
In those circumstances, it will be necessary to attempt to spell out the general laws, metaphysical and methodological principles, etc. involved in a paradigm in order to defend them against the alternatives involved in the threatening new paradigm.
In the next section, I proceed to summarize Kuhn's account of how a paradigm can run into trouble and be replaced by a rival.
Crisis and revolution
The normal scientist works confidently within a well-defined area dictated by a paradigm.
The paradigm presents him with a set of definite problems together with methods that he is confident will be adequate for their solution.
If he blames the paradigm for any failure to solve a problem, he will be open to the same charges as the carpenter who blames his tools.
Nevertheless, failures will be encountered and such failures can eventually attain a degree of seriousness that constitutes a serious crisis for the paradigm and may lead to the rejection of a paradigm and its replacement by an incompatible alternative.
The mere existence of unsolved puzzles within a paradigm does not constitute a crisis.
Kuhn recognizes that paradigms will always encounter difficulties.
There will always be anomalies.
It is only under special sets of conditions that the anomalies can develop in such a way as to undermine confidence in the paradigm.
An anomaly will be regarded as particularly serious if it is seen as striking at the very fundamentals of a paradigm and yet persistently resists attempts by the members of the normal scientific community to remove it.
Kuhn cites as an example problems associated with the aether and the earth's motion relative to it in Maxwell's electromagnetic theory, towards the end of the nineteenth century.
A less-technical example would be the problems that comets posed for the ordered and full Aristotelian cosmos of interconnected crystalline spheres.
Anomalies are also regarded as serious if they are important with respect to some pressing social need.
The problems that beset Ptolemaic astronomy were pressing ones in the light of the need for calendar reform at the time of Copernicus.
Also bearing on the seriousness of an anomaly will be the length of time that it resists attempts to remove it.
The number of serious anomalies is a further factor influencing the onset of a crisis.
According to Kuhn, an analysis of the characteristics of a crisis period in science demands the competence of the psychologist as much as that of an historian.
When anomalies come to be seen as posing serious problems for a paradigm, a period of ‘pronounced professional insecurity’ sets in.
Attempts to solve the problem become more and more radical and the rules set by the paradigm for the solution of problems become progressively more loosened.
Normal scientists begin to engage in philosophical and metaphysical disputes and try to defend their innovations, of dubious status from the point of view of the paradigm, by  philosophical arguments.
Scientists even begin to express openly their discontent with and unease over the reigning paradigm.
Kuhn quotes Wolfgang Pauli's response to what he saw as the growing crisis in physics around 1924.
An exasperated Pauli confessed to a friend, ‘At the moment, physics is again terribly confused.
In any case, it is too difficult for me, and I wish I had been a movie comedian or something of the sort and had never heard of physics’.
Once a paradigm has been weakened and undermined to such an extent that its proponents lose their confidence in it, the time is ripe for revolution.
The seriousness of a crisis deepens when a rival paradigm makes its appearance.
‘The new paradigm, or a sufficient hint to permit later articulation, emerges all at once, sometimes in the middle of the night, in the mind of a man deeply immersed in crisis’.
The new paradigm will be very different from and incompatible with the old one.
The radical differences will be of a variety of kinds.
Each paradigm will regard the world as being made up of different kinds of things.
The Aristotelian paradigm saw the universe as divided into two distinct realms, the incorruptible and unchanging super-lunar region and the corruptible and changing earthly region.
Later paradigms saw the entire universe as being made up of the same kinds of material substances.
Pre-Lavoisier chemistry involved the claim that the world contained a substance called phlogiston, which is driven from materials when they are burnt.
Lavoisier's new paradigm implied that there is no such thing as phlogiston, whereas the gas, oxygen, does exist and plays a quite different role in combustion.
Maxwell's electromagnetic theory involved an aether occupying all space, whereas Einstein's radical recasting of it eliminated the aether.
Rival paradigms will regard different kinds of questions as legitimate or meaningful.
Questions about the weight of phlogiston were important for phlogiston theorists and vacuous for Lavoisier.
Questions about the mass of planets were fundamental for Newtonians and heretical for Aristotelians.
The problem of the velocity of the earth relative to the aether, which was deeply significant for pre-Einsteinian physicists, was dissolved by Einstein.
As well as posing different kinds of questions, paradigms will involve different and incompatible standards.
Unexplained action at a distance was permitted by Newtonians but dismissed by Cartesians as metaphysical and even occult.
Uncaused motion was nonsense for Aristotle and axiomatic for Newton.
The transmutation of elements has an important place in modern nuclear physics (as it  did in mediaeval alchemy) but ran completely counter to the aims of Dalton's atomistic programme.
A number of kinds of events describable within modern microphysics involve an  indeterminacy that had no place in the Newtonian programme.
The way a scientist views a particular aspect of the world will be guided by a paradigm in which he is working.
Kuhn argues that there is a sense in which proponents of rival paradigms are ‘living in different worlds’.
He cites as evidence the fact that changes in the heavens were first noted, recorded and discussed by Western astronomers after the proposal of the Copernican theory.
Before that, the Aristotelian paradigm had dictated that there could be no change in the super-lunar region and, accordingly, no change was observed.
Those changes that were noticed were explained away as disturbances in the upper atmosphere.
More of Kuhn's examples, and others besides, have already been given in Chapter 3.
The change of allegiance on the part of individual scientists from one paradigm to an incompatible alternative is likened by Kuhn to a ‘gestalt switch’ or a ‘religious conversion’.
There will be no purely logical argument that demonstrates the superiority of one paradigm over another and that thereby compels a rational scientist to make the change.
One reason why no such demonstration is possible is the fact that a variety of factors are involved in a scientist's judgement of the merits of a scientific theory.
An individual scientist's decision will depend on the priority he gives to the various factors.
The factors will include such things as simplicity, the connection with some pressing social need, the ability to solve some specified kind of problem, and so on.
Thus one scientist might be attracted to the Copernican theory because of the simplicity of certain mathematical features of it.
Another might be attracted to it because he sees in it the possibility of calendar reform.
A third might have been deterred from adopting the Copernican theory because of his involvement with terrestrial mechanics and his awareness of the problems that the Copernican theory posed for it.
A fourth might reject Copernicanism for religious reasons.
A second reason why no logically compelling demonstration of the superiority of one paradigm over another exists stems from the fact that proponents of rival paradigms will subscribe to different sets of standards, metaphysical principles, etc.
Judged by its own standards, paradigm A may be judged superior to paradigm B , while if the standards of paradigm B are used as premises, the judgement may be reversed.
The conclusion of an argument is compelling  only if its premises are accepted.
Supporters of rival paradigms will not accept each other 's premises and so will not necessarily be convinced by each other 's arguments.
It is for this kind of reason that Kuhn compares scientific revolutions to political revolutions.
Just as ‘political revolutions aim to change  political institutions in ways that those institutions themselves pro-hibit’ and consequently ‘political recourse fails’, so the choice ‘between competing paradigms proves to be a choice between incompatible modes of community life’, and no argument can be ‘logically or even probabilistically compelling’.
This is not to say, however, that various arguments will not be among the important factors that influence the decisions of scientists.
On Kuhn's view, the kinds of factors that do prove effective in causing scientists to change paradigms is a matter to be discovered by psychological and sociological investigation.
There are a number of interrelated reasons, then, why, when one paradigm competes with another; there is no logically compelling argument that dictates that a rational scientist should abandon one for the other.
There is no single criterion by which a scientist must judge the merit or promise of a paradigm, and further, proponents of competing programmes will subscribe to different sets of standards and will even view the world in different ways and describe it in a different language.
The aim of arguments and discussions between supporters of rival paradigms should be persuasion rather than compulsion.
I suggest that what I have summarized in this paragraph is what lies behind Kuhn's claim that rival paradigms are ‘incommensurable’.
A scientific revolution corresponds to the abandonment of one paradigm and the adoption of a new one, not by an individual scientist only but by the relevant scientific community as a whole.
As more and more individual scientists, for a variety of reasons, are converted to the new paradigm there is an ‘increasing shift in the distribution of professional allegiances’.
If the revolution is to be successful, then this shift will spread so as to include the majority of the relevant scientific community, leaving only a few dissenters.
These will be excluded from the new scientific community and will perhaps takes refuge in a philosophy department.
In any case, they will eventually die.
The function of normal science and revolutions
Some aspects of Kuhn's writings might give the impression that his account of the nature of science is a purely descriptive one, that is, that he aims to do nothing more than to describe scientific theories or paradigms and the activity of scientists.
Were this the case, then Kuhn's account of science would be of little value as a theory of science.
A putative theory of science based only on description would be open to some of the same objections as were levelled against the naive inductivist account of how scientific theories themselves are arrived at.
Unless the descriptive account of science is shaped by some theory, no guidance is offered as to what kinds of activities and products of activities are to be described.
In particular, the activities and productions of hack scientists would need to be documented in as much detail as the achievements of an Einstein or a Galileo.
However, it is a mistake to regard Kuhn's characterization of science as arising solely from a description of the work of scientists.
Kuhn insists that his account constitutes a theory of science because it includes an explanation of the function of its various components.
According to Kuhn, normal science and revolutions serve necessary functions, so that science must either involve those characteristics or some others that would serve to perform the same functions.
Let us see what those functions are, according to Kuhn.
Periods of normal science provide the opportunity for scientists to develop the esoteric details of a theory.
Working within a paradigm, the fundamentals of which they take for granted, they are able to perform the exacting experimental and theoretical work necessary to improve the match between the paradigm and nature to an ever-greater degree.
It is through their confidence in the adequacy of a paradigm that scientists are able to devote their energies to attempts to solve the detailed puzzles presented to them within the paradigm, rather than engage in disputes about the legitimacy of their fundamental assumptions and methods.
It is necessary for normal science to be to a large extent uncritical.
If all scientists were critical of all parts of the framework in which they worked all of the time then no detailed work would ever get done.
If all scientists were and remained normal scientists then a particular science would become trapped in a single paradigm and would never progress beyond it.
This would be a serious fault, from the Kuhnian point of view.
A paradigm embodies a particular conceptual framework through which the world is viewed and in which  it is described, and a particular set of experimental and theoretical techniques for matching the paradigm with nature.
But there is no a priori reason to expect that any one paradigm is perfect or even the best available.
There are no inductive procedures for arriving at perfectly adequate paradigms.
Consequently, science should contain within it a means of breaking out of one paradigm into a better one.
This is the function of revolutions.
All paradigms will be inadequate to some extent as far as their match with nature is concerned.
When the mismatch becomes serious, that is, when a crisis develops, the revolutionary step of replacing the entire paradigm by another becomes essential for the effective progress of science.
Progress through revolutions is Kuhn's alternative to the cumulative progress characteristic of inductivist accounts of science.
According to the latter view, scientific knowledge grows continuously as more numerous and more various observations are made, enabling new concepts to be formed, old ones to be refined, and new lawful relationships between them to be discovered.
From Kuhn's particular point of view, this is mistaken because it ignores the role played by paradigms in guiding observation and experiment.
It is just because paradigms have such a persuasive influence on the science practised within them that the replacement of one by another must be a revolutionary one.
One other function catered for in Kuhn's account is worth mentioning.
Kuhn's paradigms are not so precise that they can be replaced by an explicit set of rules, as was mentioned above.
Different scientists or groups of scientists may well interpret and apply the paradigm in a somewhat different way.
Faced with the same situation, not all scientists will reach the same decision or adopt the same strategy.
This has the advantage that the number of strategies attempted will be multiplied.
Risks are thus distributed through the scientific community, and the chances of some long-term success are increased.
‘How else’, asks Kuhn, ‘could the group as a whole hedge its bets?’
Rationalism versus Relativism
In the previous two chapters I have summarized two contemporary analyses of science that differ in fundamental respects.
Lakatos and Kuhn offer conflicting distinctions between science and non-science or pseudo-science.
The clash between Kuhn's views, on the one hand, and those of Lakatos, and also Popper, on the other, has given rise to a debate concerning two contrasting positions associated with the terms ‘rationalism’ and’ relativism ’respectively.
The debate is over the issues of theory appraisal and theory choice and over ways of demarcating science from non-science.
In this chapter, I will first characterize two positions that represent the extremes of the debate, extremes that I will refer to as rationalism and relativism respectively.
Then I will proceed to discuss the extent to which Lakatos and Kuhn can legitimately be characterized as rationalists or relativists.
In the final section, I will begin to cast some doubt on the terms in which the debate has been set.
Rationalism
The extreme rationalist asserts that there is a single, timeless, universal criterion with reference to which the relative merits of rival theories are to be assessed.
For example, an inductivist might take as his universal criterion the degree of inductive support a theory receives from accepted facts, whilst a falsificationist might base his criterion on the degree of falsifiability of unfalsified theories.
Whatever the details of a rationalist's formulation of the criterion, an important feature of it is its universality and ahistorical character.
The universal criterion will be invoked when  judging the relative merits of the physics of Aristotle and Democritus, Ptolemaic and Copernican astronomy, Freudian and behaviourist psychology or the big bang and steady state theories of the universe.
The extreme rationalist sees the decisions and choices of scientists as being guided by the universal criterion.
The rational scientist will reject theories that fail to live up to it and, when choosing between two rival theories, will choose the one that lives up to it best.
The typical rationalist will believe that theories that meet the demands of the universal criterion are true or approximately true or probably true.
The quotation on page 10 describes how a scientist, who is ‘superhuman’ insofar as he always acts rationally, would operate according to an inductivist rationalist.
The distinction between science and non-science is straightforward for the rationalist.
Only those theories that are such that they can be clearly assessed in terms of the universal criterion and which survive the test are scientific.
Thus an inductivist rationalist might rule that astrology is not a science because it is not inductively derivable from the facts of observation, whilst a falsificationist might rule that Marxism is not scientific because it is not falsifiable.
The typical rationalist will take it as self-evident that a high value is to be placed on knowledge developed in accordance with the universal criterion.
This will be especially so if the process is understood as leading towards truth.
Truth, rationality, and hence science, are seen as intrinsically good.
Relativism
The relativist denies that there is a universal, ahistorical standard of rationality with respect to which one theory can be judged better than another.
What counts as better or worse with respect to scientific theories will vary from individual to individual or from community to community.
The aim of knowledge-seeking will depend on what is important for or what is valued by the individual or community in question.
For example, a high status will typically be attributed to the aim of acquiring material control over nature within Western capitalist societies, but will be accredited with a low status in a culture in which knowledge is designed to produce feelings of contentment or peace.
The dictum of the ancient Greek philosopher Protagoras, ‘man is the measure of all things’, expresses a relativism with respect to individuals, whilst Kuhn's remark ‘there is no standard higher than  the assent of the relevant community’ expresses a relativism with respect to communities.
Characterizations of progress and specifications of criteria for judging the merits of theories will always be relative to the individual or community that subscribes to them.
Decisions and choices made by scientists or groups of scientists will be governed by what is valued by those individuals or groups.
In a given choice situation, there is no universal criterion that dictates a decision that is logically compelling for the’ rational ’ scientist.
An understanding of the choices made by a particular scientist will require an understanding of what that scientist values and will involve psychological investigation, whilst the choices made by a community will depend on what it values and an understanding of those choices will involve sociological investigation.
Boris Hessen's account of the adoption of Newtonian physics in the seventeenth century as a response to the technological needs of the time can be read as a relativist account with respect to communities, whilst Feyerabend's assertion that it is the ‘internal connectedness of all the parts of the (Copernican) system together with his belief in the basic nature of circular motion that makes Copernicus pronounce the motion of the earth as real’ is a remark in keeping with a relativism with respect to individuals.
Since, for the relativist, the criteria for judging the merits of theories will depend on the values or interests of the individual or community entertaining them, the distinction between science and non-science will vary accordingly.
Thus, a theory of the tides based on the moon's attraction was good science for Newtonians but bordered on occult mysticism for Galileo, whilst in contemporary society, Marx's theory of historical change is good science for some and propaganda for others.
For the extreme relativist, the distinction between science and non-science becomes much more arbitrary and less important that it is for the rationalist.
A relativist will deny that there is a unique category, ‘science’, that is intrinsically superior to other forms of knowledge, although it may well be that individuals or communities place a high value on what is usually referred to as science.
If ‘science’(the relativist might well be inclined to use quotation marks) is highly regarded in our society, then this is to be understood by  analysing our society, and not simply by  analysing the nature of science.
With these caricatures of rationalism and relativism as a reference point, let us now consider where Lakatos and Kuhn fit into the picture.
Lakatos as rationalist
Some of Lakatos's writings indicate that he wished to defend a position something like the one I have labelled rationalism, and that he viewed with horror the position I have labelled relativism, a version of which he attributed to Kuhn.
According to Lakatos, the debate ‘concerns our central intellectual values’.
Lakatos explicitly stated that the ‘central problem in philosophy of science is…the problem of stating universal conditions under which a theory is scientific’, a problem which is ‘closely linked with the problem of the rationality of science’ and whose solution ‘ought to give us guidance as to when the acceptance of a scientific theory is rational or not’.
In Lakatos's view, a relativist position according to which there is no standard higher than that of the relevant community leaves us with no way of criticizing that standard.
If there is ‘no way of judging a theory but by assessing the number, faith and vocal energy of its supporters’, then truth lies in power’, scientific change becomes a matter of ‘mob psychology’ and scientific progress is essentially a ‘bandwagon effect’.
In the absence of rational criteria to guide theory choice, theory change becomes akin to religious conversion.
Lakatos's rhetoric, then, does not leave room for much doubt that he wished to defend a rationalist position and deplored the relativist position.
Let us make a careful assessment of the extent to which he succeeded in defending a rationalist position.
Lakatos's universal criterion for the assessment of theories follows from his principle ‘the methodology of scientific research programmes is better suited for approximating the truth in our actual universe than any other methodology’.
Science progresses by way of  competition between research programmes.
A research programme is better than a rival if it is more progressive, the progressive nature of a programme depending on its degree of coherence and the extent to which it has led to successful novel predictions, as discussed in Chapter 7.
The aim of science is truth, and, according to Lakatos, the methodology of research programmes provides the best means of assessing the extent to which we have succeeded in approaching it.
‘I [Lakatos]give criteria of progression and stagnation within a programme and also rules for the ‘elimination’ of whole research programmes’.
By defining standards of rationality ‘the methodology of research programmes might help us in devising laws for stemming…intellectual pollution’.
Remarks such as these indicate that Lakatos aimed to propose a universal criterion for judging research programmes in particular and scientific progress in general.
Whilst Lakatos did propose what was intended to be a universal criterion of rationality or scientificity, he did not regard this criterion as a consequence of logic alone, or somehow God-given.
He regarded it as a testable conjecture.
The adequacy of the conjecture is to be tested by confronting it with the history of science, or, more precisely, given the historical work done by Lakatos and his followers, by confronting it with the history of physics.
Roughly speaking, a proposed methodology (and its associated characterization of what constitutes progress) is to be evaluated by the extent to which it is able to account for ‘good’ science and its history.
At first glance, this mode of proceeding appears circular.
The methodology determines those theories from the history of physics that constitutes good physics whilst it is just those good theories against which the methodology is to be tested.
However, given the details of Lakatos's account and Worrall's clarification of it, this is not so.
There are genuine ways in which tests against the history of physics can support or discredit Lakatos's methodology.
Lakatos's theory gains support if it can be shown that episodes in the history of science, that have been inexplicable in terms of rival methodologies, are explicable in terms of the methodology of research programmes.
For example, Worrall's study of the rejection of Thomas Young's wave theory of light and the retention of Newton's corpuscular theory in the early nineteenth century supports Lakatos.
The rejection of Young's theory, which poses problems from the point of view of rival methodologies and which had been explained by easily discredited theories such as an appeal to hero worship of Newton, is shown by Worrall to be in complete accord with Lakatos's methodology.
A second way in which Lakatos's methodology could conceivably be supported is as follows: The methodology might serve to identify a programme that received strong support from the scientific community but which does not conform to the methodology of research programmes, and this identification might subsequently lead to the novel discovery of some external cause, such as the intervention of some government or industrial monopoly.
If an episode in the history of science does not conform to Lakatos's methodology, and if no satisfactory, independently supported, external explanation can be found, this would constitute evidence against the methodology, especially if a rival methodology can cope with the historical example in a superior way.
Lakatos offers a universal criterion of rationality, then, which is conjectural and is to be tested against the history of science.
Further, the claim is made that his criterion has withstood tests against episodes from the last two hundred or so years of physics in a superior way to rival criteria that have been proposed.
The historical case studies carried out by Lakatos and his followers certainly lend some support to that latter claim.
Some of Lakatos's remarks suggest that his criterion of rationality was intended to guide theory choice.
This is suggested by the quotations earlier in the section, which indicate that Lakatos hoped to give rules for eliminating research programmes and stemming intellectual pollution.
However, in spite of remarks like these, Lakatos's methodology is not capable of yielding advice for scientists, and Lakatos acknowledged this.
In particular, it is not a consequence of Lakatos's methodology that scientists should adopt progressive programmes and abandon degenerating ones.
It is always possible that a degenerating programme might make a come-back.
‘One can be ‘wise’ only after the event….
One must realise that one's opponent, even if lagging badly behind, may still stage a come-back.
No advantage for one side can ever be regarded as absolutely conclusive.’
Consequently, ‘one may rationally stick to a degenerating programme until it is overtaken by a rival and even after ’.
Although Lakatos's methodology embodies a definition of what progress in modern physics has consisted in, it does not offer guidance to those who aim to achieve such progress.
His methodology ‘is more of a guide to the historian of science than the scientist’.
Lakatos failed to offer the rationalist account of science that many of his remarks indicate he intended to give.
According to Lakatos, a field of enquiry is a science if it conforms to the methodology of scientific research programmes and is not if it does not, bearing in mind that this is a conjecture to be tested against the history of physics.
It is evident that Lakatos took it for granted that physics constitutes the paradigm of rationality and good science.
He assumed, without argument, that science, as exemplified by physics, is superior to forms of knowledge that do not share its methodological characteristics.
At one place he described the statement ‘physics has higher verisimilitude than astrology’ as plausible and asks why it should not be accepted as long as no serious alternative is offered.
This highlights a serious weakness in his philosophy.
Lakatos presented his methodology as a response to the problem of distinguishing rationality from irrationality, of stemming intellectual pollution and of throwing  light on questions ‘of vital social and political relevance’ such as the status of Marxism or contemporary research in genetics.
It would appear that a large part of the answer was assumed by him from the outset and without argument.
Lakatos assumed that any field of enquiry that does not share the main characteristics of physics is not science and is inferior to it from the point of view of rationality.
Kuhn as relativist
Kuhn mentions a number of criteria that can be used in assessing whether one theory is better than a rival.
They include ‘accuracy of prediction, particularly of quantitative prediction; the balance between esoteric and everyday subject matter; and the number of different problems solved’ and also, although less importantly, ‘simplicity, scope and compatibility with other specialities’.
Criteria such as these constitute the values of the scientific community.
The means by which these values are specified ‘must, in the final analysis, be psychological or sociological.
It must, that is, be a description of a value system, an ideology, together with an analysis of the institutions through which that system is transmitted and enforced’.
‘There is no standard higher than the assent of the relevant community.’
These aspects of Kuhn's position conform to my characterization of relativism.
Whether or not one theory is better than another is to be judged relative to the standards of the appropriate community, and those standards will typically vary with the cultural and historical setting of the community.
Kuhn's relativism is emphasized in the concluding sentences of the postscript to The Structure of Scientific Revolutions .
‘Scientific knowledge, like language, is intrinsically the common property of a group or else nothing at all.
To understand it we shall need to know the special characteristics of the groups that create and use it.’
Kuhn denies that he is a relativist.
Responding to the charge that he is one, he wrote: ‘Later scientific theories are better than earlier ones for solving puzzles in the often quite different environments to which they are applied.
That is not a relativist's position, and it displays the sense in which I am a convinced believer in scientific progress.’
From this it would seem that Kuhn is a rationalist specifying a universal criterion with respect to which the relative merits of theories can be assessed, namely, problem solving ability.
I do not think that Kuhn's claim that his position is not relativist can  be sustained.
He himself remarks that considerations based on problem-solving ability are ‘neither individually nor collectively compelling’ as far as the relative merits of competing paradigms are concerned, and that ‘aesthetic considerations (according to which the new theory is said to be ‘neater’, ‘more suitable’or ‘simpler’than the old) can sometimes be decisive’.
This brings us back to a relativist position.
A further problem with a universal criterion for progress based on problem-solving ability is the difficulty of specifying that notion in a non-relativist way.
Kuhn's own account of science entails that what is to count as a problem is paradigm or community dependent.
My own favourite example concerns the determination of the atomic and molecular weights of naturally  occurring elements and compounds in the nineteenth century.
These accurate determinations constituted important problems at the time.
From the twentieth century point of view it can be appreciated that naturally  occurring compounds contain what, from the point of view of theoretical chemistry, is an arbitrary and theoretically uninteresting mixture of isotopes so that, as F. Soddy remarked, the painstaking endeavour of the nineteenth century chemists ‘appears as of as little interest and significance as the determination of the average weight of a collection of bottles, some of them full and some of them more or less empty’.
 Whilst Kuhn maintains that science does progress in some sense, he is quite unambiguous in his denial that it can be said to progress towards the truth in any well-defined sense.
In Chapter 13 I will try to explain why I agree with him on this point.
On the question of theory choice, Kuhn insists that there are no criteria of choice that are logically compelling.
‘There is no neutral algorithm for theory choice, no systematic decision procedure which, properly applied, must lead each individual in the group to the same decision.’
Within a scientific community there will exist community sanctioned values guiding the choices of individual scientists, including accuracy, scope, simplicity, fruitfulness and the like.
Scientists holding these values may make different choices in the same concrete situation.
This is due to the fact that they may attribute different weight to the various values, and also may apply the same criterion differently in the same concrete situation.
For Kuhn, whether a field qualifies as a science or not depends on whether or not it conforms to the account of science offered in The Structure of Scientific Revolutions .
The most important feature of a field of enquiry with respect to the distinction between science and non-science, Kuhn claims, is the extent to which that  field is able to support a normal science tradition.
In Kuhn's words ‘it is hard to find another criterion that so clearly proclaims a field a science’.
Kuhn's demarcation criterion has been criticized by Popper on the grounds that it gives undue emphasis to the role of criticism in science; by Lakatos because, among other things, it misses the importance of competition between research programmes (or paradigms); and by Feyerabend on the grounds that Kuhn's distinction leads to the conclusion that organized crime and Oxford philosophy qualify as science.
Like Lakatos, Kuhn does not argue that science is superior to other fields of enquiry, but assumes it.
Indeed, he suggests that if a theory of rationality should clash with science then we should change our theory of rationality.
‘To suppose, instead, that we possess criteria of rationality which are independent of our understanding of the essentials of the scientific progress is to open the door to cloud-cuckoo land.’
This unquestioned high regard for science, as the exemplar of rationality, which Kuhn shares with Lakatos, is, I suggest, the one respect in which Kuhn's position differs from relativism as I have characterized it.
Lakatos's use of terms such as contagious panic with reference to Kuhn's characterization of crisis states and ‘mob psychology’ in reference to his characterization of revolutions is too extreme.
However, there is an element of truth in them.
In Kuhn's account of science the values operative in the process of science and determining the acceptance and rejection of theories are to be discerned by psychological and sociological analysis of the scientific community.
When this is taken in conjunction with the assumption that contemporary science is the epitome of rationality at its best, we are left with a conservative position.
Kuhn's position leaves us with no way of criticizing the decisions and mode of operating of the scientific community.
Whilst sociological analysis is basic within Kuhn's account, he offers very little in the way of sociological theory and offers no suggestions of how acceptable and unacceptable ways of reaching a consensus are to be distinguished.
Lakatos's account fares slightly better in this respect insofar as it does offer means by which some decisions of the scientific community might be criticized.
The discussion of this chapter so far might perhaps be summed up by noting that Lakatos aimed to give a rationalist account of science but failed, whilst Kuhn denied that he aimed to give a relativist account of science but gave one nevertheless.
Towards changing the terms of the debate
In this chapter the discussion of rationalism and relativism has been concerned almost exclusively with appraisals and judgements about aspects of knowledge.
We have considered various analyses of the kind of criteria that enable individuals or groups to judge whether one theory is better than a rival, or whether or not a particular body of knowledge is scientific.
The appropriateness of that kind of question for understanding the nature of science in a fundamental way is brought into question when it is pointed out that there is what would seem to be a fairly straightforward distinction between some state of affairs and judgements about that state of affairs made by individuals or groups.
Is it not possible, for example, that some theory is better, in the sense of being closer to the truth, a better problem solver, a better instrument of prediction or whatever, than a rival, even though no individual or group judges it to be so?
Is it not the case that individuals or groups can be wrong in their judgements about the nature or status of some theory?
The posing of this kind of question suggests that there might well be a way of  analysing science, its aims and its mode of progress, that focuses on features of science itself, irrespective of what individuals or groups might think.
In the following chapter I will prepare the way for an analysis of that kind and in Chapter 11 I will propose an account of theory change in physics that does not hinge on the judgements of individuals or groups.