

Contributors
MELVYN BRAGG has been having a busy year.
His latest novel,Crystal Rooms , originally written as a serial for Esquire, was published in the summer; his first play,King Lear in New York , premiered recently at Chichester; and the latest series of The South Bank Show begins in October.
Melvyn interviews John Cleese on page 46.
He says his favourite Monty Python sketch is the one about Jean-Paul Sartre.
NEIL MacLEAN (below) joins Esquire this month as travel editor.
A former Travel Writer of the Year, Neil's first word as a baby was ‘wuhu’, which he later discovered to be a town on the Yangtze River.
He writes regularly on travel and food for the Sunday Times and his favourite Monty Python sketch is The Cheese Shop.
DAVID JAMES SMITH began his journalistic career writing about flower shows and jumble sales in Pinner for the Harrow Observer .
Now a freelance journalist, in his first piece for Esquire he returns to Pinner to trace the story of a young man who was drawn inexorably into a spiral which led to murder (When Iain Met Tommy, page 126).
David was once cuffed around the ear for reciting The Spam Sketch during a school geography lesson.
JEREMY CLARKSON is a regular presenter on BBC2's Top Gear programme and this month becomes Esquire's new motoring editor.
Jeremy was swiftly ejected from his first job, at the Rotherham Advertiser and for a time he made Paddington Bears for a living.
Such is his passion for Monty Python that he and his friends used to ring each other up in the morning with a quotation and have until five o'clock to remember what sketch it came from.
Jeremy is a particular fan of Novel Writing From Dorset.
STEPHEN WALLIS photographed our fashion story, Grey Mischief, on page 84.
He has been taking photographs for ten years and divides his time between Paris and New York, where he was born.
He us currently working on a book of pictures of cows and admires The Knights That Say Ni in The Holy Grail .
GILBERT ADAIR is a contributing editor of Esquire and writes our regular Last Word column, two examples of which are included in a collection of his journalism published this month entitled The Post-modernist Always Rings Twice .
Gilbert's latest novel,The Death of the Author , has also just been published.
In the meantime, he continues with his task, already three years old, of translating Georges Perec's novel La Disparition .
Faithful to the original, his translation will use no words which include the letter ‘e’.
Gilbert fondly refers to this vaguely surreal project as his ‘Dead Perec Sketch’.
SMART
Nine Pages in the Life of the Culture
Is growing up just about getting to grips with your manhood?
THE WILDMAN HAS ARRIVED IN BRITAIN.
Later this month, around 100 men will gather near Wimbourne in Dorset.
Each will bring a drum and a towel, as instructed.
For three days they will act out their feelings, confront their emotions, and generally ‘bond’ with each other.
At the root of all this activity will be the search for an answer to the question: what does it mean to be a man?
‘Manhood is about growing up,’ says Chris Malcolmson, one of the organizers.
‘We're guys, we're vulnerable, but we don't like to say so.
It's time to grow up.’
One wonders just exactly how much banging a drum has to do with growing up, but the central issue of manhood is one which is certainly worth addressing.
In America, so-called Wildman weekends are proliferating and have received celebrity endorsements from the likes of Kevin Costner (although whether Costner's approval is a plus or not is debatable).
It is could be called a movement, then it is one which is concerned with feelings rather than rights.
It is about men reconciling their feelings towards their fathers and learning how to show emotion.
But if the best way to do this is by romping around a campfire and sniffing each other 's bottoms is open to question.
‘A lot of guys go thinking they're going to buy sensitivity,’ says Richard Bradley, who produced a BBC Forty Minutes documentary about a Wildman weekend shown earlier this year.
Although he admits there were ‘times it felt like farce — chasing a guy through the woods who was chasing the ghost of his dead father’, Bradley nevertheless says there were moments when he was caught up in the atmosphere.
‘To see a hundred men in a circle reduced to sobs in two minutes and hear the woods echoing with the sound was extraordinary.’
He also took part in the final ceremony of initiation into manhood which ends with a mass hugging.
‘It was very emotional,’ says Bradley, although he adds, ‘It was nice to get home and be hugged by a woman again.
Fewer bristles.’
So will it catch on here?
Bradley finds it hard to imagine ‘a stockbroker and a labourer screaming and bellowing in the wilds of Dorset’, but at the same time, he suspects that perhaps British men might get some benefit out of it.
At least it will be an opportunity to improve their drumming.
Swamp thing: wild in the country.
People
LYNCH MOB
First seen as the sultry waitress at the Double R diner in Twin Peaks , actress Mädchen Amick makes her big screen début next month in Fire Walk With Me , David Lynch's prequel to the overhyped TV series.
While Sherilyn Fenn's brand of brazen sexuality was unmistakably Fifties Hollywood, 20-year-old Amick exudes an altogether more subtle quality that oozes glamour.
Her life has been a prototypical starlet scenario: country girl with dreams comes to the city and gets to see her name in lights.
Having successfully made the leap from television to the silver screen, she's come a long way from her origins in Nowheresville, Nevada, but then Nowheresville, Nevada, sounds a little like Twin Peaks .
THE EARTH MOVED
Born in North Carolina 29 years ago, Tori Amos was playing piano before she could talk and writing songs before she could walk.
After an inauspicious début as part of a band, Amos went solo and relocated to London.
She emerged at the start of this year with the album Little Earthquakes , a collection of quietly rapturous songs that cast an unflinching eye across such subjects as loss of virginity, shattered romance and kinky sexual encounters.
She seems certain to survive comparisons with Kate Bush, Patti Smith, and Joni Mitchell to emerge as one of the great, idiosyncratic talents of the Nineties.
LIVING ON HIS WITS
‘I 1987 I went to Edinburgh and saw live stand-up comics for the first time,’ says Frank Skinner.
‘I was with a mate and he said: ‘Why don't you have a go, and I'll be your manager?’’
Four years later Skinner won the ‘Pick of the Fringe’ award at the festival.
His success projected him on to Channel 4's comedy series Packet of Three and its follow-up,Packing Them In , which starts this month.
‘I'm not political,’ he explains.
‘When I'm on stage it's just me rattling on.
In the normal course of conversation I wouldn't talk about politics, I'd talk more about shagging.
That comes out on stage.’
Music
The eclectic talent of Tom Waits
BY JON WILDE
HARRY DEAN STANTON once told me that during the filming of 1984's Paris, Texas , he wandered alone into the desert after a tiff with the director, Wim Wenders.
There, in the middle of nowhere, he found a copy of Tom Waits's début album,Closing Time , which had melted over a disused railway track.
I repeated the story to a delighted Waits.
‘It sounds like the kind of story Harry would make up,’ he grinned.
‘Hell, it's a nicer place to end up than in a cut-price bin at the local record store.’
It sounds just like the kind of story Waits himself would make up.
He once claimed to me that he was able to open a beer bottle with his eye and that it would cost me $29 for the privilege of seeing the trick.
‘I never lie,’ he once said.
‘I always tell the truth, except to policemen.
But I think there's a place where your memory becomes distorted like a funhouse mirror and that's the area I'm most interested in.’
When Waits was discovered singing in a Los Angeles club in 1971, he was working part-time as a fireman: ‘See, I got into music by chance.
I saw this ad on the back of a matchbox which promised to show me the way to achieve success without having to go through college.
I sent off my $5 and I got back a list of occupations: TV repairman, shoe salesman, musician, fireman, axe murderer.
I just liked the sound of being a musician but, for a while, I had to make do with being a fireman.
On his early records, Waits sang about the boozy netherworld of urban America with a whisky-soaked, tobacco-stained voice that seemed to grow craggier with each release.
It is the kind of voice that has always inspired extravagant metaphors.
One interviewer wrote that it sounds like it's been squatted in by thirteen separate Puerto Rican junkie families with tubercular in-laws and half a dozen barking dogs.
On the title track of his début album, Waits sang: ‘The dreams aren't broken down here, they're walking with a limp,’ and that line offers a neat résumé of his lyrical concerns through the Seventies.
Meanwhile, his music gradually evolved from straight bar-room balladry to encompass elements of jazz and blues, most effectively on 1974's The Heart of Saturday Night and 1977's Small Change .
By the start of the Eighties, he was beginning to transcend his cult status.
Consequently, he started looking rather less convincing as self-appointed bard of the downtrodden, with 1978's Blue Valentine and 1980's Heartattack & Vine verging precariously on self parody.
However, 1983 brought a shift of direction that was as welcome as it was dramatic.
Following his ill-fated collaboration with Crystal Gayle on the soundtrack to Coppola's One From the Heart , Waits released the brilliantly eclectic Swordfishtrombones , the first instalment of a trilogy that would continue through 1985's Rain Dogs and conclude with 1987's Franks Wild Years .
Described by Waits as ‘music for the electric chair’, these three albums leaned increasingly towards fractured instrumentation and lyrical obliqueness, fusing elements as diverse as Cajun, Tin Pan Alley, country, bebop and Cuban waltzes.
After the release of the lacklustre concert album,Big Time , in 1988, Waits virtually withdrew from music to concentrate on his burgeoning movie career.
He is one of the few artists to make a successful transition from music to movies.
Unlike Sting, Dylan and Bowie, Waits has never looked like a rock star overreaching himself.
Over the years he has appeared in The Stone Boy ,The Outsiders ,Rumblefish ,The Cotton Club ,Paradise Alley and, most memorably, as the down-and-out DJ in Jim Jarmusch's Down By Law and the jinked hobo in Hector Babenco's Ironweed .
More recently he has turned up in The Fisher King and At Play in the Fields of the Lord , and he has a small role in Coppola's forthcoming Dracula .
This summer brought a welcome return to music with his soundtrack to Jarmusch's Night on Earth , which is followed this month by Bone Machine , his first studio album for more than five years.
These days, he's a happily married father of two and confesses to a certain ambivalence about making records.
‘There will come a time when I won't feel the need to make any music,’ Waits's says.
‘I'll just out on the porch in a skirt with a shotgun and a torn umbrella, and if you hit your baseball into my yard you'll never see it again.’
RECOMMENDED LISTENING
FLOORED GENIUS —The Best of Julian Cope and The Teardrop Explodes (Island)Spanning a decade of Cope's wilfully erratic career, this potent compilation includes such brilliantly idiosyncratic moments as ‘Reward’, ‘World Shut Your Mouth’ and ‘Out of My Mind on Dope and Speed’.
NATURAL THING —Juliet Roberts (WEA)Former Working Week chanteuse returns to the fray with a forceful set of funk/soul workouts which occasionally inspire her peppy vocal to blissful, orgasmic heights.
HAPPY IN HELL —The Christians (Island)Restrained soul-pop outing that sees the brothers Christian returning to the kind of infectious form that brought them success with ‘Forgotten Town’ and ‘Ideal World’.
GOOD NEWS —Carmel (East West)Still criminally neglected in this country, brassy belter Carmel McCourt arranges yet another stormy marriage of jazz, pop, blues and gospel.
NERVE SET —Brian Eno (WEA)Following his collaboration with John Cale on Wrong Way Up and his production duties with U2, Eno drags his ambient aesthetic kicking and screaming on to the dance floor.
Books
Derek Raymond's bleak world
BY NICK HORNBY
NOVELISTS WHO HIDE themselves away for months or years usually emerge from their seclusion nervously clutching a manuscript, hand it over to their publishers, and wait by the phone for some kind of reaction.
The reaction that thriller writer Derek Raymond received for his most recent novel,I Was Dora Suarez , was disconcerting in the extreme: his editor vomited all over the fist chapter.
(‘Made a frightful mess of it, actually,’ Raymond recalls ruefully.)
The puke, it transpired, was a variation of the more socially acceptable ‘I wish you luck in placing this elsewhere’ rejection, and Raymond subsequently changed publishers.
‘I Was Dora Suarez is one of Raymond's celebrated sequence of ‘black’ novels, and it is difficult to see how he can borrow any further into the darkness inside us all without popping out the other side.
In The Hidden Files , his fascinating contemplation of his life and his work, he confesses that writing Suarez almost cost him his sanity, and in trying to analyse what the black novel means to him he returns to it again and again, like a child rubbing a particularly vicious boil.
That nauseating first chapter contains a graphic description of an axe murderer's modus operandi (‘You have to spell it out clearly, simply to portray just how fucking disgusting the whole thing is’); the author weaves the killer into another, quite awesomely sordid narrative involving AIDS and gerbils.
‘I'm a very bleak writer,’ Raymond elaborates unnecessarily.
‘I don't find that much to laugh at.’
In conversation, Raymond is thankfully much cheerier.
He is an odd character.
His Etonian vowels give him a peculiar aural resemblance to Brian Johnston of Test Match Special (imagine Johnners talking about what an axe can do to the flesh and you will have some idea of just how disorienting this is).
The Hidden Files confirms one's impressions that this is a writer with a life more varied than most.
After Eton and a spell as a waiter in the United States, he fell in with the exotic Soho underworld of the day and found himself earning £500 a week, very good money in 1961.
(‘I pointed out to my boss that we could run the business straight and still pull in the same sort of money, but he said straight money didn't spend right.’)
These experiences are fictionalized in his first novel,The Crust on Its Uppers (republished by Serpent's Tail to coincide with the publication of The Hidden Files ).
For much of the last couple of decades, he has been living in France, where he is accorded a reverence denied him in his native country.
He has recently been offered the use of Georges Simenon's old room in the offices of the French CID and he has won several awards for his books on the other side of the Channel.
He believes that this estrangement has had a beneficial effect on his prose and that his fusion of English and French thought has resulted in a unique hybrid.
‘A friend told me that the only adjective that describes the British is ‘opaque’.
The French, on the other hand, are so clear that they don't make sense either.
Every possibility is covered in so many different ways that in the end there's no possibility whatsoever.
I found that by grafting their Cartesian clarity on to our language I've produced a different fruit altogether.’
If this fruit is almost inedibly sour, the reason is that Raymond has intimidatingly firm views on the duty of the writer.
‘Writers shouldn't be locked away in Sevenoaks or Hampstead Garden Suburb.
The moment you slam the door on life…you're fucked.’
Life, as far as the black novelist is concerned, if found paradoxically and exclusively in a police body bag.
Consequently, Raymond spends his days trying to understand psychotic murderers (‘they're all bores because they see the rest of the world as flat, and extension of themselves’), serial killers (‘invariably gifted men’) and the police, for whom he has a particular sympathy.
‘Some coppers actually think about the psychic value of the job they're doing, you know.
Imagine finding the sort of mess that Dora Suarez was in week after week, month after month.’
Why Raymond is determined to wade through our sewers is explained by an extraordinary aside in The Hidden Files .
‘What is remarkable about it is that in its own way and by its own route it struggles after the same message as Christ.’
He makes an unlikely Messiah, this man in the beret, sipping his Castlemaine and smoking his Gitanes, but he may well be the only crime writer interested in the job.
The Hidden Files, £15.99, is published by Little, Brown & Co.)
A not very British crime writer
RECOMMENDED READING
THE ENGLISH PATIENT —Michael Ondaatje (Bloomsbury, £14.99)Canada's finest makes a long-overdue bid for the Booker shortlist with this rich, strange parable set in Italy and the North African desert.
THE WORLD OF CHAS ADDAMS —(Hamish Hamilton, £25)The original cartoons featuring Morticia and family — sophisticated and witty and given the big-screen treatment in this massive tome.
RUM PUNCH —Elmore Leonard (Viking, £14.99)This year's Leonard is exactly the same as last year's, except for a different plot.
HALO —John Loveday (Fourth Estate, £13.99)Immigrants on the Oregon trail in the mid-1850s; an impressive début novel from an English poet and painter.
THE DEATH OF THE AUTHOR —Gilbert Adair (Heinemann, £12.99)The latest novel by Esquire's resident Last Wordist, a neatly woven tale of intrigue in academia.
Film
Movies with a message
BY GREG WILLIAMS
AT ONE POINT in Robert Altman's satire on Hollywood,The Player , Griffin Mill, the cynical movie executive, comments while listening to a pitch, ‘Political doesn't scare me.
Radical political scares me.’
In filmmaking terms, South Africa is one of those subjects on which it is fairly easy to occupy the moral high ground without subjecting you audience to a sanctimonious brow beating.
The depravity of apartheid is such that even movie executives should feel comfortable that their projects will not be side-lined as too ‘political’, or ‘radical’.
John Wildsen's The Power of One fits the bill perfectly.
Although set in an overtly political atmosphere, its purpose is unashamedly entertainment.
Beginning in the 1930s it follows PK, an orphan of English parentage, through his rites of passage.
Taken from the Zulu people who helped nurture him, he is sent to a brutish Boer boarding school.
Later he forms a close relationship with a friend of his grandfather who is incarcerated for the duration of the war in a prison for black inmates.
Here he learns to play the piano and to box.
Eventually he is sent to a liberal English school where his emergence into adulthood converges with an increasing political awareness and realization that it is up to the individual to rake responsibility for altering the world around him.
Consequently he defies the law and becomes involved in a township literacy programme.
Powerful, yet emotive, and sometimes melodramatic,The Power of One goes all out for the heartstrings with the weight of justice and the inevitability of history on its side.
It could be criticized for both dealing with the suffering of black South Africa through the eyes of a white liberal, and for it's ending, which is the worst example of the movie's creeping sentimentality.
But by this time it's become easy to forgive a film that is pleasingly constructed and charmingly executed.
‘The Power of One’: overtly political, yet unashamedly entertaining
Politics and the influence of the individual are also at the heart of Bob Roberts , a satire on American politics that marks Tim Robbin's directorial début.
Bob Roberts (played by Robbins himself) is a charming, clean-cut, All-American who runs for the Senate in Pennsylvania.
But this is not all; underneath his exterior as a down-home, self-made millionaire and country and western singer, he uses his music to disseminate crypto-fascist politics.
Put together in the style of a documentary, the movie shadows Roberts on the campaign trail, showing us how shrewd media manipulation, slick presentation, and an appeal to the electorate's baser instincts can undermine democracy.
Robbins's direction complements the verité emphasis of the film and is stylized enough to make us aware that Roberts is not always comfortable with witnesses.
Although the movie's premise appears to stretch the limits of the imagination, Robbins's performance is so assured that he deftly sidesteps moments when the plot could veer towards conspiracy paranoia.
What is commendable about Bob Roberts is its evasion of holier-than-thou posturing.
Ones does not leave the cinema stuffed as full as a foie gras goose with patronizing, politically correct dogma.
(It's terrifying to think how punch drunk one would have left the cinema had Oliver Stone been director.)
Robbins has credited his audience with being sophisticated enough to decode the movie without oversalting the soup.
His central performance is subtly  mesmerizing and fully justifies the buzz of excitement surrounding the film when it was screened during Directors' Fortnight at this year's Cannes film festival.
Robbins's script exposes the amorphous nature of the language of the right, and how hearts and minds are won by the simple utterance of a few platitudes about American values, freedom and the family.
Intelligent and humorous,Bob Roberts works relentlessly to fill every moment with the sinister charm of a wolf in sheep's clothing.
Released in the US to coincide with the presidential elections, Robbins's movie demonstrates that we get the politicians we deserve and that democracy is easily eroded.
Sounds a bit radical?
Maybe, but then it's allowed to be.
Bob Roberts was picked up for distribution by a major only after it was successfully screened in Cannes.
Now even Griffin Mill might get to see it.
ON RELEASE
JUICE Spike Lee's cinematographer Ernest Dickerson makes his directorial début with this gritty urban drama about four friends growing up in Harlem.
Sharp, smart and with a great soundtrack,Juice is a rebel movie for the Nineties.
GAS FOOD LODGING Allison Anders's first film is a story about women — the men have gone AWOL, or hover in the background like so many endearing pets — and also a Winderesque pan of an America where the Dream has died and only the vastness of the desert and smallmindedness of its inhabitants survive.
PATRIOT GAMES Superior thriller taken from a Tom Clancy novel.
Harrison Ford stars as a former CIA man lured back into the fray after he becomes the target of the IRA.
Gripping and polished — it should clean up at the box office this autumn.
WATERLAND Enjoyably poignant adaptation of Graham Swift's novel that confirms Jeremy Irons's status as one of the best actors of his generation.
HOUSESITTER Steve Martin gives fans a regulation dose of his endearingly gauche self and Goldie Hawn remains true to her kooky Sixties persona, but together they enact an often hilarious charade of married life and send-up of Rockwellian morality that makes this quirky comedy far from predictable.
WHITE SANDS This New Age mystery thriller is a duplicitous maze of false identities that pits Willem Dafoe's moral man in an amoral society against Mickey Rourke's lovable arms dealer.
You figure it out.
Style
Fashion designers are banking on more of the same
BY NICK SULLIVAN
WHEN IT COMES to clothes, men are creatures of habit.
Once we're found that favourite shape, there is nothing more frustrating than discovering that fashion has made it obsolete.
Now, however, it seems that even among the top designers, obsolescence is obsolete.
Longevity is becoming more important than making a bold new statement each season.
The fashion industry has a complicated early warning network of expert consultants who job it is to identify the sure commercial looks of the future.
For the past few years the incoming information has been startlingly similar from one season to the next.
The high street stores, and even the designers, are finding there is great value in maintaining, shapes, colours and styles that worked for them in previous seasons.
Money has a lot to do with it.
Combining reliable bankable items with the more extreme looks to keep the press happy is no easy matter.
But add to that a recession that can cut turnover in half and it's no wonder that designers are becoming more commercially minded.
But there are very real changes in attitude that are compounding this change of approach.
It is seriously unfashionable now to be too interested in fashion.
Dressing well is OK, wanting quality is great, but trying to be trendy is out.
When there is less money around, you need to know that the jacket you buy will last longer than a season.
‘It's linked with business, with the fluctuations of the stock exchange,’ explains Paul Smith, who has 20 years' experience of designing for men.
‘Now there is a certain anti-fashion attitude which makes people still want to enjoy things, but in a much more low-key way.
You only have to look at the restaurants that are popular now — bistros, even the workman's cafe.’
The biggest developments in men's fashion in the past few years — the explosion of sportswear in everyday clothes, the return of knitwear and the gradual softening of the suit's construction — are more than likely to stay with us for a good few seasons yet.
Sameness is a virtue right now for designers.
For Paul Smith, it has always been so.
‘The foundation of my collection has always been ideas which have a long life.
There's one single-breasted raincoat which has been in every collection for almost 20 seasons.
In Japan they call it the Paul Smith Classic.’
For Katharine Hamnett, the new mood prompted the launch of the Katharine Hamnett Classics Range early this year.
The selection of best-selling Hamnett designs from past seasons includes silk shirts, sweatpants and cotton drill trousers in beige, navy, ivory and white.
A large number of other designers including Romeo Gigli, Jasper Conran and Joseph are making classics an integral part of their signatures, changing only the tiniest details from season to season.
But if lean times demand a sensible approach, that doesn't mean designers are waiting for the economic upturn and a more healthy fashion market.
‘Fashion now is not boring for me, because I can still have fun, even if the money is made on the more classical items,’ concludes Smith.
‘The trick is to use classical forms in an inventive way.
There is a real danger in only doing the classical things — you're OK with it for a time, but then you're left high and dry when fashion moves on.’
Classics are integral to any Paul Smith collection
HIPPY CHIC
In the recent Paris and Milan men's fashion shows for next summer, there emerged a real hippy mood.
There were bits of sharp Carnaby Street tailoring mixed with beads, CND logos, seersucker and even some patchwork denim.
Models sported immaculate centre-parted shoulder-length hair and the beginnings of goatee beards.
It's Jesus Christ Superstar , demobbed from Vietnam and back in LA to ride the big wave.
All this hippy chic is not terribly exotic for British men who grew up with long hair, earth mothers and hipster jeans.
Remember the days of the Isle of Wight festivals?
I don't.
But I do know what these designers are talking about and it's light years away from the ever-so-respectable, traditional French and Italian fashion design.
Does it mean that anti-fashion, that healthy disrespect for clobber that has always thrived in Britain, is taking hold in menswear's twin capitals?
I doubt it — the prices are the same.
The irony is that you can create the same look for a tenner down the market.
But then who really cares anyway, man?
Last Word
The imitable art of René Magritte
BY GILBERT ADAIR
THIS IS NOT the first sentence of my column.
Actually that isn't merely a cute neo-Magrittian paradox, a semantic variation on his Ceci n'est pas une pipe painting of a pipe, but a statement of fact.
I hand initially intended to start this column with the first sentence of what is now its second paragraph, but felt it would amusingly underscore the premise of the piece — the ubiquity and infinite adaptability of Magritte's once exclusively surrealist insights — were it to open thus.
THE SURREAL THING: Air France's strangely familiar billboard
No one surely needs reminding of the intimate (and, on the face of it, incongruous) relationship between advertising and surrealism — the surrealism of Magritte in particular.
As I write, I can think of a couple of billboard posters that make no attempt to conceal their debt to the Belgian fantasist: a Silk Cut advertisement, which discards the regular purple silk motif in favour of a neutral cream back ground on which are set the letters P U R P L and E, snipped from some newspaper's headlines as if by a poison pen writer; and another whose legend, ‘I didn't know that Air France had more flights to Paris than any other airline company’, is illustrated by the portrait of a man whose face is obscured by a fried egg.
The former derives from Ceci n'est pas une pipe , the latter from a celebrated self-portrait in which an outsized apple conceals the painter's features.
If, as was clear from press coverage of the recent retrospective at the Hayward, the art critical establishment is still sniffily disparaging of Magritte's achievement, this can at least partly be attributed to the disturbing facility with which his images have been appropriated by advertisers and recycled as mere media commonplaces.
For what, in fact, distinguishes the supposedly ‘inimitable’ Magritte from other modern masters is, paradoxically, his imitability.
After all, even someone with no gift for painting can ‘copy’ a Magritte — in his head if nowhere else.
For example— and just, as they say, off the top of my own head — I can imagine, even if I can't paint, these prototypically Magrittian images: a revolver that fires doves; a two-humped animal with heads at each end (a palindromedary, perhaps) a painting of the Crucifixion that is itself (the painting I mean) nailed to a Cross; an unearthly skyscape in which the four Presidents' heads from Mount Rushmore emerge out of a billowing bank of clouds.
And so on.
Or consider Magritte's The Rape , in which the sexual trial of a woman's erogenous zones (breasts and pubis) are superimposed onto the rhyming facial triangle of eyes and mouth.
I can't paint it, but I can mentally conjure up a corresponding work titled The Rapist of a huge erect penis clothed in a sober grey suit (and bowler hat?) from whose open trouser flies pops out a tiny detumescent homunculus.
THE REAL THING: ‘Son of Man’
So is it true, after all, that Magritte was an ‘ideas man’ posing as an artist?
In fact, it's possible to argue the reverse; that the commercial exploitation of his intuitions will ultimately work to the advantage of his reputation.
When ‘PURPLE’ has yielded to some new variation on Silk Cut's eternal thematics, and when the airline traveller with egg on his face has faded from the public consciousness on which it will have so briefly impinged, Magritte's images will still be there, mysterious and self-sufficient.
For the real mystery at the core of his paintings is not the ‘idea’ as such but, as with any other artist, the way it has been painted.
What makes The Rape so durably haunting is not its (rather banal) conceit of a woman viewed literally as a sex object, but the fact that it is that woman with that neck and that terrifying and terrified hair.
There is, in short, nothing generic about Magritte's work, whereas advertising is generic almost be definition.
His images at their best are indelible; whereas the images of advertising, even at their best, could scarcely be more delible .
BEYOND WARHOL…
Four contemporary artists turn the tables and borrow from advertising
RICHARD PRINCE'S series of re-photographed Marlboro cowboy ads are finely printed, enlarged and cropped to lose the logo.
Stripped of brand identity, the blatant potency of advertising imagery is laid bare.
SIMON LINKE paints exhibition advertisements from Art Forum magazine.
The slick/typographic ads are lavishly produced in oil paint, lending an absurd gravitas to an inherently  transient subject.
ASHLEY BICKERTON'S painted construction Le Art 1987 is a brash, beautifully executed compilation of the logos of the art materials that were used to make the work.
He even stylized his own signature to look like a logo alongside Liquitex and Formica.
JEFF KOONS'S concept of art as a commodity is illustrated in his sculpture New Hoover Celebrity IV 1986 which features two  vacuum cleaners seductively mounted on plexiglass and back-lit with fluorescent as if in a retail display.
IAN PENDLETON 
Modern Times
Perhaps New Age, like ecology, will have to change its name to really cross over.
Peter Culshaw explores the growth of the inner man
THE OTHER WEEK, I was at a dinner party in Kensington.
Five years ago at such a gathering everyone would probably have been talking about property, or inside deals, between bitching about colleagues.
But as the Aqua Libra flowed (and to be fair, some quite drinkable Chianti), the conversation was decidedly…spiritual.
Opposite me was a woman called Jasminder (Jazzy for short) who had some choice anecdotes, such as the one about being buried alive for a couple of days by Hopi Indians as part of an initiation ritual.
Or the time an African priest taught her how to become invisible (you don't really want to know).
This tip apparently came in pretty handy when a bus she was on coming out of Dar es Salaam was robbed.
Everyone else was searched and had all their valuables stolen…but she was completely ignored.
Jasminder is no hippy drop-out — she's mainly a high-powered type in management training.
She mentioned a conference at Lancaster University, where she'd given a talk called ‘Bringing Spirituality into Organizations’.
A hugely diverse number of organizations were represented — local government, charities, mostly hi-tech and computer business (IBM for one).
In her own work, Jasminder does conventional management training, but with a twist.
She holds seminars on ‘The Tao of Management’(about ‘working with the moment rather than patterns of the past, and using that to attempt predictions of the future’).
She says she ‘gets leaders to connect with Nature, and teaches them how to access their higher consciousness’ and does some more psychological work on things like the way managers often project their own insecurities on to others.
They also get to play games and no doubt have a lot of fun ‘getting in touch with the inner child’.
It seems that more and more well-known businesses are hiring Jasminder and colleagues of hers who work in a similar vein.
And some of these techniques must be working because she keeps getting re-hired.
She reckons the real reason the Japanese are so successful is that they have always incorporated a spiritual approach in business.
Jasminder predicts that British companies will soon be employing people whose job will be to ‘hold the vision’ for that business.
Next to Jazzy was Joanne Sawicki, a TV executive at Sky in charge of a daily news feature programme, as well as developing new ideas for them.
Three years ago, she was living in Sydney and, besides doing TV work, was writing a ‘cynical, bitchy column’ for one of the papers there.
One day she went to her favourite place, a beach a couple of hours from the city, and realized she'd become a stressed-out workaholic.
It wasn't that she was feeling bad, but that worse, she was feeling nothing.
She decided to make some changes and embarked on a quest which took her to, among other places, an ashram in Wales and a three-week ‘Relationships Seminar’ in Hawaii (price $8,000) run by an American called Chuck Spezzano.
Joanne is making a pilot for a regular Chuck Spezzano series.
She now does yoga, and says that for the first time in her life she wakes up feeling calm and generally finds that thinking positively works.
Both she and Jasminder are funny, attractive, happy and successful and give a convincing impression of loving life and making their different spiritual quests seem like an endless adventure.
Also at this dinner was the writer Andrew Harvey, who wrote thee great travel book,A Journey in Ladakh .
His latest book,A Hidden Journey , is an autobiographical account of how left his jaded, literary past behind and ended up a follower of Mother Meera, an Indian woman who, improbably, lives in a village near Frankfurt.
She attracts much more of a following than previous Indian imports, partly because she encourages people to keep their jobs  rather than dropping out to live in a commune.
Her teachings are relatively sensible (no tabloid fodder here), and, for what it's worth, she's taken seriously in India, whereas the likes of Rajneesh and the Maharishi were more admired for their business acumen.
But I know what you're thinking.
It's what I'm thinking.
Isn't this all, to use a term I've so far studiously avoided, too New Age for comfort, with all its dubious connotations of exploitation, escapism and Wyndham Hill music tapes, whose utter blandness makes the most soporific MOR music seem positively hardcore?
Then there is the David Icke problem.
For all I know, there may be a kernel of truth in what he says, but anyone expecting his followers to wear turquoise shell suits can count me out, even if his prophesy that New Zealand is about to disappear under water has a certain charm.
My own view of New Age used to be, and to some extent still is, not dissimilar to that of the performance artist Trevor Stewart, who under the alias of Ted Bunny, ritually sets fire to soft toys as a protest ‘against everything New Age and holistic’.
I was thoroughly put off the whole notion while sharing a flat in New York with a woman who went to pieces when she lost her favourite crystal, and who went to a ‘Fear of Failure’ workshop one week, only to attend a ‘Fear of Success’workshop the next.
Certainly the easiest approach to the whole thing is to rubbish it, although I suspect that is too easy an option.
Out drinking with a couple of female journalists (in what was supposedly Hemingway's favourite bar in Havana, if you must know), I mentioned I was writing this article and we all launched into our favourite New Age stories, like the one about the Immortalists, a group who take to its logical end the New Age philosophy of positive thinking and creating your own reality, and have decided they are going to live forever.
Unfortunately, a couple of them died recently.
Nevertheless, a couple of drinks later it transpired that one of them has a boyfriend who gets up at six in the morning to meditate, while the other said her best friend had been snapped out of a severe depression by a weekend of  psychodrama .
It strikes me that the whole phenomenon is in the same position as the ecology movement in the early Eighties, when it was associated with people with beards and woolly jumpers who drank Real Ale.
It changed its name to Green, was taken up by fashionable and powerful people and now everyone claims to be Green.
And Greenness can be seen as the political wing of the New Age.
Endless ads have been Green or organic, from the guy who rips his plans up to wreck the countryside and earns himself a beer, to the couple in the deodorant ad who just happen to be frolicking naked in the forest with camouflage make-up.
Now, New Ageism is also creeping in, like the father in the building society ad who imagines his son swimming with dolphins.
His son is probably the guy in the Guinness Draught ad, who is no tourist because he speaks the lingo.
Namaste.
Maybe New Age, like ecology, will have to change its name to really cross over.
The New Spirituality, for example, doesn't come with all the negative associations of New Age.
Whatever it is called, in many ways it has more going for it than Greenness and can even incorporate it.
One of the reasons the New Spirituality has legs is because it is experiential.
The consumption of experience becomes a way of creating an identity.
The growth of tourism was part of this syndrome, but even that is no longer innocent (go to paradise and wreck it).
There's only one thing left.
It's time, to use the New Age catchphrase, to ‘Explore the Great Inside’.
Certainly, there is no shortage of possible experiences.
The new edition of Holistic London has 300 pages jammed with things you might have heard of, from acupuncture, aromatherapy and flotation tanks to somewhat more esoteric stuff like Autogenic training, Rolfing and Polarity therapy.
If one needed an indicator of the exponential growth of all this, the book lists 500 New Age, spiritual or therapy centres in London alone.
Nearly everyone I meet seems to be doing something these days.
A film editor friend has just come back from a couple of weeks of yoga, a music producer I know goes to St James, Piccadilly, where they have spiritual talks on a Monday evening, while a designer friend does Chi-Kung, a Chinese movement like Tai-Chi, where you have to ‘stand like a tree’.
My position on the whole thing started to wobble last year when I had some reflexology (a foot massage) which made me more relaxed than I've felt for years.
Then someone dragged me along to learn meditation, which I found did most of the things advertised for it — you feel more focused and it reduces the interminable mental chatter that stops you getting to sleep at night.
I even did some psychodrama when a travel magazine sent me on a ‘holistic holiday’ to the island of Skyros.
It was the scariest thing I did last year — that and hanging around the barrios of Medellin, the drug capital of Colombia, which boasts a murder rate ten times that of Los Angeles.
Perhaps, the thirst for the spiritual really is a fundamental human urge.
It certainly begins to seem as though the materialist philosophy of the last few decades in the West was a myth just like any other, now that science is getting so weird, what with particles travelling back in time, and the fantastic strangeness of the new cosmology and chaos theory (all those pretty Mandelbrot sets, and stuff about butterflies in China causing storms over the Atlantic ties in perfectly with the New Spirituality).
We all need a myth of some kind, whether it's in living forever, in Communism or thinking you come from Sirius.
Let's hope the myth we end up with is less destructive than some of the recent ones.
Of course, this century has seen all manner of spiritual cults, from Madame Blavatsky and Theosophy to the Designer Spirituality of the Eighties (caricatured, with some justification, as fashion victims chanting for sports cars).
But they all remained on the fringes.
And, unlike the hippy or punk movements, the New Spirituality is not inherently opposed to authority and has more potential to really go mainstream.
What is extraordinary is that it is taking off in England — the land of the Stiff Upper Lip, where the primary emotion often seems to be fear of embarrassment.
It's about time we loosened up a bit anyway.
Who knows, I may go swimming with dolphins this year (don't knock it till you've tried it).
Although if I'm spotted wearing a turquoise shell suit, Ted Bunny is welcome to come and set fire to my teddy bear.
Business
One of the great mysteries is why consumer electronics products are so expensive in Britain
Jeffrey Ferry on the Atlantic divide
HERE ARE THIS month's special offers: a Sony cordless telephone, £56.
A Sony programmable CD player, £72.
A Packard Bell desktop 386 computer complete with hard disk, two floppy drives and software, £666.
Sounds good, eh?
If you're a fan of electronic gadgetry, your next question will be where, where, where?
Answer: in Pennsylvania, USA.
And the price-cutting superstore in question, Silo Inc, though a subsidiary of British retailer Dixons plc, does not do mail order to the UK.
While wishing you to have a nice day wherever you may be, the folks at Dixons/Silo prefer that if you're in the UK, you do your shopping at Dixons, where prices are 60 to 80 per cent higher.
One of the great mysteries of our modern free-trading world is why consumer electronics products are so much more expensive in Britain (and Europe generally) than they are in the United States.
Dixons's charming spokesperson, Nicola Marsden, claims that the enormous price differential was due entirely to (1) the manufacturers,(2) the economies of scale available when you produce for the large-volume US market,(3) the fact that British VAT is double the typical rate of American sales tax and (4) import duties into Europe.
What she neglected to mention was that Dixons's profit margins in the UK (five per cent measured at the level of pre-tax operating profit) are some five times greater than their comparable US profit of one per cent.
Obviously, to obtain a five per cent operating profit margin means they are marking up the cost price of products by far more than five per cent.
Dixons replies that their US operation, Silo, is in a great mess, and is in the midst of expansion into California and fundamental management changes, at the end of which it will emerge a much more profitable animal.
Yet even when(or if) Silo is sorted out, its profit margins (and its costs) will remain far lower than its UK counterpart's.
The reason is that Silo, like most of the US consumer electronics industry, is an edge-of-town superstore business.
John Richards, a top City retail analyst, explains: ‘The most important development in retailing in the 1980s was the deep-discount warehouse format.
Because the 1980s in the UK was a very favourable period for customers, UK retailers didn't see those developments: most of them spent the 1980s massaging their profits and margins, which they euphemistically called ‘adding value’’.
Proof of Richards's analysis comes from a quick glance at the brochures of two London-area superstores: an IBM PS/1 Family Pack 286 desktop computer sells at the new Business Superstore (on the A40, in Park Royal, northwest London) for £699 plus VAT.
Dixons's ‘unbeatable’ price: £851 plus VAT.
At the new PC World computer superstore (Croydon and Thurrock, Essex), they sell the classier 386 model of the PS/1 for £899 (Dixons's price: £1021.27).
The 20 to 30 per cent discounts offered by the superstores account for only around half of the US/UK price differential.
The rest must be profit going direct to the manufacturers.
This is borne out by a quick look at the Apple Annual Report: in 1991, Apple's profit margin the US was a pathetic 0.25 per cent(again, at operating profit level).
In Europe it was a healthy twelve per cent.
‘Historically, people have looked to Europe as a place to make up the profit margins they had to give away in the States,’ Apple spokesperson Frank O'Mahoney admitted to me immediately before launching into a lengthy explanation of how computer prices in Europe are now tumbling to less obscene levels.
The main reason why the US market is so much more competitive appears to be tradition: American consumers are accustomed to hunting out bargains and buying on price, whereas Europeans are more likely to buy on brand name.
Another factor is the widespread belief in the industry that when a new product catches on in the States, it will inevitably be adopted in Europe.
This makes manufacturers more willing to take lower prices to get established Stateside.
The European Commission also gets its oar in, helping to keep out electronics prices high with a wide variety of anti-dumping duties on certain foreign manufacturers.
Dumping is a euphemism for the EC's determination to prevent the demise of its electronics industry.
Dutch-based Philips argues that a strong consumer electronics sector is inextricably tied to success in all the rest of electronics, which remains a sector vital to a healthy modern economy.
There is merit in this argument.
As this column pointed out last June, Americans are increasingly coming to regret the untimely death of their own consumer electronics industry.
But things are slowly changing.
With troubled giants IBM and Compaq leading the way, the world's computer makers decided late last year to inject some competitiveness into the European market, hastened by the growth of direct-mail computer sales.
In audio and video goods, the change is much more gradual.
The greatest force for change is the growth of the superstores, likely to dominate British electronics within five years.
Sporting Life
When you support a football team, misery is the only currency that can purchase real ecstasy
Nick Hornby on the agony of being a fan
AUGUST 1991, and Arsenal, my team the reigning champions, take the field against QPR for the first game of the new season.
They receive a rapturous reception, which is as it should be: here, after all, are the players who have lost just one league game in the previous fifteen months, the players who are widely expected to terrify the rest of the continent in the European Cup, the team with the best strike force and the meanest defence in the First Division.
Our love for them is boundless, our optimism inexhaustible.
They start the game slowly, and noisy devotion becomes baffled silence.
When Dennis Bailey puts Rangers one up, the Bloke Behind Me can take it no more.
‘You're rubbish Arsenal,’ he bawls.
‘Dixon, you're a wanker .’
In less than half an hour, the rapture has vanished into the ether, and Highbury is once more what I have always known it to be — a refuge for depressives and malcontents, whingers and whiners.
We are getting what we paid for and all is right with the world.
My first bout of football pain came on March 15, 1969, when on my first visit to Wembley I watched Swindon Town of the Third Division destroy Arsenal with two goals in extra time.
I was eleven years old, and I honestly believe that I was too young to cope, that my father should never have taken me to the game, that if he had been a responsible parent he would have recognized the potential for trauma that the afternoon contained.
He compounded this appalling error of judgement by standing up to applaud the winners, a misguided attempt at gallantry which resulted in me trying to run out of the stadium and refusing to talk to him all the way home.
I was the only Arsenal supporter in my entire year at school.
In the Sixties — with Charlton, Law and Best at United, Greaves at Spurs, Marsh at Rangers, Moore, Hurst and Peters at West Ham — you had to be some kind of deranged flagellant to choose a team that hadn't won a thing since the Coronation.
It was wholly predictable, then, that at about 8.50 on the morning of Monday, March 17, I was lying face down in the grammar school dirt with 30 jeering first formers on my back.
It would not be whimsical to suggest that I still go to Arsenal now because of what Swindon did to me then: like a gambler who keeps playing because it is the only way to win back what he has lost, I still feel, somewhere in me, that I am owed for what Ian Ure and Jon Sammels and Bobby Gould put me through that afternoon.
Highbury in 1951: ‘a refuge for depressives and malcontents’
Since then, of course, I have lost big several more times.
York City, Tranmere, Wrexham…
And Wembley itself has become a giant Room 101.
Sometimes, just as I drifting off to sleep, I can see Dan Rogers running the length of the pitch to slip the ball past Bob Wilson, or Allan Clarke's diving header past Geoff Barnett in 1972, or Willie Young presenting Ipswich Town's Roger Osborne with an unmissable chance in 1978, or Nigel Winterburn's penalty miss ten years later, or Seaman palming Lineker's cross-shot into the corner of the net in last year's semi-final.
I don't recall the good times I've had at Wembley with anything like the same frequency — not just because there haven't been as many of them (my personal Wembley record is played ten, won two, lost eight ), but because when you support a football team, misery is the only currency that can purchase real ecstasy.
And if pain is wealth, then all of us, apart from Liverpool fans, are as rich as Croesus.
Arsenal supporters have been luckier than most of late; we have at least had something to spend it on.
Two Championships in four seasons, and a Littlewoods Cup win over Liverpool the year before that…
There are countless fans who would feel I am singularly unqualified to write about pain and football.
How does it feel to follow, say, Luton Town?
How much does that hurt?
The most committed football fan I have ever met, Neil Kaas, watches his team home and away, but this he regards as just a tiny part of the job, like opening mail.
The rest of the time he worries, and argues, and sulks, and attends Luton Town open evenings (although his ferocity is such that he is no longer very welcome at these).
Currently, he is harassing Luton Council for a statue to commemorate Raddy Antic, whose last-minute goal at Maine Road, a decade or so back, prevented Luton from dropping into Division Two.
Neil Kaas has lived with football agony for most of his life.
Despite relegation on the last day of the season (which he regards as something of a relief, peace at last for a terminally ill football team), his favourite, most lovingly cherished day of suffering remains April 13, 1985.
Luton were 1–0 up against Everton in an FA Cup semi-final; Sheedy equalized with four minutes left, and Mountfield scored the winner in extra time.
He is still bitter.
‘All Friday night they'd been showing Sheedy free kicks on the box.
The only one who wasn't watching was our goalkeeper.’
This was the closest Neil had ever come to Wembley and on the way home that night he came to the conclusion that this was the closest he would ever come in his entire life.
‘People say that you get over it, but you don't, not really, not properly.’
On Sunday 14, he spent the day in the dark, with the curtains drawn, until his mother complained.
A request to light a memorial candle — his family is Jewish — was met with blank and insensitive refusal.
He couldn't read a newspaper for a week (‘Too many pictures’).
Even the Live Aid concert that July distressed him —‘I should never have gone.
I kept looking up at the Royal Box and thinking, ‘Stevie Foster would have stood there.’’
He is aware, as we are all aware, that the sudden-death coronary shocks of the FA Cup offer only one kind of pain.
Neil is wounded every year by his team's refusal even to score at Old Trafford (they managed a goal up there 21 years ago, but he makes the long trek every season anyway), and by the permanent car boot sale that Luton indulge in.
‘If a player makes a promising début on the Saturday, I'm frightened to turn on Teletext on Monday, in case they've flogged him.’
There is the pain of watching arch-rivals succeed where you have failed dismally (the only Cup Final Neil has never watched involved Watford).
And for supporters of more ambitious clubs, there is the long, slow death of Championship dreams, where hope is extinguished little by little, week by week, until one cold wet January afternoon, you're 1–0 down at home to Southampton, and you write the rest of the year off and start looking forward to August again.
There are those who would argue that this discomfort is not real, that sport cannot matter enough to break anyone's heart, but this is simply not the case.
For some of us, the desire to see our team win at Wembley, or become league champions, or gain promotion from Division Three, is the only consistent ambition we have every held.
Whatever we want from our lives now — the Booker Prize, a recording contract, a promotion, a Porsche convertible, the girl at the Virgin Megastore checkout desk — we cannot possibly have coveted it for as long as we have cherished dreams of football glory, dreams which have remained fundamentally unchanged since childhood.
Imagine that you have been studying for 20 years for a qualification that will change your life, or waiting the same length of time to hear about a job you have applied for, the only job you have ever really wanted.
Now imagine receiving the news that you have been unsuccessful…and everyone around you standing and cheering wildly .
If you can grasp the dizzying, nauseating, stinging injustice and humiliation of such a moment, then you can grasp how Neil Kaas felt when Sheedy bent his free kick round the Luton wall and into the top corner.
The fact that the game itself is trivial, and, of course, in most ways it is, does not mean that it cannot inflict real pain.
In May 1989, after a home league defeat at Derby that seemed to have cost Arsenal the chance of their first Championship since 1971, I felt as low as it is possible to feel after a football match.
That evening, I went to see King Lear at the Old Vic, but I was unable to shake off my self-pity and I couldn't for the life of me see what the old git was moaning about.
At least he'd been king — he hadn't blown it the week before the Coronation, like we had.
I vowed then, as I have vowed many times before and since, that I would never again make myself so vulnerable to the team, that I would get them off my back and out of my life if it was the last thing I did.
Two weeks later, however, Michael Thomas scored his stunning last-minute Championship-winning goal at Anfield to provide me and thousands like me with the most intense moment of our lives.
The timing of the goal was a vital ingredient of this delirium, of course(I for one had given up all hope by then), as was the venue (we hadn't won up there for decades); but what really gave the night meaning was the anxiety and despair, year after year of it, that had gone before.
I spent every last penny of my hoarded misery that night, blew eighteen years' worth on one split second, and it felt better than anyone who is not a fan can ever be expected to understand.
When Arsenal won the league again two years later, it didn't feel the same — partly because it was achieved in a less dramatic fashion, but mostly because I had nothing left.
So being a fan is mostly about replenishment, and last year provided me with plenty of that; outplayed by Benfica, two or three months of dismal ineptitude in the league around Christmas, and then the Wrexham humiliation…
I began to feel whole again.
The genius of the football supporter is that he has managed to convert something as unappetizing and unpromising as an English football season into something from which he can take pleasure.
Manchester United fail to win the Championship for 25 years in a row, but attract the biggest crowds of all; Everton supporters turn up in their thousands week after week, ignoring the better, winning team that plays a matter of yards away; the absence of Gascoigne and Lineker will not deter the Tottenham faithful.
Meanwhile, Neil Kaas will be watching his team lose to Brentford and Peterborough, red faced with rage and frustration, and I'll be there when we go out of the Cup at home to Middlesbrough, say, or Manchester City.
The quality of football will be poor (we know that already, most of us), the weather foul, the environment uncomfortable at best, intimidating at worst .
There will be sweet moments for all of us, but they will be swamped by the sour…and we'll all be happy, in our own peculiar way, saving up for a sunny day two or three years off in the future.
Nick Hornby's book on football, Fever Pitch, is published by Gollancz on September 10 
Cleese Encounter
John Cleese is the sleeping giant of British comedy.
Since the success of ‘A Fish Called Wanda’, he has largely kept out of the public eye.
But now Cleese breaks his silence to talk about fame, fortune and ‘the fear of not being thought a nice chap’ and in the process makes a remarkable offer to the press
by Melvyn Bragg
DEADPAN, HE SLID THE BOOK across the table.
I read the first sentence: ‘It is always difficult to summarize in a page the life of a living giant without somehow reducing the giant to a mere man.’
‘Thought it might give you an opening,’ he said.
It did.
I made a note.
Then he beamed, cracked with laughter and the quite extraordinary warmth poured out.
‘How are you?
Good to see you again!
Marvellous.
What are we going to talk about — look, it it's no good please don't use it, I shan't mind a bit.
Lovely to see you again.’
The thing about John Cleese is that his sincerity is the real him.
What in others could seem the automatic showbiz all-purpose bland gladhand is the real John Cleese.
That's if he likes you.
If not, duck.
We did a South Bank Show together in 1986.
It was preceded by a scrupulous recce weeks before in a restaurant near his house with the code name Pomme  d'Amour.
In the Pomme, we talked through what we would talk through.
When he agreed to go ahead he could not have been more generous.
This included the insane gesture of allowing a television film crew full squatting rights in his house.
At the moment we were about to begin to interview Cleese's mother turned up to ask him some detail of the day.
Instantly, he sprang to his feet and suggested, in fact all but insisted, that we interview her instead of him because she knew so much more about him than he did.
Thank God she demurred.
But it had been a close call.
For this interview, talking just for the hell of it, he was immeasurably more relaxed.
What I met was Cleese in full flow, with nothing to sell — no film gale force imminent, no series, no book, nothing but a mind primed after a sabbatical which had been deliberately aimed at reflection.
We talked about London and working in London, which was genial enough as the wine was poured, and then he put a spin on it.
‘A friend of mine,’ he said, ‘an American, sometimes travels on the top of a double-decker bus and in a very loud American voice points out the national monuments.
Wrongly, ‘This is Buckingham Palace,’ he'll say — pointing to the National Gallery.
‘You can tell the Queen and all the Royals are there because the flag's up the pole.’
Or ‘That's Westminster Hall’ pointing at the House of Commons.’
Cleese beamed and paused.
‘It drives everybody crazy!
Crazy !’
The thought of it rocked him in his chair.
Cleese is the best audience I have encountered.
I've been at dinner with him when something someone has said made him laugh so much he's got up from the table to give the fullest physical expression to it.
It is part of his nature and perhaps part of a deeply endearing determination to buck people up.
‘I knew J B Priestley a bit and he once suggested to me that I should do what he did in the Thirties, which was to take a trip around Britain talking to people.
You see, I live such a pleasant life and have such a marvellous group of friends, English and American: I live a wonderful comfortable life, I work with nice people whom I can choose to work with.
I suddenly realized recently that I'm so far short of having any kind of representational experience that I just don't know what's going on in this country.
So I thought, maybe I'll go off one day and find out what's going on in the place.
I suppose it's just that the English are my tribe.
I love aspects of it and hate other aspects of it.
But one aspect that I find very worrying is the extraordinary level of negativity in the media and I mean particularly in the newspapers.’
Cleese is someone who has done one of the most difficult things in a public life — assessed his own worth without false modesty.
He knows he can help to make a difference to the tone and thrust of opinion because so many people rate his work highly.
He's a man of very decided opinions.
In the best sense, he worries things through.
This newspaper business bothers him a lot and he spoke with force.
‘I think there are more twisted, envious and irresponsible people in the London newspaper world than in any comparable area I can think of.
Which is not to say there aren't some marvellous people too.
I know one or two of the editors now, and I know one or two of the well-known correspondents and they are absolutely fine, of course they are.
But generally, I don't think there's any group of people that I have less respect for.
And on the whole, I've been fairly lucky with them, so my views aren't formed because they've been absolutely horrible to me.
But I'm worried about the effects they have on society, because a high proportion of them are emotional messes whose principal driving emotion is envy.
So they're negative, extraordinarily touchy about their power, and above all, most of them don't do their job well — which is to represent things accurately.’
Why, I asked, is this so important to you?
He was even more emphatic.
‘It's very important to tell people this, because…
Let's imagine you live in a village, and there are some nice people in the village and there are some nasty people in the village.
If people start believing the stuff the nasty people tell them, it's going to reduce the quality the life in the village.
People will become more envious, more mistrustful, more vindictive.
But if you listen to the nice people in the village, you'll get a much more objective, balanced and healthy view.
But most journalists take a very negative line on things.
It may be that people are drawn to journalism because of this negativity — the chance to cut everyone else down to size to make themselves feel better.
‘Recently, a journalist I know who had written about Charles and Diana, was challenged on it, and said: ‘It's my job.’
Now this is an argument that is so intellectually contemptible that you can hardly be bothered to demolish it.
Anybody who was in a concentration camp as a guard could use that argument.
Murderers could use it.
The point is — you choose the job.
‘So, I'm trying to issue a kind of loud, clear piece of information saying that, by and large, most of the journalism in this country is well below the standard that it should be.
As I say  I've not had anything like the bad experience of it that a lot of people have had.
But I am determined to fight back, and where I think that they've gone over the top, I'll take them to court.
It very seldom goes to court, but when they tell lies that are damaging, I sue them as a matter of principle, and always give every penny to charity.
And what is more, I instruct the newspapers to pay the charity so that they know that it's a point of principle.
And I feel that if I don't do it, being in a relatively powerful position, who the hell else is going to?’
There's a crusader inside John Cleese and nothing Spanish Quixotic about him either.
This is St George from Weston-super-Mare.
His background has been catalogued on many occasions and trawled by the man himself with the single-mindedness which characterizes all his causes.
In this case, to analyse, understand, revolt against, reject, cherish, learn from, absolve and rescue his childhood and adolescence.
He was born into the lower-middle-middle or upper-lower-middle or middle-lower-middle class of our hey diddle diddle society, and an adoring mother and a witty but ‘hilariously unambitious’ father brought up their only son on rectitude, decency and the mid-century Englishness of tea, quietness, the Daily Telegraph and Somerset cricket.
And embarrassment.
That the son turned out to be all but six and a half feet tall at the age of thirteen and went through school and university wielding a subversive wit which catapulted him into the West End and the beginnings of real fame in his early twenties, seems almost in bad taste, very embarrassing indeed, certainly uncalled for and probably best left undiscovered.
John Cleese has insisted on exploring his background…in public, in private , in his work, in his book with Robin Skynner (Families and How To Survive Them ), in detail and in steady pursuit of an enlargement of his life and his talent.
He has been remarkably successful.
Yet there is always the tension between the open, say American, way he has tackled it and in which he talks about it, and the English oyster his knife is trying to open.
‘The crippling thing is the fear of not being thought a nice chap.
It limits your possibilities hugely, you know.
I feel that I really ought to spend six minutes answering the kind of letter that begins: ‘I used to be at your prep school.
I wonder if you could come to Stoke-on-Trent to open the fete to raise funds for the local Gilbert and Sullivan society, but if you can't could you find someone who could.’
‘I'll tell you a true story.
Half past eleven at night, list weekend, the front doorbell rings.
I'm in bed reading, so I look at the little security system we have, look at the screen — I don't know this chap, he's obviously drunk, and obviously ex-public school.
So I say, ‘Hello’.
‘Oh, hello, is that John Cleese?’
I say, ‘That's right, what can I do for you?’
And he says ‘Well, I'm an old Footlighter, and I wondered if you felt like a drink.’
And this is half past eleven.
I wanted to say to him, ‘I mean, I know we were both in the Footlights, but do you realize how many thousands of us there are?
It's not a blood relationship, you know.’
But I say to him, very nicely, because I very seldom have the courage to be rude, ‘I'm afraid I've gone to bed.’
So he says, ‘Oh well, never mind, tomorrow perhaps?’
And I say, ‘Yes, perhaps’!
When what I'd like to say is, ‘I'm going to pay a lot of hard-earned money to have you killed.’’
Which brought us to fame.
When I say brought, I mean drove.
When Cleese gives interviews he is thorough and, in this case, wholehearted, but what he wants is conversation.
Almost any statement he made was punctuated with ‘What do you think?’ or ‘I'd like your opinion on that.’
It is part of his politeness, part of his curiosity about others, but also part of a hard-won philosophy which sees strength and fun and redemption in teams, in groups and in the open exchanges which can be generated there.
Back to fame.
Was it hard to cope with?
‘Yes.
And I've found it harder to cope with in the last two or three years.
I don't think it's anything much to do with the fame being any greater or different.
It's just that I seem to have got very bored with it.
I suppose, after all, I've had it since ‘66, so I've been well known for 26 years, which is a long time, and I don't get anything much out of it any more.’
What did he used to get out of it?
‘Oh, I think the thrill of being recognized, which is partly an ego boost, but also partly a measure of how well you're doing in your business, you know.
If you're a comic and you walk down the street and people recognize you, it means a lot of people are watching your show and that's a kind of indicator of quality or success or whatever.
And there's also the cheap ego massage of just having people come up and recognizing you, which is very nice when you're young but gets progressively more boring.
The huge advantage of fame is that it gives me, for no proper reason, access to people that I would never otherwise have.
It's amazing how many people are prepared to meet you if you're well known.
‘The other thing is that wherever you go, restaurants or hotels, you tend to be met with a nice smile, because if people have laughed at you, they have warm feelings towards you — there's no question about it.
And the other nice thing is, because know who you are they will tend to accept your cheques, because they know perfectly well that they can get hold of you if they have to!
‘Nevertheless, I will make this offer.
If any newspaper will promise never to use my name again — I mean, they can use it in reviews if they like — but if they promise never to mention me again, I will send £10,000 to any charity of their choice.
In the case of the Sun , I'll send £20,000 — even if it's to whatever right-wing organization Mr Murdoch supports.
‘I think that there's something insane about fame anyway.
It's very dangerous because lots of people looking at you makes you think more and more about the image that you're presenting to the world.
I am aware, when I go on publicity tours, that the necessity to project yourself, to sell your product, all the time, moves you into the outward and trivial parts of your personality, and it takes some time to get back to being centred, and to finding who you are again within yourself.’
Fame has brought a fortune and, most of all, a house he ‘intends to die in’.
It is a stately cliff of a semi in Holland Park now lashed together against a neighbouring stately semi because he found that this was the best way to double his garden space.
There's a flow about the place, like Chekhov without tears.
His second wife, Barbara, turns up with his second daughter.
Alyce Faye, with whom he now lives, sunbathes in the garden and chats to a friend who used to be John's accountant (‘A Bennite,’ says John, rather proudly.)
Alyce Faye chats to me about Cynthia, John and Connie Booth's daughter.
Next door, steady work is going ahead on a long term, very ambitious educational project to which he is now turning his energies.
Around the corner, the small office which looks like a hole in the wall of a shady bookie and turns out to be something of an art gallery, is again amiably in flow.
The house is many-roomed, high-ceilinged, deeply comfortable, crowded with paintings and, now and then, a curious object: a small leather rhinoceros, a giraffe with a hat on.
Sixty-eight bottles of malt and brandy on a Welsh dresser — not bad for a man who hardly drinks.
There is money around and money helps and here we stub on another English prejudice.
‘The funny thing is, I certainly came from a culture that didn't pursue money.
For example, when I left Clifton and had two years to kill before Cambridge, I went back and taught at my old prep school for £5 a week.
What's more, I didn't know what to do with the money.
I'd get paid at the end of the term and to into town and buy a bit of cheese; a couple of ties; two or three books — that was it.
I simply didn't need any more, although after a year's work the headmaster put me up to £7 a week.
Then I went to Cambridge and my parents couldn't afford to make up the state scholarship I'd got — they were supposed to give me £200 a year, but they weren't able to do that, so when I left Cambridge I had a £600 overdraft.
And praise be to God I went straight into the West End.
Did the overdraft bother him?
‘No, because Dad said he'd guarantee it.
He couldn't provide the money, but for some reason they accepted his guarantee.
So by November of the year I left Cambridge I was back in the black — being in the West End had enabled me to pay the overdraft off.
Then I worked for the BBC — my favourite charity, really.
When I started The Frost Report I think got £70 a week.
By the time I got to Python I was getting £240 a week.
If we did filming, we got £10 a day for filming.
The second Python film, which was in ‘74, we got £4,000 each for writing and acting it.
Fawlty Towers , 43 weeks’ work for £9,000 all in.
Second series £12,000!
‘What happened was, when the second Python film cam e out in American suddenly we all started to earn money that we never expected to earn, and I remember finding it quite funny.
I used to say it was like people waking me up in the morning and throwing money in through my bedroom window.
It was money I was never expecting.
‘At the same time, there was one other bit of me that was very practical that realized that the only money to be made if you were to stay in England — and I never thought of going anywhere else — was to get into commercials, and I waited a long time until a script came along that I thought was genuinely funny.
My instincts were these.
I thought if you hold up a box of Roses chocolates, grin at it and say, ‘Mmm…great chocolates!’ everybody quite correctly will despise you.
But if you can produce 28 seconds that actually exists as a piece of entertainment and makes people laugh, nobody will ever think the worse of you for it.
‘So I took very careful steps in the direction of advertising.
I made a bad mistake on my second lot of commercials — for Skol — by letting myself be persuaded by other people against my own instincts, so from then on I was very firm about what I wanted to do and what I was prepared to do, and it's made my life easy.
Because commercials have financed everything I've wanted to do.
But, by and large, and Wanda was an exception, all the things in life that I've most enjoyed have been the things that I've been paid really very little for, and most of the things that I've been paid most for have been the least interesting.
‘I was puzzled when a paper recently called me a ‘bread head’.
If I wanted to quadruple my income I could do it, very easily.
But my attitude to money is slightly easy come, easy go.
That is to say, I earn a lot, but I also give quite a lot away in different ways.
Charities mainly, but also sometimes commissioning friends to do things, that kind of thing.
It's the complete opposite with time.
I always feel I haven't got enough of it, so I'm mean about giving it away.’
Although comedy came to him easily in the sense that he seems to have made the class laugh at will from a tender age, it is, like everything else, something that he works at and it annoys him when others fail to do so.
‘I feel I've had an enormous advantage over a lot of comedy writers, because they don't seem to realize how difficult it is.
I'm afraid I get really rather cross about this.
There are a lot of producers who tell me it's extremely difficult to get British writers to do a third draft.
A second draft is OK, but more than that and they get huffy.
I'm defiantly proud to point out that I did thirteen drafts of Wanda and that I've been writing comedy professionally since ‘63, so by the time I was writing Wanda it was 24 years.
Thirteen drafts, of which four were major rewrites.
Also, Charlie Crichton and I re-edited the film eleven times.
That's how we got it right and that's how it finished up taking $180 million worldwide.
Now, if I'm prepared to work that hard, why do these young writers think they don't need to do a third draft?
Are they really so much better than I am?
At the moment John Cleese is in full sail, way ahead of the field, confident, at ease, and gathering energy for the next thing.
Whatever that is, his longer-term ambition seems to be increasingly clear.
‘Well, I've decided I want to be a proper writer.
Because it's the only thing I really care about.
It may seem strange.
I've got a few awards over the years, and I can't quite remember what some of them were given for, but I've only ever got one for writing and that's the one I wouldn't want to give away.
And the other thing is, that if I'm actually honest with myself and say who I am envious of, I'm almost never envious of actors, never of directors, but I am envious occasionally of writers.
I don't mean that I hope Alan Ayckbourn falls under a bus, but when I see a really good piece of writing I feel a real desire to emulate.
I mean if I could write something as good as that, I would feel really proud.
I've never felt that about acting.
It's not that I'm denying the validity of acting, it's just that it's not as important to me.
So I think that I'll do a little more work on camera in a couple of years’ time, and then see if I can become a proper writer.’
But he is unlikely to climb into a Holland Park ivory tower.
Partly because, it seems to me, his life is so much more important to him than his work, and he has seen the dreadful consequences of the solitary confinement some writers and artists consider the sine qua non of their trade.
‘We all think that the professions, academia, is such a special, desirable place to be, but some of the best-rounded people I've ever met in my life have been businessmen, because of a very wide range of experience they have.
They have to learn a lot of different skills, and also in business nothing happens unless you're good at organizing teams, so businessmen often get good at working with people, which is, I think, a hugely important experience so far as helping people to grow up is concerned.
Whereas the least grown-up people I know, although they've got a tremendous value for society so bless them anyway, are ‘artists’.
And the more these artists are able to work on their own, or become very powerful, then the more precious and ungrown-up they tend to become.
Do you think that's right?’
It was finally time for me to pack up my tent and vanish into the summer afternoon.
Despite his initial disclaimer about not feeling a representational figure in our society, it had struck me that Cleese's voice is unique.
He has a singular mind and what is on it at the moment, seems, in our time of stagnation, to speak for a lost England; and England which for the moment has been buried beneath the slogans of ideology and the jargon of modish materialism and press vendettas and bile.
John Cleese wants to clean up the town — and he's as good a sheriff as we've got.
I, Claudia
The milky pout.
The tiny nose.
The perfect teeth.
The ample bosom.
The sensational curves…
So what exactly is it that has made Claudia Schiffer the world's highest paid model?
By Jon Wilde
CLAUDIA SCHIFFER walks six feet tall through the foyer of an impossibly elegant Paris hotel.
Her defiant black clothes belie her bashful smile.
She shakes me gently by the hand and announces quietly, ‘I've just got out of the bath.’
At the restaurant table, there's a full bowl of pea soup between us that will remain untasted for the duration of our meeting.
The gentleman with the glass eye at the next table is discussing civic sculpture with a woman who might be Catherine Deneuve.
Thelonius Monk's ruminative ‘Alone in San   Francisco’ is playing softly in the background.
In hotels as expensive as this, even the waiters appear to float, and all activity is reduced to a succession of discreet gestures, endorsing luxury and profligacy.
Schiffer is used to all this.
She is said to possess 10,000 photogenic expressions but, for the time being, she simply sips thoughtfully at her iced Perrier and reflects for possibly the thousandth time on what it actually means to be described as The Most Beautiful Woman in the World.
‘When I was growing up, I never thought about my looks and I never seem to get used to talking about my features.
I'd sooner think about my insides than think about my face or my body.
I just don't think the way I look is important.
What goes on in my mind is much more important.
To the average cab driver, Claudia Schiffer is famous for being the highest-paid fashion model in the world.
To the fashion cognoscenti , she is simply famous for being perfect.
‘I never think of myself as perfect.
I'll always be a mixture of faults and virtues.
People write me letters saying that although they only know me from my photos, they feel that they know something about my personality.
It's funny how often they get it right.’
So what sort of person do they see?
‘I'm shy.
I'm sensitive.
I'm self-critical.
I drink a litre of pure water every day.
I swim and play tennis.
I like to read books on the Impressionists.
I listen to Phil Collins, Tina Turner and Prince.
I love that last Phil Collins video, ‘I Can't Dance’.
That was funny.
I'd watch that and fall over with laughter.
That's exactly my sense of humour.’
Schiffer began her extraordinary rise to fame in 1988 when she was just seventeen.
One evening, she made a rare outing to the local discotheque in her home town of Dusseldorf.
Michael Levaton, owner of the Metropolitan modelling agency, slid into the seat next to her and took the plunge; within minutes, he had offered her a contract.
At the time, she was intending to go to law school with a view to taking over her father's law firm.
But, in a matter of weeks, she was in Paris modelling for French Elle .
She came to the notice of Guess?, the American jeans company, and was made the central focus of their international campaign.
The first Guess? shots by model-turned-photographer Ellen von Unwerth showed her squeezing out of a black lace bustier, looking seductively over her shoulder.
The pictures drew the first of many comparisons with Brigitte Bardot.
Her next big campaign, shot by Herb Ritts, launched her into the fashion stratosphere and on to the covers of magazines from Vogue to Rolling Stone .
In February of this year, she signed an exclusive contract with Revlon, which will bring her an estimated $4.5m over the next three years, a deal which eclipses previous records set by Christy Turlington (Maybelline) and Pauline Porizhova (Estee Lauder).
Along with Turlington, Cindy Crawford, Naomi Campbell and Linda Evangelista, Schiffer is one of the select group of supermodel icons who have achieved international celebrity.
She is recognized wherever she goes.
When she recently appeared at a New York department store to promote a scent, over 5,000 people turned up to catch a precious glimpse of her in the flesh.
Fans send her presents of teddy bears and expensive perfume.
Occasionally, they demand locks of her hair.
Dusseldorf is considering naming a street after her.
She owns apartments in Milan, New York and Paris and divides her spare time between her family in Germany and her boyfriend, the playwright and Texan model, William Goins.
‘I enjoy the fame,’ she admits.
‘It's definitely an experience and I try to give myself to the moment and make the most of it.
If I hadn't been in that bar at that time, perhaps all this would have happened to somebody else.
What made me go out that night when, normally, I would have stayed in and watched television?
I might have left the discotheque and I'd have never met that man.
It's enough to make me believe in fate.’
Bob Fox, the Revlon president, has said that ‘Claudia brings an unforgettable quality of joy to all her work that is key to Revlon's view of beauty’.
Indeed, Schiffer's natural beauty is as uncomplicated as the mineral water that she appears to live on.
Whilst the pert, Californian sexuality of Baywatch bimbos seems to be aimed at the heart of adolescent lust, Schiffer possesses a vital ambiguity within her features and her poise which recreates her as a story waiting to be told, as opposed to a fantasy waiting to be fulfilled.
Her thoroughly Nineties image of modesty and purity is carefully policed.
She will not pose for cigarettes, alcohol or foods.
When topless photographs of her were published recently in a small-circulation New York magazine under   the headline ‘Backstage Peep Show’, she was reported to be claiming damages of $25m for ‘irreparable damage to her reputation, career and personal image’.
However, she finally decided not to go ahead with the lawsuit.
‘It's not that it was bad for image,’ she says.
‘I'm the way I am and that's my image, basically.
It had to do with making a point.
It was an AIDS benefit and I was caught in a private moment.
The photographer only had the opportunity to do it because it was a benefit and he had access to the models that he wouldn't normally have.
To take advantage of a moment like that, well, it's not very nice, is it?’
Claudia in excelsis: ‘It's an amazing way of making a living.
Right now, I couldn't be any happier’
Recent newspaper reports that she had posed with whips for Helmut Newton, proved, predictably, to be wishful thinking.
‘I've never worked with whips or anything like that,’ she says.
‘I worked with Helmut Newton, but he never suggested using whips.
That's not my sort of thing.
That's not the way I think.
It's not my style.
I like to look at photos like that, but I don't want to appear in them.
In the 1980s, stars such as Kim Basinger relied upon overt sexuality in order to give their bland beauty a quasi-pornographic appeal.
Claudia Schiffer, on the other hand, appears to represent a return to innocence and vulnerability, which has more in common with the glamorous screen goddesses of the 1930s than it does with the predatory allure of Sharon Stone.
You can fake a pout but you can't fake a blush, and Schiffer's colour heightens markedly as soon as sex is mentioned.
‘Did you say sex?
I don't think it has anything to do with sex.
But I think the idea of glamour is coming back.
People do seen to need that in their lives.
I think modelling and the movies are connected in that they're both about a dream.
I don't think it necessarily has to have anything to do with sexuality.
When people look at photos of models, the might see something sexy and they might not.
But I'd never use the word ‘sex’.
That's not what it's about for me.’
Neither is she particularly thrilled at being considered one of the world's leading sex symbols.
‘It wouldn't actually trouble me if men thought about me in that way.
But wouldn't feel flattered.
I don't think of it that way.
But I'd like to be involved in creating beautiful things.
I'd like people to look at my photos and feel good about themselves and want to do something beautiful themselves.
If they cut out my picture and put it on their wall, maybe they do it because it makes them feel good when they walk into that room.
It's a nice thought.’
The milky pout.
The tiny nose.
The perfect teeth.
The ample bosom.
The tousled upswept tendrils of hair.
The sensational curves.
These are all reasons for Schiffer's enormous popularity.
Yet there's something more; something connected with the part of her that is completely unknowable, tantalizingly out of reach.
‘It's not just about beauty.
It's got as much to do with personality, character, how you project yourself.
Whether you make it or not depends largely on how much you are prepared to give.’
Even the biggest of the supermodels accepts that her shelf-life is limited and that, sooner rather than later, it will be time to step away from the catwalk.
Despite persistent rumours that Schiffer is set to follow Naomi Campbell into pop music, she seems more likely to follow Iman's route to Hollywood.
‘I've accepted that I can do this for a certain amount of time.
Models are similar to athletes in that way.
But there's no fixed limits.
You look at Lauren Hutton, who's been doing it for more than 20 years.
So it can be done.
But I think I'll know when it's time to quit and move into something new.
I am studying acting, but that's as far as I've gone.
I don't want to jump into the first movie that's offered to me.
I'm seriously interested in acting, but I want to take my time.
I want to find out my limits.
I might find out that I'm a bad actress.
But I'd prefer to find that out for myself, rather than having millions of people finding it out for themselves.
‘I'm interested in art and maybe I'd like to do something in the art world.
It's unfortunate that I've got no talent for painting or singing.
I admire people who express themselves in that way.
I suppose that what I do is a form of expression.
People who don't know anything about it might assume that it simply involves standing in front of a camera or walking down a catwalk.
It's not as easy as that.
But it's an amazing way of making a living.
I'm not the sort of person who gets what they want and then starts longing for something else.
I'm always looking for the positive thing in any situation.
I try to arrange things so that I come out feeling happy.
Happiness, in a way, is the biggest challenge.
Right now, I couldn't be any happier.’
Out on the teeming Paris street, she is accosted by a couple of zealous American tourists who beg her for autographs.
‘You are beautiful,’ says one.
‘Unbelievable,’ adds his companion.
Schiffer's eyebrows arch.
She shakes her head with disbelief and that famous face blushes scarlet once more.
It's the kind of face that perhaps she deserves.
MIDAS TOUCH Before the collapse of Canary Wharf (right), everything turned to gold for Albert, left, and Paul Reichmann
EMPIRE OF THE SONS
Before the receivers were called in at Olympia & York, the Reichmann brothers commanded a billion-dollar business empire which had changed the skyline of London and New York.
Running their corporation according to the ancient precepts of the Talmud, they shunned all publicity and trusted only a handful of associates.
When the Toronto-based journalist Leo Heaps wrote a book detailing the secrets of their rise to power, pressure from the brothers helped ensue it never appeared.
Now, for the first time, Heaps reveals the true story of the Reichmanns and the family secret that they were so desperate to conceal
IN LONDON ON A DREARY DAY in late winter 1988, a meeting took place shortly after noon at a booth in the Horticultural Hall near Victoria Station, where a large stamp exhibition was in progress.
A man describing himself as being in the public relations business had phoned Julian Klein's office and made an appointment to meet him on this day, but had not divulged the nature of his business.
Instead of the single man whom Klein expected, three showed up.
They had come, they said, to take Klein to lunch and to have a friendly discussion about a matter in which he might have a mutual interest.
Their intentions were oblique and somewhat vague, but Klein already had a good idea about the subject to be discussed.
I had warned Klein to expect some inquisitive visitors either in London or at his home in Lugano where he spent his winters.
His name had  been leaked inadvertently in a press interview which I had given and someone had traced his whereabouts.
I realized that sooner or later the immense resources of the Reichmann family would be used to cover all traces of the past.
The gentlemen presented their calling cards.
One was Patrick Grayson, managing director of Kroll Associates UK Ltd, a private investigation company.
Another, Steve Rucker, was the managing director of the same company in New York.
The third caller was Steven Blair Sharpe, a senior partner in the prestigious Canadian law firm, Davies, Ward and Beck.
The men were emissaries of Paul Reichmann and were there to question Klein about the story he had told me on a number of occasions.
But Klein stuck to his guns.
Samuel Reichmann, the father of the multi-billionaire sons, had done what Klein said he had done in Tangier.
Forty-five years had passed, but Klein had not forgotten.
Neither had his superior, Colonel Edward Wharton-Tigar, who had commanded the SOE (Strategic Operations Executive) from the British Consulate in Tangier during World War II.
Both men had fought the German Abwehr in the unrelenting, clandestine war that went on daily in North Africa.
Klein had played an important role under Wharton-Tigar, who had described him as ‘completely reliable, someone who had performed an important service for the British’.
When the Germans, who controlled Tangier through General Franco, demanded Klein's arrest, Wharton-Tigar in 1943 had spirited Klein out to Gibraltar and from there on to the safety of England where he had been given British citizenship.
Klein prided himself on being a loyal subject who had served his adopted country with honour.
He had abhorred many of the traders of Tangier who would do business with either side.
Klein would not be bought for money or favours.
He would never forget how Samuel Reichmann and his partner, Emmanuel Hollander, had been fined for trading with the Germans by the Jewish Court of Tangier, and how one or both of them were on the blacklist of the British Consulate.
FOUR YEARS AGO, I was commissioned to write a book on the Reichmann brothers.
From their base in Canada, they had engaged in the conquest of America and after that, it seemed, the conquest of the whole world.
Few countries of Europe and few major cities of America had failed to benefit from their large developments in the constant search for new markets in the expanding empire they were building.
Property, railroads, oil companies, pulp and paper corporations were devoured.
Nothing that they sought eluded them, no matter the price.
The quest to conquer was led by the leader of the clan, Paul, a modern conquistador of the Book of Life embodied in the writings of the Talmud which he meticulously followed.
Opposition crumbled before him and the path he followed was strewn with gold.
When I first began to research their past, the brothers were men cloaked in mystery; a mystery it appeared, that deliberately cultivated.
The Reichmann family's social interests were narrow and parochial and revolved around their small, tightly controlled, ultra-orthodox community.
The laws they followed belonged to Gemara and they swore by the Midrash and the Mishmeh Torah, an encyclopaedic religious code written by Maimonides eight centuries ago.
The brothers looked like moderns, acted like moderns, but in truth they were not of this age.
They would keep their word no matter what.
But in almost all other matters, they were bound to a higher law.
Their first allegiance was to the Messiah whose embrace they eagerly awaited.
Soon he could come to lead his disciples home to the Promised Land.
For centuries the followers of the Messiah had combined a shrewd business sense with the world of prayer and devotion to their prophet.
The Reichmann brothers were no different.
I had always found something odd about the secrecy that the Reichmann brothers wished to preserve.
Were they simply bashful?
As I peeled away the layers of the past, their life grew more confounding and the enigma expanded.
That, if anything, did their obsessive secrecy hide?
What magic did these brothers possess that had catapulted them into the rarefied atmosphere of the multi-billionaires.
Where did the wealth come from?
Never before in financial history had so much wealth been acquired so quickly.
The owned companies in England, France, Belgium, America and Canada, and had substantial shares in 100 other corporations.
When I first met them they had hardly ever granted interviews for the purpose of making any disclosures about their background.
In fact, little was known about them.
I explained to them that when you begin to acquire so much of a nation's wealth, then you cannot escape attention.
A responsibility emerges to divulge certain facts.
I don't think this argument made any impression upon the brothers.
Only a few people were interested in how it all began.
I was one of the few.
Two obsessions dominated the life of Paul Reichmann, who commanded the family fortunes.
One was immense drive for power which I didn't fully understand until I had a better idea of the second quality.
This was a messianic fervour that must have been similar to that possessed by the ancient zealots who died defending Masada against the Romans 2,000 years ago.
As a young man, Paul had studied at a London yeshiva.
Later, he would spend tens of millions of dollars, the true extent of which may never be known, to support the ultra-orthodox parties of Israel — enough to influence the country's politics.
THE BEGINNING OF THE END Lord Young looks on as Paul Reichmann drives the first pile at Canary Wharf in 1987.
Top: Paul, Albert and Ralph this year, when Olympia & York filed for bankruptcy protection in America
All this I knew before we met one warm summer Sunday, after the brothers had seen my unfinished manuscript.
Their phone call came to my home in Hampstead inviting me to come to Toronto to meet them on the following Sunday.
My ticket would be sent the next day.
I had a pretty good idea what they wanted to discuss with me.
There were also a number of questions I had for them.
Our meeting was scheduled for 2.00 pm in their 72-storey, white monolith overlooking the downtown waterfront of Toronto.
I was early and made my way slowly through the deserted canyon of skyscrapers on this hot afternoon.
The meeting had been arranged with intense, frantic planning as to detail, with letters despatched by lawyers through couriers, paragraphs changed bo mutual request, assurances as to what I could say or not and, indeed, whether I could admit that I had even appeared  on this day at the august offices of Olympia & York.
The hot day, my uncomfortable collar made tighter by a tie on this deserted Sunday, made this make-believe rendezvous more unreal than it already had become.
The Reichmann brothers would already have taken their day off on Saturday and today would be back at business as usual.
The doors to the great white stone building that led to the palatial rotunda were open, the lobby empty except for a single security guard sitting and reading behind the circular information desk.
I boarded an elevator and shot up alone to their office on the 32nd floor.
I stepped out on to a floor of empty desks set on an acre or more of thick carpet.
At the end of a corridor of panelled mahogany was the boardroom where the black-bearded Paul and his clean-shaven, white-faced brother, Albert, awaited me.
Both wore similar dark suits, white shirts and ties.
Beneath their shirts I could just catch a glimpse of the tassels of their tsitses or religious bibs.
We weighed each other up for a few moments without speaking.
Something about the way I looked did not quite fit the picture they had envisaged.
Was I older or younger, fatter or thinner?
Had I really written all those nasty things?
‘Well,’ I said, ‘we have finally met.’
For the first time I noticed the brothers' yarmulkes in the somewhat subdued light of the boardroom, plain black skullcaps blending in with the pale glow of the room.
Maybe it was minutes or just seconds, I cannot be sure, before Paul began to speak.
Then Albert joined.
They recalled almost in totality everything I had written, the people I had interviewed, the story of the vast corruption in New York's building trades and how it affected the construction of their monumental World Financial Centre on the Hudson.
How did they respond to corruption?
After all, as scrupulous followers of the Talmud, dishonesty and corruption were abhorred.
Some of the people I had interviewed were ridiculed, relegated to a position of insignificance, although one was their senior vice-president in New York.
The brothers were being circuitous.
In business they conferred with each other for a few minutes and then made their offer.
But today they were on the defensive.
Why was the father's background never mentioned?
Had Samuel and his partner, Emmanuel Hollander, traded with the enemy?
As the afternoon wore on and the muted tones and friendly manner of my hosts remained unaltered, we discussed religion, morality and many of the people I had mentioned in the manuscript.
For over three hours we talked and talked and still neither brother had returned to the subject that lay foremost in our minds.
Instead, Paul explained that he was dissatisfied with his life.
He had been a student driven by his father into commerce when all he wanted was to study, to be acclaimed as a Hebrew scholar.
I listened to the gentle manner of his discourse and disarming admissions, but did not entirely believe him.
‘We are no high leverage operators, no shufflers of paper either, as you accuse me of being,’ Paul protested.
‘We are more constructive than that.
The deals did not work out that way.’
When the afternoon was almost over the subject of the early life in Tangier was brought up.
I didn't mention the subject first.
They had to do that.
In circuitous, typical Talmudic fashion, the most important business was left to the last.
And I would expect that to be so.
Was I bluffing?
Did I have evidence?
How much did I know?
This interview had been granted to set the record straight.
‘You know, I try to bring up my son as normal as possible.
It is very difficult.
I hope he can grow up to be a normal young man in spite of what has happened to me.
I don't care about myself.
But what you said about my family I care about.’
This was as close as Paul Reichmann would come to answer the accusation.
But the history of the family speaks for itself.
Late in the afternoon, I decided the time had come to go.
I had said what I had to and listened long enough.
Perhaps the brothers had waited in vain for me to make some retraction.
But none had come.
I knew that when I left that this was not be the end.
Paul Reichmann asked me to delay everything for two months and I agreed.
Some weeks later, another meeting with the Reichmanns took place in which the new owner of my publishing company participated.
When I left, I knew the book was doomed.
SAMUEL REICHMANN was born in 1910 in the town of Csorna, Hungary, into a community of extreme orthodox Jews.
His wife Renée, was a cousin of Sigmund Gestetner, who emigrated to England early in the 1930s and made a personal fortune with the copying machine that carried his name.
Before World War II, Samuel had travelled extensively in Europe as a merchant, and thanks to the close fraternal society of orthodox brethren he had contacts in most cities.
In 1939, he and his family of six children, Eva, Edward, Louis, Albert, Paul and Ralph, were living in Vienna.
As the Nazi threat increased, he planned his departure with great care.
On their journey, the family travelled to Hungary, then on through Switzerland and Belgium to London.
To survive with a young family of six and travel across Europe in those terrible days must have demanded the dexterity of an escape artist, and an iron will — not to mention extremely good connections and much luck.
According to former Tangier refugees like Pubi Rosenbaum, who lived until recent years in New York, and George Wertheimer of Madrid, Samuel was entrusted with considerable sums of money and jewellery from his orthodox brethren in Vienna and Hungary which he left in various strategic places for safekeeping.
When Samuel arrived in England in 1939, after a hazardous journey of two months, the country did not look like a safe place in which to live.
War had been declared.
There were grave dangers.
After making his plans for the safekeeping of funds in several banks he started off on his travels once again.
The money deposited in England, Switzerland and other parts of Europe would remain there for many years until Samuel was free again to travel through a liberated continent.
When he cast his eyes around for the one place that seemed, for a man of business, the least affected by the tumult of war, the shrewd Samuel decided on Tangier.
An enterprising man could do business under the Spanish dictator, Franco, and live in this North African refuge without fearing for the safety of his family.
Samuel arrived in  Algeciras late in 1939, after a journey of three months, not long after General Franco announced that Tangier would become a Spanish territory.
Britain, the United States, Germany and Italy all maintained consulates.
The largest was Germany's with 400 employees.
The Germans had deposited hundreds of millions in gold, jewels, and precious works of art in Tangier banks.
The large German consulate building in the Mendoubita had also become a depository where high Nazi officials cached their wealth as a hedge against the future.
The Jews of Tangier were living in a fool's paradise and refused to believe how vulnerable they were.
Since 1492, when they were evicted from Spain, Tangier Jews had been a people without a country, owing allegiance to no one but the Jewish nation.
These Sephardic Jews did not take kindly to newcomers, especially to European or Ashkenazi Jews, unless they came with large sums of money.
Samuel had money.
Spaniards controlled every racket in Tangier.
From the military governor, General Uriarte, down to the lowliest officer, the Jews were made to pay to survive in business.
With the exception of very few families who had the protection of the British consulate, the Jews were defenceless.
As ADF Gascoigne, the British Consul at the time, said in a despatch, Tangier was ‘a plundered town’.
In this atmosphere, newcomers like Samuel learned to function with their fellow traders.
From morning to dusk on all days except the Sabbath, he was out in the marketplace among the other merchants trading in any commodity with which he could make a profit, including money itself.
The Germans were evil, but fighting them was a concept far removed from Samuel Reichmann's mentality.
One way to seek their protection was to do business with them.
Not all Jewish merchants in Tangier would made their fortune at any price, however.
Many escaped to Gibraltar, joined the Allied armies and distinguished themselves in the fight against Hitler.
But all this was far away from the mind of Samuel Reichmann.
One of the refugees who arrived from Hungary about the same time as Reichmann was Emmanuel Hollander, who would become his partner in numerous business ventures.
Another was the urbane and sophisticated stamp dealer from Budapest, Julian Klein, who by chance befriended Edward Wharton-Tigar, then working under cover as a cipher clerk at the British Consulate.
Klein fought the Germans with what he knew best — stamps.
In one of his operations he had British Intelligence print hundreds of thousands of fake stamps with a picture of Himmler on them and distributed them through Switzerland into Germany.
This caused chaos in the German postal system.
Klein also engaged in numerous other activities against the enemy, often raising large sums of money for the SOE through his stamp operations.
It was Wharton-Tigar who, in the end, saved Klein's life by shipping him out to Gibraltar when the Abwehr sought his arrest.
Samuel's large stall was in the rue de Sanghines, the street of the moneylenders.
Once profitable transaction followed another in quick succession and Samuel prospered as he had not believed possible.
Once in a while he must have thought about the gold and wealth he had deposited in Europe and wondered about the fate of those who had entrusted it to him.
Business was coming faster than he could deal with.
Flour from France, from the Moulin Corbeil, was imported, heavy bribes were paid to the Spaniards and it was then sold to either German or British commercial agents to feed the armies of those nations.
Wharton-Tigar recalls quite well the sardine factory controlled by Reichmann and Hollander.
A large shipment of sardines canned in Tangier was sold to representatives of the British Consulate by Hollander.
The British consulate advanced the money, about $50,000, but the sardines were never delivered — the enemy offered more.
Hollander and Reichmann were fined by the Jewish court.
Hollander and possibly Reichmann were placed on the British consulate blacklist.
Wharton-Tigar and Klein have not forgotten the incident over all the years that have passed.
To deal with the enemy as a Jew has a special significance.
When the new state of Israel was declared this act would be considered an unforgivable sin.
An act of treason.
BETWEEN 1945, WHEN the war ended, and 1956 when the first Reichmann son, Edward, appeared in Canada, Samuel engaged in a programme of frenzied European activity, the purpose of which was to gather together the early Reichmann millions.
Everything was planned in fastidious detail.
The five sons would become Samuel's missionaries to the new world.
The family would also become the beneficiaries of the cached wealth, retrieved in Switzerland, Belgium, London, Madrid and Paris.
Applications to both the United States and Canada were filled out for all the members of the family except the oldest child, Eva.
They would go to whichever country first offered them sanctuary.
Immediately after the War, Paul was sent to London, where he studied the Talmud in a yeshiva in Stamford Hill for five years.
Edward the oldest son, went to Montreal in 1956 to establish Olympia Floor and Wall Tile.
But the big money Samuel was still accumulating would have to wait until Canada obliged with the immigration papers.
Edward's job was to prepare for the arrival of the family.
(Later, Edward was to settle in Israel, where he engaged in building projects in Tel Aviv and undertook to construct a new city centre in Jerusalem.
This latter project is now on hold.)
When Samuel Reichmann finally came to Canada in 1958, his son Paul was pecking out letters with two fingers on his typewriter in a dingy walk-up apartment on Palmerston Street where the bicycles and overshoes were left in the hallway.
Paul acted as a secretary for Olympia Floor and Wall Tile, which would eventually become the mighty Olympia & York.
When Samuel and his wife arrived in Toronto, they made a large deposit in a local bank of between £20 and £30 million.
The fruits of the father's labours, his dealings and retrieved deposits, had been consolidated.
With the arrival of Samuel, the invasion of America had begun in earnest.
In 1965, the Reichmanns purchased some industrial land in north Toronto for £17.8 million.
Two years later, a small portion of the tract recouped the entire investment, and the Reichmanns had entered the league of major developers.
This pattern of good fortune, on a market that kept on rising, would be repeated over and over.
Two large towers were constructed on the site as the family moved their activities to other choice locations in Toronto and Calgary where sizeable amounts of oil money were available.
The boom was on.
Everything the family built was easily rented and money was plentiful.
By 1969, the family had time to take stock.
The had assets of close to £100 million.
Paul Reichmann, meanwhile, had moved out of his small apartment into a large home and a matchmaker had found a devotedly religious bride for him from Tangier.
The entire family had settled in a group of large homes in North Toronto not far from each other.
As the years passed, a rabbi from the New York yeshiva was imported to instruct the Reichmanns' children in a rigorous six-day schedule of studies based largely on the Talmud.
Then, without warning, one Friday evening in the spring of 1975, Samuel Reichmann was stricken with a fatal heart attack on his way to his small orthodox synagogue.
On his shoulder he carried a holy Torah which was to be a gift to his place of worship.
Now the son, Paul, would replace this patriarch merchant, about whom the kindest words an outsider might have offered were that he had an ability to survive and prosper and stay as far away from conflict as possible.
But among his brethren this benefactor would be sadly missed.
The first real jewel in the crown of the empire came in the mid-Seventies with the building of the 72-storey First Canadian Place, where the Reichmanns have their world headquarters.
The Bank of Montreal, who supplied the financing, rented one third of the building, which was sufficient for the Reichmanns almost to break even.
For a number of years it was the tallest building in Canada.
By the time of its completion the company's assets were climbing close to a billion dollars.
Financing everywhere was assured.
THE REICHMANNS HAD already turned their attention south of the border when Edward Minskoff, a sophisticated New Yorker, called Paul Reichmann one day in the spring of 1976.
He had eight skyscrapers for sale in Manhattan.
The city of New York had sunk over the years into a position where there were disastrous levels of debt.
The bottom had fallen out of the city's property market and skyscrapers offered for sale at ridiculously low prices could find no buyers.
What Minskoff described that morning on the phone from New York sounded so attractive that Paul and Albert took the earliest plane to La Guardia.
The were taken by limousine through the streets of Manhattan, observing with awe the eight magnificent structures that had been on the market for many months and which no one had wanted to buy.
The Reichmanns figured that if New York went out of business the world would go with it.
They would take their chance for the sale price of $380 million.
They couldn't see how they could go wrong.
As soon as Olympia & York's bankers agreed to loan the $50 million down payment, Reichmann said to Minskoff: ‘Go ahead.
Make arrangements.
I'll be back in New York before the Sabbath to close the deal.’
The rest of the story became legend.
From being little-known property owners, who were simply willing to risk where others hesitated, the Reichmanns were suddenly stars in the financial firmament of America.
Within two years the New York market turned around.
Rent rose from $10 to $30 a square foot.
Property values escalated.
By 1980, the $380 million the Reichmanns had invested was worth $3 billion.
On one building alone, they arranged a Eurobank loan of $700 million, almost twice what the entire eight had cost.
Battery Park came next.
The eight million square feet in the World Financial Centre went up in four years and defied all predictions.
Richard Kahan, the Battery Park commissioner, awarded Olympia & York the contract when Reichmann guaranteed payment of several hundred million on the city's bonds which were due the next year.
Kahan called Paul Reichmann ‘the biggest crapshooter New York had ever seen’.
He didn't know that Reichmann had already rented out two of the four towers before he had signed the contract.
Kahan warned Reichmann there was a deadline.
Overtime and weekend work would be necessary.
This would probably mean working on Saturdays.
Paul Reichmann threw up his hands in protest at the suggestion, but did not utter a sound.
Every problem had a Talmudic solution.
He would find a way.
However, Reichmann had a request.
Instead of the 99-year lease on the land he wanted double — 198 years.
He was thinking of the future.
The request was granted.
At 2.00 pm each Friday, in all the Reichmann offices around the world, work stops.
No one is allowed into the offices on Saturday at the risk of immediate dismissal.
The World Financial Centre required that construction continue every working hour of every working day in order to complete the strict deadline imposed by the Battery Park Commission.
The solution was that each Friday before sundown, Olympia & York sold the company that owned the World Financial Centre to a non-Jewish company.
Saturday at sundown it was sold back again to the Reichmanns.
Thus the Sabbath laws had not been violated and work was completed on time.
The World Financial Centre was secured by major tenants.
The concept and beauty of the development, its majesty and size, had altered the silhouette of Manhattan.
Moreover, it was an outstanding financial success.
About this time, the Reichmanns divested themselves of their English Properties company in London for a profit of £90 million.
They sold Le Boursidière in Paris and holdings in Brussels where Samuel Reichmann had first established connections many years ago and deposited substantial funds.
With this money and large credit the Reichmanns embarked on the purchase of several major resource companies.
They bought Abitibi Paper, Gulf Oil, engaged in a struggle with Allied Lyons for control of Hiram Walker, bought ten per cent of the conglomerate Santa Fe Railroad…
The list went on and on.
Thirty thousand people now worked for the brothers' resource companies in addition to the many thousands they employed in the construction of their property.
They had become the largest property owners in North America and beyond that, the world.
The Reichmann brothers borrowed and bought with a recklessness that stunned the staid financial community.
On paper, Olympia & York still looked like a good thing to the institutions who gave their money.
The net worth of the company on the books was $6 billion.
The gross assets of the brothers' holdings were more than $24 billion.
There was plenty of cash in the bank.
Yearly gross income was close to $1 billion.
The lenders were collecting their interest like clockwork.
The brothers could do no wrong.
Then finally, Paul Reichmann saw the opportunity he had been waiting for in London, a city he fondly recalled from the days when he studied there as a young man.
Canary Wharf was up for grabs.
This development could be greater, even more dramatic than the World Financial Centre.
The builders of Canary Wharf were going out of business and needed help.
In a series of quick strokes, the brothers took control of the massive project.
Billions would be poured into what seemed like a black and bottomless hole.
But the brothers believed they could do no wrong.
With the help of the British government, the London Docklands would be revived.
ON APRIL 13, 1992, the empire that began with Samuel Reichmann in a stall in the street of the moneylenders in Tangier was not back among the moneylenders.
The men and women who came were dressed differently from those who jostled one another in the rue Sanghines, but they looked at money the same way.
The creditors had come from every corner of the globe and filled up the ballroom of the Sheraton Hotel in Toronto with their lawyers and advisers.
Olympia & York was insolvent and had sought the protection of the courts to avoid bankruptcy.
The company needed a million dollars a day simply to function and could no longer generate the money.
The creditors, many of whom had once eagerly asked the Reichmann brothers to grace their boards as directors, now sat grim, hostile and stony faced.
How did Olympia & York intend to pay $18 billion of debt?
The amount would be sufficient to rehabilitate a large part of the underdeveloped world.
No Reichmann appeared at this gathering.
When the going got rough the brothers usually sent a deputy to face the unpleasant hostility to which they would be exposed.
They still employed enough hired and expensive help to negotiate for them, but with instructions how far they could go.
Paul Reichmann was not yet ready to abandon the ship.
His personal wealth, well protected, was still very considerable.
And with caution, shrewdness and bluff maybe he was still, as Richard Kahan said, the biggest crapshooter New York had ever seen.
But this could be Paul Reichmann's last roll of the dice.
High Times on the Dying River
This is a story about rafting down the Colorado River through the Grand Canyon, about running America's biggest rapids.
It's a story about adventure and excitement and risk.
But it's also a story of ecological disaster and man's excess.
By Richard Grant
‘IT IS A REGION more difficult to traverse than the Alps or the Himalayas, but if strength and courage are sufficient for the task, by a year's toil a concept of sublimity can be obtained never again to be equalled on the hither side of Paradise.’
John Wesley Powell, the first man to run the Colorado River through the Grand Canyon, in 1869 .
MILE 76.
We glide along a glassy-smooth stretch of water, listening to the steadily increasing roar of Hance Rapid.
Thirty yards downstream, the calm water ends abruptly, and the river takes a headlong plunge into a frothing maelstrom of rocks, boulders, giant such holes and standing waves.
Some of the waves are fifteen feet high; if they catch a boat sideways, they will flip it like a pancake.
Garrett, trip leader and captain of our puny-looking paddle raft, bellows some last minute instructions.
‘Remember: paddle or swim.
The force of the paddle digging into the water is what keeps your butt on the boat.’
Ahead of us, another of the boats slams through a wave, folding and buckling with the impact.
‘One more thing!’
Five yards to go.
Faces spin around in alarm.
‘Don't forget to have fun.’
We shoot down into the rapid as if fired out of a cannon.
I am in the front of the boat, where there is only water, sky, water, sky, and Garrett's booming commands, ‘Go!
Go!
Go!
Right Turn ’.
We skirt an abyss-like hole, narrowly avoid a rock, then another wall of water rears up in front of me, blocking out the sky.
There is a moment of slow motion in which I have time to register the force of the water rushing over my body, my toes slipping out of the footcups, the paddle flying out of my hands.
Then abruptly I am back in real time, bobbing up and down in the river, powerless against its current.
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-THREE years ago, a one-armed Civil War veteran and amateur geologist named John Wesley Powell led a small band of adventurers into the unexplored canyons of the Colorado River.
They spent 95 days on the river, suffering extremes of heat and cold, desperate food shortages, upsets in the rapids, and the constant, all-pervasive fear of the unknown.
It proved too much for three of the men, who hiked out at Separation Rapid, only to be killed by Indians.
When Powell and the five survivors eventually reached safety, ragged, half-starved and exhausted, their expedition was hailed as one of the most courageous feats of exploration of the time.
Fifty years ago, only a hundred hardy individuals had succeeded in running the river through the Grand Canyon, its most challenging stretch, and many had drowned in the rapids trying.
Now, in the age of hypalon rafts and life-jackets, ice chests and propane stoves, the trip has become a popular vacation activity.
In many respects, it is a different stretch of river to the one that Powell ran.
The Colorado, named ‘river coloured red’ by the Spanish, now flows green; the silts and muds that gave the river its distinctive colour are trapped behind Glen Canyon Dam, fifteen miles upstream from the beginning of the Grand Canyon.
The construction of the dam in 1963 also eradicated the seasonal flows of the river.
The wild Colorado would flood every spring with snowmelt from its mountain headwaters, nourishing the riverbank ecosystems, and building up the waves in the big rapids to the size of three-storey houses.
Now the river's flow varies on a daily basis, according to demands for hydroelectric power at the dam, and never reaches spring flood proportions.
The rapids are still the biggest in North America, and still claim the occasional luckless victim, but 15,000 people now run the river every year.
Strength and courage are no longer essential for the journey, and toil is unheard of.
Most river tourists travel in big noisy motor rigs, which crash through all but the biggest rapids without difficulty.
They race through the 277 miles of the Grand Canyon in six or seven days, drinking beer and spewing exhaust fumes all the way.
When they see us paddling on the river, they stare at us open-mouthed, as if we are completely insane.
There are none of us, including Cliff, a concrete contractor from Washington state, and his wife Sandy, who wanted to go to Paris this summer but lost the toss of a coin; Bill, who writes travel guides and is comfortable only in his own company; and Ken, a semi-retired naval man from Oregon, who spends most of the time wrestling with the impossible task of capturing the gigantic scenery in photographs.
In age we range from 21-year-old Megan, the younger sister of one of the boatmen, to 67-year-old PG, an indefatigable grandmother who out-hikes everyone on the trip.
We are on a sixteen-day oar and paddle-powered trip  that falls under the category of ‘exotic wilderness vacation’.
The rapids provide the all-important frisson of danger, but four boatmen, state-of-the-art equipment and a cook ensure that discomfort is kept to a minimum.
Six days in the Grand Canyon have wrought a powerful change in the complexion of the group.
We are in an environment where money and status are irrelevant, time is measured in aeons, and human arrogance is an object of frequent ridicule.
Every day the Canyon humbles us with some new wonder: a 2,000ft sheer wall of red limestone, a golden eagle soaring down to the river to fish, a natural rock amphitheatre which would comfortably accommodate a full orchestra and 20,000 people.
Initial awkwardness and self-consciousness dissolve swiftly in such surroundings, and we have grown close, sharing a sense of dumbstruck awe before the landscape.
Two hours after my ‘swim’ in Hance Rapid, I am lounging in a sandy beach in dry, warm clothes.
The cook's latest masterpiece languishes in my stomach, and I am drinking a river-cooled beer.
Three of us went swimming in the rapids today.
Cliff, the concrete contractor, and Tessa, the schoolteacher, were flipped off the paddle boat in a suck hole and held underwater by the boiling currents for a few seconds before their life-jackets brought them spluttering to the surface.
I was dragged back into the boat almost immediately.
We compare minor skin abrasions, and tell and retell our experiences until those brief moments of panic begin to assume the glow of adventure.
At the boats, ‘cocktail hour’ is in progress, an important nightly event for Garrett, Pete and Sam, the boatmen.
(Tom, who rows the baggage boat, is the lone teetotaller.)
At first, the passengers were too nervous about intruding into the this ritual, but now it is the social focus of the camp.
Pete has a bottle of Bourbon in his hand and is telling stories about Powell, whose ghost still haunts every Colorado River trip.
‘At this point, they had been on the river for nearly three months,’ he says, pulling lavishly at the bottle.
‘They had already lost one boat, their clothes were in rags, and all they had to eat was mouldy flour and a few dried apples.
The men wanted to get the hell out as fast as possible — they were concerned about survival.
Meanwhile, Powell is off trying to survey the goddamn Grand Canyon, hiking up the side canyons, taking his frickin' measurements.
The amazing thing is that his measurements were so accurate.
The US Geological Survey went back and checked them.
None of them was out by more than a few feet.
‘They lined the rapids when they could, lowering down the boats on a rope.
When they couldn't line they portaged, dragging these 1,500lb oak boats over the boulders on the shore.
It would take them hours.
They would only run the rapid if they couldn't line or portage.
Back then, no one knew how to run rapids.
No one had ever seen rapids like the ones down here.
The guy rowing would have his back to the rapid, he can't see that's going on.
So there's another guy trying to steer with a big, heavy sweep oar.
And ol' Powell is sitting up there in a wooden chair strapped down to the deck, yelling instructions and waving with his one arm.’
Towering above us, menacing in the twilight, are the jagged black cliffs of the Inner Gorge, the deepest point of the Grand Canyon.
The river has cut down through 6,000 feet of the Colorado Plateau, exposing a quarter of the earth's geological history.
The oldest rocks are here at river level, the Zoroaster granite and Vishnu schist, formed in primeval turmoil 1.7 billion years ago.
Near the waterline, the rushing waters have polished the schist to gunmetal, and carved it into fantastic flutes and chambers.
Powell's journal describes the inner Gorge as ‘a granite prison’.
He knew from prior disasters that the rock presaged bad rapids, but he had no other clue as to what lay ahead.
The expedition took place in the middle of a vast desert wilderness marked blank on the maps.
There were rumours of impassable rapids, and falls bigger than Niagara.
An Indian myth held that the river flowed underground.
The Inner Gorge prompted Powell to write one of his most famous passages, which the boatmen can recite from memory:
‘We are three-quarters of a mile in the  depths of the earth, and the great river shrinks into insignificance as it dashes its angry waves against the walls and cliffs that rise to the world above; the waves are but puny ripples, and we but pygmies, running up and down the sands or lost among the boulders.
‘We have an unknown distance yet to run, an unknown river to explore.
What falls there are, we know not; what rocks beset the channel, we know not; what walls rise over the river, we know not.
Ah, well! we may conjecture many things.
The men talk as cheerfully as ever; jests are bandied about freely; but to me the cheer is sombre and jests are ghastly.’
THE NEXT MORNING, we consult our waterproof maps of the river, which detail the perils that lie ahead: ten rapids, including Granite and Hermit, which rank among the biggest in North America.
The boatmen make sure everything is lashed securely.
Just short of Granite, the boats pull into the shore.
We scramble over the boulders to inspect the rapid below.
It is a daunting sight: a seventeen-foot drop through a complex arrangement of boulders, holes, standing waves, scissor waves, and lateral waves rebounding off a sheer wall on the right.
At the base of the rapid, a huge rock stands in the middle of the channel.
‘So, Garrett,’ I ask, ‘if this is a nine, what does a ten look like?’
‘A waterfall,’ he grins.
These scouting expeditions are highly effective in raising the tension among the passengers, but their main purpose is for the boatmen to gauge the water level.
As it pounds through Granite Rapid, the Colorado River gives every appearance of being a wild and untamed torrent, but this is an illusion.
The waters on which we travel are released from the penstocks of Glen Canyon Dam, 105 miles upstream, according to the demand for hydroelectric power in cities hundreds of miles away.
At night, when air-conditioners are turned off in Phoenix, the water level drops as much as ten feet.
Then, on Monday mornings when peak power is needed, a huge volume of water is released all at once, washing away the Canyon's beaches and wreaking havoc on the fragile riverside environment.
Changes in the water level also affect the nature of the rapids.
Some are more dangerous at high water: the waves build, the holes deepen.
Others are more dangerous in low water, because rocks become exposed in the channel.
The route that the boatmen choose varies according to the water level, and their ability to estimate it has become a vital skill of their trade.
In effect, the Grand Canyon has been turned into an irrigation ditch, between Glen Canyon Dam and Lake Mead, the reservoir of Hoover Dam downstream.
Nevertheless, it is a hard concept to grasp while you're perched on the side of a rubber paddle-boat in the middle of Granite Rapid.
The adrenalin blocks out all rational thought.
I exist somewhere in the high wild zone where thrill ends and panic begins, conscious only of the bucking and rolling of the boat.
Hermit looks even more spectacular, a series of mountainous standing waves and yawning trenches, but the run is straightforward, the rhythm of rise and fall like a rollercoaster ride.
In between rapids the river flows placid and serene.
Patterns of light, reflected by the river dance along the base of the cliffs —‘canyon television’.
We float in silence, listening to the melodic, descending whistle of the ubiquitous canyon wren, gazing up at the ravens and turkey vultures, scanning the cliffs for deer and sheep.
From the rim, the eye travels down sixteen layers of rock, passing through bands of maroon, pink, russet, vermilion, green, to the grey granite and black schist immediately above the river.
Around each bend, a new configuration of arches, pillars, temples, cathedrals and amphitheatres peels into view, eroded rock forms which geologists have sought to describe in architectural terms, but which in scale and complexity dwarf the largest creations of man.
I focus for a moment on one arch carved into the Redwall limestone.
Struggling for a frame of reference, I calculate that it would contain Empire State Buildings.
The main reaction of Europeans confronted by the American desert has been a powerful sense of dread, at the vastness, the silence, the heat, the absence of greenery, the land's total indifference to the existence of human life.
For the time the first pioneers arrived to the present day, the white man has felt compelled to tame the desert, to reduce its primeval vastness to human dimensions.
In particular, he has sought to make the desert bloom, damming its rivers and plundering its scant resources of water to create neat, green fields and, more recently, the harmonious, man-made landscapes of the golf course.
The primary source of water in the region is the river flowing under our boats, less notorious now for its canyons and rapids, more so for the political, environmental and legal battles that rage over its water.
The Colorado is the lifeblood of the West.
Los Angeles, San Diego, Phoenix, Las Vegas — 20 million people, and two million acres of irrigated farmland — are helplessly dependent on its water and the electricity produced by it fourteen dams.
Behind every dam is a reservoir, and underneath every reservoir is a flooded wilderness.
In 1966, work began on damming the Grand Canyon.
We have already passed one of the drilling sites; another is downstream.
It was only halted after a massive nationwide media campaign orchestrated by conservationists, but nearly every year Arizona congressional representatives push for a dam to be built at mile 238, which would inundate most of the lower Grand Canyon.
It seems unthinkable, but Glen Canyon Dam is a reminder that no wilderness is safe in the American West.
The reservoir behind it, Lake Powell (or ‘Lake Foul’ as it is called by environmentalists, who think it dishonours his name) flooded 186 miles of Grand Canyon, which Powell and others who saw it described as the most beautiful of all the West's river canyons.
MILE 98: The boat touches shore as the Canyon falls into shadow.
We make camp for the night in earshot of Crystal Rapid, which in recent years has flipped more boats, taken more lives, and humbled more boatmen than any other on the river.
The mystique of the rapid has been building since day one, and now, at cocktail hour, Crystal assumes demonic proportions.
Garrett mixes gin and tonics and ribs Sam about the time he mired his boat on the rock island at the foot of the rapid.
He was struck there for four hours with Park Service rescue helicopters buzzing around, throwing him ropes.
Pete recalls 1983, when a huge quantity of snowmelt caused the Colorado to flood, almost breaking through Glen Canyon Dam, and making Crystal virtually unrunnable.
‘It was totally berserk.
Four motor rigs flipped in a week.
Two people died.
They got trapped in a hole, and no one could get near enough to get them out.
The died of hypothermia.’
I hike along the shore with his sister, Megan, to examine what Pete describes as ‘the most impressive runnable stretch of white water I've ever seen’.
We sit there for nearly an hour, staring into the house-sized holes, mesmerized by the relentless sound and fury.
I fall asleep that night with the rapid roaring in my ears.
After breakfast, Pete sits us down in a semi-circle.
‘In Powell's day, this was a relatively minor rapid,’ he begins.
‘It turned into an extremely major and dangerous rapid in 1966.
There was a torrential rainfall in the drainage of Crystal Creek.
It set in motion what we call a debris flow, a mixture of 50-ton boulders, rocks, sand and gravel bound together in a kind of slurry, which came rolling down the side canyon and dammed the river.
The force of the water coming over the day and pounding through the debris is what creates the rapid.
I would ask you not to distract the boatmen with anything this morning.
We need total concentration.
This is where we earn our pay.’
In the event, all four boats make good runs.
In the paddleboat we start right and weave a stylish course across the left of the rapid, dodging the holes.
At least, this is what Garrett tells me as we emerge from the outwash, half-crazed with adrenalin.
‘This is what we call the ABC moment,’ says Garrett, ‘Alive Below Crystal.’
MILE 136.
We float down the river on a piercing blue desert morning.
The talk, not for the first time, is of dams.
Cliff is the nearest thing we can muster to a devil's advocate.
‘Don't get me wrong, I think it's a tragedy that Glen Canyon Dam was built; but if I was a farmer in Arizona I'd probably think it was the greatest thing in the world.’
Actually, none of the water stored in Lake Powell is used to irrigate the area.
The dam's main purpose was to provide hydroelectric power revenues to finance the building of more dams elsewhere in the Colorado River basin.
In the terminology of the Bureau of Reclamation, it is a ‘cash register dam’.
Nevertheless, we take Cliff's point.
‘Sure, we need water, we need electricity,’ says Garrett.
‘But we also need wilderness.
I think the 15,000 people who recreate down here every year are a testament to that.
There has to be a balance.
We already use every drop of the Colorado and it still isn't enough for our needs.
At some point growth in the West will have to stop.’
The discussion is brought short by the sight of Deer Creek Falls, a 150ft cascade pouring out of the cliffs.
We tie up the boats and wade up the creek towards it, enveloped in a wind of fine mist.
A trail leads above the fall, and we follow it back into a narrow gorge, proceeding carefully — at times it is only a foot wide, and 50 feet above the creek.
Ahead of us, the ledge widens and the walls of the gorge flare out, framing an idyllic, enchanted scene.
The creek splashes and gurgles in a series of descending pools stemming from a small waterfall.
The force of its descent has created a natural Jacuzzi in the head pool, surrounded by stands of maidenhair fern, flowering cactus and red lilies growing in the gnarled roots of a spreading cottonwood tree.
In this parched red rock desert, where you have to drink a gallon of water a day to prevent dehydration and heatstroke, a sight like this is pure euphoria.
I spend most of the day in there, splashing and wallowing with the delight of a five-year-old.
At sunset, I climb back to the waterfall and wash my hair in the cold, clear water — a mundane chore elevated into sublime pleasure.
Back at the boats, I reflect that if the Grand Canyon dam is ever built, most of what I can see will be a hundred feet under water.
MILE 179.
We approach Lava Falls, the last and the biggest of the major rapids on the river, in a thunderstorm.
Twenty-four miles of calm water preceded the rapid, and by now we know the statistics by heart: a 37ft drop in 200 yards, the biggest rapid in North America.
Powell and his men made a three-hour portage around the left shore.
We will run it in 27 seconds.
I am in Sam's oar boat, enjoying the luxury of safety straps to hang on to.
The first wave is an absolute monster which dumps a huge slab of water into the boat.
We plunge, we climb, we plunge.
A jagged piece of rock, which looks like it could shear a boat in two, looms out of the spray, and disappears.
We are being swept off to the right, towards a giant chunk of basalt in the river, and despite Sam's frenzied efforts at the oars, we bounce into it.
He hauls on one oar, and we spin deftly off the rock.
Below Lava, there is a sense of anticlimax.
There are no more big rapids, and tomorrow we leave the river.
Thoughts of traffic jams, telephones, alarm clocks, jobs and money intrude, and begin to break the Canyon's spell.
MILE 225.
We unload the boats for the last time, take the final photographs, and cast our minds back, trying to fix the memories.
A peregrine falcon dive-bombing teal.
The cool, clear embrace of a spring-fed pool.
Standing on a cliff, high above the river, watching the colours of the Canyon shift and glow in response to the passing clouds.
A truck waits on the shore to return us to the world of air-conditioners, crisp white sheets and hot showers, a world sustained by the river, and one whose insatiable demands are destroying it.
Fifty miles downstream the mouth of the Virgin River, where Powell ended his first expedition, now lies under the stagnant waters of Lake Mead, the reservoir backed up behind Hoover Dam.
Below Hoover, the Colorado loses all resemblance to a living river.
It is diverted hundreds of miles along aqueducts to slake the thirst of Los Angeles, Phoenix and Tucson.
What remains is released into an elaborate system of drains, penstocks, pumps, flumes, and concrete-sided irrigation ditches, from which it emerges at the Mexican border, severely depleted and laden with salts and pesticides.
One year in ten, a slow poisonous trickle reaches the sea.
THE WONDERFUL WORLD OF THE PENIS
Man's best friend or nature's cruellest joke? by Jon Wilde
acorn, almond, arm baby maker, bald-headed hermit, bazooka, beef, beef bayonet, big bird, big foot Joe, bird, blue-veined piccolo, blue-veined steak, blue-veined trumpet, blow stick, candy stick, cannon, cherry splitter, chopper, cock, colleen bawn, cream stick, dagger, dangler, derrick, dibble, dick, dickery dock, dingaling, ding-dong, dingus, dinosaur, dirk, do-jigger, dong, doodle, doover, dork, driving post, end, equipment, ferret, flapper, four-eleven-forty-four, giggle stick, goober, good-time gun, gut stick, hammer, Hampton rock, Hampton Wick, hog, honker, horn, ID, inch, Irish root, jigger, jock, joint, JT, John Thomas, joy prong, joy stick, kidney wiper, knob, liver tickler, love truncheon, one-eyed brother, one-eyed trouser snake, peace-maker, pecker, percy, peter, peenie, piece, pillock, pipe, pistol, plonker, pole, pork sword, prick, prod, prong, pud, putz, rod, short arm, skin flute, stalk, stick, tagger, third leg, todger, tommy, tube steak, tummy banana, weapon, wedding tackle, wife's best friend, willy, winkle, woofer, worm, yoyo, yutz
I'M STARING AT IT NOW.
I've been staring at it for the past hour, waiting for it to start twitching around like a fat little worm on a fishing hook.
But it does nothing of the sort.
It just hands there, strangely still, wearing a pale and embalmed look.
Nothing has ever looked less inspired or more unready for action.
It might as well be under sedation.
I have to keep reminding myself that this idle lump of slack flesh is my penis.
Any minute now, I'll do what I've done every day of my adult life.
I'll grip it between thumb and forefinger, look it straight in the eye and say, ‘You've got to be fucking kidding.’
There is no shortage of affectionate names to illustrate the multifaceted personality of the penis: from trouser snake to blue-veined piccolo, from beef bayonet to one-eyed brother, from John Thomas to Old Blind Bob.
Yet none of these jolly appellations begins to tell us how treacherous, uncooperative and deceitful this most mysterious of organs can be.
The penis is arguably the laziest and most unpredictable part of a man's body.
Even the eyebrows and the elbows seem as busy as hens on hot griddles by comparison.
Most of the time, the penis does exactly what mine is doing now — precisely nothing.
When it does decide to rouse from its slumbers and join in the fun, it has a flair for the unexpected.
With its seemingly endless capacity for dealing surprises, the penis might be one of nature's cruellest jokes
I often find myself wondering how something that looks so simple and straightforward manages to cause its owner so many headaches.
On the face of it, the penis could not be more uncomplicated and our demands on it could not be more reasonable.
It consists of three parallel cylinders of spongy tissue enclosed in an outer sheath of elastic skin and all we ask is that it stiffens on demand and performs its time-honoured functions without complaint.
The problem lies in the fact that the penis has a life and a mind all of its own.
The pop singer, Morrissey, was so astounded to discover that some girls' breasts are bigger than others that he wrote a song about it.
Some of us never quite come to terms with the fact that penises come in all shapes and sizes.
Personally, I doubt that I have ever completely recovered from my first experience of a communal shower almost 20 years ago.
After a particularly barbarous game of Murder Ball in the school gym, I stripped off and queued up for a quick soaking, along with 40 other pre-pubescent boys.
Standing at a safe distance, my eyeballs popped at the sight of the rich variety of penises on show, ranging as they did from dainty chipolatas to Bowyer's jumbo sausages, with a few unfortunate specimens doing impersonations of mummified button mushrooms left for dead at the bottom of a refrigerator.
Having sized up the competition and feeling confident that I had nothing to fear, I boldly took a step forward, grabbed a morsel of soap and proceeded to scrub away.
Halfway through my wash, I happened to glance up an notice one particularly well-hung lad studying my privates with a look of some amusement.
Arranging his features into a look of consummate disdain, he remarked, ‘Where d'you get that, mate?
In a lucky dip?’
We seem to spend the whole of our adolescence at the mercy of our erectile tissues, bending and buckling to the whim of our most troublesome organ.
The adolescent penis insists on being in a state of almost constant erection, regardless of the appropriateness of the situation.
It takes perverse joy in getting hard at the wrong time, causing its owner no end of embarrassment and inconvenience.
The merest mention of the word ‘sex’ is more than sufficient for Old Cyclops to start straining against the trousers before jumping to attention as if he has been plugged into a battery-charger.
The duration of our youth seems to be equally divided between thinking obsessively about the penis and conducting odd little experiments with it.
There was a particularly enterprising fellow in my class, a flame-haired boy called Derek Elfman.
Although he was affectionately known to all as ‘Broomstick’, this fetching nickname severely underestimated the enormity of his appendage.
His penis was as thick as a chair leg and measured something in the region of seven inches in a flaccid state.
He bragged that he needed a special licence to bring it on the bus.
Half the school would gather behind the bike shed to witness his daily lunchtime exhibition.
He would begin by dropping his trousers and fondling himself until fully erect.
Pupils would then lob ping-pong balls in his direction and he would swing his tremendous member with the aim of knocking the balls into a waste-bin set up especially for the occasion.
Elfman used to boast to anyone who would listen that he was able to auto-fellate with the minimum of effort, making him the envy of every young buck who had tried it for himself and only succeeded in collapsing with a racking backache.
However, he finally got his comeuppance during the chilly winter of 1975, when he got his penis stuck in a milk bottle while masturbating behind a hedge during a games lesson.
The school caretaker, an eccentric Scotsman with a handlebar moustache, ill-advisedly took matters into his own hands by breaking open the offending bottle with a large brick.
By the time the fleet of ambulances arrived, Elfman had metamorphosized from popular hero to universal laughing-stock and he never fully recovered from the experience.
It gradually becomes apparent to every adolescent  male that the only thing most penises have in common is that they are the wrong shape or size as far as their owners are concerned.
They're too small or they're too big.
They're too thin or they're too thick.
They bend too much to the left.
They bend too much to the right.
This realization does not make it any easier to accept that our own mercurial organ is the right size and shape for our body.
All of us have, at some time, taken matters into our own hands and attempted to improve on nature.
I recall spending the entire Christmas of 1974 experimenting with various methods of enlarging my equipment.
Having failed dismally with a bicycle pump and an unidentified device that I found at the back of my Dad's garden shed, I stumbled across what seemed like a promising routine and set aside the whole of Boxing Day to test it out.
Thus I found myself standing against my bedroom wall, with a large stone secured to the end of my penis with a length of string.
‘Lonely This Christmas’ by Mud was playing of the radio and I was swinging my body from side to side in time to the music in order to pass the time.
Suddenly, my grandmother entered the room, proudly holding a Dundee cake.
Choosing to turn a blind eye to the unlikely drama that was unfolding a few feet in front of her, she merely expressed her gratitude for the imitation topaz bangle that she'd just unwrapped, before turning on her heels and heading downstairs to catch the special seasonal episode of Crossroads .
The only consequence was a throbbing pain in my scrotum that persisted well into the spring.
It is perhaps not so surprising that the penis becomes so wilfully difficult in later life when you consider the punishment that is doles out to it in adolescence.
After the miraculous discovery that constant tugging at the organ produces a highly pleasurable sensation, the adolescent male develops an insatiable appetite for sexual self-abuse.
During these moist-palmed days of self-discovery, it is taken for granted that the penis can withstand a rigorous pummelling up to eight times a day.
An experience at Scout camp one summer, finally alerted me to the dangers that could befall a young lad if he wasn't too careful.
I had the misfortune of sharing a tent with a compulsive masturbator called Ollie, an unfortunate-looking fellow with rocking-horse nostrils and a pale green complexion, who claimed to have reached orgasm eight times in a single afternoon.
Halfway through the night, he was at it again.
After a few minutes, his breathing quickened and he started making noises that might have come from a monkey-house at feeding time.
Suddenly he was apprehended by an irate Scout master who took a dim view of being woken at such an hour.
For the rest of the holiday, poor Ollie spent his nights in the open air, his hands fastened to the tent pegs.
Stumbling uncertainly into adulthood, we become slightly more realistic about the powers of the penis.
By this time, most of us are enjoying something resembling a regular sex life.
After being endlessly reassured that, ‘it's not the tractor, it's how long he stays out that field ploughing,’ we give up craving a member that could be mistaken for the Eiffel Tower.
No longer do we expect the penis to be a magical instrument that stands upright on demand, throbs and pulsates all night with the strength of 10,000 men, and immediately regains its firmness just seconds after ejaculation.
However, almost as soon as we've come to terms with its limitations, the penis decides to create a whole new set of trails and tribulations for its owner.
As we move into our twenties and thirties, hormones are no longer racing through the body like the clappers and, from time to time, the penis is more likely to cause embarrassment by its lack of activity than by its exuberance.
On occasion, it might refuse to work at all and we find ourselves longing for the days of youth when it would stand at attention regardless of any identifiable sexual stimulus.
There you are, trembling and writhing with lust, feeling passion in every corpuscle, and the penis is snoring away regardless, leaving you in a state of mortal terror, wondering whether it will every work again without the assistance of a rope and pulley.
While suffering from a temporary bout of impotence in my early twenties, I considered all the possible remedies (from exotic aphrodisiacs to penile splints) before paying a visit to my local GP, who consulted some weighty medical tome before advising me to avoid wearing excessively tight trousers.
Premature ejaculation is another can of worms entirely.
You're in the mood for a long spell at the crease, but the penis decides that it can't wait to get the game over and done with before heading back to the pavilion to put its feet up on the couch.
I was once advised that the best way to avoid jumping the gun during intercourse was to concentrate on an image that offered the minimum in erotic possibilities.
After a few attempts at checking myself by thinking of Hattie Jacques and Eric Sykes riding a tandem, I found myself back at the doctor.
Over the long haul, my penis might be more of a curse than a blessing and it might fall short of the goals I set for it.
But I've come to accept that it's far more sensitive and vulnerable than my other possessions and it cannot be hauled back to the manufacturers at the first sign of malfunction.
At times, the relationship between my penis and the rest of my body might appear to be a classic case of the tail wagging the dog.
But I've learned to stop blaming my penis for getting into a muddle when attempting to decode my hidden desires.
I'm learning to live with its troublesome Jekyll and Hyde nature.
When it fails to rise to the occasion, I no longer get rattled and threaten to chop it off with a pair of barber's scissors, tie it up in a sack and drop it down a deep, dark  well .
Secretly, I might still yearn for a bumper-sized twelve-inch member.
But I'm not prepared to slice off six-inches for anyone.
THE WONDERFUL WORLD OF THE PENIS
Everything you never needed to know about life in the trouser department
THE PENIS OF THE FUTURE
JG BALLARD (writer): ‘It's been suggested that women will be keen to dispense with the penis when they find an imaginary substitute within virtual reality.
But I don't think there's any danger whatsoever of the penis becoming redundant.
Human beings may become redundant, but the penis will be more essential than it has ever been.
I want to reassure Esquire readers that their penises are safe.’
‘And now he's tiny, and soft like a little bud of life!’ she said, taking the soft small penis in her hand.
‘Isn't he somehow lovely!
So on his own, so strange!
And so innocent!’
Lady Chatterley's Lover , DH LAWRENCE 
Little and large
Who do you think you're kidding, Mr Hitler?
Full Marx
Little Englander
Rising and damp
This is your lingam
THE LONG…
Errol Flynn
Charlie Chaplin
Bill Oddie
Jimi Hendrix
Groucho Marx
Frank Sinatra
Pele
Aristotle Onassis
Gary Cooper
Buddy Holly
Iggy Pop
Jonathan Ross
Vic Reeves
Eric Idle
Jim Kerr
Eamonn Andrews
Charlie Parker
Tony Curtis
Stan Laurel
Tommy Cooper
Warren Beatty
Leonard Rossiter
…
AND THE SHORT
Nijinsky
Napoleon Bonaparte
Montgomery Clift
Chico Marx
Winston Churchill
Ernest Hemingway
Adolf Hitler
Henry Miller
John Lennon
Truman Capote
John Wayne
Oliver Hardy
Bob Marley
Arthur Askey
Edward VIII
The penis as sales tool, or how to get head in advertising: right, the creamiest milk chocolate advert in the world and, left, a lipstick that any man would be proud of
‘It had lost all the appearance of a sexual implement; it looked disgustingly like a cheap gadget from the five and ten cent store, like a bright-coloured piece of fishing tackle minus the bait.’
Sexus , HENRY MILLER
THE PENIS IN ART
GEORGE MELLY (art critic and jazz singer): ‘The Greeks used to put tiny penises on muscular bodies, while the Romans carved enormous penises on little feet.
During the Renaissance, they were small.
Many people see the penis as a joke; although I've never got a great deal of amusement out of mine.
Having said that, I used to do an act which culminated in me tucking my genitalia between my legs, bending over and shouting ‘Bulldog’.’
Sci-fi skin flick: Flesh Gordon saves the world from the evil Wang, ruler of the planet Porno
‘When the prick stands up, the brains are as good as dead.
Up it jumps, a dog through a hoop, right into the bracelet of middle finger, index finger and thumb that I have provided.’
Portnoy's Complaint , PHILIP ROTH 
Big leggy
‘When I got to my door I found that I had this cement cock in my pocket.
The damn thing must have been at least two feet long.
I walked down and stuck the thing into my landlady's mailbox.’
Tales of Ordinary Madness , CHARLES BUKOWSKI
THE PENIS IN COMEDY
SEAN HUGHES (comedian): ‘I never got over the fact that my penis looked like Bobby Charlton.
I had two brothers who were both better endowed than me.
When I went to the toilet, one would come and piss next to me to make me feel inadequate.
However, I realized if I looked at it underwater, it was bigger.
I could look at it and think, ‘Cor!
What a whopper.’
Remind you of anybody?
THE TRIBAL PENIS
AUSTRALIAN aboriginals have been known to slit the penis through to the urethra so that it can be flattened out to resemble the forked penis of the kangaroo.
Some tribes in Polynesia believe that soaking the penis in pepper and vinegar keeps it strong and alert.
For hundreds of years, the Caramoja tribe of Northern Uganda have attempted to elongate their penises by knotting them to the backs of watercarts which are then pulled around the village by mules.
What's up Doc?
They aren't all pygmies in New Guinea
‘It sprang from the tightness of his jeans, leaping and rearing from the shorts that draped it.
Like a dagger it glistened against her cheek, radiating heat, big, vast, pulsating with purpose in her face.’
Malibu , PAT BOOTH
THE PENIS IN FILM
DAVID McGILLIVRAY (author of Doing Rude Things: a History of British Sex Films 1957–81 ): ‘The whole point of the British sex film is that there was no sex.
The woman would pull up the sheet to her neck.
The man would be discovered with his trousers down, revealing nothing so vulgar as a penis.
The penis did not exist at all in the British sex film because it was considered rude.’
PUTTING YOUR FOOT IN IT
The glans of the penis is similar in sensitivity to the soles of the feet.
THE PENIS IN ARCHITECTURE
STANLEY TIGERMAN (Chicago architect): ‘I was commissioned to build a house by a crude and interesting man.
I decided I'd make him laugh, so the house was shaped like a penis.
There's less phallic symbolism in architecture than people might like to imagine.
It's often a case of people looking at a building and reading something into it.’
Looking for mushrooms: shameless man of rock, Iggy Pop, meets the shameless mushroom Phallus Impudicus or ‘stink horn’
HALF AN INCH MATTERS
Among whites the average flaccid penis is 4″ long, among blacks 4½
THE SPORTING PENIS
MATTHEW YATES (runner): The main problem for athletes is that the penis tends to swing about quite a bit and can be something of a distraction.
I had a friend who suffered from twisted testicles so I made sure part of my sponsorship arrangement is that I'm provided with decent shorts with inner briefs that give me support.
THE PENIS AS SEX OBJECT
BARBARA WINDSOR (actress): ‘Let's face it, the penis ain't all that pretty to look at.
When the penis is flaccid it hangs there like the last chicken in Sainsbury's.
When men get the horn, it's even more of an embarrassment.
If the truth be told, women aren't that interested in looking at cocks.’
ISABEL KOPROWSKI (managing editor,For Women ): ‘There's always been this patronizing idea that women don't want to see pictures of men's penises.
We're beginning to show that it's totally wrong.
Women don't find a flaccid penis terribly exciting sexually, but it's better than nothing.’
Mr Softie: ‘For Women’
HOW THE ANIMALS MEASURE UP
Gorilla 2″
Platypus 3″
Chimpanzee 3″
Sea Lion 6″
Ram 6″
Armadillo 7″
Tiger 12″
Elephant seal 14″
Pig 18″
Rhinoceros 24″
Walrus 25″
Humpback Whale 120″
Charcoal single-breasted pure New Wool suit, £169; Airforce blue silk twill shirt, £59.99, and Chequers silk tie, £19.99, all by Principles.
Black glasses, £89, by Cutler & Gross.
Opposite page: grey single-breasted pure New Wool suit, approx £450, by Hugo Boss.
Light grey viscose shirt £125, by Ermenegildo Zegna Soft.
Silk woven tie, £44, by Church & Co.
Automatic watch, £175, by Oris.
Glasses, as before.
All women's clothes and shoes by Bella Freud.
Jewellery by Butler & Wilson.
All tights by Falke
Grey Mischief
They say grey is boring.
They say grey is dull.
They say grey means John Major.
But they're wrong.
Grey can be good.
Grey can even be sexy…
Photographs by Stephen Wallis
Grey single-breasted wool/cashmere suit, £590; grey viscose shirt, £75, and silk tie, £36, all by Paul Smith.
Opposite page: grey single-breasted pure New Wool suit, £225, from Blazer.
Mid-blue cotton shirt, £49.95, by Stephens Brothers at Austin Reed.
Silk tie, £55, by Polo Ralph Lauren.
Black leather Oxfords, £99.50, from Russell & Bromley
Grey and black herringbone single-breasted pure New Wool suit, £950; grey and red check shirt, £195, and matching tie, £60, all by Giorgio Armani.
A selection of godron and blason silver-plated lighters, £198–270, by Cartier.
Opposite page: grey single-breasted pure New Wool suit, £795, by Ermenegildo Zegna.
Tartan silk tie, £49, by Paul Smith.
Black and mulberry ‘Coward’ leather brogues, £195, by Oliver Sweeney
Outer band, top to bottom: DRAKE'S, approx £45, half-tartan stripe CHURCH & CO, £42, navy boxes ALFRED DUNHILL, £55, sun set MICHELSONS, from £20, electric neat HILDITCH & KEY, £39.95, gold stars KENT & CURWEN, £28, zigzags HARVEY & HUDSON, £39.95, microcheck CANTINI, £32,99, microdots BODEN, £24, white daisies SALVATORE FERRAGAMO, £49, elephant parade TIE RACK, £10.99, bright stripes HARDY AMIES, £44, red tartan POLO RALPH LAUREN, £60, double diamonds
Neckerchief
Ties talk, and whether it's stripes or squares, kippers or cravats, there's always a message…right school, right club and now, right designer
Inner band, top to bottom: GUCCI, £55, cup tie EMPORIO ARMANI, £40, city squares ASCOT, £39.95, teddy bear's picnic MOSCHINO, £55, regular roundels HUGO BOSS, approx £39, painted ovals PAUL SMITH, £36, bright green stripes JASPER CONRAN, £42.95, imperial purple THOMAS PINK, £19.50, Indian elephants ERMENEGILDO ZEGNA, approx £50, rush hour HERMES, £56, frog chorus
DESPITE ALL THE changes that 100 years of modern style have brought, the tie is still the focal point of the male wardrobe.
In the old days, the right colours and the right width of stripe signified that you belonged.
But today, wearing the right tie often means wearing the right label.
Right now things are looking very classic.
Top of the pile are neats, or small-scale patterning, using a strong contrast of two or three colours.
Bright yellow on a navy background is typical, but navy on light blue and cream on navy are also popular.
For the big three designer labels — Hermès, Gucci, and Ferragamo — animal magic is the trend of the moment.
Little frogs, dancing elephants, tiny giraffes, starfish and whales are Europe's most stylish offerings, witty with a small ‘w’.
Novel animal patterns such as these have been big all year — and they show no sign of disappearing just yet.
But don't be fooled into thinking that a three-inch elephant in a fuchsia tutu prancing across the blade of your tie is in any way the same thing.
In all things, and particularly in ties, it's essential to maintain a sense of scale.
NICK SULLIVAN 
Man of the Cloth
At first glance Nino Cerruti may look an unlikely fashion king.
But, at 62, he is the owner and driving force behind a global clothing and textile empire
IN MEN'S CLOTHING, everything starts with the cloth.
In Italy, that means cloth from Biella, an ageing industrial town crumbling into the River Cervo on the edge of the Piedmontese Alps northwest of Milan.
There, 50 or so textile mills produce what is widely acknowledged to be the finest wool cloth in the world.
One of the mills, Fratelli Cerruti, is the foundation upon which the Cerruti 1881 international fashion empire is built.
Due to be replaced next year by a huge new   hi-tech complex, the original Cerruti mill is winding down after 110 years in production.
Dark and not a little satanic, its shuddering looms make a deafening noise and the air hangs thick with a sick-making stench like rotting chicken feathers.
‘Oh, that?
That's sulphuric acid,’ Signor Fenzi, the managing director of the factory, shouts cheerily over the din.
Immune to sound and smell and in no hurry to escape, he pauses at every bale of raw wool, every bolt of half-finished cloth, tugging at it, scrunching it up, letting it slip through his fingers to satisfy himself that all is well.
Textile men see as much with their hands as with their eyes.
‘Textiles are what we have always done in Biella.
We're not good at anything else,’ he says, before disappearing back into the infernal noise.
Five miles away, in the quiet of the family home, Nino Cerruti agrees.
‘Textiles has always been slow and painstaking work.
It suits introverted mountain people like us.’
Cerruti's house, perched on a high dome of clay, was built primitively by modern standards in 1834, using huge stones a foot across, washed down from the mountains by the nearby river Cervo.
‘There's not a single angle in the place,’ he declares proudly.
The marketing machine constructed around successful fashion labels often turns the designer's house into a glorified show home crammed with objets d'art , a totem of tastefulness, open to the press at controlled periods to offer fleeting glimpses as corroborative evidence of the host's status.
Cerruti's house is certainly grand, but it was once rather grander.
The stuccoed exterior was painted with Pompeiian red and terracotta panels and pale green trompe l'oeil shutters.
Now they have been washed by years of rain into earthy camouflage patterns.
Inside the jumble of amassed objects is refreshingly haphazard and unplanned: a spiral four-poster Moorish bed from Spain, nineteenth century Piedmontese painted country dressers, a large glass dome filed with exotic and rather dusty stuffed birds.
The garden was once carefully manicured.
Now, parts of it are inaccessible and the tennis court is a chicken run.
‘I like it that way,’ says Cerruti.
‘I prefer it to be as natural as possible.’
Cerruti began work in his father's factory at the age of eleven, and his 50 years of experience have given him strong convictions about style.
‘It has always been an applied art,’ he says, ‘combining artistic creation and science.’
Fashion for Cerruti is nothing if it is not wearable.
‘In the Nineties we are regaining a sense of balance, of authenticity, that I think we lost after World War II.
The style of the Thirties is my favourite — linear, smooth, clean and relaxed.
In the Nineties we are rediscovering a way of living and dressing which picks up the threads of that decade and updates it.’
Cerruti's style is pure Italian — long elegant lines, subtle colours and the supplest of cloths.
‘I like to think it is Italian without Italian local inhibitions,’ he says.
But Paris provides inspiration too.
‘Paris is the only modern metropolis that is pleasant to live in.
Spending time there and in Biella, I have a good balance of values that I like personally.’
Even if men's fashion has come a long way since the Sixties, the overwhelming inspiration, Cerruti concedes, is still the archetypal English businessman's suit.
‘Ironically, it is an image of a certain British establishment that hardly exists any more.
The Italians have mae it work for them because they have been able to inject a comfortable, relaxed mood.
Italians have always had a more sensual approach, a Mediterranean approach if you like.’
Designers such as Giorgio Armani, Gianfranco Ferrè and Cerruti have turned what Cerruti himself terms ‘casual chic’ into a fashion credo that now dominates the top end of the world fashion business.
Cerruti uses words like ‘authenticity’, ‘security’ and ‘comfort’.
Comfort, according to Cerruti, is now the major direction of menswear.
‘And that means softness.
You achieve it by using more fluid fabrics and gentler construction.
It is a new development because it means placing a higher priority on dressing to please yourself.’
He clearly shares the Italian middle-class horror of excess.
But he's also wary of fashion which disappears into tasteful conformity.
‘I prefer it if men find ways of dressing to enhance their personality rather than using clothes to make up for the lack of one.
What I like is combining something strict with something free — it creates ambiguity and I love ambiguity.
Like a navy suit worn with a check shirt and a knitted tie — it is classic but not inhibited, and to me that's real class.’
To those raised on an Eighties diet of youth-oriented street style, such games of detail may seem like intellectual tiddly-winks.
But the Italian designers, confident that they have God, good taste and commercial sense on their side, believe that details make the difference.
And for Cerruti youth culture means little.
‘For a long time teenagers have dictated fashion.
But it is now becoming clear that the people who really shape fashion and move our society are young professional men and women in their late twenties, rather than teenagers.’
For the most part content with his lot, Cerruti's hackles are raised only by hype.
‘I have never enjoyed the business totally — I hate the artificiality that surrounds it.’
But it still has its compensations.
‘Fashion is a business where you don't get old.
There is continuous stimulation — you have to be as curious as possible, put your nose into everything, because it is always changing.’
CLASSICAL STYLE Art Malik wears grey cashmere cardigan and grey cashmere pullover, both by Cerruti 1881
SOFT OPTION This page: beige single-breasted mélange wool jacket, écru wool turtleneck sweater and brown wool knitted trousers, all by Cerruti 1881.
Opposite: grey/black herringbone single/breasted wool suit, blue cotton check shirt and blue knitted wool tie, all by Cerruti 1881.
Art Malik wears clothes by Nino Cerruti in his latest film, ‘The Year of the Comet’
NEW LOOKS FOR AUTUMN
Nick Sullivan previews this season's collections from Paris and Milan
Country casual
The French and Italians have always have always been besotted with the English country look; for them it is not only the quintessence of weekend style, but also standard office kit for all but the stuffiest or circles.
While the authentic squire style is still done best by British manufacturers, our continental neighbours have perfected a gentler, more up-to-date version in rough-looking but soft and lightweight tweed, cashmere and cotton.
No good for rummaging around in gorse bushes, of course, but Paris and Milan have recognized that for today's centrally heated lifestyle we don't need tweed as thick as carpet underlay.
At the other end of the country's ideal is the big outdoors.
Sportswear, inspired by tough American work clothes, abounds.
Lumberjack checks reworked in black and white wool are everywhere.
Simple heavy cotton parkas and overjackets go well with chunky sweaters and jeans.
Western style is big news right now as easy basics are our most viable option for everyday casualwear.
Giorgio Armani
Gucci
Hermès
Sonia Rykiel
This season, designers have preserved the comfort factor while making the suit neater
City smarts
Fashion may dictate a change in cut and fabric from time to time, but the archetypal businessman's suit has remained basically the same.
For some years, the suit has been undergoing a softening process; the shoulders have lost their stiffness, fabrics have become lighter.
This season, designers have preserved the comfort factor while making the suit neater — it has a long, narrow shape with a natural shoulder, reminiscent of tailored clothing prevalent around the turn of the century.
The jacket is fitted close to the body without being strict.
The more extreme designers have turned the jacket into a frock coat, emphasizing the Edwardian feel.
For many this is just costume dressing, but it points to a refinement of the relaxed creed now dominant in menswear, which is bound to filter through to high street shops in the next couple of seasons.
Comme des Garçons
Romeo Gigli
Dolce & Gabbana
Daniel Hechter
Jean Paul Gaultier
Easy knits
The sweater has enjoyed something of a renaissance since the 1980s.
As being ourselves becomes more important than looking flashy, it is only natural that relaxed, comfortable clothing should emerge once more from the wardrobe.
These days, knitwear is a prominent part of every collection.
The best-looking sweaters this winter have a familiar, lived-in look.
They may cost you a couple of hundred quid, but they look as if your grandmother may have knitted them from one of her own patterns.
Faded, natural colours and chunky wool that has been boil washed create the essential aged look.
Some collections are using fine knitted fabrics for jackets, which have traditionally been made from woven fabrics.
As a result, the cardigan jacket — that old Sixties favourite — has emerged, but even knitted jersey fabrics are now being made into fully tailored jackets.
Paul Smith
Yohji Yamamoto
Giuliano Fujiwara
Dries van Noten
Classic coats
There is little consensus these days on just which is the right coat.
That just means that there is a broad range of ideas out there.
The strongest contender is the overjacket or car coat, which is little more than a sophisticated donkey jacket.
Its short length makes it ideal for ordinary day-to-day wear.
However, there are smarter, more classic options: the French like the three-quarter length, belted version; the Italians prefer the longer camel greatcoat.
At its shortest the coat is seen by some designers as little more than a regular outsize jacket.
The most classic coat is the cashmere three-quarter length in navy or tan.
It may be pricey but it will never date.
Natural fabrics, particularly wool, are always favourites.
But whatever your choice, the advantage of modern fabric technology means that you can create a thick and substantial-looking coat without it being too heavy or uncomfortable — it often doesn't need to be lined either.
So the greatcoat is sometimes as light as the traditional mac.
Dries van Noten
Dominique Morlotti
THE RULING CLASS
The 25 men who REALLY run Britain
by Chris Blackhurst and Paul Halloran
AS A NEW GOVERNMENT attempts to reverse the problems of 100 years of economic decline and the faces of the previous decade begin to recede into the past, who now rules Britain?
Making a list of the most powerful people in the country used to be easy.
It would be headed by the Monarch, followed by the Lord Mayor of London, the aristocracy and church leaders.
But times have changed.
Aristocrats may be rich and own a great amount of land, but they have no real power any more.
As for the Church, they can't even stop shops opening on Sundays.
Yet, despite being a nation of shopkeepers, no retailers are on the list.
The number of retailers collapsing during the recession bears witness to the fact that they need customers more than customers need them.
There can be little doubt that the Prime Minister is still the most powerful man in Britain.
He runs the Government, oversees the Civil Service, the Armed Forces, the Security Services and, ultimately, his is the hand on the nuclear trigger.
However, we have looked at the men who operate outside the Premier's direct influence, at the men whose phone calls no one ever puts on hold.
Rupert Murdoch: lord of the skies
Politicians come and go, but Whitehall still retains its hold on power.
Hence, one civil servant, Sir Robin Butler, is included in the list because he has survived three former Prime Ministers and has the strength and the staying power to outlast the present incumbent.
With a greatly reduced Government majority in the Commons, there is one individual the Prime Minister must retain on his side at all cost.
Chief Whip Richard Ryder delivers Tory back-bench support to the PM.
Should he turn against Major, then the Prime Minister would be finished.
Two lawyers make the list.
However, no City lawyers or top barristers are included as they rarely touch the lives of ordinary people.
As for the Fourth Estate, journalists think they are more important than they actually are.
Consequently only one make the top 25.
Perhaps, for the first time, it is now true to say that money does not automatically equal power.
Therefore, the businessmen on our list have been chosen not merely for their money-making skills, but rather for the influence they can bring to bear.
Their actions affect our lives beyond the apparent significance of their positions.
GLOBAL MOGUL
Rupert Murdoch, 61
There's no escaping Rupert Murdoch.
We read his newspapers and watch his TV.
His trenchant views on market freedom and the benefits of greater market competition are legendary.
But not so long ago, it looked as though the tough-talking Aussie would be a victim of market forces as his Sky satellite TV station appeared doomed to failure.
Then, in a twist of genius, Murdoch welded a merger with its arch-rival BSB and, suddenly, where there were two at each other 's throats, there was now only one.
The newly constituted BSkyB, with Murdoch firmly in control, has not looked back.
When something needs doing, Murdoch does it.
In 1986, he destroyed at a single stroke the stranglehold of the unions over the British newspaper industry by removing his operation overnight to non-union Wapping.
He is more accessible than most tycoons and is frequently seen dining in the works canteen at Wapping.
Abrasive, but not arrogant, there is no edge to him but, surprisingly for the owner of the Sun , he has a puritanical side.
This summer he fired the £600,000 a year president of his US TV subsidiary for hiring a male stripper to perform for an audience of high-powered Murdoch executives.
Strangely, that modesty did not extend to sparing the Royal Family's blushes over the serialization of Andrew Morton's book about Princess Di and her marriage.
DANGER MAN
Martin McGuinness, 42
If anyone can be described as leader of the IRA it is Martin McGuinness.
Commander of the Derry Brigade in 1971, Director of Operations in 1977 and Chief of Staff from 1978 to 1982, he is regarded as the Sinn Fein leader with most influence over IRA activities.
McGuinness is more hard-line than Adams and reckoned to be in closer touch with the mood of die-hard republicans.
Any utterance from the enigmatic McGuinness about the future direction of the IRA carries more weight than similar statements from Adams.
That was seen to maximum effect two years ago when just a hint from McGuinness that the IRA might declare a ceasefire in return for talks with the Government was hailed by Whitehall as a major breakthrough.
Under McGuinness, the IRA developed its virtually impenetrable cell network and scored some of its greatest coups, including the murder of Lord Mountbatten in 1979.
Today, ironically, McGuinness himself rarely leaves the Bogside, where he was born, for fear of assassination.
Left to right: Martin McGuinness, Prince Charles, Kerry Packer
THE MAN WHO WOULD BE KING
Prince of Wales, 44
Despite tales about his marriage and ridicule by the tabloids, Prince Charles demands to be taken seriously.
His ability to force discussion and change is second to none.
When he speaks out, the  Government and authorities listen.
His lack of a definable role makes him impossible to manage.
Unlike his mother and father, who rarely make their presence felt on anything, he is not constrained by protocol.
He has proposed that the civil list be abolished and that the Royal family live off the proceeds of the crown estate, whose income goes at present direct to the Exchequer.
Similarly, his views on architecture, education and social issues have brought him much closer to the man in the street than any of his relatives.
PIT-BULL
Kerry Packer, 55
At a business seminar in Australia a few years ago, Kerry Packer described his method of obtaining loans: ‘Make sure you get the bankers to come to your office.
And always keep 'em waiting.
Hit 'em around the head a bit.
Let ‘em know who's boss.’
It is that sort of attitude that has made Packer Australia's richest man.
At the press conference to announce the huge Packer-Goldsmith bit for BAT in 1989, Packer was the brooding presence in the background as Goldsmith fielded questions.
He was asked shy he had joined the team: ‘Because I always wanted to get to a press conference like this,’ he growled.
His great wealth has brought contacts and political influence.
It is alleged that, along with his friend, British gambling millionaire John Aspinall, he contributed $650,000 to Chief Buthelezi's Inkatha party in South Africa.
Bottom row, from left to right: Richard Ryder, Bill Jordan, Kelvin MacKenzie
THE LOBBYIST
Ian Greer, 59
In 1969, Ian Greer, a former Conservative Party agent, brought to Britain a craft that had long been established in America: the political consultant or professional lobbyist.
Today, his company, Ian Greer Associates, dominates the Westminster lobbying industry.
It is noted for its high proportion of ex-civil servants: ‘They are young chaps who by and large have contacts in the Civil Service and have a jolly good grounding of how the system works,’ he says.
Greer has close links with the Tory party.
He caused a stir in the last Parliament by attending a private Conservative back-bench committee meeting and taking notes.
There is, he maintains, nothing untoward about what he does.
‘So you entertain MPs to lunch.
The thought that MPs are so easily bribed with a couple of gin and tonics and a lamb cutlet is ridiculous.’
His clients, which include the likes of British Airways and other major corporations, clearly value his cooking.
Right, Lord Mackay, top right, Viscount Cranbourne
POWER PACKER
Lord Weinstock, 68
The Thatcher years were not kind to Lord Weinstock, GEC's legendary managing director.
Originally one of Mrs Thatcher's closest confidants, he soon became disillusioned when increased competition in the defence and telecommunications industries threatened to weaken his beloved company.
But with Margaret Thatcher gone and the much more understanding Michael Heseltine installed at Trade and Industry, he is back with a vengeance.
He enjoys close links with senior Conservatives.
Lord Prior is GEC's current chairman and his predecessors have included Lords Carrington and Aldington.
Weinstock has little need for lobbyists, knowing key ministers and senior civil servants in person.
With British Aerospace in the doldrums he is the undisputed leader of Britain's defence industry.
Indeed, there are even rumours that he wants to take over BAe.
Top row, from left to right: Ian Greer, Lord Weinstock, Lord Hanson, Mark McCormack
BUSINESS BUCCANEER
Lord Hanson, 70
During the Thatcher years, James Hanson built up a £10bn business empire through a series of audacious takeovers and acquired a peerage in the process.
But unlike John Major's predecessor, he shows no sign of fading away.
Currently able to call upon cash and borrowings of £16bn, he is the most feared man in business on both sides of the Atlantic, sending shivers down the spine of even the biggest company.
A purchase of just 2.8 per cent of ICI last year was enough to spark talk of a pending mega-bid and cause gnashing of teeth among Labour politicians and union leaders.
The ferocity of the response hurt him deeply, although he could say, ‘I told you so’ with ICI's announcement that it is to split into two to enhance shareholder value.
In the last two years, Hanson has been seen as a provider of last resort, as someone to whom the Government can turn for relief, especially its privatization programme runs into problems.
In 1990, it emerged that he had held discussions about buying PowerGen, the state electricity generator, outright.
He is now making noises about buying British Coal.
THE PROMOTER
Mark McCormack, 62
Not long ago, it would have been inconceivable that two of Britain's great sporting events, Wimbledon and the British Open, would be represented by a lawyer from Cleveland, Ohio.
But it's not far from the truth.
Mark McCormack's IMG Group has got it all sewn up.
McCormack represents the leading players, negotiates their appearance money if it is paid, acts for the top competitions, haggles over TV rights and oversees merchandising.
Not everyone welcomes his presence.
Ex-Minister fro Sport, Dennis Howell, has questioned the possible conflict of interest in the World Matchplay Championship, which he has staged in Britain every autumn since 1964.
McCormack owns it, sells the sponsorship, collects gate receipts, does the commentary on BBC TV and his clients play in it.
It would be wrong, however, to imagine that McCormack's role is limited to sport.
His non-sporting client list includes Michael Parkinson, Selina Scott, Jan Leeming, Peter Alliss, Zandra Rhodes, Des O'Connor and Dame Kiri Te Kanawa.
Oh, and 45 world-famous orchestras, 21 conductors, 18 concert pianists and the Nobel Prize Committee.
Left to right: Jacques Delors, Tiny Rowland, Maktoum el Maktoum
THE REFORMER
Lord Mackay of Clashfern, 65
The late George Gale once said law is more important than politics.
It affects us all and its practitioners do not come up for re-election every five years.
That probably explains why, on a salary of £106,000 a year, Lord Mackay, the Lord Chancellor, earns £30,000 more than his Cabinet chief, John Major.
Mackay is a Scot who came south at the request of Mrs Thatcher following the resignation of Lord Havers due to ill health in 1987.
Far from being the ‘safe’ appointment as most people imagined — an impression enhanced when he resigned from the Free Presbyterian Church of Scotland after refusing to apologise for attending the Catholic funeral mass of a colleague — he has turned out to be a sweeping, radical reformer.
He has overhauled the legal aid system; attacked the Bar's 200-year-old monopoly; moved towards a unified family court system; introduced major changes in civil court procedures; called for more black judges and women lawyers; and removed magistrates who were disqualified from driving for twelve months after drink-driving convictions.
Along the way he has brushed aside the wrath of his fellow-judges.
The former Lord Chief Justice, Lord Lane, called his green paper ‘one of the most sinister documents ever to emanate from Government’.
And Lord Donaldson, the Master of the Rolls, warned Mackay to ‘get your hands off my lawn’.
TOP TORY
Viscount Cranbourne, 45
As the new Defence Under-secretary, Robert Cranbourne occupies just about the lowliest position in John Major's cabinet, Yet he is also  somebody the Prime Minister and his colleagues cannot afford to ignore.
Cranbourne's status derives from his dinner table, where is he regular host to the Blue Chips, the most powerful and staunchly Majorite group of senior Tories.
Formed out of the class of 1979 — founders included the likes of Chris Patten, John Patten, William Waldegrave and Tristan Garel-Jones — the group was noted for the blue-bloodedness of its members, hence its name.
At Westminster, they dined together.
At weekends they journeyed down to Cranbourne Manor.
As they rose through the ranks they maintained the association.
Indeed, claim Thatcherites, it was the Blue Chips who plotted her downfall in November 1990.
Cranbourne has held ministerial office before.
In 1982, he was Parliamentary Private Secretary to Foreign Office minister Cranley Onslow, but resigned after just six days in protest over a dispute involving Northern Ireland.
He resigned his South Dorset seat at the 1987 general election.
Such is his importance that in order for him to become a minister again, the Government invoked a short-cut used only three times in the last 300 years.
Under the writ of acceleration procedure he is allowed to sit in the Lords, as Lord Cecil, even though his father, the Marquess of Salisbury, is still alive.
WHIPPER-IN
Richard Ryder, 43
It is nineteen months since Richard Ryder was appointed Government Chief Whip and in that time he has risen to become John Major's right-hand man.
His role is multi-faceted: prime ministerial strategist, eyes and ears in the Commons, confidant, fixer.
What he is not is a publicity seeker.
Yet he was founder of the group of ‘four musketeers’, the senior Tories who masterminded Mr Major's successful general election campaign.
The four — Ryder, Chris Patten, John Wakeham and John MacGregor — held daily breakfast brainstorming sessions at No 10.
As Chief Whip he has managed to paper over the cracks in the back benches and maintain a united front behind the Prime Minister.
He loves his back-seat role, moving quietly up and down the lines, constantly persuading and cajoling.
Ryder makes a point of seeking out potential waverers and listening to their arguments in person.
Almost always they are convinced to put loyalty before principle.
Left to right: Duke of Kent, Denys Henderson, Geoffrey Dear, Richard Branson
THE NEGOTIATOR
Bill Jordan, 56
It is thanks to Bill Jordan, President of the Amalgamated Union of Engineering and Electrical Workers, and not Norman Willis, head of the TUC, that many own their shorter working week.
When Jordan launched his shorter hours campaign in 1989, it was greeted with scepticism by union and industrial leaders.
Its eventual success acted as a springboard for the union boss, who looks much younger than his 56 years.
He is both idolized and despised within the Union movement.
Those in the centre and on the Right regard him as a pragmatist; those on the Left see him as a right-winger.
His power comes from being the union leader the Tories do not know how to cope with.
When the TUC expelled the electricians' union it was Jordan who determinedly merged his engineering union with theirs, to the fury of the hard left.
The AEEU is now the biggest manufacturing union in Britain, although Jordan claims not to seek personal power.
His position, however, seems untouchable.
He scored another victory recently when the Labour Party abolished the unions' block vote in the leadership elections, something he had been advocating for ages.
Another string to his bow is his governorship of the BBC.
PAPER TIGER
Kelvin MacKenzie, 45
That Kelvin MacKenzie's position as editor of the Sun is devolved from his proprietor, Rupert Murdoch, is unimportant.
MacKenzie is a powerful man in his own right.
He has in his grasp the ability to reduce anyone to tears, through a snappy headline or lurid story.
He loves to bully and to unleash his hounds on what he sees as the snooty, wishy-washy liberal establishment.
When the Government hinted darkly about a privacy bill in the wake of the Mellor affair, MacKenzie went on the offensive.
In a rare on-the-record interview, he alleged that during the general election he was personally approached by a Cabinet minister with dirt on Paddy Ashdown.
MacKenzie did not name the politician but the Prime Minister soon dropped all reference to the privacy bill.
Within journalism, MacKenzie is either loved or loathed.
He makes, in his own words, some major ‘cock-ups’, but a cheeky apology normally saves him.
Those close to him speak of his warmth and kindness.
Others who have crossed him consider him vindictive.
Despite his uncouth manner and four-letter language, no editor is more courted by senior Conservative politicians.
His ability to deliver the C2 blue-collar, Essex-man vote has, arguably, won them the last two general elections.
Clockwise from top: Mick Newmarch, Roger Pannone, Sir Robin Butler, Greg Dyke, Sri Hinduja with Lord Mackay and their wives
LE PRESIDENT
Jacques Delors, 67
The Sun says ‘Up Yours Delors’, the Tory Right despise him, the Government is suspicious of him, yet Jacques Delors, President of the European Commission, just will not go away.
‘Federal organization is not an idea of the past, it is an idea of the future,’ he insists.
He is a modes man who appears genuinely bemused by the British reaction to him: ‘I have always been impressed by British democracy and the irony is that — although I have differences with the British leaders from time to time— I sometimes feel my kind of federalism is better understood in Britain than by some of the federalists elsewhere in Europe who always cry, onwards, onwards!’
The message is simple: become his friend and we have nothing to fear.
LITTLE BIG MAN
Tiny Roland, 74
A foreign office contact once described in awe-struck terms how, when an African government changes, the first person from Britain to meet the new ruler is often not our ambassador, but Tiny Rowland.
The enigmatic Rowland flies the world, meeting leaders, smoothing lines of communications and setting up deals.
Business is his profession, dabbling in politics is his passion.
Prior to the Falklands War, he tried to broker a peace conference with Mexico acting as the go-between.
During the Lebanese hostage saga he maintained a dialogue with the Iranian Government.
He thinks nothing of doing business with the pariahs of the UN.
Earlier this year he provoked outrage by selling a stake in Lonrho's Metropole Hotels chain to Colonel Gadaffi.
Those who cross him do so at their peril.
Mohammed Al Fayed had the temerity to snatch Harrods from under his nose and has been hounded mercilessly ever since, often in the pages of Rowland's own Observer newspaper.
Australian tycoon Alan Bond was on the point of conquering the world until he bought shares in Lonrho without first checking with Rowland.
For ‘Bondy’ the roof literally caved in as Rowland launched a detailed investigation into his financial affairs that triggered his downfall and subsequent imprisonment.
Rowland moves outside the establishment — in fact, he likes nothing better than upsetting it.
He is no respecter of titles: when the Daily Express queried his ability, he sent a lemon to Lord Stevens, the paper's proprietor and invited him to suck on it.
RACING CERTAINTY
Sheikh Maktoum, 50
Although Sheikh Maktoum al Maktoum spends less time in this country than his three younger brothers, the ruler of Dubai still owns about 130 top racehorses here and has extensive business interests.
Maktoum al Maktoum has emerged as a major player in the London property market, backing a £350m luxury hotel and office project on the Isle of Dogs in London's Docklands.
Unlike the Reichmann brothers, he can afford to sit out the slump.
The withdrawal of the Aga Khan means that Maktoum al Maktoum and his brothers own more than 650 of the country's 6,500 flat horses.
Robert Sangster, the second biggest owner, by contrast, owns just 70.
GRAND MASTER
Duke of Kent, 56
Earlier this year, a specially invited audience at Earls Court, London, was treated to the spectacle of the Queen's cousin sitting on a golden throne wearing an apron.
The occasion was the 275th anniversary of the Grand Lodge of England and the 25th anniversary of the appointment of the ‘Most Worshipful’ Duke of Kent as Grand Master, or senior Freemason.
As Grand Master, the Duke of Kent presides over the largest secret society in England and Wales with an estimated 600,000, all male, members.
The Duke's brother, Prince Michael of Kent, is also a member, as is Prince Philip.
His efforts to soften the Masons' sinister image — he ordered all branches to launch publicity drives — have failed to impress their numerous critics.
The Church of England's General Synod doubts if Freemasonry and Christianity are compatible and the organization is suspected of being behind police corruption, but Royal approval is nevertheless accorded it.
MARKET MOVER
Sir Denys Henderson, 59
A nod and a wink from Sir Denys Henderson is all it takes to move the share prices up or down.
He is chairman of ICI and the stock market's traditional bell-wether.
For the City the recession will end when Henderson says so.
In the last year, Henderson has proved himself more than a mere economic indicator by giving Lord Hanson a drubbing before he had even formally launched a takeover bid for ICI.
He joined the company in 1957 and succeeded Sir John Harvey-Jones as chairman 30 years later.
Henderson has said: ‘I like to win, no question.
Nobody arrives at ICI board level without some steel and determination in his character.’
Does that mean he is hard?
‘I'm warm toward people, but you can't expect to be loved.
You need the courage to take the unpopular decision.’
THE ENFORCER
Geoffrey Dear, 54
The country's most powerful policeman is not Sir John Woodcock, Chief of Her Majesty's Inspector of Constabulary, or Sir Peter Imbert, the Metropolitan Commissioner.
Rather, Geoffrey Dear — the Chief Constable who disbanded his own Serious Crimes Squad for malpractice and then, in a shock decision, joined the ranks of Her Majesty's Inspectors policing the police — is the man who exerts the most influence.
Dear is a copper's copper.
He may have been West Midlands Chief Constable when it's squad was exposed for its creative-writing skills, but he was not to blame.
His reaction was swift and decisive.
All 53 members of the squad had to go and been seen to go, even though, he acknowledged, he was ‘cutting into good wood’.
He has his own forceful views on the future of policing, beginning with the establishment of a national crime intelligence unit.
He is loathed by some, more traditionally minded officers for his astute and ready use of publicity.
At the inspectorate he is advising the Home Secretary on policy in four crucial areas: complaints and discipline; firearms; public order and counter-terrorism.
I theory, either of the two more senior posts — Chief HMI or Metropolitan Commissioner — cannot be far  away .
In reality, though, he is top dog already.
RULE-BREAKER
Richard Branson, 42
Do not be fooled by the cheeky chappy grin and baggy jumper — Richard Branson may not play by the rules but he plays to win.
Until March this year he was a music entrepreneur who did whacky stunts and ran an airline of the side.
But then he sold his Virgin music business to Thorn EMI for £560m.
Suddenly, he was free to devote all his attention to winning his increasingly nasty war with British Airways.
His allegations of a BA dirty tricks campaign to force Virgin out of the sky have seen him hold his own against some of the best PR manipulators in the business.
They would do well to remember that his record shops began by running an illegal scheme which meant that records that were marked for export (and therefore exempt from tax) were sold domestically, a scam that only ended when Branson was caught and fined.
Branson said recently in a magazine interview on the airline industry, ‘You know, I'm trying very hard to resist saying, ‘Up Yours, Lord King!’’
He was smiling but nobody was laughing.
THE INVESTOR
Mick Newmarch, 54
As chief executive of the Prudential, Mick Newmarch is the country's biggest investor, with £35bn of funds under his control.
Known as Mick the Bruiser, he is a big man with a reputation for an autocratic, direct management style and strong views on just about everything.
But it is outside the Pru, in the City, where Newmarch's muscle is wielded to the most dramatic effect.
Traditionally the Pru was a passive investor and could normally be counted upon to favour the incumbent management in a takeover bid — under Newmarch that approach has changed.
PEOPLE'S LAWYER
Rodger Pannone, 52
When John Stalker needed a lawyer he chose Rodger Pannone.
When the elderly victims of Opren and women injured by the Dalkon Shield IUD wanted advice, they went to Pannone.
Similarly, when the victims of the Manchester Airport, King's Cross and Zeebrugge disasters sought compensation, they turned to Pannone.
His enemies call him an ‘ambulance chaser’.
His admirers applaud him as the ‘people's lawyer’, the first solicitor in Britain to realize that victims of disasters have more chance of success if they stand and fight collectively.
Other firms may be bigger and more prestigious, but their clients are terrified of Pannone.
Within weeks of the Zeebrugge disaster, P&O, the ship's owners, agreed to a settlement with Pannone far in excess of its statutory obligations.
After Pannone took up the King's Cross victims' plight, London Regional Transport agreed to make ex-gratia payments without them having to prove negligence.
SIR HUMPHREY
Sir Robin Butler, 55
John Major may be Prime Minister, but Sir Robin Butler, head of the Home Civil Service and Cabinet Secretary, has spent longer at the heart of power.
The stings that lead throughout the Whitehall machine are pulled, discreetly of course, from his office.
It is a testament to Butler's skill that he served as Private Secretary to both Edward Heath and Harold Wilson and, even more impressively, stayed the course as Principal Private Secretary under Mrs Thatcher.
An Oxford rugby blue and a keen cyclist, he is a more outgoing figure than his predecessor as Cabinet Secretary, Lord Armstrong.
Yet Butler is no fan of freedom of information.
He is said to come into his own behind closed doors when giving Prime Ministers advice they do not want to hear — in the politest possible way.
MISTER ITV
Greg Dyke, 45
As the managing director of LWT and founder of Sunrise, the breakfast station, Greg Dyke was the major winner in last year's franchise auction.
The package of share options and perks on offer if LWT retained its franchise was said to be worth £3m.
Michael Green of Carlton may have won the London daily franchise from Thames and Andrew Quinn may have been appointed head of ITV's scheduling, but they still have everything to prove.
Dyke has been there already.
He has emerged as the dominant personality in the commercial network.
Even though they lost, he led the ITV side in the recent Premier League football deal.
He may consolidate his position by entering into a merger of sorts with Carlton when the Government permits such tie-ups in 1994.
If that should happen nobody in television will be able to touch him.
MAHARAJAH
Sri Hinduja, age unknown
When Sri Hinduja, head of the richest Indian family and seventh richest man in the world, threw a party to celebrate the Hindu festival of light last year, he hired the V&A Museum.
The invitations were sent out on his and his three younger brothers' behalf, by Lord Armstrong, the former Cabinet Secretary of Spycatcher fame and Chairman of the V&A.
The party was attended by 1,400 guests, including senior politicians from all the main parties and many of the leading members of the Anglo-Asian community.
From his home in Carlton Gardens, the secretive Sri runs the enormous Hinduja group of oil trading, arms manufacturing and heavy engineering companies.
He is the unofficial head of the increasingly influential Anglo-Asian community.
Last December, he led a high-powered delegation of Asian businessmen to dinner with John Major at No 10.
Earlier this year, Dharam, his son and heir, committed suicide after incurring family displeasure over his choice of bride.
…
And those who think they're more powerful than they are
Sir Timothy Bell, 51
Once close to the seat of power because of his association with the Thatchers, Bell has lost out since Major became Prime Minister.
Bell was instrumental in pulling the pieces together to rescue David Mellor from the sex scandal with actress Antonia de Sancha.
His contacts with Government remain good, but they are no better than those of many PR companies.
Bell also had the dubious achievement of being the only non-Royal at the meeting which announced the split of Prince Andrew and the Duchess of York.
Lord Jeffrey Archer, 52
A major purveyor of Tory gossip and still looking for a job.
Although he promotes himself as a friend of John Major, the Conservative Party has for some inexplicable reason been unable to find him a job in the Government where his extensive talents could be stretched.
Some, uncharitably, have suggested the railways, particularly as his last book reputedly didn't sell so well.
Anthony Cheetham, 39
The publisher who was removed from Random House in a boardroom coup.
Although Cheetham walked away with packets of dosh and has taken over Weidenfeld, his new list of authors relies on the same tired (and expensive) formula of ‘star’ novelists, which ultimately bores the reader and spoils the cash flow.
Lord Goodman, 79
Never as powerful as he was when Harold Wilson was Prime Minister and Jeremy Thorpe was a client, Goodman still tries very hard to exert influence and broker deals.
But, for influence, there has never been a lawyer to equal Goodman at his height.
Brian Basham, 49
Basham has had a varied career in the field of ‘public relations’.
As MD of Warwick Communications he advises British Airways and Cable and Wireless.
He is often hired to inform Fleet Street about client views or, less charitably, to dish the dirt on opponents.
He is in the middle of an unseemly row with Virgin Airways and was criticized in a memo from Lord Hanson to Sir Timothy Bell at the time of the abortive takeover battle between Hanson and ICI.
Basham has good contacts and, because of his Fleet Street connections, thinks he has influence.
But most clever journalists see him coming a mile off.
John Birt, 47
Under the control of Marmaduke Hussey and therefore the Government, Birt sees his mission as to drag the Beep into the next century leaner and fitter.
In fact, the BBC charter comes up for review in 1993 and the Government will decide how broadcasting will be run without much regard for Birt's opinions.
After that, and because of that, Birt may not want to be around.
Sir Michael Richardson, 67
As head of NM Rothschild, Sir Michael was until very recently the most powerful banker in the city, overseeing most privatizations and advising the likes of Lord Hanson.
But the collapse of two other tycoon clients, Robert Maxwell and Polly Peck boss Asil Nadir, has raised questions over his judgement and may signal the end of his career.
Lord David Owen, 54
Politically, almost everything David Owen has done has turned to dust.
He split and mortally wounded the Labour Party.
Then he split and mortally wounded the Social Democrats.
His power was founded on his soundbite-ability.
Owen was more media darling than political heavyweight, more idol than icon.
He was expected to get Hong Kong or the BBC after endorsing Major over Kinnock.
But he got neither.
Lord McAlpine, 50
Ex-Conservative Party grandee whose power was derived from his family's ability to marry well as much as his own commercial acumen.
McAlpine is an old-style High Tory networker and friend of Conrad Black and the Saatchis whose influence has declined with the power of his old political mistress.
Roy Miles, 57
At the height of the Eighties, West End gallery owner Roy Miles promoted Russian art of indeterminate quality with extraordinary results.
The number of qualified experts who have emerged recently in the field has devalued his influence in the market.
CAREER MOVE
A SHORT STORY BY MARTIN AMIS
Alistair is a struggling writer.
He sends his work to a tiny literary magazine and hopes that one day one of this screenplays might be published.
Luke, on the other hand, has made it into the bigtime.
He's in Hollywood mixing with the moguls.
Luke writes sonnets…
WHEN ALISTAIR FINISHED his new screenplay,Offensive from Quasar 13 , he submitted it to the TLM — and waited.
Over the past year he had had more than a dozen screenplays rejected by The Little Magazine .
On the other hand, his most recent submission, a batch of five, had been returned not with the standard rejection slip but with a handwritten note from the screenplay editor, Hugh Sixsmith.
The note said:
I was really rather taken with two or three of these, and seriously tempted by Hotwire , which I thought close to being fully achieved.
Do please go on sending me your stuff.
Hugh Sixsmith was himself a screenplay writer of considerable though uncertain reputation.
His note of encouragement was encouraging.
It made Alistair brave.
Boldly he prepared Offensive from Quasar 13 for submission.
He justified the pages of the typescript with fondly lingering fingertips.
Alistair did not address the envelope to The Screenplay Editor.
No.
He addressed it to Mr Hugh Sixsmith.
Nor, for once, did he enclose his curriculum vitae — which he now contemplated with some discomfort.
It told, in a pitiless staccato, of the screenplays he had published in various laptop broadsheets and comically obscure pamphlets; it even told of screenplays published in his university magazine.
The truly disgraceful bit came at the end, where it said, ‘Rights Offered: First British Serial only ’.
Alistair spent a long time on the covering note to Sixsmith — almost as long as he had spent on Offensive from Quasar 13 .
The note got shorter and shorter the more he worked on it.
At last he was satisfied.
There in the dawn he grasped the envelope and ran his tongue across its darkly luminous cuff.
That Friday, on his way to work and suddenly feeling completely hopeless, Alistair surrendered his parcel to the sub post office in Calchalk Street off the Euston Road.
Deliberately — very deliberately — he had enclosed no stamped addressed envelope.
The accompanying letter, in its entirety, read as follows:
Any use?
If not — wpb.
‘Wpb’ stood, of course, for ‘wastepaper basket’— receptacle that loomed forbiddingly large in the life of a practising screenplay writer…
With a hand on his brow Alistair sidled his way out of there, past the birthday cards, the tensed pensioners, the Biros and the balls of string.
WHEN LUKE FINISHED the new poem entitled, simply, ‘Sonnet’— he Xeroxed the printout and faxed it to his agent.
Ninety minutes later he returned from the gym downstairs and prepared his special fruit juice while the Ansafone told him, among many other things, to get back to Mike.
As he reached for another lime Luke touched the preselect for Talent International.
‘Ah, Luke,’ said Mike.
‘It's moving.
We've already had a response.’
‘Yeah, how come?
It's four in the morning where he is.’
‘No, it's eight in the evening where he is.
He's in Australia.
Developing a poem with Peter Barry.’
Luke didn't want to hear about Peter Barry.
He bent, and tugged off his singlet.
Walls and windows maintained a respectful distance — the room was a broad seam of sun haze and river light.
Luke sipped his juice: its extreme stringency caused him to lift both elbows and give a single, embittered nod.
He said, ‘What did he think?’
‘Joe?
He did backflips.
It's…
‘Tell Luke I'm blown away by the new poem.
I just know that ‘Sonnet’ is really going to happen.’’
Luke took this coolly.
He wasn't at all old, but he had been in poetry long enough to take these things coolly.
He turned: Suki, who had been shopping, was now letting herself into the apartment, not without difficulty.
She was indeed cruelly encumbered.
Luke said, ‘You haven't talked numbers yet.
I mean like a ballpark figure.’
Mike said, ‘We understand each other.
Joe knows about Monad's interest.
And Tim at TCT.’
‘Good,’ said Luke.
Suki was wandering slenderly towards him, shedding various purchases as she approached — creeds and caskets, shining satchels.
‘They'll want you to go out there at least twice,’ said Mike.
‘Initially to discuss…‘
Luke could tell that Suki had spent much more than she intended.
‘Of course,’ he said.
They can't get over it that you don't live there.’
Luke could tell that Suki had spent much more than she intended.
He could tell by the quality of patience in her sigh as she began to lick the sweat from his shoulder-blades.
He said, ‘Come on, Mike.
They know I hate all that LA crap.’
ON HIS WAY TO WORK that Monday, Alistair sat slumped in his bus seat, limp with ambition and neglect.
One fantasy was proving especially obdurate: as he entered his office, the telephone on his desk would actually be bouncing on its console — Hugh Sixsmith, from The Little Magazine , his voice urgent but grave, with the news that he was going to rush Alistair's screenplay into the very next issue.
(To be frank, Alistair had had the same fantasy the previous Friday, at which time, presumably,Offensive from Quasar 13 was still being booted round the floor of the sub post office).
His girlfriend, Hazel, had come down from Leeds for the weekend.
They were so small, he and Hazel, that they could share his single bed quite comfortably — could sprawl and stretch without constraint.
On the Saturday evening they attended a screenplay reading at a bookshop on Camdem High Street.
Alistair hoped to impress Hazel with his growing ease in this milieu (and managed to exchange wary leers with a few shambling, half-familiar figures — fellow screenplay writers, knowers, seekers).
But these days Hazel seemed sufficiently impressed by him anyway, whatever he did.
Alistair lay there the next morning (her turn to make tea), wondering about this business of being impressed.
Hazel had impressed him mightily, seven years ago, in bed: by not getting out of it when he got into it…the office telephone rang many times that Monday, but none of the callers had anything to say about Offensive from Quasar 13 .
Alistair sold advertising space on an agricultural newsletter; so his callers wanted to talk about galvannealed sink paint and offal reprocessors.
He heard nothing for four months.
This would normally have been a fairly good sign.
It meant, or it might mean, that you screenplay was receiving serious, even agonized, consideration.
It was better than having your screenplay flopping back on the mat by return of post.
On the other hand, Hugh Sixsmith might have responded to the spirit and the letter of Alistair's accompanying note — and dropped Offensive from Quasar 13 into his wastepaper basket within minutes of its arrival: four months ago.
Rereading his faint carbon of the screenplay.
Alistair now cursed his own (highly calibrated) insouciance.
He shouldn't have said, ‘Any use?
If not — wpb.’
He should have said, ‘Any use?
If not — sae!’
Every morning he went down the three flights of stairs the mail was there to be shuffled and dealt.
And every fourth Friday, or thereabouts, he still wrenched open his TLM , in case Sixsmith had run the screenplay without letting him know.
As a surprise.
‘Dear Mr Sixsmith,’ thought Alistair, as he rode the train to Leeds.
‘I am thinking of placing the screenplay I sent you elsewhere.
I trust that…
I thought it only fair to…
’ Alistair retracted his feet to accommodate another passenger.
‘My dear Mr Sixsmith: In response to an inquiry from…
In response to a most generous inquiry, I am putting together a selection of my screenplays for…
’ Alistair tipped his head back and stared at the coagulated window.
‘For Mudlark Books.
It seems that the Ostler Press is also interested.
This involves me in some paperwork, which, however tedious…
For the record…
Matters would be considerably eased…
Of course if you…‘
LUKE SAT ON AN expo love-seat in Club World at Heathrow, drinking Volvic and availing himself of a complimentary fax machine — clearing up the initial paperwork with Mike on the poem.
Everyone in Club World looked all hushed and grateful to be there, but not Luke, who looked exhaustively displeased.
He was flying first class to LAX, where he would be met by a uniformed chauffeur who would convey him by limousine or courtesy car to the Pinnacle Trumont on the Avenue of the Stars.
First class was no big thing.
The cabin itself was full of mile-savers and trip-of-a-lifetime artists, milky old Mormons whose vast progeny had spent years in the air to defray this last great stretching of the wings.
In poetry, first class was something you didn't need to think about.
It's wasn't discussed: it was statutory.
If you were a poet, first class was business as usual.
So, with just this tacit surety, might a NUPE park attendant rely on his full-pay days-off increments due to sick leave (pending a doctor's certificate, obviously).
Luke was tense: under pressure.
A lot— maybe too much — was riding on ‘Sonnet’.
If ‘Sonnet’ didn't happen, he would soon be able to afford neither his apartment nor his girlfriend.
He would recover from Suki, before very long.
But he would never recover from not being able to afford her — or his apartment.
If you wanted the truth, his deal on ‘Sonnet’ was not that great.
Luke was furious with Mike except about the new merchandising clause (potential accessories on the poem like toys or T-shirts) and the improved cut he got on tertiaries and sequels.
Then there was Joe.
Joe calls and he's like, ‘What kind of car do you want while you're here?’
‘A big one.’
‘What colour?
Automatic or shift?’
And all kinds of other stuff.
‘We really think ‘Sonnet's’ going to work, Luke, Jeff thinks to too.
Jeff's just come in.
Jeff?
It's Luke.
Do you want to say something to him?
Luke, Jeff's coming over.
He wants to say something about ‘Sonnet’.’
Luke?’ said Jeff.
‘Jeff.
Luke?
You're a very talented writer.
It's great to be working on ‘Sonnet’ with you.
Here's Joe.’
‘That was Jeff,’ said Joe.
‘He's crazy about ‘Sonnet’.’
‘So what are we going to be talking about?’ said Luke.
‘Roughly.’
‘On ‘Sonnet’?
Well the only thing we have a problem on ‘Sonnet’ with, Luke, so far as I can see anyway, and I know Jeff agrees with me on this — right Jeff?— and so does Jim incidentally, Luke,’said Joe, ‘is the form.’
Luke waited.
Then he said, ‘You mean the form ‘Sonnet's’ written in.’
‘Yes, that's right, Luke.
The sonnet form.’
Luke waited for the last call and was then at length guided, with much unreturned civility, into the plane's nose.
‘DEAR MR SIXSMITH,’ wrote Alistair:
Going through my files the other day, I vaguely remembered sending you a little effort called Offensive from Quasar 13 — just over seven months ago, it must have been.
Am I right in assuming that you have no use for it?
I might bother you with another one (or two!) that I have completed since then.
I hope you are well.
Thank you so much for your encouragement in the past.
Need I say how much I admire your own work?
The austerity, the depth.
When, may I ask, can we expect another ‘slim vol.’?
He sadly posted this letter on a wet Sunday afternoon in Leeds.
He hoped that the postmark might testify to his mobility and grit.
Yet really he felt much steadier now.
There had been a recent period of about five weeks during which, Alistair came to realize, he had gone clinically insane.
That letter to Sixsmith was but one of the many dozens he had penned.
He had also taken to haunting the Holborn offices of The Little Magazine : for hours he sat crouched in the coffee bars and sandwich nooks opposite, with the unsettled intention of springing out at Sixsmith — if he ever say him, which he never did.
Alistair began to wonder whether Sixsmith actually existed.
Was he, perhaps, an actor, a ghost, a shrewd fiction?
Alistair telephoned the TLM from selected call-boxes.
Various people answered, and no one knew where anyone was, and only three or four times was Alistair successfully connected to the apparently permanent coughing fit that crackled away at the other end of Smith's extension.
Then he hung up.
He couldn't sleep, or he thought he couldn't, for Hazel said that all night long he whimpered and gnashed.
Alistair waited for nearly two months.
Then he sent in three more screenplays.
One was about a Machine hit man who emerges from early retirement when his wife is slain by a serial murderer.
Another dealt with the infiltration by the three Gorgons of an escort agency in present-day New York.
The third was a heavy metal musical set on the Isle of Skye.
He enclosed a stamped addressed envelope the size of a small knapsack.
Winter was unusually mild.
‘MAY I GET YOU something to drink before your meal?
A cappuccino?
A mineral water?
A glass of Sauvignon Blanc?’
‘Double decaf espresso,’ said Luke.
‘Thanks.’
‘You're more than welcome.’
‘Hey,’ said Luke, when everyone had ordered.
‘I'm not just welcome any more.
I'm more than welcome.’
The others smiled patiently.
Such remarks were the downside of the classy fact that Luke, despite his appearance and accent, was English.
There they all sat on the terrace at Bubo's: Joe, Jeff, Jim.
Luke said, ‘How did ‘Eclogue by a Five-Barred Gate’ do?’
Joe said, ‘Domestically?’
He looked at Jim, at Jeff.
‘Like…fifteen ?’
Luke said, ‘And worldwide?’
‘It isn't going worldwide.’
‘How about ‘Black Rook in Rainy Weather’?’ asked Luke
Joe shook his head.
‘It didn't even do what ‘Sheep in Fog’ did.’
‘It's all remakes,’ said Jim.
‘Period shit.’
‘How about ‘Bog Oak’?’
‘Bog Oak’?
Ooh, maybe 25?’
Luke said sourly, ‘I hear nice things about ‘The Old Botanical Gardens’.’
They talked about other Christmas flops and bombs, delaying for as long as they could any mention of TCT's ‘Tis He Whose Yester-evening's High Disdain’, which had cost practically nothing to make and had already done 120 million in its first three weeks.
‘What happened?’
Luke eventually asked.
‘Jesus, what was the publicity budget?’
‘On ‘Tis’?’ said Joe.
‘Nothing, Two.
Three.’
They all shook their heads.
Jim philosophical.
‘That's poetry,’ he said.
‘There aren't any other sonnets being made, are there?’ said Luke.
Jeff said, ‘Binary is in post production with a sonnet.
‘Composed at — Castle’.
More period shit.’
Their soups and salads arrived.
Luke thought that it was probably a mistake, at this stage, to go on about sonnets.
After a while he said, ‘How did ‘For Sophonisba Anguisciola’ do?’
Joe said, ‘For Sophonisba Anguisciola’?
Don't talk to me about ‘For Sophonisba Anguisciola’.’
IT WAS LATE AT NIGHT and Alistair was in his room working on a screenplay about a high IQ-IQ homeless black man who is transformed into a white lady junk-bond dealer by a South Moluccan terrorist witch-doctor.
Suddenly he shoved this aside with a groan, snatched up a clean sheet of paper, he wrote:
Dear Mr Sixsmith:
It is now well over a year since I sent you Offensive from Quasar 13 .
Not content with that dereliction, you have allowed five months to pass without responding to three more recent submissions.
A prompt reply I would have deemed a common decency, you being a fellow screenplay writer, though I must say I have never cared for your work, finding it, at once, both florid and superficial.
(I read Matthew's Sura's piece last month and I thought he caught you bang to rights.)
Please return the more recent screenplays, namely Decimator ,Medusa Takes Manhattan and Valley of the Stratocasters , immediately.
He signed and sealed it.
He stalked out and posted it.
On his return he haughtily threw off his drenched clothes.
The single bed felt enormous, like an orgiast's four-poster.
He curled up tight and slept better than he had done all year.
So it was a quietly defiant Alistair who, the next morning, came plodding down the stairs, and glanced at the splayed mail on the shelf as he headed for the door.
He recognized the envelope as a lover would.
He bent low as he opened it.
Do please forgive this very tardy reply.
Profound apologies.
But allow me to move straight on to the verdict on your work.
I won't bore you with all my personal and professional distractions.
Bore me? thought Alistair, as his hand sought his heart.
I think can at once give the assurance that your screenplays are unusually promising.
No: that promise has already been honoured.
They have both feeling and burnish.
I will content myself, for now, by taking Offensive from QQuasar 13 .
(Allow me to muse a little longer on Decimator .)
I have one or two very minor emendations to suggest.
Why not telephone me here to arrange a chat?
Thank you for your generous remarks about my own work.
Increasingly I find that this kind of exchange — this candour, this reciprocity — is one of the things that keeps me trundling along.
Your words helped sustain my defences in the aftermath of Matthew Sura's vicious and slovenly attack, from which, I fear, I am still rather reeling.
Take excellent care.
‘GO WITH THE LYRIC,’ said Jim.
‘Or how about a ballad?’ said Jeff.
Jack was swayable.
‘Ballads are big,’ he allowed.
It seemed to Luke, towards the end of the second day, that he was winning the sonnet battle.
The clue lay in the flavour of Joe's taciturnity: torpid, but unmorose.
‘Let's face it,’ said Jeff.
‘Sonnets are essentially hieratic.
They're strictly period.
They answer to a formalized consciousness.
Today, we're talking consciousnesses that are in search of form.’
‘Plus,’ said Jack, ‘the lyric has always been the natural medium for the untrammelled expression of feeling.
‘Yeah,’ said Jeff.
‘With the sonnet you're stuck in this thesis-antithesis-synthesis routine.’
Joan said, ‘I mean what are we doing here?
Reflecting the world or illuminating it?’
It was time for Joe to speak.
‘Please ,’ he said.
‘Are you ever going to stop with this stuff?
Are you ever going to stop?
Mirror lamp, mirror lamp, mirror lamp.
Christ, even Abrams admits it's a false dichotomy.
Are we forgetting that ‘Tis’ was a sonnet, before the rewrites?
Were we on coke when we said, in the summer, that we were going to go for the sonnet ?’
The answer to Joe's last question, incidentally, was yes; but Luke joined the silence.
He looked carefully round the room.
The Chinese lunch they'd had the secretary phone out for lay on the coffee table like a child's experiments with putty and paint and designer ooze.
It was four o'clock and Luke wanted to get away soon.
To swim and lie in the sun.
To make himself especially lean and bronzed for his meeting with the young actress Henna Mickiewicz.
He faked a yawn.
‘Luke's lagged,’ said Joe.
‘Tomorrow we'll talk some more but I'm pretty sure I'm recommitted to the sonnet.’
‘SORRY,’ SAID ALISTAIR.
‘Me yet again.
Sorry.’
‘Oh yes,’ said the woman's voice.
‘He was here a minute ago…
No he's there.
He's there.
Just a second.’
Alistair jerked the receiver away from his ear and stared at it.
Gingerly he started listening again.
It seemed as if the phone itself was in paroxysm, all squawk and splat like a cabby's radio.
Then the fit passed or paused and a voice said tightly but proudly, ‘Hugh Sixsmith?’
It took Alistair a little while to explain who he was.
Sixsmith sounded surprised but, on the whole rather intrigued to hear from him.
They moved on smoothly enough to arrange a meeting (after work, the following Monday), before Alistair contrived to put in:
‘Mr Sixsmith, there's just one thing.
This is very embarrassing but last night I got into a bit of a state about not hearing from you for so long and I'm afraid I sent you a completely mad letter which I…
’ Alistair waited.
‘Oh you know how it is.
For these screenplays, you know, you reach into yourself, and then time goes by and…‘
‘My dear boy, don't say another word.
I'll ignore it.
I'll throw it away.
After a line or two I shall simply avert my unpained eye,’ said Sixsmith, and started coughing again.
Hazel did not come down to London for the weekend.
Alistair did not go up to Leeds for the weekend.
He spent the time thinking about that place in Earl's Court Square, where screenplay writers read from their screenplays and drank biting Spanish red wine and got stared at by tousled girls who wore overcoats and no make-up and blinked incessantly or not at all.
Where was Hazel, in this particular dream?
Where was Alistair?
He was up on the podium, still a bit pale and puffy, but recovering gamely from her suicide.
LUKE PARKED HIS Chevrolet Celebrity on the fifth floor of the studio carpark and rode down in the elevator with two minor executives in tracksuits who were discussing the latest records broken by ‘'TIS He Whose Yester-evening's High Disdain’.
He put on his dark glasses as he crossed the other carpark, the one reserved for major executives.
Each bay had a name on it.
It reassured Luke to see Joe's name there, partly obscured by his Range Rover.
Poets, of course, seldom had that kind of clout.
Or any clout at all.
He was glad that Henna Mickiewicz didn't seem to realize this.
Joe's office: Jim, Jack, Joan — but no Jeff.
Two new guys were there.
Luke was introduced to the two new guys.
Ron said he spoke for Don when he told Luke that he was a great admirer of his material.
Huddled over the coffee balloon with Joe, Luke asked after Jeff, and Joe said, ‘Jeff's off the poem’, and Luke just nodded.
They settled in their low armchairs.
Luke said, ‘What's A Welshman to Any Tourist’ doing?’
Don said, ‘It's doing good but not great.’
Ron said, ‘It won't do what ‘The Gap in the Hedge’ did.’
Jim said, ‘What did ‘Hedge’ do?’
They talked about what ‘Hedge’ did.
Then Joe said, ‘Okay.
We're going with the sonnet.
Now.
Don has a problem with the octet's first quatrain, Ron has a problem with the second quatrain, Jack and Jim have a problem with the first quatrain of the sestet, and I think we all have a problem withe final couplet.’
ALISTAIR PRESENTED himself at the offices of the TLM in an unblinking trance of punctuality.
He had been in the area for hours, and had spent about fifteen quid on teas and coffees.
There wasn't much welcome to overstay in the various snack parlours where he lingered (and where he moreover imagined himself unfavourably recollected from his previous TLM vigils, holding with both hands the creaky Styrofoam container, and watching the light pour past the office windows.
As Big Ben struck two little Alistair mounted the stairs.
Would have deemed common decency .
Both florid and superficial.
Got you bang to rights .
He took a breath so deep that he almost fell over backwards — and knocked…
An elderly office boy wordlessly showed him into a narrow, bumf-heaped office that contained, with difficulty, seven people.
At first Alistair took them for other screenplay writers and wedged himself behind the door, at the back of the queue.
But they didn't look like screenplay writers.
Not much was said of over the next four hours, and the identities of Sixsmith's supplicants emerged only partially and piecemeal.
One or two, like his solicitor and his second wife's psychiatrist, took their leave after no more than 90 minutes.
Others, like the VAT man and the probation officer, stayed almost as long as Alistair.
But by 6.45 he was alone.
He approached the impossible haystack of Sixsmith's desk.
Very hurriedly he started searching through the unopened mail.
It was in Alistair's mind that he might locate and intercept his own letter.
But all the envelopes, of which there were a great many, proved to be brown, windowed and registered.
Turning to leave he saw a jiffy-bag of formidable bulk addressed to himself in Sixsmith's tremulous hand.
There seemed no reason not to take it.
The old office boy, Alistair soon saw, was curled up in a sleeping-bag under a work table in the outer room.
On the street he unseamed his package in a ferment of grew fluff.
It contained two of his screenplays,Valley of the Stratocasters and, confusingly,Decimator .
There was also a note:
I have been called away, as they say.
Personal ups and downs.
I shall ring you this week and we'll have — what?
Lunch?
Enclosed too was Alistair's aggrieved letter — unopened…
He moved on.
The traffic, human and mechanical, lurched past his quickened face.
He felt his eyes widen to an obvious and solving truth.
Hugh Sixsmith was a screenwriter.
He understood.
AFTER AN INCONCLUSIVE day spent discussing the caesura of ‘Sonnet’ 's opening line, Luke and his colleagues went for cocktails at Strabismus.
They were given the big round table near the piano.
Jane said, ‘TCT are doing a sequel to ‘Tis’.’
Joan said, ‘Actually it's a prequel.’
‘Title’? said Joe.
‘Undecided.
At TCT they're calling it ‘Twas’.’
‘My son’, said Joe thoughtfully, after the waiter had delivered their drinks, ‘called me an asshole this morning.
For the first time.’
‘That's incredible,’ said Bo.
‘My son called me an asshole this morning.
For the first time.’
‘So?’ said Mo.
Joe said, ‘He's six years old for Christ's sake.’
Phil said, ‘My son called me an asshole when he was five.’
Bill said, ‘So did mine.
No.
He wasn't even five yet.
He was four.’
‘My son hasn't called me an asshole yet,’ said Jim.
‘How old is Sammy now?’ said Jean.
‘Nine.’
Joe and Phil and Bill looked at each other with some concern.
Joe said, ‘Nine?
I don't know.
I think I'd be a little worried about that.’
‘Bill said, ‘Have you — have you talked to anyone about it?
I mean,nine …’
Luke sipped his Bloody Mary.
Its hue and texture made him wonder whether he could risk blowing his nose without making yet another visit to the bathroom.
He hadn't called Suki for three days.
Things were getting compellingly out of hand with Henna Mickiewicz.
He hadn't actually promised her a part in the poem, not on paper.
Henna was great except you kept thinking she was going to suddenly sue you anyway.
Mo was saying that each child progresses at his own rate, and that later lulls regularly offset the apparent advances of their early years.
Bo said, ‘My son's three.
And he calls me an asshole all the time.’
Everybody looked suitably impressed.
TREES WERE IN LEAF and the rumps of the tourist buses were thick and fat in the traffic and all the farmers wanted fertilizer admixes rather than storehouse insulation when Sixsmith finally made his call.
In the interim, Alistair had convinced himself of the following: before returning his aggrieved letter, Sixsmith had steamed it open and then resealed it .
During this period, also, Alistair had grimly got engaged to Hazel.
But the call came.
He was pretty sure he had come to the right restaurant.
Except that it wasn't a restaurant, not quite.
The place took no bookings, and knew of no Mr Sixsmith, and was serving many midday breakfasts to swearing persons whose eyes bulged over mugs of flesh-coloured tea.
On the other hand, there was alcohol.
All kinds of people were drinking it.
Fine, thought Alistair.
Fine.
What better place, really, for a couple of screenplay writers to…?
‘Alistair?’
Confidently Sixsmith bent his long body into the booth.
As he settled, he looked well pleased with the manoeuvre.
He contemplated Alistair with peculiar neutrality, but there was then something boyish, something consciously remiss, in the fact he turned to the waiter.
As Sixsmith ordered a gin and tonic, and as he amusingly expatiated on his weakness for prawn cocktails, Alistair found himself wryly but powerfully drawn to this man — to this tousled screenplay writer with his dreamy gaze, the curious elisions of his somewhat slurred voice, and the great dents and bone-shadow of his face, all the faulty fontanelles of vocational care.
He knew how old Sixsmith was.
But maybe time moved strangely for screenplay writers, whose flames burned so bright…
‘And as for my fellow artisan in the scrivener's trade: Alistair.
What will you have?
At once Sixsmith showed himself to be a person of some candour.
Or it might have been that he saw, in the younger screenplay writer, someone before whom all false reticence could be cast aside.
Sixsmith's estranged second wife, it emerged, herself the daughter of two alcoholics, was an alcoholic.
Her current lover (ah, how these lovers came and went!), was an alcoholic.
To complicate matters, Sixsmith explained as he rattled his glass at the waiter, his daughter, the product of his first marriage, was an alcoholic.
How did Sixsmith keep going?
Despite his years, he had, thank God, found love, in the arms of a woman young enough (and, by the sound of it, alcoholic enough) to be his daughter.
Their prawn cocktails arrived, together with a carafe of hearty red wine.
Sixsmith lit a cigarette and held up his palm towards Alistair for the duration of a coughing fit that turned every head in the room.
Then for a moment, understandably disorientated, he stared at Alistair as if uncertain of his intentions, or even his identity.
But their bond quickly re-established itself.
Soon they were talking away like hardened equals — of Trumbo, or Chayevsky, of Towne, of Eszterhas.
Around 2.30, when, after several attempts, the waiter succeeded in removing Sixsmith's untouched prawn cocktail, and now prepared to serve them their braised chop with a third carafe, the two men were arguing loudly about early Puzo.
JOE YAWNED AND shrugged and said languidly, ‘You know something?
I was never that crazy about the Petrarchan rhyme scheme anyway.’
Jan said, ‘Composed at — Castle’ is ABBA ABBA.’
Jen said, ‘So was ‘Tis’.
Right up until the final polish.’
Jon said, ‘Here's some news.
They say ‘Composed at — Castle’ is in turnaround.’
‘You're not serious,’ said Bo.
‘It's released this month.
I heard they were getting great preview reaction.’
Joe looked doubtful.
‘'TIS’ has made the suits kind of antsy about sonnets.
They figure lightning can't strike twice.’
‘ABBA ABBA,’ said Bo with distaste.
‘Or,’ said Joe, ‘or …or — we go unrhymed.’
‘Un rhymed?’ said Phil.
‘We go blank,’ said Joe.
There was a silence.
Bill looked at Gil, who looked at Will.
‘What do you think, Luke?’ said Jim.
‘You're the poet.’
Luke had never felt very protective about ‘Sonnet’.
Even its original version he had regarded as no more that a bargaining chip.
Nowadays he rewrote ‘Sonnet’ every night at the Pinnacle Trumont before Henna arrived and they called room service.
‘Blank,’ said Luke.
‘Blank.
I don't know, Joe.
I could ABAB ABAB or even ABAB CDCD.
Christ, I'd go AABB if I didn't think it'd tank the final couplet.
But blank.
I never thought I'd go blank .’
‘Well it needs something, said Joe.
‘Maybe it's the pentameter,’ said Luke.
‘Maybe it's the iamb.
Hey, here's one from left field.
How about syllabics?’
AT 5.45 HUGH SIXSMITH ordered a gin and tonic and said, ‘We've talked.
We've broken bread.
Wine.
Truth.
Screenplay writing.
I want to talk about your work, Alistair.
Yes, I do.
I want to talk about Offensive from Quasar 13.’
Alistair blushed.
‘It's not often that…
But one always knows.
That sense of pregnant arrest.
Of felt life in its full…
Thank you, Alistair.
Thank you.
I have to say that it rather reminded me of own early work.’
Alistair nodded.
‘Before…before the blood slowed.
Or ‘before urgency became encrusted in facility and technique’, to quote a verdict from a recent pen.’
Alistair shook his head.
Having talked for quite some time about his own maturation as a screenplay writer, Sixsmith said, ‘Now.
Just tell me to shut up any time you like.
And I'm going to print it anyway.
But I want to make only tiny suggestion about Offensive from Quasar 13 .’
Alistair waved a hand in the air.
‘Now,’ said Sixsmith.
He broke off and ordered a prawn cocktail.
The waiter looked at him defeatedly.
‘Now,’ said Sixsmith.
‘When  Brad escapes from the Nebulan experiment lab and sets off with Cord and Tara to immobilize the directed-energy scythe on the Xerxian attack ship — where's Chelsi?’
Alistair frowned.
‘Where's Chelsi?
She's still in the lab with the Nebulans.
On the point of being injected with a Phobian viper venom, moreover.
What of the happy ending?
What of Brad's heroic centrality?
What of his avowed love for Chelsi?
Or am I just being a bore?’
THE SECRETARY, Victoria, stuck her head into the room and said, ‘He's coming down.’
Luke listened to the sound of 23 pairs of legs uncrossing and recrossing.
Meanwhile he readied himself for a sixteen-tooth smile.
He glanced at Joe, who said, ‘He's fine.
He's just coming down to say hi.’
And down he came: Jake Endo, exquisitely westernized and gorgeously tricked out and perhaps 35.
Of the luxury items that pargeted his slender form, none was as breathtaking as his hair, with its layers of pampered light.
Jake Endo shook Luke's hand and said, ‘It's a great pleasure to meet you.
I haven't read the basic material on the poem but I'm familiar with the background.’
Luke surmised that Jake Endo had had his voice fixed.
He could do the bits of the words that Japanese people were supposed to find difficult.
‘I understand it's a love poem,’ he continued.
‘Addressed to your girlfriend.
Is she here with you in LA?’
‘No.
She's in London.’
Luke found  he was staring at Jake Endo's sandals, wondering how much they could possibly have cost.
A silence began its crescendo.
This silence had long been intolerable when Jim broke it, saying to Jake Endo, ‘Uh, how did ‘Lines Left Upon a Seat in a Yew-Tree, Which Stands Near the Lake of Easthwaite, on a Desolate Part of the Shore, Commanding a Beautiful Prospect’ do?’
‘Lines’?’ said Jake Endo.
‘I was thinking about ‘Composed at — Castle’,’ said Jim weakly.
The silence began again.
As it neared its climax Joe was suddenly reminded of all this energy he was supposed to have.
He got to his feet saying, ‘Jake?
I guess we're nearing our tiredness peak.
You've caught us at kind of a low point.’
This was true.
All morning everyone had been speechless with depression about ‘Sonnet’.
‘We can't agree on the first line.
First line?
We can't see our way to the end of the first foot .’
Jake Endo was undismayed.
‘There always are these low points.
I'm sure you'll get there, with so much talent in the room.
Upstairs we're very confident.
We think it's going to be a big summer poem.’
‘No, we're very confident too,’ said Joe.
‘There's a lot of belief here.
A lot of belief.
We're behind ‘Sonnet’ all the way.’
‘Sonnet’?’ said Jake Endo.
‘Yeah, sonnet.
‘Sonnet’.’
‘Sonnet’?’ said Jake Endo.
‘It's a sonnet.
It's called ‘Sonnet’.
‘Sonnet’.’
In waves the West fell away from Jake Endo's face.
After a few seconds he looked like a Dark Age warlord in mid campaign, in mid mop-up, on mired mountaintop, taking a glazed breather before moving on to the women and children.
‘Nobody told me,’ he said as he went towards the telephone, ‘about any sonnet .’
THE PLACE WAS CLOSING.
It's tea trade and its after-office trade had come and gone.
Outside, the streets glimmered morbidly.
Members of the staff were donning macks and overcoats.
An important light went out.
A fridge door slammed.
‘Hardly the most resounding felicity, is it?’ said Sixsmith.
Absent or available for over an hour, the gift of speech had been restored to Alistair — speech, that prince of all the faculties.
‘Or what if,’ he said, ‘what if — Chelsi just leaves the experiment lab earlier?’
‘Not hugely dramatic.’
‘Or what is she never went there in the first place?’
‘Again, slightly unrivetting.’
‘Or what if Chelsi gets killed by Nebulan guards when she escapes with Brad?’
‘One might find that a trifle gratuitous,’ said Sixsmith.
He ordered a carafe of wine and inquired as to the whereabouts of his braised chop.
‘Or what if she just gets wounded.
During the escape.
In the leg.’
‘So long as one could avoid the wretched cliché: girl impeded, hero dangerously tarrying.
Also she's supernumerary to the raid on the Xerxian attack ship.
We really want her out of the way for that.’
Alistair said, ‘Then let's kill her.’
‘Very well.
Slight pall over the happy ending.
No. no.’
A waiter stood over them, sadly staring at the bill in its saucer.
‘All right,’ said Sixsmith.
‘Chelsi gets wounded.
Quite badly.
In the arm.
Now what does Brad do with her?’
‘…
Drops her off at the hospital.’
‘Mm.
Rather hollow modulation.’
‘Or drops her off at the beach house.’
‘Not markedly less hollow.’
The waiter was joined by another waiter, equally stoic; their faces were grained by evening shadow.
Now Sixsmith was gently frisking himself with a deepening frown.
‘What if,’ said Alistair, ‘what if there's somebody passing who can take her to the hospital?’
‘Good.
A police patrol car, perhaps.
Something like: ‘That's all right, sir.
We'll take her to the hospital.’’
‘You just leave her with us.’’
‘Take good care of her.’’
‘That young lady means an awful lot to me.’’
‘Possibly,’ said Sixsmith, who was half standing with one hand awkwardly dipped into his inside pocket.
‘Or what if,’ said Alistair, ‘— or what if Brad just gives her directions to the hospital?’
BACK IN LONDON the next day Luke met with Mike to straighten this shit out.
Actually it looked okay.
Mike called Mal at Monad, who had a thing about Tim at TCT.
As a potential finesse on Mal, Mike also called Bob at Binary with a view to repossessing the option on ‘Sonnet’ plus development money at rolling compound — and redeveloping it somewhere else entirely, say at Red Giant, where Rodge was  known to be very interested.
‘They'll want you to go out there,’ said Mike.
‘To kick it around.’
‘I can't believe Joe,’ said Luke.
‘I can't believe I knocked myself out for that flake.’
‘Happens.
Joe forgot about Jake Endo and sonnets.
Endo's first big poem was a sonnet.
Before your time.
‘Bright Star!— Would I Were Steadfast as Thou Art’.
It opened for like one day.
It practically bankrupted Japan.’
‘I feel used, Mike.
My sense of trust.
I've got to get wised up around here.’
‘A lot will depend on how ‘Composed at — Castle’ does and what the feeling is on the ‘Tis’prequel.’
‘I'm going to go away with Suki for a while.
Do you know anywhere where there aren't any shops?
Jesus, I need a holiday.
Mike, this is all bullshit.
You know what I really want to do, don't you?’
‘Of course I do.’
Luke looked at Mike until he said,
‘You want to direct.’
WHEN ALISTAIR HAD convalesced from the lunch he revised Offensive from Quasar 13 in rough accordance with Sixsmith's suggestions.
He solved the Chelsi problem by having her noisily eaten by a Stygian panther in the lab menagerie.
The charge of gratuitousness was, in Alistair's view, safely anticipated by Brad's valediction to her remains, in which sanguinary revenge on the Nebulans was both prefigured and legitimized.
He also took out the bit where Brad declared his love for Chelsi, and put in a bit where Brad declared his love for Tara.
He sent in the new pages, which, three months later, Sixsmith acknowledged and applauded in a hand quite incompatible with that of his earlier communications.
Nor did he reimburse Alistair for the lunch, though he did explain that his wallet had been emptied that morning — by which alcoholic, Sixsmith never established.
Alistair kept the bill, as a memento.
This startling document showed that during the course of the meal Sixsmith had smoked, or at any rate bought, nearly a carton of cigarettes.
Three months later he sent a proof of Offensive from Q Quasar 13 .
Three months after that, the screenplay appeared in the TLM .
Three months after that, Alistair received a cheque for £12.50, which bounced.
Curiously, although the proof had incorporated Alistair's corrections, the published version revered to the typescript, in which Brad escaped from the Nebulan lab seemingly without concern for a Chelsi last glimpsed on an operating table with a syringe full of Phobian viper venom being eased into her neck…
Later that month Alistair went along to a reading at the Screenplay Society in Earl's Court.
There he got talking to a gaunt girl in an ash-stained black smock who claimed to have read his screenplay and who, over glasses of red wine, and later in the terrible pub, told him he was a weakling and a hypocrite with no notion of the ways of men and women.
Alistair had not been a published screenplay writer long enough to respond to, or even recognize, this graphic proposition (though he did keep the telephone number she threw at his feet).
It is anyway doubtful whether he would have dared to take things further.
He was marrying Hazel the following weekend.
In the new year he sent Sixsmith a series — one might almost say a sequence — of screenplays on group-jeopardy themes.
His follow-up letter in the summer was answered by a brief note that stated that Sixsmith was no longer employed by the TLM .
Alistair telephoned — He then discussed the matter with Hazel and decided to take the next day off work.
It was a September morning.
The hospice in Cricklewood was of recent design and construction; from the road it resembled a clutch of igloos against the sheenless tundra of the sky.
When he asked for Hugh Sixsmith at the desk, two men in suits climbed quickly from their chairs.
One was a writ-server.
One was a cost-adjustor.
Alistair waved away their complex requests.
The warm room contained clogged regretful murmurs, and defiance in the form of bottles and paper cups and cigarette smoke, and the many peeping eyes of female grief.
A young woman faced him proudly.
Alistair started explaining who he was, a young screenplay writer come to…
On the bed in the corner the spavined figure of Sixsmith was gawkily arranged.
Alistair moved towards it.
At first he was sure that the eyes were gone, like holes out of pumpkin or blood orange.
But then the faint brows began to lift; and Alistair thought  he saw the light of recognition.
As the tears began he felt the shiver of approval, of consensus, on his back.
He took the old screenplay writer's hand and said, ‘Goodbye.
And thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.’
OPENING IN 437 THEATRES, the Binary sonnet ‘Composed at — Castle’ did seventeen million in its first weekend.
At this time Luke was living in a two-bedroom apartment on Yokum Drive.
Suki was with him.
He hoped it wouldn't take her too long to find out about Henna Mickiewicz.
When the smoke cleared he would switch to the more mature Anita, who produced.
He had taken his sonnet to Rodge at Red Giant and turned it into an ode.
When that didn't work out he went to Mal at Monad where they'd gone for the villanelle.
The villanelle had become a triolet briefly, with Tim at TCT, before Bob at Binary had him rethink it as a rondeau.
When the rondeau didn't take, Luke lyricized it and got Mike to send it to Joe.
Everyone, including Jake Endo, thought that now was surely was the time to turn it back into a sonnet.
Luke had dinner at Rales with Joe and Mike.
‘I always thought of ‘Sonnet’ as an art poem,’said Joe.
‘But things are so not now I've started thinking more commercially.’
Mike said, ‘TCT are doing a sequel and a prequel to ‘Tis’ and bringing them out at the same time.’
‘A sequel?’ said Joe.
‘Yeah.
They're calling it ‘'Twill’.’
Mike was a little fucked up.
So was Joe.
Luke was a little fucked up too.
They'd done some lines at the office.
Then drinks here at the bar.
They'd meant to get a little fucked up.
It was okay.
It was good, once in a while, to get a little fucked up.
The thing was not to get fucked up too often.
The thing was not to get fucked up to excess.
‘I mean it, Luke,’ said Joe.
He glittered potently.
‘I think ‘Sonnet’ could be as big as ‘—‘.’
‘You think?’ said Luke.
‘I mean it.
I think ‘Sonnet’ could be another ‘—‘.’
‘—‘?’
‘—‘.’
Luke thought for a moment, taking this in. ‘—’…’ he repeated wonderingly.
Art Nouvel
Jean Nouvel is set to follow in the footsteps of Philippe Starck and become the new design superstar by Fay Sweet
Le maître in his Paris studio, right, and, inset left, work in progress La Tour Sans Fins
NEMAUSUS HOUSING PROJECT, 1985–87 In the mid-Eighties Nouvel produced the Nemausus experimental public housing scheme at Nimes.
Jacques Tati should have made a film here.
It resembles a couple of great beached iron ships lying side by side.
Each apartment opens out onto terrace/balconies-cum-decks with jaunty mesh balustrading.
The Nemausus project was offered to Nouvel as a consolation prize after he lost a competition to Norman Foster
BEFORE THE YEAR is out Paris should see the first sprouting of architect Jean Nouvel's Tour Sans Fins.
When it is complete, the slender glass and steel tube, standing well over a quarter of a mile high and with a base diameter of only 43 metres, will soar above and keep watch over the garden of fin de siècle delights at La Défense.
The great architectural exclamation mark of the ‘endless tower’— good 100 metres taller than the Eiffel Tower — comes from the man described by British architectural showman Piers Gough as ‘the most worshipped architect in France’.
Nouvel has not yet sunk foundations into British soil, but his work on his home turf in France has produced a crop of prize-winning designs and an endless stream of commissions.
He has also recently found an eager audience in Germany, where major projects are planned in Cologne, Berlin and Frankfurt.
Now in his late forties, Nouvel originally wanted to be a painter.
However, according to esteemed French critic Olivier Boissière, ‘common sense made him turn to architecture’.
Nowadays, Nouvel says, he feels more like a filmmaker, commenting that, ‘I work like a movie director behind the camera’.
One of his closest friends is the director Wim Wenders.
The link in all three areas of creativity is an understanding and appreciation of the beauty and power of light.
In each of Nouvel's buildings his handling of light is superb.
After a dazzling spell at the Beaux Arts school in Paris, Nouvel got his first few jobs building private houses.
The severe, concrete Delbigot   House (1968–73) sent great wedges of light crashing through the chunky, angular spaces.
Since then, Nouvel's methods of expression have gradually become more refined and his artistry more graceful.
INSTITUT DU MONDE ARABE, 1987 Nouvel's greatest triumph to date was also the first of President Mitterrand's ‘Grands Projets’ and subsequently became the first building in a Western country to receive an Aga Khan Award.
The building sits on a awkward site on the left bank of the Seine.
It describes a sort of U-shape with one ‘arm’ smartly clipped round like a scythe blade and is famed for its south wall of light-sensitive iris diaphragms, which echo the Muslim mashrabiya (fretwork) wall.
‘Light should be the most important material in our project,’ proclaimed the architect.
One critic described the effect as ‘a curtain in constant movement’.
HOTEL SAINT JAMES, 1989 When Nouvelle Cuisine chef Jean-Marie Amat invited Jean Nouvel to build an extension to his rural hotel on a ridge overlooking a valley near Bordeaux, Nouvel hatched the idea of constructing several agricultural-style buildings…in rusting metal.
The finished ‘sheds’ come completely with moving rusty louvre panels, just like those of the nearby tobacco-drying sheds.
The panels cast a dreamy light in the rooms — which are furnished in the most sparse manner with stone floors, white beds and the odd piece of exquisite antique glass.
There was a period of experimentation with materials.
Monumental slabs and cubes of brick in the Dick House (1978), Citroën van-style corrugated panelling for the Val Notre Dame Medical Clinic (1978–80) and modular factory-produced beams and coloured panels for the Collège Anne Franck (1978–80).
In complete contrast to the Nemausus project (see previous page), Nouvel teamed up with Philip Starck (Nouvel frequently invites other artists and designers to work on projects) to produce the sleekest of designs in 1986 for the Tokyo Opera House.
The work was unplaced, but the concept was electrifying — a smooth, lacquered black box with an ominous bulge at one end, looking for all the world as if something inside wanted to escape.
Perhaps this was too sinister for the judges' tastes?
It is interesting, however, to look at his very recent designs for the chair called Elémentaire, manufactured by Ligne Roset, which bears more than a passing resemblance to the spooky opera house.
Nouvel's work is difficult to categorize.
However, nor  surprisingly , critics have drawn comparisons between the Frenchman and Sir Norman Foster and have attempted to attach to Nouvel the tag of High Tech architect.
It is a tag he disowns.
Nouvel admits to a strong admiration for Foster's work — which is returned — but, explains Nouvel, ‘I use technology not for performance, but for sensitivity, for emotional effect.’
An exhibition of Jean Nouvel works will be staged at the ICA in December .
When Iain Met Tommy
The Anatomy of a Suburban Murder by David James Smith
Iain went to boarding school.
Tommy went to Borstal.
Iain and Tommy drank together on the back streets of Pinner.
Then they stole together.
And then one day they killed together…
THE PATHOLOGIST WAS already working on the post-mortem.
In life, Christopher Jabelman had been an urbane, well-educated man who was drinking his way to oblivion.
In death, the pathologist would report, he resembled somebody who had been hit full-on by a heavy lorry.
The police had found his body the previous afternoon, just before lunch.
after an anonymous telephone call that had been passed on from Scotland Yard.
He was lying sandwiched between two single mattresses in the bedroom of his first-floor flat on the Hazeldene Drive estate.
He had been there at least a week, a stain of blood spreading out from his face across the bottom mattress, his shattered body preserved by the freezing February weather.
It was still bloody cold and getting colder.
The three officers peered down the hill into the darkness of Wiltshire Lane and wished they could get in there and get it over with.
Anyone who said they liked observations must have a pretty high threshold of boredom.
And what's the use of being on observation when you can't observe anything?
Not even with binoculars.
The anonymous call had offered up two names for the Jabelman murder: Iain MacPherson and Tommy somebody.
Tommy was easy.
Tommy cook had been plaguing Pinner for months.
Thieving, fighting, hassling the locals.
Petty stuff, really, though he was obviously trouble.
Iain they didn't know.
He was just a boy.
But wherever Tommy went, Iain seemed to follow.
Christopher Jabelman's body is taken away for examination, above.
Iain and Tommy used to drink with Christopher.
Tommy, inset left, killed him when they thought he owned them £25.
Left: Lyneham Walk led to another murder scene
Crime Squad officers had quickly been on to the address in Wiltshire Lane.
It was ground-floor maisonette, part of a small council estate on the outer reaches of Eastcote, barely a mile from Pinner.
There were fields opposite and an alleyway running down the side to Lyneham Walk.
There was car park wound the back by the garages, facing another row of maisonettes.
It was a difficult place to watch because of the fields.
They had someone out front in an old van, someone round the back by the car park, and PC Stephen Robinson up the hill with two other officers, Adrian Grater and Clive Strachan.
They'd cruised past when they arrived that afternoon, just after four o'clock, and seen Tommy standing on the doorstep.
But nobody was too sure what Iain looked like.
They couldn't be certain he was inside.
Finally, at five past eight, the message comes over the radio from the van: ‘They're out.’
It's a positive identification of both men, as they head down Lyneham Walk, and are watched by the officer in the car park, all the way into one of the maisonettes.
Eleven minutes later, Iain is on his way back.
He's carrying something — a hi-fi, an Alba MCH53 dual-cassette stereo system.
Tommy  lingers at Lyneham Walk.
Then he reappears, two minutes behind Iain.
By twenty past eight, they're both together again inside Wiltshire Lane.
They've been out for fifteen minutes.
The police have heard nothing.
Finally, the decision is made to move in.
They rendezvous in the car park and DI Eric Keene apportions the roles: ‘Robin, you take the door down; Sean, you take the back; you two arrest Cook; you take MacPherson; Stephen, you do the exhibits.’
DC Robin Lane leads them up the alleyway to the front door.
Robinson pulls up behind him as Lane lifts his boot and crashes it against the door, in the middle, right by the lock.
Once, twice, smash, in it goes on the third kick.
Then Robinson's in the door.
He's not supposed to be first, he's only supposed to be the exhibits man, but suddenly he's there, running down the hallway.
Behind him someone's shouting, ‘Police, Police’.
In front of him, a figure looms in the doorway of the lounge.
It's Tommy.
Tommy raising his right arm.
A shining chrome gun in his hand.
Lane bellows, ‘Put that gun down, Tommy!’
Jesus Christ, thinks Robinson.
He's got nowhere to go but forward.
It's only three or four paces, but in that moment he sees Tommy tense his arm at full stretch and turn his head away.
The gun is pointed at directly at his chest.
Now he's reached Tommy.
He lunges at his right hand and the gun falls to the floor.
Thank God.
It was only a toy.
Tommy is pressed face up against the wall, arms handcuffed behind his back.
An officer asks, ‘Who wants this?’
‘Leave it there, it's only an imitation,’ says Robinson.
‘Tommy Cook, I'm arresting you for the murder of Christopher Jabelman…‘
‘Yeah, I know.’
Iain's sitting quietly in an armchair in the lounge.
‘Iain MacPherson, I'm arresting you for the…‘
‘I've been waiting for this,’ says Iain.
‘I knew I shouldn't have stayed here.’
Three minutes, maybe less, and it's all over.
Tommy's being taken out to the car.
Everything's under control.
Clive Strachan's driving and Tommy is squashed in the back between Grater and Robinson.
He's shaking as he speaks.
‘I've been fucking stupid here, I'm going to get life.
Can you get me fifteen years for manslaughter?’
‘Tommy, you've just been cautioned for the murder of…‘
‘I did the cunt in.
I stoved his head in with a crowbar.’
‘Where's the crowbar?’
‘I threw it over there.’
Tommy gestures out across the fields.
‘Why did you kill Christopher?’
‘He owed me and Iain £25.
We were waiting on his giro and it didn't come.2
The Maestro's pulling away when the night comes alive with a fresh wave of police cars and ambulances.
Flashing lights, officers everywhere in protective clothing.
All hell has broken loose.
Robinson recognizes a friend from Uxbridge Police Station.
‘What's going on?’ he asks.
The friend indicates back to Lyneham Walk.
‘There's a man in there with a bullet hole in him.
There's a woman with a hole in her throat.’
‘That was me,’ Tommy says suddenly.
‘I shot the cunts.’
‘Who have you shot, Tommy?’
Robinson asks.
‘Those two cunts around the corner.
I shot the bitch in the throat because she screamed.
I shot him in the arm.’
Robinson feels sick in his stomach.
The gun was real after all.
He replays the scene in his head.
The tensing of the arm, the flinch of Tommy's head as he turned away.
Had he tried to shoot?
Robinson prefers to think not.
‘Tommy Cook, your are being arrested for the attempted murders of…‘
‘It's a good old fucking gun, that one,’ says Tommy.
It was a King Cobra .357 Magnum.
Tommy and Iain had been out for fifteen minutes.
They police had heard nothing.
Not a single shot.
Tommy's going quiet now.
He bows his head.
‘Someone put their arms around me for fuck's sake.’
Robinson's left arm reaches out around Tommy's shoulders.
As Robinson hugs, Tommy begins sobbing.
‘I want to seem my babies.
I want to see my babies.’
It's February 13, 1991.
Day 28 of the war in the Gulf.
Day 10 of Tommy and Iain's terrible adventure in Pinner.
The last day.
SEVEN STOPS NORTH-WEST of Baker Street on the Metropolitan Line, Pinner is the quintessence of a certain kind of Englishness, an embattled outpost of suburbia surrounded on all sides by the encroaching urban sprawl.
What was once the tide of progress and aspiration embodied in John Betjeman's twee Metro-land verses has become the sediment of middle-aged, middle-class insularity.
Not so much dormitory as dormant.
Nail-scissored lawns; hand-waxed cars and twitching net curtains in brilliant white.
Pinner is very white.
A monoculture in thrall to its own respectability.
It is only at Pinner Green that the warts begin to show.
Here, at the top of Bridge Street, on the road to Rickmansworth, is where respectable Pinner finds itself in rude confrontation with the real world.
There isn't much to Pinner Green, just a parade of shops — a couple of off-licences. a garage — flanked by two pubs, The Bell and The Starling.
But behind the bland frontages are the small estates such as Mill Farm Close and Hazeldene Drive where Pinner hides its share of the dispossessed and the fallen: some making the most of the little they have, others burdened by the weight of broken families, unemployment, problems with drink and drugs, and plain old-fashioned poverty.
The sons of Pinner, the true sons, are groomed in the local prep schools and dispatched  to Merchant Taylors in Northwood for their private education.
Iain MacPherson was spared this when he failed the common entrance examination for Merchant Taylors.
It was disappointing for the family.
Later, his parents would look back and see this moment as an early warning of the nightmare that was to consume them.
Ann and Peter MacPherson had worked hard to enhance their lives and create opportunities for their children.
Peter, born into a working-class family in Edinburgh, had barely known his mother, who died when he was still a baby.
Raised in London by his grandparents, he had studied hard to become an oil industry engineer.
In the late Seventies, the couple had bought a Tudor farmhouse in Pinner which they extended and refurbished to create a luxurious five-bedroomed house.
Christopher Jabelman, above left, was haunted by anxiety and depression, which he attempted to quell with sweet sherry.
His front door, above, was always open
Iain was their youngest child, and only boy.
He had two older sisters, Karen and Jacqueline.
It would be trite, but not entirely inaccurate to say that they were, respectively, the good sister and the bad sister.
Karen, six years older than Iain, had held an even keel through adolescence.
She had studied, worked, travelled some and blossomed into an attractive, intelligent, perhaps slightly too conventional, young woman.
Jacqueline, the eldest, was Iain's senior by eight years.
When she was thirteen years old she was already showing signs of disruptive, disturbed behaviour.
And it just got worse and worse.
Jacqueline would later say she had been an alcoholic since she was fourteen.
At the very least, she started drinking then.
Drinking, smoking, doing mild drugs.
She was already sexually active.
There were spells in hospital, attempts at treatment.
It was beyond Peter and Ann's comprehension and best efforts.
Their daughter was aggressive, violent, accusing.
Her parents, she felt, were snobs.
They had never loved her.
Ann thought her daughter would one day emerge from all this.
Marry, perhaps, and settle down.
Jacqueline married when she was 21.
Billy Norfolk was a nice enough bloke, but it wasn't much of a marriage.
He went back to his parents' council house on the wedding night.
Jacqueline was already pregnant, and her first child, was born soon after, defying medical concerns about her robustness for giving birth.
Jacqueline was evidently tougher than she looked: a slight, waifish creature with spiky hair and swollen, arthritic knuckles.
Peter and Ann despaired of Jacqueline, but feared her destructive urges.
Karen was safe, immune to her sister's advances.
Iain, like any impressionable adolescent, was always going to find the bad sister more exciting.
When he failed to get in to Merchant Taylors, Iain was sent off to boarding school in Bishop's Stortford.
It was an expensive, well-regarded establishment, buried in the Home Counties.
Iain called it The Prison, and he began breaking out at weekends, finding his way back to Pinner, and Jacqueline's flat.
The family believes that Jacqueline used to pave the way for Iain's escapes by writing to the school, explaining that he was needed at home.
It is also said that Jacqueline had begun writing to a young Glaswegian who really was in prison.
She suggested he write to her brother, Iain, at Bishops Stortford College.
It was probably in this way that Iain first met Tommy Cook.
In 1986, when he was fifteen, Iain was caught smoking and was expelled.
He went back to Pinner and saw out his last year of education at a local comprehensive.
He left before sitting any exams and started work as a trainee butcher at Pinner Green.
Living back at home, Iain engaged in the time-honoured frictions between parents and their teenage offspring.
His mother nagged him.
Iain was quiet —‘deep, sensitive’, people would say — invariably gentle, never aggressive.
He spent more time hanging out at Jacqueline's flat.
She had tapped into the rich vein of local ‘undesirables’, as her parents would call them.
There were liberal quantities of drink and dope, and Iain enjoyed his share.
When his parents tackled him Iain would say he was in control.
‘It's alright.
I know what I'm doing.’
Peter MacPherson was sceptical.
He feared the direction his son's life was taking.
He sought help from the police and other agencies.
But there seemed to be nothing anybody could do.
Jacqueline married again in 1988.
Her new husband, Andrew Leach, made some attempt to wean her from alcohol.
But within a year Tommy Cook was appearing on the doorstep first thing in the morning with a bottle of vodka.
When Leach discovered Jacqueline was sleeping with Tommy he moved back to his mother's house in Slough, and at Easter, 1989, Tommy moved into Jacqueline's flat.
TOMMY WAS NOT TALL, but he was stocky.
He was given to drunken displays of macho prowess.
Piercing his nipple with a nail was a favourite.
He was tattooed, scarred and had cold, piercing eyes.
‘Don't-mess-with-me eyes,’ somebody called them.
He had blackened, gapped teeth and a wild head of dark, curly hair.
He had eighteen previous convictions when he was finally arrested for murder, including assault and bodily harm, and three charges pending.
He had been born in Coatbridge, Glasgow in 1962 and been inside periodically from the age of seventeen.
In a kind of parody of Peter MacPherson's southwards journey.
Tommy had made his way from Glasgow to London at a young age, and ended up in Borstal.
He had been drifting back and forth between the two ever since.
Jacqueline and Tommy lived together and drank and fought.
Jacqueline became pregnant, her flat was repossessed, she sought refuge from Tommy's violence.
She also introduced Iain to Karen Farnan who was living in Wiltshire Lane.
Karen was twelve years older than Iain.
Her husband was serving a life sentence for murder.
Iain lived with Karen for a while.
They drank heavily.
By January 1991, Iain's parents were hoping this chapter of his life was closed.
He had split up with Karen and moved home, vowing to organize his life, and start a business doing gardening and roofing work.
He was nineteen years old.
Jacqueline had given birth to Tommy's daughter and moved in with a man called Steve Branch, who was living on Mill Farm Close.
Tommy was in prison in Scotland.
But only for 60 days.
It was Peter MacPherson who answered the phone to Tommy.
He as out of prison, down  from Glasgow looking for Iain.
It was no use pretending Iain wasn't there.
Tommy was back with a vengeance.
There was a new intensity to his drinking and his drunken anger.
ONE DAY, TOMMY'S round at Hazeldene Drive, trying to get into Ann Nalson's second-floor flat.
He tears down the hardboard panel next to the front door and clambers in, with Iain behind him.
Ann's boyfriend hits Tommy around the head with a bamboo cane spiked with nails.
There's a rare old ruck before the police arrive.
The walls are splashed with blood, Ann's pot plants strewn everywhere.
Ann Nalson has known Iain for years.
Seen him sitting in his spot on the bench at Pinner Green shops.
Smoked his dope.
But Tommy is a whole new experience.
Now her boyfriend vanishes, and Tommy and Iain just kind of move in, take over, rearrange the furniture, and sit in her front room drinking litre bottles of Old English Cider.
Ann if over her heroin addiction and working on her compulsion to go shoplifting.
She's in her early forties, she doesn't drink and, frankly, could do with a bit of peace and quiet.
Instead, she's got Tommy and Iain dancing around her flat to UB40 at full volume, heavy on the bass, psyching themselves up for another night of action on the by-ways of Pinner Green.
Ann senses Iain's reluctance.
She can see that Tommy is hyping him up.
The flats in Hazeldene Drive where Christopher Jabelman and, for a time, Iain and Tommy lived
THEY'RE FIGHTING in The Bell, fighting outside The Bell.
Tommy's demanding money from people in the streets.
A pound.
A fiver…
He's in The Wine Cellar Off-Licence, demanding cider on credit, and taking it anyway when he's refused.
He's on the loose with Ann's crowbar, which is long and heavy and has a split end with two pointed prongs.
Over at The Wine Cellar, Keith Meerza, the joint owner, has sat a customer down in the corner and is trying to persuade him to go to the police.
Christopher Jabelman often stops by for a chat during the day, but this is different.
He has bruises on his face and shows Keith the bruises on his legs.
Christopher shakes his head.
He doesn't want to go to the police.
‘It's my own fault.
If you mix with shit it will stick to you.’
A few days later Keith Meerza sees Christopher for the last time.
His face is badly beaten and he has two black eyes.
Christopher says he surprised intruders in his flat and fought them off.
He grins.
‘That's my story, and I'm keeping to it.’
Keith does not believe him.
A short while later Tommy and Iain are in the off-licence.
‘Have you seen Chris?’
‘Yes, he was here a little while ago.’
‘What did he tell you?’
Keith tells them what Christopher told him.
They grin too.
Christopher Jabelman was a familiar figure on the walkways of Hazeldene Drive.
Smartly dressed, wearing a hat, carrying a shopping bag laden with sherry.
He drank Old England Cream Sherry.
He liked the sweetness of the cream.
If it was unavailable he took the dry and mixed that with sugar to achieve the same effect.
He drank his sherry from long glasses, diluted with water.
Two, three, or four bottles a day, starting early and finishing late.
He was 59 years old and lonely, in search of company, preferably drinking company and conversation.
He was living in what would traditionally be described as reduced circumstances.
Jabelman was privately educated, and had nurtured his talent as a painter at art school.
But he was haunted from an early age by anxiety and depression, which he attempted to quell with sherry.
It had destroyed his promise and left him unable to sustain a relationship.
After his mother died in 1987, he had spent eight months in hospital, diagnosed as having Koirsakoff's Psychosis — short-term memory loss resulting from long-term alcohol abuse.
One his release he had moved to a flat in Hazeldene Drive.
The front door was painted purple, and it was always open.
He dressed from the Pinner charity shops, and was widely regarded as a gentleman, who wittered on rather too much about himself and could be a bit of a nuisance when he was drunk.
He could be volatile and aggressive too.
He lived on an invalidity pension which came as a weekly giro: £52.10.
Iain had met Chris on the bench at Pinner Green, two years previously.
They had shared a drink and a chat, and started a casual friendship, mostly revolving around drinking at Chris's flat.
People noticed Chris's appearance had deteriorated in recent weeks.
He was letting himself go.
It coincided with the arrival of Tommy.
Just as he had with Ann, Tommy had taken over at Christopher's.
He would have stayed there more regularly, but Chris's meagre income and drinking habits allowed little scope for the financing of electricity.
There was rarely any light and not much heat.
ON SUNDAY, February 3, United are playing Liverpool in a league fixture at Old Trafford.
It's The Match on ITV, and Tommy and Iain decide to watch it at Ann's.
They head for The Wine Cellar, where the co-owner refuses their request for credit.
Tommy is agitated and annoyed.
‘Come on, come on, the game's about to start.’
They leave with £11 of cider and sherry.
The football is disappointing.
A one-all draw and minimum drama.
Tommy and Iain head over to Christopher's.
They're back in the off-licence when it re-opens at seven o'clock, running up another £16.76 on credit, including the cost of a bottle of Old England Cream Sherry.
They send Christopher round to Ann's to borrow some butter and a set of batteries for the cassette player.
‘I don't know what's wrong with them today,’ says Christopher.
‘They're in a foul mood.’
Tommy and Iain have been supplying Christopher with drink.
Now they don't have any money, and they believe he owes them £25.
Christopher's £52.10 giro is due.
It should have been there by now and its non-appearance is a real wind-up.
Tommy and Iain do not know that the cheque will never come.
Christopher had not renewed his invalidity claim, and it has just expired.
By the early hours of Monday, February 4, they are all swimming in alcohol.
Then Iain starts to get wound up with Chris.
‘If your money doesn't come we'll do you in.’
‘You'll put me out of my misery then,’ says Chris.
‘Don't, Iain,’ says Tommy.
‘You'll end up winding me up.
We'll end up killing him.’
Iain knows Tommy will flip out, but killing?
It's not within his comprehension.
Iain's got his shoes and socks off.
He delivered a karate kick to Christopher's face.
Tommy's gone and stupid.
Turning up the music to drown the noise; old Sixties hits playing as he beats Christopher with his fists, and with the crowbar, which he liked to keep at Christopher's flat, dangling from a nail in a wall.
Christopher's on the floor.
‘Stop, or I'll collapse or something,’ he says.
Tommy's over him, leaning forward with his palms against the wall, jumping up and down on Christopher's chest, breaking every rib in his body.
You could hear them cracking.
Christopher's semi-conscious, mumbling — his rank and serial number from his days in National Service.
Ann's dragged out of bed at five in the morning, for the second time that night.
Earlier, Tommy and Iain had said they were fighting up the road.
Now they're back, Tommy splashed with blood, Iain with a bloodstain on the leg of his denims.
They haven't been fighting, they've been beating Chris up.
They're worried, and they want Ann to see if he's alright.
They shine the torch on Christopher's face.
His eyes are bulging, he is wheezing, making awful sounds.
Ann is afraid; she just wants to get away, there is nothing she can do.
Later, when Ann has gone, and Christopher is lying on his side in his bed, Tommy lifts his head.
Christopher gurgles.
‘It's the death rattle,’ says Tommy.
He had been there when his Auntie Margaret died and heard the same sound.
Pauline and Chris Russell were given a hi-fi for Christmas.
When they wouldn't let Tommy take it, he shot them
ON MONDAY MORNING, Tommy and Iain return to Ann's flat, and Tommy cracks up.
Iain just sits there, impassive, ashen, not speaking, barely moving.
Tommy's got his head in his hands, sobbing uncontrollably.
‘Chris is dead.
Chris is dead.
I knew this would happen.
My brothers told me I'd end up killing someone.
Poor bloke, never did any harm to anyone.
I didn't mean to do it.
i didn't mean to.’
Later, Tommy warns Ann not to go to the police, or tell anyone what has happened.
‘We've done one, another one won't make much difference.’
They describe to her in detail how Christopher died.
When they leave, Ann is violently sick.
In the evening, Iain goes home to his parents on Cuckoo Hill.
His father, and sister, Karen, are away.
He tells his mother he has cut himself to explain the blood on his jeans.
She puts them in the washing machine, on long soak, and removes every trace.
Ann Macpherson knows that her son is troubled, and he tells her that he is under pressure from Jacqueline.
She is making life difficult for Tommy and himself.
Meanwhile Jaqueline, accompanied by her children, and a friend, Caroline, has gone looking for a reunion with Tommy.
They meet up on Hazeldene Drive where Caroline overhears them arguing, and catches Tommy's pleading tones.
‘Jackie, you don't understand, I'm going down for the big one.’
Jacqueline will subsequently deny knowing that Christopher had been killed, though she and Tommy spent that Monday night alone at Christopher's flat.
They lie on a mattress in the living room and make love by candlelight.
Christopher's dead body is in the next room.
With Jacqueline and the two children now in tow, Tommy and Iain need somewhere else to stay.
They all decamp to Karen Farnan's in Wiltshire Lane.
Tommy and Iain journey back and forth between Wiltshire Lane and Hazeldene Drive, wondering what to do with Christopher's body, and hoping it will not be discovered.
They try to hide it in a wardrobe, but it will not fit.
So they cover it with a mattress, and disguise the mound with piles of old clothes.
They are still drinking, and Tommy is still excitable.
At Ann's he goes into a rant about the people of Pinner Green who are annoying him.
He'd like to get hold of a gun and blow them all away.
Ann thinks he wants to be top dog in Pinner.
It seems an odd ambition to her.
Tommy and Iain walk into Pinner Green Petrol Station.
Tommy picks up a batter charger and a booster cable, worth £21.99 and £34.99 respectively, and walks right out with them.
He is filmed by a video surveillance camera.
They take the things to Glynn Reynolds, a friend who buys stolen goods.
Tommy tells Glynn he needs a gun.
Glynn has a brother-in-law who belongs to a gun club.
That evening, Philip, an ex-Merchant Taylors boy who has known Iain since prep school, is at home in his room when his mum calls him to the phone.
Iain is on the line and wants Philip to meet him.
Philip doesn't want to go out, but there is an urgency in Iain's voice: ‘What's the worst crime you can imagine?’ he asks.
Philip and Iain meet after ten or fifteen minutes.
They walk together now, Philip listening, in horror and disbelief, as Iain unburdens himself of the story.
Iain saying he has been back to the body, and looked into Christopher's eyes.
He and Tommy, drunk, laughing as they offer the body a glass of cider.
‘Have a drink, Chris.
Oh, no, you can't can you?’
When he leaves Iain, Philip's mind is in turmoil.
He walks round to see his girlfriend, Tanya.
They talk and talk through the night, trying to decide what to do.
For Philip, the encounter has been a bizarre and disturbing diversion from his ordinary world.
But for Iain there is no way back to ordinariness.
He has crossed the line and is locked into a sequence of events that are by now way out of his control.
His parents had feared something dreadful would happen if he continued to spend time with Tommy — they had feared he would get involved in stealing.
But for Iain such everyday adolescent misadventures have already been left far behind.
At lunchtime the following day, Tuesday, February 12, the police are breaking down the new lock which Tommy has attached to Christopher's purple front door.
Iain and Tommy are in a red Talbot Sunbeam on the road to Hayes.
Glynn Reynolds drops them outside his brother-in-law's home, and parks his Sunbeam outside the nearest pub, The Crane.
He orders a half-pint glass of white wine, and waits.
Tommy and Iain throw a slab of concrete through the back window of Glynn Reynolds' brother-in-law's home.
In next to no time, they're walking down the road to the pub.
Iain's carrying a Harrod's bag with a CD Walkman inside.
Tommy's got the video.
They've also got two watches, a ring, a Barclaycard, two bottles of spirits, 100 rounds of ammunition, a Smith & Wesson 9mm semi-automatic pistol, and a King Cobra .357 Magnum handgun.
It has made Tommy's day.
He's got a gun.
Back at Wiltshire Lane he admires the Magnum.
He brandishes it wildly in the air, telling everyone they are safe now.
He will protect them.
‘Silly bastard,’ says Glynn Reynolds.
‘Thinks he's Clint Eastwood or something.’
The three men set off again in the Sunbeam, touring the stores of Ruislip and Eastcote, making purchases with their newly acquired Barclaycard.
In 90 minutes, they use the card eight times in eight different shops.
They buy chicken breasts, frozen prawns, toilet rolls, plants, flowers, cigarettes and large quantities of alcohol — spirits, cider, and cream sherry.
ON WEDNESDAY, February 13, 1991, Tommy, Iain, Jacqueline and Karen are drinking various individual cocktails of cider, sherry and vodka.
Tommy starts firing the gun.
Only a couple of shots out into the fields from the front door.
It must be just before four o'clock.
Just before the police observation team moves in.
Iain wants a go too, and fires into the kitchen.
By about six, they're cranking the music up loud again.
There's a twin cassette deck in the living room and Iain's monopolizing it wit the song ‘Everything I Own’.
After the third play, Tommy's heard enough.
He puts on Gene Pitney.
Iain hates Gene Pitney so he stops it and puts on ‘Everything I Own’ again.
Tommy picks up the Magnum and fires it twice at the stereo, one bullet in each cassette deck.
By 7.30, Tommy and Iain are missing their sounds.
They're trying to think of someone who will lend them a stereo.
Somebody remembers Chris Russell on Lyneham Walk.
Iain's on his way out of the door, and Tommy's right behind him, tucking the Magnum into the waistband of his jogging pants.
Chris and Pauline Russell are familiar to all at Wiltshire Lane.
They like to see people for a cup of tea, and they like popping round to Karen's for company.
Though not when Tommy is in residence.
The Russells are widely regarded as kind, trusting people, entirely without malice.
Chris and Pauline met while being treated at the same psychiatric unit of a local hospital.
Pauline was a few years older than Chris, who was 31, but they had found mutual support and love, and together created the opportunity to live on their own.
They married, on April 1, 1986, and made their home at Lyneham Walk.
They spend much of their time in the bedroom, especially at this time of year when it's so cold.
They keep the television at the front of the bed, and receive friends there when they call for tea.
Chris likes music, and has a large collection of albums and cassettes.
His family have bought him a new hi-fi for Christmas.
An Alba MCH53 dual-cassette stereo system.
Chris and Pauline are in bed when they hear the knock at the door.
Chris is taping albums — The Stylistics.
He gets up, opens the door, and his heart sinks, seeing Tommy standing there with Iain.
‘Hello.’
Chris always thinks it wise to be polite to Tommy.
‘Do you want a cup of tea?’
Chris leads them down the hallway to the bedroom, and gets back on the bed next to Pauline.
Tommy says: ‘I've come to take your stereo.’
‘No, you can't take it,’ says Chris.
Tommy pulls a shining chrome gun from the waist of his trousers.
It like a toy cowboy gun to Chris.
He thinks Tommy is joking.
‘I've got one like that,’ says Chris, who keeps a toy revolver under the bed, with which he fires red caps at the television.
He turns to get his gun out.
Tommy fires.
Chris sees a flash, hears a bang, and his left arm goes numb.
His elbow is shattered.
There is a lot of blood.
Iain is standing there with his fingers in his ears.
Pauline starts to rise and screams.
Tommy turns towards her and fires again.
The bullet hits Pauline's throat.
It travels down her neck and hits the top of her left lung, which collapses.
It bounces off a back rib and exits through Pauline's back.
‘Stop it, stop it!
Are you mad?’
Chris shouts.
Tommy turns back to face him and fires once more, hitting Chris in the left arm again.
Iain is still standing there with his fingers in his ears.
Pauline has got up and walked to the bathroom.
She is staring at her throat in the bathroom mirror.
Chris is unplugging the stereo: ‘Go on, take it, take it.’
Tommy turns to Iain and says, ‘OK, you can take it now.’
Iain picks up the stereo and walks out.
Tommy stands over Chris.
‘If you call the police or the ambulance I'm going to put this fun in your mouth and blow your fucking head off.’
Tommy follows Iain.
They have been out for fifteen minutes.
The police have heard nothing.
Not a single shot.
Pauline and Chris wait.
The decide to go out through the back door.
They climb over the fence, and knock at the next-door maisonette.
John's there with his mate Paul, who's just got back from work.
John leads Pauline into the front room while his mate Paul dials 999.
Pauline sits on the settee, and asks for a cup of tea.
At Wiltshire Lane, Iain's got the Alba stereo on the floor in the living room, trying to get it going, Tommy's back, brandishing the gun.
‘I've shot Chris.
Shot  him in the neck.
 He's gone.’
‘Might as well go back and finish him off,’ says Iain.
Then the stereo's going and Iain's sitting in the chair.
Crash.
Tommy's running in the living room.
‘They're here.
The police are here.’
Crash.
Tommy's picking up the gun from the living room floor.
Crash.
‘POLICE…
POLICE…
PUT THAT GUN DOWN TOMMY.’
CHRIS AND PAULINE RUSSELL were taken to Mount Vernon Hospital.
Pauline developed complications and was transferred to Harefield Hospital.
She lapsed into a coma and was on a life support machine.
On February 20, one week after the shooting, the couple's local vicar took the decision, on Chris's behalf, to switch off the machine.
Christopher Jabelman was cremated at Ruislip Crematorium on April 9, 1991.
There was a collection for a wreath on the estate where he had lived.
They raised £35 —‘from friends and neighbours of Hazeldene’.
Jacqueline MacPherson faced a charge of handling stolen goods.
The charges were not proceeded with when Jacqueline agreed to enter a long-stay residential clinic for the treatment of alcoholism.
She was awarded £60 travelling expenses by the court.
Glynn Reynolds received three-and-a-half years for burglary and possession of a gun.
Tommy Cook pleaded guilty to two murders, one attempted murder and related charges.
He received two life sentences, with a recommendation he serve a minimum of eighteen years.
Peter and Ann MacPherson were devastated by the news of their son's involvement in the killings.
They supported him throughout his year on remand, and worked hard to prepare his defence.
Iain MacPherson pleaded not guilty to two charges of murder, one attempted murder and related charges.
He had not delivered the fatal blows, he had not pulled the trigger.
He had been swept along by Tommy's drunken madness.
Surely, the court would see that.
‘When I'm with Tommy I just try to be like him,’ Iain had told the police.
‘I use the mouth, but I can't hack all the violence.
I thought someone might get a couple of black eyes or something.
I didn't think anyone was going to die or anything.’
He said he admired Tommy ‘because of his great strength’.
On February 11 this year, after a two-week trial, Iain was found guilty on all counts and sentenced to detention for life.
He parents wept as the judge delivered the mandatory sentence.
Iain stood impassive, ashen.
It was the law of joint enterprise in homicide which had done for him, the same law which had hanged Derek Bentley.
The accused must have been party to the act which caused death, the law states.
His state of mind will help to determine whether he is guilty of murder or the lesser offence of manslaughter.
Iain's impassivity must have made it difficult to determine his state of mind.
It will take Iain a long time to come to terms with his conviction.
He does not believe himself to be guilty of murder, and yet he now faces between and fifteen years' imprisonment.
He will be 21 this month.
Ali & Me
‘I'm young and handsome and fast and pretty and can't possibly be beat,’ said the young boxer on the TV screen.
The sickly ten-year-old sitting at home looked on in wonder…
That was in 1963.
Later, Muhammad Ali and the American writer Davis Miller were to become friends.
Here, Miller describes their encounters in the months leading up to Ali's 50th birthday
DECEMBER 1989 IN A SUITE ON THE 24TH FLOOR of the Mirage Hotel, Muhammad Ali is sitting on a small white sofa near full-length windows that overlook much of the east side of Las Vegas.
He's wearing a pair of well-presses, dark pinstripe slacks and a white, V-necked T-shirt that has a couple of nickel-sized holes in it, one of which reveals whorls of thin white hair on the left side of his chest.
His waist is very thick; I'd guess he weighs about 265lbs.
‘My man,’ he says.
‘Glad to see you.’
THE YOUNG ALI ‘His hands and feet seemed to be moving in almost impossibly splendiferous patterns’
Ali and I go back a long way.
I first became a serious Muhammad Ali watcher in December 1963.
I was ten years old and was the shortest, skinniest and sickliest kid in town.
My mother had died unexpectedly only a few months before.
Her death had nit me hard.
I'd been in and out of hospitals, where my veins had been pumped full of glucose because I'd refused to eat.
At home, I spent nearly every waking moment staring at the TV.
I talked occasionally to my father and less to my sister, but I was mostly silent.
Ali was still Cassius Clay then.
He was 21 and his skin was luminous.
His hands and feet seemed to be constantly moving in almost impossibly splendiferous patterns, his eyes shone like June blackberries and there was music in his voice which seemed to roll up in great hopeful waves from deep in his abdomen.
I remember sitting mesmerized in front of my Dad's small black-and-white television as Ali's voice roared from the huge world outside and through the TV's rattling three-inch speaker.
‘I'm young and handsome and fast and pretty and can't possibly be beat,’ the voice said.
And the voice touched radium in me.
Since then, many of the events that have defined my life have been related to Ali.
In September 1977, my girlfriend Lynn and I eloped and tried to get married at the Ali-Shavers bout.
My first-ever story for a national magazine was about another of my seminal Ali experiences — a sparring session I'd had with the Champ in 1975, when, because of his influence, I was trying to make a living as a kickboxer.
Now, at the Mirage, Ali stands and walks stiffly towards the picture windows overlooking Las Vegas.
The label of his white cotton underwear is sticking out of the top of his pants.
He motions for me to follow.
‘Look at this place,’ he says, scarcely louder than a whisper.
‘This big hotel, this town.
It's dust, all dust.’
His voice is so quiet that the words seem to be spoken not be Ali, but by a spectre standing right behind him.
‘Don't none of it mean nothin'.
It's all only dust.’
He shuffles back to the sofa and drops heavily into his seat.
‘The only thing that matters is submitting to the will of God,’ he says.
‘The only thing you've got is what's been given to you.’
He gestures for me to join him by patting the cushion to his left.
‘How you been?’ he asks.
‘I'm okay,’ I say.
‘But my Dad died a couple of months ago.’
This surprises the Champ.
‘How old was he?’ he asks.
‘Only 59.
And I thought he was healthy.
He was getting ready to retire   and I thought I'd have lots of time with him.’
‘How did he pass?’
Ali asks.
‘A heart attack?’
I nod yes.
Ali pats me on the hand.
‘I know you miss him,’ he says.
‘When I was young, people used to call me up, messin' with me, tell me my father'd been killed.
Used to scare me so bad.
Life is so, so short.
Bible says it's like a vapour.’
He uses his right arm to reach across the chrome and glass coffee table in front of us.
When I last saw him, his left hand shook nearly continuously.
The right one did not.
Now it, too, often trembles, as does his head.
He grabs his thick, black briefcase, places it on his knees and opens it slowly, reverentially, as if revealing the contents of the Ark of the Covenant.
It contains hundreds of yellow, green and blue Muslim pamphlets (personally signed and predated with today's date), his eyeglasses, a Koran, a Bible.
From a pocket in the case, he removes a copy of a painting of Jesus, which he holds up for me to see, widening his eyes like he used to when challenging an opponent or the press.
‘I carry this everywhere I go.
It reminds me just how famous I am.
If you had your whole life handed back to you right now, and your one goal, from the moment you were born, was to become more famous than this man, how would you do it?
If somebody told you some nigger boxer from Loovul, Kentucky would become better known than Jesus Christ, you'd tell ‘em, ‘You crazy.’
But I did it.’
He returns his briefcase to the table, moves mechanically for the bathroom, and when he gets there, slowly takes a white, starch-crisp shirt from its hanger on the door and slips it on, then struggles a little with the buttons.
Without tucking the shirt in his pants, he pulls a royal red tie over his head that has been pre-knotted, I'm sure by his wife, Lonnie.
He looks at me through the mirror and nods slightly, which I take to mean he'd like my help.
In this moment, the most talented athlete of the twentieth century looks so eggshell fragile that I find my hand shaking a little.
Ali is so large I have to stand on my toes to reach over and across the huge expanse of his back to slip the tie under his collar.
He puts his shirt in his slacks without unsnapping or unzipping, then tugs on his jacket.
Without being asked, I pick a few motes of white lint from the jacket's dark surface and help him straighten his tie.
He picks up his briefcase and we leave the room.
‘Watch how people react,’ he says in the elevator.
When we reach the ground floor, as the doors open, he makes an amazingly loud clicking noise by popping his tongue across the roof of his mouth.
The sound is immediately repeated from probably 20 feet away.
Less than a minute later, Howard Bingham, who has been Ali's personal photographer and best friend for nearly 30 years, appears in the doorway.
We walk from the elevator with Ali in the lead.
Bingham follows me.
We don't get more than fifteen steps before there are over 100 people around us, wanting to touch Ali or shake his hand.
Cameras appear from women's purses, as do pens and scraps of paper.
‘Do the shuffle, Champ,’ an older man shouts.
Ali hands me his briefcase, gets up on this toes and dances to his left.
He tosses a few slow jabs at several male heads, then for a couple of seconds allows his black, shiny Florsheims to blur into the patented Ali shuffle.
The crowd, ever growing, explodes into laughter and applause.
The space behind him clears and he uses it, knowing it's there without turning to look.
He moves toward the right corner of the wide hallway, waving on his audience, then turns to take his briefcase from me, pulling out a thick blue stack of Muslim tracts.
Bingham reappears with a metal folding chair.
Ali sits, places the briefcase on his lap and produces an inexpensive pen from the pocket of his jacket.
Two minutes later, there is no way to skirt the throbbing crowd around him.
A Mirage security guard uses his walkie-talkie to cal for reinforcements, and directs people who want autographs into a line.
Ali gives every waiting person something personal.
He talks to almost no one, yet most everyone seems to understand exactly what he means.
He signs each person's first name on the Muslim literature and hugs and is hugged by everybody from three-year-old tykes to their 80-year-old great-grandmas.
He has a radar that is attuned to children.
Whenever kids are near he goes out of his way to pick them up and snuggle and kiss them, sometimes more tenderly than one could imagine their parents doing.
A huge, rough, Italian-looking fellow in his mid-forties takes Ali's hand, kisses it, then refuses an autograph: ‘I don't want anything from you, Champ,’ he says, his mud-brown eyes red and swollen.
‘We've taken too much already.’
I have breakfast with Ali the next morning.
I ask why, unlike the old days, everyone, everywhere, seems to love him.
‘Because I'm b aadd ,’ he clowns, but them holds up his shaking hand, spreads his fingers and says: ‘It's because of this.
I'm more human now.
It's the God in people that connects them to me.’
AUGUST 1990 It's very hot today, over 100.
The Champ greets me at the door to his mother's house in Louisville.
He's wearing a knife-creased, sky-blue seersucker, safari-style suit.
His face has lost much of its puffiness; his pecan-coloured skin refracts the late summer sun.
At this moment, he looks much like the Ali we remember.
‘Man, you look good.
Are you working out?’
I ask.
‘Doin' five rounds heavy bag, five speed bags, five shadow-boxin'.
Lost over 30 pounds.’
I follow him to the kitchen and take a chair at a cream-coloured, linoleum-topped table.
Cassius Clay Sr's stained and yellowed registration card for a 1972 Cadillac is propped between salt and pepper shakers.
Ali's Dad died only a few months ago.
I pick up the paper and think about my father's Social Security card sitting on my desk at home.
‘How do you feel?’
I ask.
‘Got more energy.
Move better.’
Mrs Clay comes into the room.
‘Oh, I'm so glad you're here,’ she says to me.
Like her son, Odessa Clay had a pretty, oval-shaped face.
She's wearing a yellow paisley dress and she smells of flour.
Although she seems tired and a light sweat shines on her forehead and neck, she's smiling her usual fragile-looking smile.
‘Would you like a glass of root beer?’ she asks.
She brings the soda in an old Welch's jelly glass.
Ali leaves the room to say his midday prayer.
‘These days,’ I say, ‘what does he talk about when it's just you and him?’
‘Oh, he doesn't talk anymore.
He's so quiet now you forget he's in the house.
He writes and reads all the time.’
Ali returns to the kitchen, still barefoot from his prayers, moving so quietly I can't help but believe he's trying not to disturb so much as the dust beneath his feet.
We go downstairs and sit side-by-side on the sofa.
A gold-framed certificate I haven't seen before is hanging crooked above the TV.
I get up to seen what's on it.
‘In Memoriam,’ it reads.
‘The Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors extends its deepest sympathy to you in the passing of your beloved  father, Cassius Marcellus Clay.’
‘It was a relief,’ Ali says before I have a chance to ask.
‘He was getting so old, in so much pain all the time.
Talked to him a week before he died.
He said he wouldn't see me again.
‘I'm tired,’ he said.
‘Tired of this pacemaker.
Don't want it no more.’
It happens to all of us.
It'll happen to me before long, it'll happen to you.
We'll close our eyes and won't open them again.
I'm preparing myself for the next life.
That's what matters now.’
A few minutes later, he says: ‘I'm tired.
I need a nap.
The heat's botherin' me.’
The words sound ancient, totemic.
‘Are you gowna be here when I wake up?’ he asks
‘I think I'll go on home,’ I tell him.
He reaches to hug me, all the time watching my eyes.
His body is so thick, his skin cool and moist through the thin shirt.
I remember rubbing my Dad's back and shoulders in the hospital.
Next Wednesday, it'll be exactly one year since he died.
Ali's skin smells of earth and of trees.
I kiss him on the cheek.
‘Be cool and look out for the ladies,’ he says.
It is his standard way of saying goodbye.
ALI TODAY ‘I'm more human now.
It's the God in people that connects them to me’
MAY 1991 There are around 75 people at a Louisville gym.
Almost none of they are boxers.
Ali is dressed in a suit and tie and is playfully winging clownish punches at everybody around him.
Dozens of men and boys take turns trading shots with him.
His moves come fairly loose and reasonably fast.
He turns and sees me and nods, then puts both hands beside his head.
I get up on my skates and dance to my left, in exactly the style I learned from him 25 years before.
He opens his eyes fried-egg wide and feigns surprise.
‘I could be your Daddy,’ he says, ‘if I was white.’
We pirouette around the old wooden floor for probably 45 seconds, throwing punches a half-foot from each other 's chins and bodies.
It's the first time in years I've been able to uncoil a little with Ali.
I find myself smiling.
I feel good.
He points at a young blond amateur heavyweight who looks like a fraternity kid.
The Champ motions toward the ring and removes his jacket.
I'm sure he must be joking, but he picks up a pair of liquorice-coloured Everlasts and walks to the ring apron.
He pulls his tie from his neck and the sixteen-ounce sheaths of leather are strapped on his wrists.
‘Gowna do five rounds,’ he yells to the people gathering ringside.
The volume level of his voice has greatly increased.
And the sound no longer issues from high in his throat; there is a musky roundness to his words.
In his corner, a second pulls Ali's shirt-tail from his trousers; the top button remains buttoned.
Someone says, ‘Ding,’ and then it's actually happening — sick old Muhammad Ali is really boxing.
I want to wince with each blow thrown.
I feel sweat sliding down the small of my back.
Ali doesn't seem able to get on his toes; his balance doesn't look good.
He's throwing jabs, but every punch is missing.
I believe the frat kid may be holding back in order to avoid hurting the ailing legend.
But suddenly, around one minute into the round, the Champ drops his gloves to his sides, exposing his chin, and when his opponent tries to reach it with punches, he pulls his head back and away, just like  the Ali we remember, causing the kid to miss by less than an inch.
At the beginning of round two, his face is animated, focused, serious.
The kid comes out hard, apparently wanting to make it a real fight.
He thumps Ali with stiff punches to the chin and chest.
Ali covers up.
The kid steps in and Ali stabs him with a well-timed jab that's as sweet as a bite from the last tangy apple of autumn.
Fifteen seconds later, he shivers the college kid's legs with a straight right lead.
At this, Ali backs off.
He doesn't want to hurt his student.
The kid gets on his bicycle; for a few moments he wears the expression of someone who had just been made aware of his own mortality.
Ali continues to box the rest of the round at a level just slightly above the boy's abilities.
With 20 seconds left, he zings in a series of eight jabs and a razor of a right, all designed to make only surface contact, but to confirm that he is still Ali.
The old master does three more rounds with less capable students than the frat kid, then he steps awkwardly from the ring and immediately begins to walk his great-granddaddy walk.
He takes a seat with me on the edge of the ring.
‘H-h-how did I look?’ he asks.
He has to repeat the twice before I understand.
Both his arms are shaking, as is his head.
‘D-d-did I surprise you?’
I admit that he did.
He chuckles and nods, satisfied.
FEBRUARY 1992 It is three weeks after Ali's fiftieth birthday.
A light snow is falling on the village of Berrien Springs, Michigan.
It sparkles on Ali's oak and birch-lined driveway.
My son Isaac is with me.
He's never met the Champ and I've always wanted him to.
We drive past the old barn where Ali keeps a boxing ring and training bags, pass several other buildings and look down on Love Creek, which flows slowly, muddily past Ali's 88-acre farm.
We pull behind the modest, green-shuttered, white frame house and park beside the brown and beige Rolls Royce.
Lonnie Ali opens the door to the kitchen.
The fourth Mrs Ali grew up in Louisville across the street from the Cassius Clay Sr residence.
Her mother is Mrs Clay's best friend.
Like Ali's mom, Lonnie is light-skinned, splashed with a galaxy of freckles; her hair has an aura of redness to it, and she is roundish and tall and strong.
She is a gentle person, yet not naïve.
She and Muhammad were married in Louisville in 1986, after she earned her MBA.
Lonnie is carefully spoken and her reputation in her husband's business affairs is one for shrewdness tempered by a relaxed, understanding nature.
She is carrying Ali's adopted ten-month-son, Asaad Amin Ali.
Isaac and I step through the kitchen and into the family room, a large warmly lit area with thick, wheat-coloured carpet, a TV and a couple of overstuffed couches.
To our right, in the corner, Ali is sitting at a desk, signing pamphlets.
He looks at me and nods, almost invisibly, then reaches his arms out to my son, who moves slowly, reverentially, forward.
Ali's arms encircle his.
‘You'll remember this when you're an old, old man,’ Ali says, both to me and to my son.
‘Happy birthday, Champ,’ I say as Asaad waddles unaccompanied into the room.
A few minutes later, Ali asks Lonnie to take the baby.
When she does, he finds a shirt, puts it on, then turns to Isaac, who is playing with one of Asaad's toy cars.
‘Stay here,’ he says.
‘We'll be back.’
He waves for me to follow.
We go outside, stepping across the driveway to the garage.
The day glows phosphorescently; snow is coming down in chunks the size of a young child's hand.
We enter the garage through a side door and climb a set of stairs.
He pulls open a door.
An otherwise empty space, having the approximate dimensions of a master bedroom, is piled floor to ceiling with boxes and envelopes and packages.
‘This is the mail I don't have time to open,’ he says.
I grab the two pieces closest to my foot.
The top one is covered with brightly coloured stamps from Indonesia.
The other is a thick letter on onion-skin paper with a return address in Kansas.
‘Want you to help me,’ he says.
‘Feel bad not bein' able to write everybody.
Want to get a 900 number, where people can call and get a message, where I can talk with them.
Want you to find out how to do it.’
‘If you want me to, I'll help,’ I say.
But there's something I want to know.
‘Last year, at the twentieth anniversary dinner of the first Frazier fight, you got up to speak and you ended up talking for probably ten minutes.
You didn't slur or stammer, your volume was fine, you were funny, your timing was good.’
It's true.
He was terrific.
And I've seen it happen on several occasions over the past couple of years, always when there are no TV cameras on him.
‘How do you do that?’
I ask.
He doesn't tell me how.
I doubt he knows.
Instead, he immediately falls into his old pre-fight voice.
‘This is Muhammad Ali, the greatest of all times.
I did what I set out to do.
Whupped Sonny Liston, whupped Joe Frazier, George Foreman, whupped the United States draft board.’
After 30 seconds or so, he stops and rubs his left hand across his face in the way I do when I've just woken from a night's sleep.
‘See wh-wh-what you can find out,’ he says.
His voice gurgles like the creek behind his property.
As we leave the garage and head for the house, Lonnie, Asaad and Isaac meet us halfway.
‘Saad wanted to go with you, Muhammad,’ Lonnie says.
She hands the child to her husband and looks at his feet.
He's wearing a pair of slick-soled shiny leather shoes.
‘Don't you dare drop that baby,’ she says.
Her tone is wifely, concerned, but not patronizing.
She turns and goes back to the house.
With Ali and Asaad in the lead, we trudge around the driveway.
Soon, Ali's son decides he wants down.
Ali lowers him to the ground, holding his left hand, and tries to get him to walk.
Asaad turns to look at Isaac; he intends to play.
I ask Isaac to take Asaad's right hand so he'll go with his Daddy.
I stay a few feet behind, watching the three of them shuffle along at a ten-month-old's pace.
For many minutes, Ali, Asaad and Isaac plod back and forth in a chain through the snow.
The only sounds are those of wind in the bare branches of trees and of Ali's feet shooshing on the ground and, in the distance, of water tumbling over rocks.
Just before we go back inside, I reach to brush the melting snow from the children's hair and from Ali's.
ISAAC AND I STAY at the farm for two more days.
As we're leaving for our long drive home, Ali walks us to the car and closes our doors.
It's still snowing.
Like Lonnie, I'm concerned that Muhammad might fall.
There's a video cameral in the back seat.
When I'm certain that Ali's balance is okay, I grab it and push the power button.
Ali sees the camera and points at the lens.
‘Watch my feet,’ he says in his thick slow voice, then turns his back and takes about ten shuffling steps.
Looking over his left shoulder, he raises his arms perpendicular to his sides.
Then, although he sometimes has trouble walking and talking even on dry land, he seems to levitate about three inches off the ground.
The winter light is tawny.
‘This is Muhammad Ali in Berrien Springs, Michigan,’ he says.
‘Today is February 8, 1992.
Ain't nobody else like me.
Joe Louis, Ray Robinson, they just boxers.
I'm the biggest thing that ever happened in sports.
I ain't boastin', it's just the way it is.
From Adam until now I am the greatest in the recorded history of mankind,’ he says to the camera, and to the world.
Davis Miller is currently writing a memoir about his time with Muhammad Ali.
He wishes to dedicate this story to his father, Roy L Miller, who died on September 6, 1989 .
The Spirit of FRANCE
by Christian Dior
DEREK FROST, men's shirt and tie buyer for House of Fraser stores: ‘Consumers recognize Christian Dior as a premium label.’
Among the select coterie of French couturiers, no one has had as consistent an influence on menswear around the world as Christian Dior.
In a hectic 10 years from 1947, this self-effacing designer laid the basis for a prestige brand which to this day encapsulates the fashion verve and innate stylishness of France.
Other Paris-based names, such as Pierre Balmain, Pierre Cardin, Louis Féraud, Hubert de Givenchy, Ted Lapidus, Guy Laroche and Paco Rabanne, have all had their times of influence, but only Yves St Laurent rivals Christian Dior's position.
Aged only 52, Dior died of a heart attack in 1957.
But since that time, his name has grown in stature and now represents a multi-million pound business the globe.
And while some ‘designer names’ have traded their integrity for the financial rewards of supplying a mass market, Christian Dior is among the few companies which has remained true to the stylish vision of its founder.
Licensing deals have secured Dior's reputation.
The first — for men's ties in the US — was signed way back in 1948.
Today, more than 300 licences, granted for 70-plus fashion-related products in 100 countries, are controlled from the company's imposing head office at 30 avenue Montaigne, Paris.
Celebrated couturier, Patrick Lavoix, has recently taken over as world designer for Dior, controlling the global direction for the label.
A fresher, even more confident approach is predicted thanks to Lavoix's influence.
The three major menswear licensees in the UK are: Benjamin Simon (for suits, jackets, trousers and coats); Paul Salgo (ties) and Hathaway (shirts).
Although they operate independently, each of these specialist manufacturers principally supplies better independent menswear shops and major department stores.
At House of Fraser, the UK's largest store group, shirt and tie buyer Derek Frost selects Dior products for his 30 top stores.
‘I look at about 40 to 50 shirt collections each season, but I buy from only 12 or so.
I see about 100 tie ranges to buy from a select few.
My customers want brands which quality of manufacture, reliability, fit and fairness of price — Christian Dior remains one of the premier couturier names supplying that.
It has a very strong consumer awareness and is recognized as a premium label, appealing to a wide range of customers from the mid-20s upwards.’
The guiding hand of Patrick Lavoix and his team in Paris ensures that there is a common handwriting to Christian Dior licensed products around the world, so there is a connecting theme between licensees.
They also insist on a high level of quality — the fact that clothing from Benjamin Simon's Lees factory is sold in Dior's Paris flagship store is proof that their quality control works.
That quality is also seen in the Christian Dior sections which the manufacturer operates in nine of the larger House of Fraser stores.
Essential to the label's enduring appeal is that CD menswear is about style rather than fashion.
Dior voids making its customers look ridiculous with extreme designs which will go out of fashion as quickly as they came in.
The Christian Dior route is to calmly evolve and constantly fine-tune a modern image.
Monsieur Dior himself would certainly approve.
What's in a name?
If the name's Christian Dior, it's quality, confidence and style.
The Spirit of France
at Woodhouse
GUY TOLSON, buying director of Woodhouse: ‘Fashion is becoming more aggressive and the French are going to do well.’
More than ever, Paris is the cultural centre of Europe and I go there maybe six times a year for ideas and inspiration, from the shops and the street as much as from the fashion companies.
In Paris you see street fashion — individualism, if you like — which you see less in other countries.
Recently, fashion has been very safe, but now it's becoming more aggressive, it's making more statements, and the French are going to do well because of that,’ says Guy Tolson.
Having worked for the influential retailer Woodhouse since it opened in 1975, Guy Tolson is well-placed to analyse the ebb and flow of trends in fashionable menswear.
The chain, now with six shops in London and one in Manchester, has always been a pioneer, bringing to the UK the most innovative of the continent's labels.
Woodhouse had made its reputation by setting the trends, not following them, and in its early days carried labels such as YSL and shirt specialist Verte Valle.
For autumn ‘92, the French are enjoying a resurgence as the fashion barometer swings their way once again.
If the 1980s was the decade of the yuppie, the 1990s are going to have much more of a street look.
But Woodhouse will continue to have a large demand for businesswear, which is why Kenzo is always high on Guy Tolson's list for buying priorities.
The suits, jackets, trousers, shirts and ties from the Paris-based Japanese designer have been a mainstay of the shop for some 10 years.
‘Although he is well-known for his colours on blazers, on suits it's the blue and blacks and the black-and-white story which we always do well with,’ says Tolson.
‘They are modern classics, simple styles and very fairly priced.’
Back on the rails and shelves at Woodhouse for autumn are the designs of Marithé and François Girbaud, who were among the most creative design teams in the world in the 1980s.
Always known for their use of innovative fabrics, the pair are now concentrating on marrying active sportswear ideas to formal shapes.
Guy Tolson is particularly excited about the Girbauds' use of a sweatshirt-like fabric for semi-formal trousers.
‘They have some fabulous ideas and are definitely on course, I'm very pleased to say.’
Also returning is Junior Gaultier, the sportier range from Jean Paul Gaultier, who is probably the most influential French designer of the past 15 years.
‘Gaultier was one of a new breed of French designers,’ recalls Tolson.
‘We were very successful with his extreme, fashion victim look in the mid-1980s.
It was always a complete sell-out.
The very wide shoulders narrowing sharply to a slim hip on a longer jacket was the biggest influence on menswear at the time and he took the world by storm.
The Junior Gaultier collection presents his ideas with more of a sportswear or street feel, more for club-goers and it's just right for the new designer room we have opened at our branch at 362 Oxford Street in London.’
Comme des Garçons shirts, suits by Paris-based Nino Cerruti and the simple strengths of silk shirts by Equipment are among the other French designs being stocked by Woodhouse this season.
For Guy Tolson, the reliability of deliveries from France makes his job a little less stressful.
‘We deal with companies all over Europe and the French are pretty good.
At least they don't have such long holidays as the Italians…‘
Only the French could have developed the coordinated look of Rodier Hommes.
The Spirit of France
by Rodier
SIMON BROWN, of Rodier Hommes at The A1 Galleria: ‘Rodier's use of colour for menswear prompts most comment.’
Some clichés are true.
Frenchmen do dress better than us.
The whole approach to their wardrobe is more considered, but their trick is to make it look as though they haven't given their appearance more than a passing thought.
In this they are helped by the large number of independent menswear retailers across the Channel, small shops which have individual identity.
They compare only too favourably with our faceless multiples where price is king and quality often questionable.
In an effort to bring some of the flair of France to the UK, Rodier Hommes is importing its own retail concept.
Part of VEV, one of France's most powerful textile conglomerates, Rodier, first with womenswear and then with Rodier Hommes, has been a pioneer of the franchise shop system, through which manufacturer and retailer form a mutually supportive — and mutually lucrative — partnership.
In essence, the retailer provides the property and knowledge of the local market, while the supplier brings the concept, the clothes and the support of a ‘big brother’.
There are 62 Rodier Hommes franchises in France, plus almost 30 more throughout Europe.
In the last two years, the company has opened its own flagship in London's Whiteleys and has granted franchises in Leeds, Newcastle and Hatfield.
In The Galleria shopping complex built over the A1, the Hatfield store is the largest Rodier Hommes unit in Europe and is an impressive, airy setting for this singular collection.
French names like New Man and Rodier Hommes were innovators in the 1970s, offering men a complete coordinated collection instead of just a range of suits or a collection of shirts.
Rodier has now refined this philosophy to perfection, offering its customers six colour and styling themes each season.
The six themes work individually or together, coordinating or contrasting, offering countless stylish possibilities.
‘We find a lot of our customers have worked abroad or travelled extensively, and are used to the idea of a sophisticated coordinated approach,’ says Simon Brown, who manages the Rodier Hommes shop in Hatfield.
‘Our use of colour is what prompts most comment.
It's obviously different, very French, very confident.’
Reflecting trends across Europe, casualwear makes up 70 per cent of sales in the shop, but casual does not mean sloppy.
‘Although we do well with suits — and we are selling far more single-breasted than double-breasted — we find that a lot of Rodier Hommes customers are ready to wear a jacket with perhaps a cashmere or fine wool turtleneck underneath,’ says Simon Brown.
‘It's all about that less stuffy, more relaxed, but still smart, approach that the French have created.’
Apart from shoes, the collection offers all a man's wardrobe needs, from socks to overcoats, from ties to blousons.
The Rodier group's heritage is in wool, so knitwear is strong all year round, often acting as the linking garments between two colour themes.
Given its experience, Rodier Hommes successfully avoids the dressing-by-numbers look which less extensive and less well managed coordinated collections are victims to.
In keeping with the demands of the French consumer, quality is high and there are plenty of delightful touches which indicate the consideration which has gone into the design.
For instance, a black jacket has a midnight blue lining rather than black, while all tailored jackets have four inner pockets.
Alongside the programme of developing the franchise chain — Wilmslow and Bromley open shortly, with Belfast, Harrogate and Kingston planned for the end of the year — Rodier Hommes is building up a network of approved stockists around the UK.
The flair of France is spreading.
Only the French could have developed the coordinated look of Rodier Hommes.
The Spirit of France
at Selfridges
NICKY LOVELL, men's underwear buyer at Selfridges in London: ‘The interest the French take in their appearance definitely includes their underwear.’
Remember boxer shorts?
We've got the French to thank for the explosion of patterned underthings in the 1980s.
Their caleçons became our boxers in one of the more entertaining menswear trends of recent years.
Today the prevailing trend in underwear is for more close-fitting styles and more active sportswear influence.
And the French are right at the forefront of design again.
Given the Frenchman's — and reportedly the Frenchwoman's — interest in his total wardrobe, it's not surprising that some of the best-known names in underwear originated in France.
Hom, Eminence, Mariner, Jil,caleçon specialist Coup de Coeur and designer marques like Cerruti and Pierre Cardin are all important sources for British buyers such as Nicky Lovell of Selfridges.
‘The interest the French take in their appearance definitely includes their underwear, so buying trips to Paris are always informative for me,’ she says.
‘Currently the most important influence we're seeing is from athletic sportswear.
The use of a touch of Lycra with cotton is giving underwear a more stylish, closer fitting look, for briefs, shorts, vests and T-shirts, putting more emphasis on the physique.
We are also seeing the sporty influence in the blue and grey mélanges which are mow important colours, rather than the simple black and white.
The T-cut brief, inspired by swimming trunks, is a shape which is growing in popularity, as is the longer-line short.’
New ranges like Kirtos from Mariner and 109 from Eminence have been introduced to suit this younger styling.
Growing in popularity too is the all-in-one body suit popularized by Hom, consistently one of the most innovative underwear brands.
Worn with jeans the all-in-one looks as though you're wearing a regular vest.
‘About 50 per cent of our sales are made to women and they tend to buy their men more adventurous underwear than the men buy themselves,’ says Nicky Lovell, ‘but British men are becoming more interested in something other than a pair of white underpants.’
The French suppliers are only too happy to oblige.
And as the skiing season approaches, you can rely on them to supply first-class winter warmers.
Says Nicky Lovell: ‘Mariner does an excellent winter range called Canadian Forest, which has all-in-one combinations, long-sleeve T-shirts and long johns.
It's all very nostalgic in feel and even comes in a sepia mélange colour.’
Perfect for the man who wants a change from white.
Out of sight is not necessarily out of mind.
A few thoughts on French underwear.
The Spirit of France
from Chipie
NEIL PROSSER, co-owner of four Chipie shops, likes the options the label offers: ‘You can buy the whole look or just a T-shirt.’
To find a Chipie store, you don't have to look too hard, but you do have to look off the main shopping street.
If a shop's good enough, it's worth making a little effort to get to.
That's the theory which Neil Prosser follows, anyway, and as he's got 16 years of successful retailing behind him, it's hard to argue with the strategy.
Individualism has been his secret ingredient in developing his Flannels menswear ships in Manchester, Altrincham and Leeds which, over the years, have always carried in-demand continental labels, including French names like Paraboot shoes, Jean Paul Gaultier, Closed jeans, Nikos underwear — and Chipie.
When he was looking to expand with another concept, he looked at the labels in his shops for something with a distinctive yet commercial image and decided on this French casualwear label.
In conjunction with Steven Peters, the brand's Uk agent for 10 years, Chipie shops have been opened in Manchester, Glasgow and Birmingham, with Edinburgh to join them in September.
The locations are always ‘off-beat city centre sites’.
‘I'd been looking for a fairly young product which had a range of merchandise to allow a shop to stand on its own two feet.
When you set those criteria, you don't come up with many names,’ says Prosser.
‘What Chipie offers is a tremendous amount of options for men, women and children, from jeans and sweatshirts to accessories.’
The formula for Chipie — the mane means something akin to ‘cheeky’— has been refined since 1967, when founder Jean-Michel Signoles began the company in Carcassonne, close to the foot of the Pyrenees, marrying a naive French country feel with the nostalgic influences of American jeanswear.
The French fascination with the romance of America in general and blue jeans in particular is seen in labels like Liberto, Chevignon, Bonaventure, Big Star and C17, but Chipie, whose global turnover is now about £85 million, remains an inspiration.
Significantly, Chipie has run its own shops, as well as wholesaling its clothes, almost from the start.
There are 25 shops in France and 60 around the world.
‘Jean-Michel's success is about being in touch with the market and adapting to suit it, which is what retailing is all about,’ says an admiring Neil Prosser.
Chipie's slogan since 1967 has been ‘Qualité et Drôlerie’.
The French consumers' demands for quality of manufacture and their desire for a fun approach to dressing remain the hallmarks of a label which has enjoyed a cult following in the UK during the past few years.
But the signs are that street-wise teenagers who caused the Chipie boom are moving on again, leaving the brand to settle back to what it is meant to be, a broad-based fashionable collection with an appeal to all members of the family who like off-beat colours and tradition given a twist.
It remains an unmistakably French collection sold in three official Chipie shops in London, plus a further 100 stockists around the country.
Jeans — which were Chipie's sole product until 1975 — remain the backbone of the range, but the bright, bold colours of the shirts, sweatshirts and jackets are noticed more readily.
‘The great thing about Chipie is that you can buy a whole look, or just buy a T-shirt,’ says Neil Prosser.
He probably hopes you buy the whole look.
For more than 25 years casualwear label Chipie has lived by its motto of ‘quality and fun’.
RESOURCES
The insider's guide to the material world
Food
A PERFECT PEAR
The sensual appeal of a plump and succulent fruit BY MATTHEW FORT
LIFE IS THE SEARCH for the dish that tantalizes, draws oohs and aahs of appreciation from your dinner guests, and takes no more than a quick yo heave ho to knock together.
This is the story of just such a dish.
Take wine, any sweet wine you like.
As we are going to take pears as well, make the Gewürztraminer from Alsace.
It could equally be a Muscatel from Valencia or a Romanian sweetie.
There is no point in ransacking the cellar for the finest bottled sunshine that has been put away for the special occasion.
Pluck it from the supermarket shelf or from wherever it is cheapest.
Now, as to pears, may I suggest the Doyenne of Comice, generally sold as Comice, or, better still, the Williams.
Alan Davidson lists nineteen principal varieties in the exquisitely illustrated, lightly but learnedly written Fruit (Mitchell Beazley), and there are plenty of minor variations as well.
What a wonderful thing is the pear.
‘A pear,’ wrote Edward Bunyard, ‘should have such a texture as leads to silent consumption.’
Oh yes, indeed, and feel the sweet, fragrant juice gush down your throat, and, if you are not careful, down the front of your best bib and tucker.
A sliver of Parmesan or pecorino cheese, and there is a perfect pudding of its own.
But we are considering something altogether grander here.
In the course of the year, you can find a good many specimens on show — Anjou, Red Anjou, Beurre Bosc, Passacrassana, Conference — but in my view the Comice and the Williams represent the top of the range.
For the recipe that follows, Conference will do, but it lacks the plump punch of its more aristocratic cousins.
Allow half a pear per person, peel and core then, and cut each in half.
Your pears should be under-ripe because you are going to poach them very gently, and it is very important that they don't go mushy  on you.
Poach them in apple juice or water and sugar (ie syrup), or even the Gewürztraminer, for perhaps ten minutes at most.
The real length of time will depend on the size and ripeness of the fruit.
Using the wine has its dangers, because bits of pear may drift off, clouding the liquid, which must remain absolutely clear for the sake of the final éclat.
Anyway, there are your pears, just nicely poached, not too soft and not too hard.
You know this because you have prodded one of the pieces with the tip of a sharp knife.
Out with the corks of the wine, assuming you haven't done so already, and empty it into a saucepan.
Warm it up, add four sachets of gelatin and stir until it's all dissolved.
That's it.
That's all.
Pour half the warm wine/gelatin into a mould — I use nonstick bread thins lined with clingfilm, but a terrine mould does equally well.
Then put it into the freezer until it sets.
Load the pears carefully on top and pour the rest of the wine over them.
Put it into the fridge to set firm, and pour yourself a substantial nerve tonic.
The worst is over.
All you have to do now is, when the hour comes, turn out you pear terrine in Gewürztraminer jelly, slice across with a very sharp knife (an electric carving knife, normally an abomination, is ideal), and lay each pristine slice of pale gold jelly and creamy pear on a plate.
The semi-set jelly has a deliciously seductive, viscous quality as it trembles briefly in the mouth before slipping, fragrant and alcoholic, down the throat.
And once you have grasped the concept, just vary the fruit and the wine according to taste and season — cherries and strawberries in a Romanian Tamaiosa, rhubarb in Muscatel di Valencia, blood oranges in orange juice and Cointreau.
The permutations can run with your imagination.
LABOUR OF LOVE A sludge-grey turbot is held proudly against the plastic overalls of a fish gutter in Newlyn market.
This photograph is part of an exhibition by Toby Glanville of British and French traditionally food producers.
People who, in an age where profit comes before quality, have eschewed mass production.
The portraits are simple, uncluttered compositions of subjects at one with their environment.
The exception is a Scottish pig farmer who stands uneasily next to the carcass of Jamie, a pig he reluctantly slaughtered and to which he was so attached he credited it with the IQ of a three-year-old child.
IAN PENDLETON
Food Producers from Britain and France is at the Photographers' Gallery, London WC2 from August 21 to September 19.
Drink
SET ‘EM UP
Bourbon is best on its own BY TIM ATKIN
IF YOU COME from Kentucky, you're supposed to know about three things — chicken, thoroughbreds and Bourbon whiskey,’ says Bill Samuels, a former rocket fuel scientist turned distiller at Maker's Mark.
While Colonel Sanders's fried poultry hasn't done much for the state's image and few of us get to attend the Kentucky Derby, America's leading spirit is becoming increasingly fashionable in Britain.
Even the names of the whiskeys evoke images of the Confederacy and the frontier: Elijah Craig, LW Harper, Jim Beam, George Dickell and Jack Daniels sound like a team of hard-drinking Baptist preachers.
Wild Turkey, Rebel Yell, Heaven Hill, Four Roses and Early Times belong in a Wild West saloon.
There are three legal requirements for Bourbon.
The whiskey has to be aged for at least two years in charred new oak barrels; it must have at least 40 per cent alcohol by volume and it must be made from a minimum of 51 per cent corn.
As Booker Noe Jr, the master distiller at Jim Beam, puts it: ‘It takes good Bourbon at least four years to get to know the inside of the barrel.’
Leave the whiskey in oak too long and it tastes like a sack of splinters, but if the ageing is done correctly, it makes the spirit mellow and vanillin-sweet.
Bourbon is made all over Kentucky, although there are no distilleries in Bourbon County itself.
It is one of the great ironies that Bourbon is a dry county.
Sit at the back of a bluegrass concert in 80 of Kentucky's 121 counties, and you will drink nothing more alcoholic than a tall glass of orange juice.
As with malt whisky, much depends on a distiller's source of water as well as how and where he ages his spirit.
Bourbon producers set great store by the soft local water which passes through limestone on its way to the distilleries.
The size and humidity of each warehouse will affect the rate at which the whiskey ages.
Most Bourbons are sold without an  age statement on the label, but the well-known brands are between four and eight years old.
Bottle strengths vary from 40 per cent to nearly 60 per cent— some distilleries leave the whiskey uncut; others reduce it with water.
The percentage of malt, wheat, barley, rye and corn is also important.
Maker's Mark, for example, is the only Bourbon which does not contain rye.
An important distinction between Bourbon and Tennessee whiskeys such as George Dickell and Jack Daniels is that the latter are filtered through maplewood charcoal after distillation and have a sweeter, dustier character.
Like Armagnac and grain whisky, Bourbon is distilled only once is a continuous still, although many distilleries use a ‘doubler’ to remove some of the rougher fusel oils and aldehydes.
The quality of the basic spirit is vital.
As Jim Russell at Wild Turkey tells you in a southern drawl: ‘If you don't make a good product to start with, a charcoal barrel ain't gonna help.’
As far as I'm concerned, good Bourbon is ruined by Coke and other mixers.
The same goes for cocktails like Manhattan and Mint Julep.
The best way to drink America's finest spirit is neat, on the rocks or with a little mineral water.
But however you choose to consume it, one thing is for sure: Bourbon tastes a whole lot better than Kentucky Fried Chicken.
WHISKEY GALORE
Brands to look out for are Jim Beam (£15.49, Oddbins), George Dickell (£15.99, Oddbins), Maker's Mark (£19.89, Oddbins) and Rebel Yell (£16.60, Milroy's).
The biggest whiskey selections are available from Oddbins and Milroy's in London .
Money
SAFE AS HOUSES?
The get-rich-quick illusion of home ownership
BY CHRISTOPHER FILDES
MY EDITOR EXPLODED.
What was this nonsense with my name on it?
‘Home loans,’ I had written.
‘Good news.
Millions of savers better off.
Boon for buyers.
The building societies raised their interest rates by two per cent today, taking the steam out of house prices…‘
Good news, to the editor, was when house prices were going full steam ahead.
Wasn't this a property-owning democracy, hadn't the Prime Minister told him so herself, didn't all our readers have mortgages, did I know how much prices in his road had gone up?
Get out, he said.
This was not the moment to tell him that six people had to put money into a building society for every borrower who took it out, and some of the six must read the paper.
Other readers, trying to buy houses, might be glad to find they could afford them.
House prices were like any other price — they were fuelled by too-easy credit, and when that happened, it was called inflation.
Everybody knew better than me.
House prices always went up, and so the more you borrowed, the more you stood to gain.
It was wonderful while it lasted and a better way to make money.
Many people — editors audible among them — still cannot believe it has stopped.
They take the cracking of the house market for an aberration, as if the very laws of nature had been temporarily suspended.
Building societies themselves always reckoned that, over time, prices would go up in line with people's incomes — which govern how much they can spend.
It is a wavering line, though.
House prices may average three times incomes.
Then, the average first-time buyer was borrowing 90 per cent of the price of his house, which meant that any fall would leave him underwater.
He was told that it could never happen, but it has.
It had happened before — a surge in mortgage lending, which led first to a boom and then to a bust.
Then (the 1970s) double-digit inflation came along to bale the over-borrowed house-owner out.
He had borrowed money and could pay back in washers.
The losers were the depositors who had put the money up.
The 1990s are not supposed to be like that.
We are trying to keep up with the Germans, whose central bankers call their four and a half per cent inflation rate monstrously high, and would barely tolerate a return to two per cent.
Here, high interest rates and lowish inflation are good news for all those depositors my editor took for granted.
The losers, this time around, have been the borrowers.
Hardest hit are those who cannot afford either to service their loan or to sell their house.
Some have given up, to become another pitiful statistic among the year's 100,000 repossessions.
Others cling on and hope.
What will rescue them, if anything can, is the next wave of first-time buyers.
They, unlike their predecessors, will find houses quite affordable.
If they have the cash they will have the choice.
That wave will send gradual ripples through the market — but it will not be a tidal wave — to float house-owners carelessly upwards before tipping them over into an angry sea of debt.
Making your fortune while you were asleep, just by getting into debt to own the roof over your head, was always to good to be true.
Forget it.
Health
BALLBREAKER
New techniques take the strain out of treating groin hernias
BY SARAH STACEY
A SIMPLE ANATOMICAL weakness causes at least one in 50 men to suffer from inguinal (groin) hernias.
Lifting heavy objects, gaining weight, sneezing or coughing violently, and even constipation can exacerbate an existing weakness and result in a painful mass of intestine bursting through the groin muscles.
According to Ken Waters, head surgeon at the Grosvenor Clinic in Hendon, all men have a potential weakness in the inguinal canal, the route down which testicles descend from the upper abdomen to the scrotum.
‘It's just a basic design fault,’ he explains.
‘Instead of a strong flat wall of muscles, the three layers around the canal are curved, creating a weak spot (the so-called deep ring), where the intestine can bulge through.
Hernias vary in size from a golf ball to a football and can strike at any age.
The problem certainly runs in families, although research hasn't yet identified a genetic basis.
Dilwyn Bowles's hernia appeared last September after he fell over a kitchen chair.
While the diagnosis was straightforward, the business of getting treatment soon became an epic.
Originally, he was promised surgery by December 1991.
This February, after several delays, the Hammersmith Hospital registrar admitted that he couldn't promise anything before 1993.
By then, his condition was causing Bowles, a 35-year-old civil servant with two small children, severe pain.
‘It messed up everything.
I couldn't even walk as fast as the kids, and standing for more than five minutes was impossible.
My staff had to lift everything for me at work.’
At this stage, a supportive truss, which may help if the hernia is only causing slight discomfort and can be easily pushed back, will be of no use.
Desperate, his wife Irene chased up a radio advertisement for drop-in surgery performed with only a local anaesthetic.
Bowles's GP was sceptical, but an initial consultation (costing £35) with Ken Waters at the Grosvenor Clinic persuaded Bowles to go ahead.
‘He said the hernia needed surgery quickly (they can otherwise become stuck), but there was no pressure to have it done there,’ he says.
The all-in cost was £695, including the first consultation.
Fees at comparable private clinics with two or three nights' in-patient care average £2,400, a financial impossibility without insurance.
Although Bowles admits he was nervous, the process was ‘absolutely brilliant and completely painless’.
It was also, compared to the traditional procedure, extraordinarily quick.
‘I was admitted at 10.30 am, ready to go at 11, and walked off the operating table at 12.10.’
After a snack of coffee and pastries, he did ten minutes on the exercise bike to  prevent his muscles from getting stiff, and then went home.
Using a technique pioneered in America, where drop-in surgery is commonplace, Waters made a three-inch incision, cut through the layers of ‘padding’, pushed back the hernia sack, and then tucked in a 2½ inch by 1 ¼ inch piece of polypropylene mesh to reinforce the muscle wall.
Eventually, the patient's own tissue grows through the plastic mesh.
Traditionally, inguinal hernias are corrected by pushing the intestines back and stitching the muscle to the ligament below: ‘effective, buy very painful’, according to Waters.
Initially, he thought this new concept was nonsense.
Brought up on the dictum that ‘any foreign material in the body would re-emerge in a sea of pus’, his biggest fear was of bacterial infection.
However, American trials using a new mono-filament, non-fray mesh showed virtually no infection.
Furthermore, recurrences, which usually ran at ten to 20 per cent, dropped close to zero.
A fortnight after the operation, Bowles was back at work.
‘I felt a fraud after the first week off,’ he says.
The recommended recovery time after in-patient surgery is four to six weeks.
Waters believes local anaesthetics are good for the patient and good for the surgeon: ‘A conscious patient is, after all, monitoring your every move, so you have to be extra gentle.
It takes a bit longer, but there is less trauma, meaning less pain and quicker healing.
And because patients can get up and exercise right after the operation, the muscles never have a chance to stiffen up.’
Although Dilwyn Bowles had a bad experience with the NHS, changes are in progress.
At London's Middlesex Hospital, for instance, surgeon John Scurr runs a pioneering day-care unit where hernias are repaired under local anaesthetic with woven nylon threads or Teflon patches as alternatives to polypropylene mesh.
Scurr is also investigating the use of laporoscopy, where two tiny holes are made at the navel and the hernia repaired from inside.
As well as hernias, conditions such as cataracts and varicose veins are also being successfully treated on a drop-in basis.
Although, as a Department of Health spokesman admits, district health authorities are notoriously slow to make changes, day-care surgery is undoubtedly the way ahead.
CALLING ALL HEP CATS
YOU'RE PRETTY SAFE munching prawns in Morecambe Bay, but if you intend cracking crabs in the Orient, there's a distinct risk of being stuck down by Hepatitis A, a virus mainly caught from contaminated food, particularly shellfish, and water.
As with all forms of this inflammation of the liver, there is no medical treatment.
HepA can cause sickness, diarrhoea, jaundice and, in the worst case, liver failure.
Until this year, massive and painful jabs of immunoglobulin in the bottom have been the only short-term chance of protection.
Now Havrix, a vaccine given as two initial injections followed by a booster six to twelve months later, will provide up to ten years of immunity.
Havrix manufacturers SmithKline Beecham also make EngerixB, a vaccine which protects against Hepatitis B, a highly infectious virus — transmitted sexually or by infected needles — which is rife worldwide.
HepB infection can lead to cirrhosis and causes 80 per cent of liver cancer worldwide.
For more information and support for sufferers, contact GroupB,
WHAT A CARRY ON
FRENCH OBSTETRICIAN and natural childbirth guru, Michel Odent, claims that men are increasingly falling victim to ‘couvade’, literally, hatching pains.
According to Odent, fathers not only groan with a miscellany of aches and pains before, during and after the birth of a child, but also put on weight beforehand, then top it off with post-natal depression.
A straw poll among women who have recently given birth revealed one father who mirrored every pain his wife laid claim to with one of his own; back ache was a special problem.
One 6′ 7″ hunk collapsed during the birth in a dead faint and another stalwart demanded the morphine his wife had just refused.
It's only recently, of course, that political correctness has demanded that the fathers not be at the birth but also do the right thing.
With no kettles to boil, basins to fill or clean towels to fetch, true participation is required.
Where you position yourself is vital.
It's no good, Odent maintains, trying to direct operations from the end of the bed.
‘When that happens, you can anticipate a long and difficult birth.’
The truly empathetic New Man positions himself by the head of his partner's bed, knows when to go for a walk in the park and, reverting to a traditional male role, protects the woman from unwanted intruders.
For prospective fathers in search of a guaranteed macho activity which also merits innumerable brownie points, Odent says water birth are the remedy: ‘First you build the birthing pool, then you fill it, then it's almost bound to go wrong.’
Motoring
JEAN MACHINE
Cashing in on the youth cult
BY JEREMY CLARKSON
WHEN ASKED TO list the greatest fashion guru of all time most people would go for some foreign Johnnie with a ludicrous name.
But in fact, the greatest contribution to latter-day fashion has been made by the American manual labourer.
For every person in a lime-green suit that's 87 sizes to big, you will find 20,000 in jeans.
And jeans were originally made for manual labourers.
So were engineer boots.
So were leather jackets.
Now, if a vast majority likes to base its fashion garmentry on what the American road worker is wearing this year, it seems only sensible that it should base its fashion vehicle on what he is driving.
And what is the American road worker driving?
A pick-up truck, that's what.
And because there are a lot of manual labourers in the US, there are a lot of pick-up trucks.
For every thirteen cars sold in the States, one has a box where the back seats should be.
Already, the square-jawed, Californian ski ‘n’ surfists have moved in, buying pick-up trucks as a fashion accoutrement to go with their bandannas and leather bracelets.
Said vehicles are then equipped with enough lights to do a Guns N' Roses gig, chrome roll-over bars and white letter tyres.
The end result, more often than not, is horrid to drive and looks like a cross between a barbeque and a plane crash.
But they seem to like them.
Anyway, keen to cash in on this burgeoning demand, the car manufacturers are offering a range of pick-ups aimed smack at the jugular of America's youth.
And top of the pile is the GMC Syclone, four of which have been sold in Britain so far.
I found one and now I want one so badly it aches.
It ain't much to look at, but those of an eagle-eyed persuasion have the twin exhaust pipes and fat tyres as a sort of clue.
To get the whole story, though, you need to raise the bonnet because there, nestling in the space where you might expect to find a nice, sensible Marks & Spencer diesel, there is a 4.3 litre V6 motor, which, for good measure, is turbocharged and intercooled.
Thanks to the 280 bhp that results, the Syclone is the world's fastest accelerating production vehicle.
With a 0–60 time of just 4.2 seconds, it is faster than a Lamborghini Diablo, faster than a Ferrari F40.
It's a four-wheel drive earthquake.
The cherry on the cake, though, is the price.
General Motors has two dealers in Britain — in Kingston and Manchester — and if you want a Syclone they will only lighten your wallet to the tune of £20,000.
The Diablo costs £150,000.
Now fair enough, the Syclone looks like a barn door, and chews fuel like a jet fighter, but, if you like fast cars, there is simply nothing that even gets close for the price.
And if, one day, the pick-up does catch on over here with the vigour of Ray-Ban shades, Zippo lighters and Levi jeans, it will make the last great fashion car, the Golf GTi, look about as silly as velvet loon pants.
BARGAIN BASEMENT
There was a sharp intake of breath from the assembled throng when Jaguar announced its 212 mph XJ220 would cost upwards of £400,000.
But this beginning to look like a bargain.
In the last few weeks, McLaren has announced its new BMW powered supercar will cost £530,000 when it goes on sale at the end of 1993.
But best of the lot, if you like jokes, is the new supercar from Yamaha, which looks anything but super.
It will cost $1 million — enough to make your teeth itch.
ACQUIRE
Essential life-savers for a weekend in the wilderness.
By Joanne Glasbey
IF YOU THORNPROOF is more barbarous than Barbour, then it's time to reach for the Barbour Repair Kit.
The kit provides all you'll need to spruce it up — replacement fabrics, waterproof dressing, cottons and more.
£8, from ,,().
THE IDITAROD SUPERBOOT is the boot for serious outdoor pursuits — they're worn by the mushers in the Iditarod sled race.
The boots are waterproof, have a Gore-Tex lining and tough Vibram rubber lug soles.
£164, from ,,().
WITH LIBERTY'S collapsible drinking vessel your cup need never overflow when you venture into the great outdoors.
The cup comes in a leather case.
£45, from ,,().
BERGHAUS, meaning ‘mountain hut’, does not originate in the Alps as you might think.
Set up in Newcastle by two mountain climbers, Berghaus makes the best in tough rucksacks for the skywardly mobile.
The Icestar is £59,99, available from ,,() and all good sports shops.
ROBERTS RADIO is 60 years old this year and the latest addition is the R808.
It's compact and has a shortwave capacity to pick up stations around the globe.
£120, call  for stockists.
PATAGONIA'S bright, functional clothing enjoys cult status among dedicated West Coast surfers, climbers and mountain bikers.
The hi-tech waterproofs are made of tough nylon with Velcro fastenings and pockets.
The Storm Jacket, £229.99, is available from ,,().
FUNCTIONAL, ELEGANT, Zeiss's Design Selection compact binoculars are of the highest quality.
This 10 x 25 model sells for £319, the 8 x 20 for £295.
For stockist details, contact Carl Zeiss sales department .
CAPTURE the whole picture with a long-format disposable camera — the frames are double the normal 35 mm width.
You can make stunning landscapes and developing couldn't be easier — just hand in the whole camera.
About £8, by Fuji and Kodak, from all good stores.
HOT OR COLD running liquids are on offer for anything up to a whole day in the 24 Hour Flask.
The flask is guaranteed unbreakable and contains absolutely no fragile glass.
It also comes complete with an adjustable shoulder strap.
£25.95, from ,.
For full stockists details call .
Travel
HARE KRISHNA, HARRY LLAMA
Finding inner peace in the sacred mountains of California
BY NEIL MACLEAN
HIS NAME WAS HARRY and he had a shaggy coat you could lose a hairdryer in.
‘He sure seems to have taken to you,’ said Janine as she loaded another sack on to his saddle.
We looked each other in the eye at 5′ 10″.
He had large dark eyes, like pears set in port wine aspic, deep pools in a thin, delicate face.
His eyelashes were like the feathery brushes of a model's compact.
His astonishing ears rotated independently, one a fly swat, one on radar alert, conducting the sound of the chickadees, sending semaphore to the bees.
They were the sort of ears that could keep plates spinning at the circus.
He would pick his way delicately, almost mincing, along the trail between the giant pine cones, planting his two-toed feet as delicately as the Queen Mother would in a field of cow pats.
When he came to a stream or a fallen tree trunk, he would launch himself like a ballet dancer, but in slow motion, and land as softly as if his feet were scatter cushions.
Big fairy.
But strangest of all, his coat, particularly the light fur round his neck, smelled to me of cardamom — not lanolin, not the sweet spring grass of northern California, not the yellow dust of a hot dry trail, but cardamom.
I had a llama that smelled of chicken korma.
We met at the north fork of the Sacramento River, the longest river in California.
Behind us lay the snow-streaked slopes of Mount Shasta, one of the seven sacred mountains of the world; before us lay the Sisson Callaghan Trail, an old Indian trade route (today used by old Indians with a very good sense of direction).
The first myth about llama packing is that you ride them.
You don't.
Llamas are your walking companions.
They carry your luggage and your provisions; they will even keep you amused along the way by pulling faces.
But try sitting on them and they will end up flattened with four feet splayed out to all points of the compass.
Carrying humans is not part of the llama lifeplan.
The second myth is that they spit.
Not if they are well trained.
Shasta llamas do not spit, kick, bite, burp or talk with their mouths full.
We climbed slowly but steadily along the river and through a natural rock garden of tiny pale blue phlox.
Harry's breath felt like the blast from a sauna door against the back of my neck as he cropped pungent cedar shoots along the way.
We crossed the Sacramento on the bleached bones of an old dead pine and pitched camp in a meadow 6,000 feet above sea level, under the summit of Mount Eddy.
Joel arrived in time to pitch my tent.
A tall man with a droopy moustache, cowboy hat, neckerchief and walking staff, he looked like a scout for the Seventh Cavalry.
But Joel was Shasta Llamas' resident naturalist mountaineer and survival specialist.
While Janine and John cooked supper, he led us on a trek through the woods and around the two-mile meadow.
Before dinner, John, who was so laid-back he made the trees seem neurotic, offered us a yoga lesson.
This seemed very Californian; assuming the Peace Position with my llama grazing by my side.
Hare Krishna, Harry Llama.
That night we sat round the campfire telling stories of great daring, of man against nature, of strange beasts in the wilderness, of the best pizza in San Francisco, while listening to the coyotes howl.
Next morning we again set off beside the river.
The path forked when it reached an old log cabin; left would have taken us to the top of Mount Eddy, right took us on the Pacific Crest Trail stretching from Canada down to Mexico.
It was a gentle climb through the sub-Alpine forest on to the melting snowline.
We stopped on the ridge by a battered and solitary old foxtail pine.
To the east lay Mount Shasta; to the west lay Big Foot country (the Russian Wilderness and the Marble Mountains).
To the south sat the snowy summit of Mount Eddy.
And to the north — stood Harry.
He had big nose in my face and was blowing impatiently.
That is the trouble with llamas.
You can take them up a mountain, but you can never make them enjoy the view.
He was doing semaphore again.
One ear was pointing to the mountains; the other suggested it was time for lunch.
TRAVEL NOTES
ANOTHER AMERICA
While most British visitors beat a well-worn path to the familiar tourist areas of the United States, Off The Beaten Track offer something different.
They lead a Southwest Indian cultural and archaeological tour exploring New Mexico, Colorado and Arizona.
Highlights include the Puye Cliff Indian ruins, Monument Valley and a tour of Canyon de Chelly — which some people consider more beautiful than the Grand Canyon — led by Navajo tribe members.
It costs £2,330.
Details from  ().
STOP FUMING
City cyclists more used to traffic fumes will breathe deeply in the clean air around Lake Bolsen in Italy.
Fresco Cycling Holidays () sell go-as-you-please cycling tours as well as one-centre holidays in the Monte Rufeno nature park, which is closed to motor traffic.
From £329, and you can take your own bike.
A CASE OF THE BITER BIT?
Piranha fishing is one of the attractions of the Clipper Line's cruise along the jungle rivers of South America.
It departs on October 13, with another trip exploring the Amazon leaving on November 12.
The cruises last from fourteen to nineteen days and prices start at £2,617.
Details on .
LEST YOU FORGET
You can now hire video cameras at Gatwick Airport as you check in for your flight.
£54 for one week, plus £12 insurance, from the Travel-Cam Company ().
HOW TO GET THERE
Shasta Llamas guide several treks a year through the Shasta-Trinity National Forest, the Klamath National Forest and the Marble Mountain Wilderness.
Prices start at £350.
Shasta Llamas, PO Box 1137, Mount Shasta, California 96067 ().
The nearest airport to Shasta is at Redding, one hour from San Francisco.
American Airways () fly daily from Heathrow, Gatwick, Stansted, Glasgow to San Francisco, changing at one of their hub airports: Chicago, Dallas, New York JFK.
The lowest fare is £309 midweek, low season.
American Eagle (same number) fly regularly to Redding four times daily from $136 return.
The lowest through fare from London straight to Redding is £385 midweek, low season.
Closer to home, llama packages are available from the Dunbeath Hotel () in Caithness.
A guided walk in the beautiful Dunbeath Strath with a llama by your side costs £15 including lunch.
You can also go llama trekking in the South Downs (Saddler's Farm, Ashington,) round the Chanctonbury Ring, over the Devil's Dyke and through Houghton Forest above Arundel.
Llama trip plus lunch costs £15.
MEN OF PRINCIPLES
Esquire and Principles Menswear announce the ‘Men of Principles’ award.
Nominate yourself or another as a ‘Man of Principles’ and you could win a menswear wardrobe worth £1,000, as well as a donation to your personal cause
From left to right : Single-breasted Pure New Wool dogtooth suit, £149; white shirt, £14.99, and silk tie, £14.99.
Mustard cashmere/wool blazer, £99; stone chinos, £24.99; cream turtleneck, £19.99, and blue chambray shirt, £29.99.
Petrol cashmere/wool blazer, £99; navy chinos, £24.99, stone turtleneck, £19.99 and beige shirt, £19.99.
Double-breasted Pure New Wool suit, £169; blue shirt £29.99, and silk tie, £14.99.
For details on your nearest Principles Menswear branch, call 
THERE ARE FEW AMONG US who put others before themselves.
But to celebrate the unacknowledged commitment of time, talent and energy that some do make, Esquire and Principles Menswear have named these four men, ‘Men of Principles’.
If you would like to nominate yourself, or another, as a ‘Man of Principles’ then you could receive a £20 voucher — you might even win a complete Principles Menswear Wardrobe worth £1,000, as well as a £1,000 donation to a cause of your choice.
David Grouse is the London Appeals Organizer for Action Research.
He is 33 and lives in London with his wife Karen and daughter, Lily.
It is David's job to co-ordinate all AR fund raising activities in the London area, be they large or small.
It's a job that requires endless flexibility and calls upon David's earlier experiences in the worlds of sport, marketing and publishing, which are all put to good use.
Action Research, established 40 years ago, currently funds 150 different projects around the UK.
Projects which tackle medical problems at their root and provide long-term solutions.
For instance, it funded research that was crucial to the discovery of the polio and rubella vaccines and more recently, it helped to fund the untrasound scanner that's now to essential in antenatal care.
If you would like to know more about Action Research, call  
‘Through AR, I can commit my energies to people’
Patrick Alley is a fund raiser for the Environmental Investigation Agency.
Five years ago, increasingly concerned about the environment, he decided to work directly for an environmental group.
Patrick, now 34, joined the EIA, and is now responsible for creating and coordinating all fund raising operations.
The EIA pioneered ‘investigative conservation’.
The group obtains film and photographic evidence of problem areas that is then used to press for changes in legislation.
The EIA have been responsible for the ban in the ivory trade, and their campaign on the plight of captured wild birds has resulted in 74 major airlines refusing to co-operate in the transport of wild birds.
Most recently, it has forced the resolution to limit the slaughter of dolphins, as well as warding off the threat of the renewal of whaling.
If you would like to know more about EIA, call  
‘Everyone at EIA is so committed — certainly, no one 's here for the money’
Andy Sinton , the footballer, is 26 and lives with his wife Linda and their three-months-old son, Daniel.
Andy has six full England caps and was in the England team that competed in the recent European Championship.
The charity he has closest to his heart is The Spastics Society.
He has a unique insight into the problems and difficulties that people with cerebral palsy have to face as his wife's brother is a sufferer.
The Spastics Society was founded in 1952 by a group of committed people who wanted to create greater opportunities for people with cerebral palsy.
It is now the largest charity in Britain and employs some 3,500 staff across the country.
If you would like to know more about The Spastics Society, call  
‘Andy has used his footballing success to better the lives of the disabled’
Geoffrey Henning is the Director of Crusaid.
Born and educated in South Africa he first came to the UK as private secretary to the ambassador.
After leaving the embassy, he gained experience in everything from retailing and personnel management to public relations, before finally joining Crusaid.
Crusaid raises funds for individuals and projects that are related to and affected by HIV and AIDS.
Since its launch in 1986, it has raised over £4 million.
One of the earliest projects was to create the first out-patient clinic at St Stephen's Hospital in London.
Crusaid's enormously successful fund raising activities include the annual sponsored walk, Walk for Life.
If you would like to know more about Crusaid, call  
‘Crusaid has made a donation to almost every major HIV/AIDS project in the UK’
Letters
The Sound and the Fury
The feminist mystique
ZOE HELLER'S article on feminist men (‘View from a Broad’, July/August) was a real gem.
As soon as women are coerced into adopting their own dreary, pathetic, feminist views by the opposite sex, they take offence and suggest we revert to behaving like pigs — which is, of course, what we're best at.
It's reassuring to know that we can all get back to abusing each other and women know their place —‘Harry, the ceiling needs painting’ and ‘Isn't it my turn on top?’
Feminism, after all, is a bit like communism — a great idea, but it doesn't work.
Missing out
JON RONSON'S article, ‘The Secret World of Sex’(July/August), exposed the perverted habits of apparently normal British citizens.
Just who are these people really?
The popular press would have us believe that the whole of Parliament exchange bodily fluids and God knows what else at these sex fiestas.
It's terrible.
It's sickening.
It's soul destroying because I never get to know about these parties.
Do I have to wear a cheap suit and drive a Sierra to get invited.
Well I don't believe this sort of thing goes on and suggest that Jon Ronson made it all up after reading a dodgy magazine.
Glory days
HOW COULD you refer to Banana Splits catch-phrases (‘Spacehoppers, Spangles and The Golden Shot’, June) without mentioning the all-time classic from the Arabian Nights cartoon, ‘Size of an elephant!’?
Like many other pre-pubescent boys of the time, I spent the larger part of the Seventies with my shorts round my ankles, making magician's hands (raised above the shoulders, fingers splayed) and shouting the incantation at a hairless and not especially elephantine willy.
Glory days indeed.
To Di for
FOR TOO LONG the popular media had conceived of the male fantasy in two tired and specious extremes: the blond bombshell and the whip-bearing dominatrix.
John Wilde and Michael Bracewell put those clichés to rest (‘The Sexual Volcano’, June) by demonstrating that in Princess Diana the mind's eye may picture a beautiful woman with sensitivity and conviction who is also both sexual and innocent.
She is feminine enough to maintain her own identity.
Now that is the real man's fantasy.
AFTER READING Jon Wilde's espousal of marital bliss (‘Modern Times’) in your June issue, I was surprised to discover that he is not above indulging in a masturbatory fantasy over our beloved future queen in the self same issue!
The empire strikes back
DESPITE HIS assertion that he is not anti-Japanese (Business column, June), it is difficult to see Jeffrey Ferry's article as anything other than yet another petulant cry at the temerity of these Japanese — for being good at business when they don't look like us, behave like us or even speak the language properly.
All Japanese businesses are corrupt, eh?
So what about Maxwell, Guinness, Salomon Bros, etc?
Their underhanded practices include taking America's best ideas, buying hi-tech companies and using lobbyists?
Why doesn't Ferry ask instead why some Western companies didn't buy these companies or develop those ideas?
Various Japanese practices do seem sexist and racist to use but, as a white woman working for a Japanese company, I'd say that they are trying to change, and it's a shame more of us don't try to learn Japanese and understand the culture.
We expect them to make all the concessions.
WE IN BRITAIN and the US seem quite happy to ignore the very real threat that is set to destroy us economically.
Britain's almost suicidal apathy was shown by politicians of all parties in our recent general election, who hardly debated the issue of trade at all.
The UK trade deficit of £1 billion plus in the depths of recession is testament to our insatiable appetite for, mainly Japanese, imports.
Just how far does Britain have to go into the red before our Government recognizes the problem and moves to tackle it?
In both Britain and the US we have the ability to produce all we need, but if our leaders do not have the political balls to plan Japan by their rules we are both destined for economic annihilation.
I READ with amusement Jeffrey Ferry's commentary on the threat posed to Britain and the US by the Japanese economy.
We in Canada have always lived with the imperialism of both the British and the Americans.
To this day it is nearly impossible to find a Canadian movie screened; in any of our cities, or investment capital which would allow a cutting edge industry to develop in Saskatchewan rather than Idaho, or a cultural figure who has not had to make it in the US (Bryan Adams) or the UK (Conrad Black) before the person is taken seriously at home.
Hell, we even have a foreign monarch as our head of state.
Welcome to the ranks of your former colonies.
Take yourself in hand
ALTHOUGH WE NEVER discover quite how a medium-sized magazine fulfils the duties of the male party on these pitiful outings (‘Esquire Date: A Lonely Night with a Girl Called Stephanie’, June), it is satisfying to know that its/his oily, pin-headed attitude has resulted in ostracism by all but paid-for companions.
Perhaps next month Esquire could stay at home and have a wank.
They we might all be excused the embarrassment of this innately dreadful interview format.
The writer of the lead letter each month will receive a Waterman Man 100 pen with an 18-carat gold nib
Men Talking
Paying for it
Why do some men use prostitutes?
What makes them wait in seedy side rooms for a few moments of dangerous pleasure?
Marina Cantacuzino listens to three explanations
RODNEY, 37, lives in Kent.
He works in the fashion business and has lived with his girlfriend for the past six years.
They have a young daughter.
He has occasionally used prostitutes.
I like the idea of sex for sex's sake.
I'm not like some men who can't do it with a woman unless they feel emotionally involved with her.
I find the randomness of prostitutes a real turn-on.
The first time, I was a student and had just finished a holiday job as a shopfitter in Soho.
After having witnessed what Soho had to offer I fancied some of the action for myself.
I was ushered into a waiting room by a madam and then eventually shown into a bedroom.
The woman was in her early forties and she asked me for £5 straight away.
Then she washed my equipment in the sink.
I found this such a turn-on that I nearly came then and there.
Luckily, however, I managed to hold on and we got on to her bed, which I seem to remember was covered with a plastic sheet.
I got on top of her and as usual I didn't last very long, which annoyed me a bit because I didn't feel I was getting my money's worth.
It was all fairly clinical, really, in that she didn't seem to enjoy it much.
She had the light on the whole time and the radio blaring.
But I found the whole experience very sexy because it was so impersonal.
I've never been particularly good at chatting up women although I've always liked women and sex, so the idea of cutting out all the small talk seemed both convenient and appealing to me.
Two years later, I was travelling around America with a friend.
We were staying in a seedy hotel in San Francisco close to the red light district.
We'd had dinner and were on our way back to the hotel when I told him I was going to go for a walk before going to bed.
Once he'd gone, I was approached by a woman who started rubbing my stomach and putting her hand down my trousers, which I must say was enough to make me say yes immediately.
Since I only had $11 on me, all I could afford was a blow-job.
Nothing happened for about three years after that.
I was in and out of relationships and didn't feel any particular urge to use prostitutes.
But then, one September, I was with my father in Paris when we came upon the rue St Denis where the prostitutes hang out.
He told me proudly how he'd been there a few times in the past.
I was quite impressed by this and since he was going back to England that evening I decided to go back as soon as I'd seen him off.
I was propositioned by this absolutely stunning girl who couldn't have been any more than seventeen.
She was so beautiful that I just melted and we went to this tiny little room, where she washed me.
We then proceeded to have straight sex without using a condom.
Again, I was very disappointed that it was all over in such a short time.
The last time I was with a prostitute was four years ago in New York.
I was wandering around the red light district with no particular intention of doing anything, when I was propositioned by a woman.
She took me up to an apartment and started giving me a blow-job.
It was only semi-erotic because she made me wear a condom.
Then I started feeling her breasts, but she said that would be another $15.
AIDS has made me think twice about how safe the whole thing is.
From a moral point of view, however, I feel it's infinitely preferable to doing it with someone you know, as at least you're not playing with another person's emotions.
I think the fact that I was abroad at the time may have had something to do with it — having left the country I'd also left my conscience behind.
JULIAN, 46, is single and began using prostitutes last year.
He is a senior bank clerk and lives in London.
Until a year ago I had very little do with women in the sexual sense.
After a disastrous relationship in my early twenties in which the woman made me feel like a rapist, I gave up on the idea of sex and women.
That's not to say I didn't think about sex — I did — and in order to relieve my frustration I would read books, watch videos and practise solitary sex.
Two years ago, I went on holiday to the States and witnessed scenes in clubs that made me realize women weren't as inhibited as I'd thought.
Eventually I plucked up courage and booked a ticket to Amsterdam with the sole purpose of getting laid.
Once in my hotel room, I got hold of the Yellow Pages and dialled for a woman.
They sent me a girl in her mid-twenties who was petite and reasonably attractive.
From reading sex  manuals I knew I wanted to give oral sex because I love that part of a woman's anatomy and I wanted to get close to it.
Also, I've always thought that giving pleasure is as important as receiving it.
We started off by having a shower together, which relaxed me and from that moment on there was a surprisingly intimate and friendly atmosphere.
After that I went down on her and once she'd come she did the same to me.
Then she put a condom on me and we had penetrative sex.
It was all extremely arousing and lasted for two whole hours.
After I'd kissed her goodbye I felt pretty happy because not only had I at last had an extremely enjoyable sexual experience, but I'd also been able to give enjoyment.
I wasn't worried about disease because nowadays prostitutes all seem to use condoms.
When I got home I told everybody where I'd been and what I'd done: my 63-year-old father, my three sisters, my nephews, my friends, the men and women in my local pub and my colleagues at the bank.
No one was disapproving.
After this I bought some contact magazines.
You write to a PO box with your photo and telephone number, and they contact you if they're interested.
In all my letters I said I was interested in giving oral sex.
Ejaculating isn't the be all and end all to me.
The first woman to reply told me to bring a bottle of wine.
I had the feeling that she was married and had children, but the front room had been designated for her activities, which took place on Thursday, Friday and Saturday evenings.
She also employed a woman who let her guests in and out and offered them a glass of wine while they waited.
There was no bed and we did it on the floor, which I found excruciatingly uncomfortable.
At first I gave her oral sex while she was sitting in an armchair and then we had full sex with a condom.
What I really want is to meet someone who I can have a bit of fun with, but who is in it for the pleasure and doesn't want paying.
After so many years of being on my own I really don't want to settle down and commit myself to a relationship.
I have a feeling that most women want more than just a casual affair.
At the same time I enjoy the excitement of prostitutes, the sense of anticipation and the variety.
I feel a lot more at ease since I've been using prostitutes.
I'm surprised at my abilities and how easily it has come to me.
When the first woman I went with cried out, ‘Oh, you've hit the button there,’ I thought to myself, ‘You really can learn a lot from books’.
TIM, 32, is a production manager and lives in Birmingham.
In the last ten years he has used a prostitute about 20 times.
I was 21 when I first used a prostitute.
I had just passed my RAF selection and went up to Soho with a couple of mates to celebrate.
I was a bit shocked when a 60-year-old woman opened the door until I realized that she was the ‘madam’ who took the money.
I was ushered into a bedroom and there was this stunning blonde.
I can't remember the details.
She put a condom on me and we got stuck in, but as soon as I had ejaculated she whipped the condom off me, leaving me floundering for a while on the bed.
Although brief and rather clinical, it was a highly enjoyable experience and I thought to myself, ‘I must try this again some day’.
When I went to Germany with the RAF I found that all the lads used prostitutes.
Most of them used local girls, but I decided to go to the famous state-run Eros Centre in Hamburg, which I've since heard has been closed down due to the AIDS scare.
The building was like a hotel.
Each girl had a room allocated to her and each floor had a cashier sitting behind a desk.
She would give the girl a clean towel and the key to a room and then take your money.
The German prostitutes were terribly clean and efficient and not one of them seemed in the least turned on by what they were doing.
The next time I used a prostitute was a couple of years later when I went with some friends to Amsterdam.
I much prefer the attitude to sex in Amsterdam where the whole set-up is less clinically efficient than in Germany.
And, above all, the Dutch women seem to enjoy it.
The other place I've been to is Thailand, where prostitution is blatantly up-front and hard to avoid.
The Thais enjoy life and they definitely enjoy sex.
When I was there last year it cost only £12: the rate had gone down due to the Gulf war and the fear of AIDS.
One girl I went with was a translator for an embassy; she didn't seem to be that interested in the money and was happy to stay the whole night with me.
I asked her why she slept with tourists and she said because she didn't like Thai men.
I've had unsafe sex with prostitutes on a number of different occasions, but it doesn't worry me any more than having unsafe sex with other women.
I'm not sure whether I take AIDS that seriously.
My life is certainly not dominated by sex; in fact, on the whole I would say that sex is totally overrated.
For me it's purely recreational.
It's part of an evening's entertainment.
It's a totally spontaneous thing for me, rather like trying out different beers.
Being with a prostitute is different from meeting a girl at a party and ending up in bed together, although there's no difference in the mechanics of the sex.
It's the element of novelty and danger that makes it different, plus the deliberate nature of going out to get laid.
I've never told any of my girlfriends that I've been with prostitutes because I know they would be horrified.
If I get married I will definitely give prostitutes up as I take marriage seriously and think it would be very insulting to a woman.
Esquire eye
Compiled by Rebecca Letty
IF MUSIC be the food of love…here's the recipe for a romantic evening at London's Kenwood House on September 5, at 7.30 — a dinner hamper and chauffeur-driven car followed by fireworks and baroque music.
Aqua Libra, the refreshing non-alcoholic drink, is giving two tickets to the first person to call their hotline ().
Five runners-up will also receive a pair of tickets and goodie bag.
(Car in Greater London only).
IVANA TRUMP and Chris Eubank were just two of the celebrities at Esquire's charity midsummer fashion show.
Readers who came to Harvey Nichols for the show saw Linford Christie, Jeremy Guscott, George O'Dowd, Suzanne Mizzi and 50 models and 50 models all on the catwalk in the aid of charity.
Raffle tickets were drawn by Ivana Trump and all proceeds went to Crusaid.
Watch this space for details of our next event.
KENT & CURWEN, the traditional sports outfitters, have refurbished their shop at  and are inviting Esquire readers to celebrate.
Between 5 and 7.30 pm on October 1, you'll get a ten per cent discount.
There's free Faxe lager from Finland and prizes to be won — golf lessons at Silvermere, a pair of tickets to the Wentworth World Match Play and a chance to play the Jack Nicklaus Signature Edition computer game.
Tickets are £3, redeemable against any purchase.
Cheques to Golf/Esquire,.
DO YOU FANCY leaping off a high place attached to earth by only a large rubber band?
Well, Seltzer, the soft drink in the see-through can, has joined forces with Esquire to offer three readers (plus a friend each) the chance to go bungy jumping.
The winner will enjoy a luxury weekend in Normandy in October — including a champagne breakfast, commemorative video, transport and accommodation.
One hundred runners-up will each receive free samples of Seltzer, which is available from Boots and Holland & Barrett.
Send a postcard with your telephone number to Seltzer/Esquire,.
Poker
What is it with these Iranians and their second sight?
BY ANTHONY HOLDEN
WITH A NAME like Hamid Dastmalchi you might think the new world poker champion is a Middle Easterner — maybe an Iranian like Mansour Matloubi, the Cardiff-based player who won the title two years ago.
And you would be right, but for the fact that Hamid, like so many other adopted sons of Ellis Island, is now an all-American poker pro hustling out of San Diego.
What is it with these Iranians?
Their parents' flight from the Shah and the Ayatollah has flooded the poker world with creatures of blinding second sight whose ability to anticipate the contents of all flops has become a serious threat to most western economies.
Until recently it was Chinese Americans who were the most feared of poker immigrants — above all Johnny Chan, back-to-back world champ in 1988-'89, known as the ‘Oriental Express’ because he rakes in so many pots so fast.
A former stir fry chef at the Fremont Hotel in Las Vegas's Glitter Gulch, the young Johnny is remembered next door at the Horseshoe for arriving in the card room straight from his shift, his white apron around his waist.
Like all Far Easterners, Chan likes his action thick and fast and has since fallen victim to a perversion of the game known as Pai Gau poker — a game of pure chance, played as fast as mah-jong for very large amounts of money.
But he got to the final table of the championship again this year.
He can still smell a million dollars when it's within reach.
So can Dastmalchi.
After four days and nights of play, the final table had seen him bust out such other local legends as Clyde ‘Slippery’ Coleman and the dread Dave Crunkleton.
Going into the head-to-head with over $2 million in play, he faced a seasoned tournament veteran in ice-cool Tom Jacobs of Denver, Colorado.
The antes were at the $10,000-$20,000 level, and Dastmalchi was well ahead in chips when the crunch hand came.
The hole cards for what proved to be a $2 million pot looked pretty small at the time: for Dastmalchi, for Jacobs.
His two overcards made Jacobs at the off a 1.73–1 favourite to win the hand.
Then, the flop brought , giving Jacobs two pairs and boosting him to a heady 4.96–1 advantage.
He bet a mere $50,000 — tempting enough for Dastmalchi to call in the forlorn hope of a miracle six to fill his inside straight.
Fourth Street brought…yes, a .
Rather  surprisingly , Dastmalchi now bet $100,000.
The furrow on Jacob's brow grew deeper than the Grand Canyon.
Could Dastmalchi have started with 5–6 or 6–7?
Sure he could, in which case he was losing.
Quite rightly, Jacobs called the $100,00 and went all-in, the rest of his pile building the pot to $1,062,000.
When Dastmalchi called and showed his hand, Tom knew the game was up.
Only a jack or a seven, ti fill a house, could save him now.
With four available among the remaining 44 cards, he had gone in one  from 1–5 favourite to 10–1 underdog.
Fifth Street brought an eight, giving Dastmalchi an irrelevant pair to rub salt in Jacob's wounds.
Hamid was more than a million dollars richer and the second Iranian-born player in three years to be crowned world champion.
So now you know how to win a million dollars.
Get born in Iran, emigrate to the US, get caught in a pot you should never have been in, and wait till it climbs into seven figures before you call and fill an 11–1 inside straight.
View from a Broad
I have met few men in my life about whose bathroom habits I have felt entirely comfortable
Zoë Heller on personal hygiene
WHEN I WAS GROWING UP, the boys I hung around with used to have competitions to see how long they could go without changing their underpants.
They had all these jokes about ‘skid marks’ and something even more disgusting called ‘Klingons’(too disgusting for me to explain to you now).
Their riffs about the current state of their underwear would continue for hours at a time.
‘Oh man, I've had these pants on so long, there are potatoes growing in them,’ one of them would start off.
‘Yeah?’ someone else would say, ‘Well, I've got a whole vegetable plot in mine.’
Then another would chime in: ‘Nah, nah — you're way behind.
I'm growing weed.
If the drug squad ever found out about my pants, man…
’ And so it would go on.
I look back on my early teenage years with some amazement.
What was I doing consorting with these freaks?
Back then I think my girlfriends and I took it for granted that washing regularly was an exclusively feminine pursuit.
We didn't like the fact that our male companions smelt like compost heaps, but we didn't dream of challenging them about it.
Just as it was our duty, we felt, to shower two or three times a day and keep ourselves wrapped in a permanent cloud of Charlie perfume, so, it seemed, it was the male imperative to cultivate mossy teeth and socks that could stand up on their own.
The first time I met a boy who wasn't completely gross in his personal habits, I was thrown into confusion.
I was definitely pleased, but vaguely uneasy when I discovered that he didn't have a black rim around his neck.
Jeez, I thought, what kind of a man is this?
To my fourteen-year-old mind, his cleanliness was connected in some mysterious way to the fact that he went to public school and liked classical music.
That's what these square, effete types did, I eventually figured: they listened to Bartok and bathed a lot.
Naturally, my expectations of men have changed a lot since then: I no longer think that toe jam is a prerequisite of masculinity.
And if physical intimacies are to take place, I do demand that certain basic standards — like having had an all-over wash in the last seven days — are met.
Yet still, some vestiges of my teenage thinking linger on.
Like many women, I find scrupulous attention to personal hygiene slightly sinister in a man.
This, of course, is very unfair: it is just not reasonable for me to flounce about in the bathroom for hours and then make a man feel inadequate when I catch him using my dental floss. or to bellow in disgust when I find out he blow-dries his hair.
But even if I suppress my reactions, this is how I feel, and, consequently, I have met few men in my adult life about whose bathroom habits I have felt entirely comfortable.
Either they have been slobby, and it has eventually got depressing having to argue the case for owning a toothbrush; or they have been scrupulous — in which case I have started longing for a bit more rough-and-readiness.
I'm never quite sure which is worse.
I have known at least two men who refused to use soap, and that was pretty horrible.
(Both used to lie in baths hoping that the dirt would just leap off them.)
I also have a girlfriend who went out for several years with a man who didn't wear underpants at all and only washed his jeans once a month.
Even now she goes pale thinking about it.
On the other hand, there was something unbeatably creepy about the time I walked into a man's bathroom at the very beginning of an affair and saw a bottle of ‘scruffing lotion’ by his basin.
I called him immediately.
‘Excuse me,’ I said, ‘what is that?’
Completely unperturbed, he explained what marvellous things it did for his skin texture.
I had to concentrate very hard to stop myself from running screaming out of the flat.
The use of skin products is particularly difficult to deal with.
One girlfriend of mine recently caught the man she lives with holding a bottle of her moisturizer.
He said: ‘Oh — I was just wondering, you know, because my skin's been getting a little dry recently.’
She said: ‘I don't care if your skin falls off your face, you will never use moisturizer in this house.’
And it's not as if she and I have had to deal with really bad cases — like those men who go regularly for facials.
I admit that all of this is completely out of order — that it looks as if I'm putting men in a no-win situation.
There is, however, one way men can get revenge.
If you want to stop a woman nagging you to wash your hair or throwing away your nancy bottles of conditioner, all you have to do is awaken her ancient, adolescent anxieties about her own cleanliness.
Just ask her a couple of times whether she had a bath this morning and she will immediately be reduced to the anxious teenager she once was, surreptitiously sniffing her armpits and combing chemists for bottles of Charlie.
Who says I never give you helpful advice?
Zoë Heller is a staff writer on the Independent on Sunday