

[COURT OF APPEAL]
ATTORNEY-GENERAL'S REFERENCE (NO. 1 OF 1990)
1992 March 30;
Lord Lane C.J., Macpherson of Cluny and Judge JJ. 1992 April 13
Crime — Abuse of process — Delay in prosecution — Delay by prosecution for 27 months before trial — Possibility of prejudice — Whether stay to be ordered — Whether abuse of process
A police officer attended an incident in August 1987 at which two people were arrested.
Complaints about his conduct were made, of which he was given notice, and a formal investigation was instituted and adjourned pending the outcome of criminal proceedings against those arrested.
They were acquitted in January 1988, and the investigation of the complaints was resumed.
In March 1989 the police officer was served with summonses alleging two offences of assault occasioning actual bodily harm.
Thereupon, for the first time, he consulted a solicitor and, at the trial in the Crown Court, over two years after the incident, the police officer submitted that in view of the delay the proceedings constituted an abuse of the process of the court.
The trial judge held that although the delay was not unjustified, on the balance of probabilities, it might be prejudicial to the police officer, and he ordered the proceedings to be stayed.
The prosecution offered no evidence and, by direction, a verdict of not guilty was recorded.
The Attorney-General referred to the Court of Appeal under section 36 of the Criminal Justice Act 1972 the questions whether proceedings upon indictment could be stayed on the grounds of prejudice resulting from delay in the institution of those proceedings even though that delay had not been occasioned by any fault on the part of the prosecution, and, if so, what degree of likelihood and seriousness of prejudice was required to justify a stay of such proceedings.
On the reference:—
Held , that in the opinion of the court,(1) a stay for delay or any other reason was to be imposed only in exceptional circumstances; that, even where delay could be said to be unjustifiable, the imposition of a permanent stay was to be the exception rather than the rule; and that even more rarely could a stay properly be imposed in the absence of fault on the part of the complainant or the prosecution, and never where the delay was due merely to the complexity of the case or contributed to by the defendant's actions (post, pp. 18H — 19A).
Connelly v. Director of Public Prosecutions [1964]A.C. 1254, H.L. (E.);Reg. v. Derby Crown Court, Ex parte Brooks (1984) 80 Cr.App.R. 164, D.C. and Reg. v. Telford Justices, Ex parte Badhan [1991]2 Q.B.
78, D.C. applied.
(2) That no stay was to be imposed unless a defendant established on the balance of probabilities that, owing to the delay, he would suffer serious prejudice to the extent that no fair trial could be held, in that the continuation of the prosecution amounted to a misuse of the process of the court; that, in assessing whether there was likely to be prejudice and if so whether it could properly be described as serious, the court should bear in mind the trial judge's power at common law and under the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 to regulate the admissibility of evidence, the trial process itself which should ensure that all relevant factual issues arising from delay would be placed before the jury as part of the evidence for their consideration, and the judge's powers to give appropriate directions before the jury considered their verdict; and that, accordingly, the judge's decision to stay the proceedings had been wrong, since such delay as there had been was not unjustifiable, the chances of prejudice were remote, the degree of potential prejudice was small, the powers of the judge and the trial process itself would have provided ample protection for the police officer, there was no danger of the trial being unfair and in any event the case was not exceptional so as to justify the ruling (post, p. 19B–E).
Reg. v. Heston-Francois [1984]Q.B.
278, C.A. applied.
Per curiam .
In the event of an unsuccessful application to the Crown Court on grounds of delay, the appropriate procedure will be for the trial to proceed in accordance with the trial judge's ruling and, if necessary, the point should be argued as part of any appeal to the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division)(post, p. 19E–F).
The following cases are referred to in the judgment:
Connelly v. Director of Public Prosecutions [1964]A.C. 1254;[1964]2 W.L.R. 1145;[1964]2 All E.R.
401, H.L. (E.)
Hunter v. Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police [1982]A.C. 529;[1981]3 W.L.R. 906;[1981]3 All E.R.
727, H.L. (E.)
Jago v. District Court of New South Wales (1989) 168 C.L.R. 23; 87 A.L.R. 577
Mills v. Cooper [1967]2 Q.B.
459;[1967]2 W.L.R. 1343;[1967]2 All E.R.
100, D.C.
Reg. v. Bow Street Stipendiary Magistrate, Ex parte Director of Public Prosecutions (1989) 91 Cr.App.R. 283, D.C.
Reg. v. Brentford Justices, Ex parte Wong (1980) 73 Cr.App.R. 67, D.C.
Reg. v. Derby Crown Court, Ex parte Brooks (1984) 80 Cr.App.R. 164, D.C.
Reg. v. Heston-Francois [1984]Q.B.
278;[1984]2 W.L.R. 309;[1984]1 All E.R.
785, C.A.
Reg. v. Humphrys [1977]A.C. 1;[1976]2 W.L.R. 857;[1976]2 All E.R.
497, H.L. (E.)
Reg. v. Telford Justices, Ex parte Badhan [1991]2 Q.B.
78;[1991]2 W.L.R. 866;[1991]2 All E.R.
854, D.C.
The following additional cases were cited in argument.
Bell v. Director of Public Prosecutions [1985]A.C. 937;[1985]3 W.L.R. 73;[1985]2 All E.R.
585, P.C.
McFadyen v. Annan , The Times, 11 February 1992
Reg. v. Bow Street Metropolitan Stipendiary Magistrate, Ex parte Director of Public Prosecutions (unreported), 24 January 1992, D.C.
Reg. v. Bow Street Metropolitan Stipendiary Magistrate, Ex parte Watts (unreported), 19 October 1990, D.C.
Reg. v. Buzalek [1991]Crim.
L.R. 115, C.A.
Reg. v. Chief Constable of the Merseyside Police, Ex parte Calveley [1986]Q.B.
424;[1986]2 W.L.R. 144;[1986]1 All E.R.
257, C.A.
Reg. v. Chief Constable of the Merseyside Police, Ex parte Merrill [1989]1 W.L.R. 1077, C.A.
Reg. v. Colwyn Justices, Ex parte Director of Public Prosecutions (unreported), 7 March 1988, D.C.
REFERENCE by the Attorney-General under section 36 of the Criminal Justice Act 1972.
The Attorney-General referred a point of law for the opinion of the Court of Appeal in the following terms:
‘1.
The point of law referred for consideration by the court is:
(i)
whether proceedings upon indictment may be stayed on the grounds of prejudice resulting from delay in the institution of those proceedings even though that delay has not been occasioned by any fault on the part of the prosecution;
(ii)
if the answer to
(i)
above is in the affirmative what is the degree of:(a) the likelihood and (b) the seriousness of any prejudice which is required to justify a stay of such proceedings.
‘2.
The facts
‘The material facts of the case which give rise to this reference are as follows.
(1)
The respondent was at all material times a police officer of the Metropolitan Police.
(2)
On 16 August 1987 he was on duty in plain clothes and as a result of a radio message attended an incident following a wedding party in West London.
Two young men were arrested and charged with public order offences.
(3)
The same incident also gave rise to complaints by a number of members of the public in respect of the conduct of several police officers who had attended it.
Following a formal investigation and consideration of the resultant report by the Director of Public Prosecutions, proceedings were instituted against the respondent on 2 March 1989 for the two offences of assault occasioning actual bodily harm.
Following committal proceedings the case came before Judge Holden in the Crown Court at Isleworth on 11 December 1989.
Submissions were made on behalf of the respondent that the proceedings constituted an abuse of process.
After hearing argument the trial judge acceded to those submissions and ordered a stay of proceedings.
In the light of that ruling the prosecution caused the case to be further listed on 22 December 1989 and offered no evidence.
A verdict of not guilty was entered by direction.
(4)
If the case had proceeded to a full trial, the essence of the prosecution case would have been the use of excessive force towards two persons (members of the family of the arrested young men referred to at paragraph
(2)
above) when removing them from the vicinity of a police van into which the arrested persons were being placed.
The respondent was alleged to have grappled the father of the young man around the neck and pushed him away so violently that he fell and cut his head above the right eye.
He was also alleged to have dragged or thrown their sister by the neck so as to cause bruising to the upper arm and neck.
(5)
Chronology of investigation .
The respondent was informed in the early hours of 17 August 1987 that complaint had been made against him and a report was made to New Scotland Yard.
On 25 August 1987 Chief Inspector Lovell was appointed as investigating officer in accordance with the statutory complaints procedure and a notice in accordance with regulation 7 of the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 (S.I.
1985 No. 518) was served on the respondent giving details of an alleged assault by him during the incident on 16 August 1987.
The respondent did not however consult a solicitor until March 1990 and prior to that time did not carry out, or arrange for the carrying out of, any investigations.
(6)
On 7 September 1987 an interim police report was submitted.
Reference was made to Annex F of the Guidance to Chief Officers on Police Complaints and Discipline Procedures promulgated by the Home Office (1985 ed.).
Further investigation of the complaint was deferred until the outcome of the criminal proceedings against the two young men.
Those proceedings were concluded on 19 January 1988 when both were acquitted.
(7)
Thereafter the investigation was re-activated.
It was a substantial inquiry involving the conduct of eight police officers.
Between February and August 1988, 64 written statements were taken and approximately 326 documents were seized.
(8)
On 22 March 1988 a further notice under regulation 7 of the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 (S.I.
1985 No. 518) was served on the respondent.
In May and June all eight officers under investigation were interviewed under caution.
(9)
In August 1988 Chief Inspector Lovell retired from the police service and the final report was completed by Inspector Wyke in September.
The report comprised 235 paragraphs and was supported by 112 pages of statements and 366 pages of documents.
Recommendations were made in respect of each of the officers under investigation.
(10)
In October 1988 the report and its recommendations was considered (as is required by the complaints procedure) by the relevant Commander of the Metropolitan Police.
(11)
In November 1988 the report and its recommendations were submitted for consideration by the Director of Public Prosecutions.
(12)
Counsel's advice was sought on 20 January 1989 and that advice was submitted to the Director on 10 February 1989.
(13)
On 2 March 1989 summonses were sought in respect of the respondent.
On 20 March 1989 papers were served on the respondent.
The respondent consulted a solicitor for the first time at that stage.
(14)
The first hearing of the summonses at court was on 24 April 1989.
On 8 May the case was adjourned for a committal for trial under section 6(1) of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980.
(15)
On 21 September 1989 committal proceedings commenced: they were concluded on 13 October.
(16)
On 2 November 1989 the case was listed for trial in the Crown Court at Isleworth on 11 December.
On that date a submission was made on behalf of the respondent to Judge Holden that the proceedings should be stayed on the grounds of delay and the ‘resultant prejudice to the defendant.’
(17)
Following a two-day hearing, on 13 December the judge upheld the submission and directed that the indictment should remain on the file not to be proceeded with without the leave of the Crown Court or the Court of Appeal.
(18)
The judge held:
‘Doing the best I can, I take the view here that although the delay was certainly not unjustified, as far as the effect is concerned it comes to this: I take the view, on the balance of probabilities, that the delay in these particular circumstances may well be prejudicial to the [respondent]in his defence.
I reach that conclusion, I hope, having properly considered the pros and cons of the situation; the fact that he has this particular advantage as a police officer in marshalling evidence; considering the issues.
But, doing the best I can, I have reached the conclusion that the delay, on a balance of probabilities, might be prejudicial.
I cannot say, and I do not say, that it is bound to be.
I do not have to go that far and I do not go that far.’
The judge did not specify the nature of the prejudice.
He did refer to the fact that, if the trial proceeded, witnesses would be giving evidence about things that had occurred a long time ago and said that he did ‘not think that is a position which is salvaged or saved by reason of the fact that there are in being notebooks, that there are in being witness statements.’
He went on to say that ‘The very aspect of age can have an unfortunate effect on cases, and, on balance, I think this is one of the cases.’
‘Argument
‘It is submitted:
(1)
that there was no delay either in the investigation of the complaint or in the bringing of these proceedings which could properly be said to constitute an abuse of the process of the court;
(2)
that any delay which occurred was reasonable and, as the judge found, justifiable and was in part the inevitable consequence of following the Home Office Guidelines (1985 ed.) referred to above;
(3)
that there was no evidence of, or finding of, any specific prejudices to the respondent in the preparation of his defence caused by the delay in the proceedings;
(4)
that the judge erred in law in ordering that the proceedings be stayed on the grounds that the delay might be prejudicial.’
Anthony Hooper Q.C.
and Oliver Sells for the Attorney-General.
Anthony Arlidge Q.C.
and Peter Cooper for the respondent.
13 April.
LORD LANE C.J. read the following opinion of the court.
This is a reference by Her Majesty's Attorney-General under the provisions of section 36 of the Criminal Justice Act 1972.
The point of law referred for consideration by the court is:
(i)
whether proceedings upon indictment may be stayed on the grounds of prejudice resulting from delay in the institution of those proceedings even though that delay has not been occasioned by any fault on the part of the prosecution;
(ii)
if the answer to
(i)
above is in the affirmative, what is the degree of:(a) the likelihood and (b) the seriousness of any prejudice which is required to justify a stay of such proceedings.
The facts giving rise to the reference are these.
The respondent was at the material times a police officer of the Metropolitan Police.
On 16 August 1987 he was called to an incident following a wedding party in West London.
Two young men called Murphy were arrested and charged with public order offences.
As a result of that incident there were a number of complaints by members of the public about the conduct of some of the police officers who had attended the incident.
A formal investigation was mounted and, at the instance of the Director of Public Prosecutions, proceedings were launched against the respondent on 2 March 1989 for two offences of assault occasioning actual bodily harm, contrary to section 47 of the Offences against the Person Act 1861.
The case was committed to the Crown Court at Isleworth and came before Judge Holden at that court on 11 December 1989.
Submissions were made on behalf of the respondent that the proceedings constituted an abuse of the process of the court.
The judge heard argument on each side and, having done so, acceded to the submissions and ordered that the proceedings should accordingly be stayed.
The case was listed again on 22 December 1989 and on that occasion the prosecution offered no evidence.
A verdict of not guilty was entered by direction.
The essence of the prosecution case would have been the use by the respondent of excessive force towards two members of the family of the Murphy brothers in the course of removing them from the vicinity of a police van into which the brothers were being placed.
It was to be alleged that the respondent had pushed the father of the two brothers so violently that he fell and cut his head and that he dragged or threw their sister in such a way as to cause bruising to her arm and neck.
Since the question of delay is at the root of this reference, it is necessary to examine the chronology of events in some detail.
The respondent was informed in the early hours of 17 August 1987, that is to say, the day after the incident, that a complaint had been made against him.
The matter was then reported to New Scotland Yard.
On 25 August 1987, the following week, Chief Inspector Lovell was appointed as investigating officer in accordance with the statutory complaints procedure.
A notice in accordance with regulation 7 of the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 was on 1 September 1987 served on the respondent.
This gave details of the alleged assault by him during the incident in question.
The respondent did not take the opportunity to consult a solicitor until March 1989, nor did he prior to then carry out or arrange for the carrying out of any investigations.
On 7 September 1987 an interim police report was submitted.
Further investigation of the complaint was deferred until the criminal proceedings against the Murphy brothers had been concluded.
This was in accordance with police procedure.
The judge sets out in his judgment the Home Office Guidance to Chief Officers on Police Complaints and Discipline Procedures, 1985 edition as follows:
‘A common type of case where problems of timing may arise is one in which the complaint and allegations involved in it are directly or closely associated with criminal proceedings which are pending.
[In]such a case, save in exceptional circumstances…it is suggested that the complaint should be regarded as being in effect sub judice and the investigation should ordinarily be deferred until the conclusion of the trial.
The proceedings against the brothers were concluded on 19 January 1988 when both of them were acquitted.
The investigation of the complaints against the respondent was then resumed.
No less than eight police officers were the subject of inquiry and between February and August 1988 some 64 written statements were taken and 326 documents were seized.
On 22 March 1988 a further notice under regulation 7 of the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 was served on the respondent.
In May and June 1988 all eight officers under investigation were interviewed under caution.
Chief Inspector Lovell retired from the police service in August 1988 and the final report was accordingly completed by an Inspector Wyke in September 1988.
The report comprised no less than 235 paragraphs and was supported by 112 pages of statements and 366 pages of documents.
In October 1988 that report was considered as is required by the complaints procedure by the relevant Commander of the Metropolitan Police and in November 1988 it was submitted for consideration by the Director of Public Prosecutions.
Counsel advised the Director on 10 February 1989, and on 2 March summonses were sought in respect of the respondent.
On 20 March 1989 papers were served on him and he then consulted a solicitor for the first time.
On 8 May 1989 the case was adjourned for a committal for trial under section 6(1) of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980 and on 21 September 1989 committal proceedings started.
They were concluded on 13 October 1989 and on 2 November the case was listed for trial in the Crown Court at Isleworth, the trial to commence on 11 December.
It was on that date that the submission already described was made on behalf of the respondent, the defendant, as he then was, to Judge Holden.
In the judgment delivered by Judge Holden appears the following passage:
‘Doing the best I can, I take the view here that although the delay was certainly not unjustified, as far as the effect is concerned it comes to this: I take the view, on the balance of probabilities, that the delay in these particular circumstances, may well be prejudicial to the defendant in his defence.
I reach that conclusion, I hope, having properly considered the pros and cons of the situation: the fact that he has this particular advantage as a police officer in marshalling evidence; considering the issues.
But, doing the best I can, I have reached the conclusion that the delay, on a balance of probabilities, might be prejudicial.
I cannot say, and I do not say, that it is bound to be.
I do not have to go that far and I do not go that far…
I happen to think that the prosecution here and the investigating team have done the very best of jobs in the right spirit and in the fairest frame of mind — of that I am totally convinced.
…So…it may be a very unusual and surprising decision that I have reached, but I intend here, appreciating the seriousness of the position, the ramifications that could follow, I propose to direct that these proceedings are stayed.
It is submitted on behalf of the Attorney-General that there was no delay, either in the investigation of the complaint against the respondent or in the bringing of proceedings against him which could properly be said to amount to an abuse of the process of the court.
Secondly, that any delay which did occur was reasonable and, as indeed the judge himself found, justifiable.
And was partially at least the inevitable consequence of the fact that the Murphy brothers were being prosecuted at the same time as the complaint against the arresting officers was being investigated.
Thirdly, that there was no evidence, nor indeed was there any finding by the judge of any specific prejudice to the respondent in the preparation of his defence caused by any delay in the proceedings against him.
The submission in short is that the judge's ruling was wrong.
Mr. Arlidge on behalf of the respondent bases his submission primarily on the terms of Magna Carta 1215.
His argument is that Magna Carta, both in its original form and as confirmed by Henry III in 1225 (9 Hen.
3) and by Edward I in 1297 (25 Edw. 1), is indeed a statute, with all that that entails.
We do not dissent from that proposition.
His principal submission is based on the words in chapter 29 of the Statute of 1225, namely:
‘No freeman shall be taken, or imprisoned, or be disseised of his freehold or liberties, or free customs, or be outlawed or exiled, or any otherwise destroyed; nor will we not pass upon him, nor condemn him, but by lawful judgment of his peers, or by the law of the land.
We will sell to no man, we will not deny, or defer, to any man, either justice or right.
Mr. Arlidge's argument is as follows: The word ‘defer’ in this context means ‘put off’or ‘postpone’or ‘delay’and that if a trial takes place after a time which is obviously longer than that normally required for the preparation of a trial of that nature, then there has been the kind of delay prohibited by the statute.
Thus, on the facts of the instant case, goes the argument, the fact that the proceedings against the respondent were postponed until the proceedings against the Murphy brothers were concluded (despite the fact that such postponement as we find was in practice almost inevitable) amounts to a breach of Magna Carta chapter 29.
Once that finding is made, goes on the argument, the remedy is not discretionary and it is not necessary for the defendant to prove prejudice.
Delay has occurred contrary to the terms of chapter 29 and he is entitled to his stay.
We disagree with the whole basis of that argument.
In the context of the rest of chapter 29, as already set out, it seems clear to us that the delay or deferment means, at its lowest, wrongful delay or deferment, such as is not justified by the circumstances of the case.
That argument accordingly fails.
There is no statutory limitation period for criminal proceedings such as those in the instant case.
The court is not however powerless to regulate its own proceedings in this area.
In Connelly v. Director of Public Prosecutions [1964]A.C. 1254, 1296, Lord Reid said: ‘there must always be a residual discretion to prevent anything which savours of abuse of process.’
Those words are reflected in the judgment of Lord Parker C.J. in Mills v. Cooper [1967]2 Q.B.
459, 467 and also in the speech of Lord Salmon in Reg. v. Humphrys [1977]A.C. 1, 46:
‘a judge has not and should not appear to have any responsibility for the institution of prosecutions; nor has he any power to refuse to allow a prosecution to proceed merely because he considers that, as a matter of policy, it ought not to have been brought.
It is only if the prosecution amounts to an abuse of the process of the court and is oppressive and vexatious that the judge has the power to intervene.
In Hunter v. Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police [1982]A.C. 529, 536 appears this passage from the speech of Lord Diplock:
‘this is a case about abuse of the process of the High Court.
It concerns the inherent power which any court of justice must possess to prevent misuse of its procedure in a way which, although not inconsistent with the literal application of its procedural rules, would nevertheless be manifestly unfair to a party to litigation before it, or would otherwise bring the administration of justice into disrepute among right-thinking people.
The abuse alleged may arise in many different forms.
It may involve complaints about the methods used to investigate the offence: see Reg. v. Heston-Francois [1984]Q.B.
278.
It may be based as Connelly v. Director of Public Prosecutions [1964]A.C. 1254 itself was, on the allegation that the defendant is being prosecuted more than once for what is in effect the same offence.
It may be a misuse of the process of the court to escape statutory time limits: see Reg. v. Brentford Justices, Ex parte Wong (1980) 73 Cr.App.R. 67.
However, the most usual ground is that based on delay, that is to say the lapse of time between the commission of the offence and the start of the trial.
The number of applications based on this ground has increased alarmingly over the past few years.
The decision of the Divisional Court in Reg. v. Derby Crown Court, Ex parte Brooks (1984) 80 Cr.App.R. 164 for some time seems to have provided the guidelines for courts faced with this problem of delay.
Sir Roger Ormrod, delivering the judgment of the court in that case, said, at pp. 168–169:
‘In our judgment, bearing in mind Viscount Dilhorne's warning in Director of Public Prosecutions v. Humphrys [1977]A.C. 1, 26, that this power to stop a prosecution should only be used ‘in most exceptional circumstances,’…the effect of these cases can be summarised in this way.
The power to stop a prosecution arises only when it is an abuse of the process of the court.
It may be an abuse of process if either (a) the prosecution have manipulated or misused the process of the court so as to deprive the defendant of a protection provided by the law or to take unfair advantage of a technicality, or (b) on the balance of probability the defendant has been, or will be, prejudiced in the preparation or conduct of his defence by delay on the part of the prosecution which is unjustifiable: for example, not due to the complexity of the inquiry and preparation of the prosecution case, or to the action of the defendant or his co-accused, or to genuine difficulty in effecting service.
…The ultimate objective of this discretionary power is to ensure that there should be a fair trial according to law, which involves fairness both to the defendant and the prosecution, for, as Lord Diplock said in Reg. v. Sang [1980]A.C. 402, 437: ‘the fairness of a trial…is not all one-sided; it requires that those who are undoubtedly guilty should be convicted as well as that those about whose guilt there is any reasonable doubt should be acquitted.’
We would like to add to that statement of principle by stressing a point which is sometimes overlooked, namely, that the trial process itself is equipped to deal with the bulk of complaints which have in recent Divisional Court cases founded applications for a stay.
This was pointed out in clear terms in a case which merits more attention than it sometimes receives, namely,Reg. v. Heston-Francois [1984]Q.B.
278.
In that case the police searched under warrant the defendant's home for stolen jewellery.
They removed files of documents and tape prepared for his defence to charges of burglary.
The officer showed the documents to prosecution witnesses.
The defendant applied to the trial judge for a stay on the grounds that the actions of the police amounted to an abuse of the process of the court.
The judge refused the application.
On appeal against that ruling, it was held that the judge was correct in the view that he took.
The following passage in the judgment of the court delivered by Watkins L.J.
appears at p. 290:
‘A pre-trial inquiry, such as the appellant contends the judge in this case was under a duty to embark upon, would itself be open to abuse by unscrupulous and dishonest accused persons.
The criminal trial system would be placed in jeopardy.
The facts of the present case demonstrated the importance of, among other things, discovering during the trial whether alleged misconduct by the police had had any effect upon the evidence and any likely bearing on the result.
It had had none.
…However reprehensible conduct of this kind may be it is not, at least in circumstances such as the present, an abuse or, in another word, a misuse of the court's process.
It is conduct which in these circumstances falls to be dealt with in the trial itself by judicial control upon admissibility of evidence, the judicial power to direct a verdict of not guilty, usually at the close of the prosecution's case, or by the jury taking account of it in evaluating the evidence before them.
Although decisions in this type of case will very much depend upon their own facts, it is not easy to reconcile some of the more recent cases with the principles enunciated in Reg. v. Heston-Francois and Reg. v. Derby Crown Court, Ex parte Brooks , 80 Cr.App.R. 164.
In Archbold, Criminal Pleading Evidence & Practice , 44th ed. (1992), vol. 1, para. 4–45, appears a list of some of the cases decided on this issue.
Perhaps the most important of those is Reg. v. Bow Street Stipendiary Magistrate, Ex parte Director of Public Prosecutions (1989) 91 Cr.App.R. 283.
The facts in the case were similar to those in the instant case in that they involved complaints made against police officers in respect of arrests made by them at the Wapping disturbances in January 1987.
There were complaints of inordinate delay such as to make a fair trial impossible; that regulation 7 notices were served far too late; that the police officers were not interviewed until a year later, that being the first time that they were notified of any specific allegations against them.
The following passage in the judgment of the court appears at p. 296:
‘We see no warrant for not following ample precedent, now well set, for the proposition that mere delay which gives rise to prejudice and unfairness may by itself amount to an abuse of the process.
There are a number of instances of this,Reg. v. Colwyn Justices, Ex parte Director of Public Prosecutions (unreported), 7 March 1988 being one of them.
It will be seen that whereas in Reg. v. Derby Crown Court, Ex parte Brooks , 80 Cr.App.R. 164 it was stated that any delay must be unjustifiable before relief by way of stay will be granted in Reg. v. Bow Street Stipendiary Magistrate, Ex parte Director of Public Prosecutons , 91 Cr.App.R. 283, mere delay giving rise to prejudice and unfairness, it is said, may by itself amount to an abuse of the process of the court.
One therefore reaches the anomalous situation whereby the earlier and stricter rule has been broadened, so it seems, by the weight of subsequent decisions.
On the basis of the decision in Reg. v. Telford Justices, Ex parte Badhan [1991]2 Q.B.
78, Mr. Hooper, appearing before us on behalf of the Attorney-General, felt constrained to concede that the answer to the Attorney-General's first question is a qualified ‘Yes.’
As it is not possible to anticipate in advance all the infinitely variable circumstances which may arise in the future, we feel ourselves, albeit reluctantly, forced to agree to a limited extent with that concession.
However, we remind ourselves of the principles outlined earlier in this judgment and the observation of Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest in Connelly v. Director of Public Prosecutions [1964]A.C. 1254, 1304, that
‘generally speaking a prosecutor has as much right as a defendant to demand a verdict of a jury on an outstanding indictment, and where either demands a verdict a judge has no jurisdiction to stand in the way of it.
Stays imposed on the grounds of delay or for any other reason should only be employed in exceptional circumstances.
If they were to become a matter of routine, it would be only a short time before the public, understandably, viewed the process with suspicion and mistrust.
We respectfully adopt the reasoning of Brennan J. in Jago v. District Court of New South Wales (1989) 168 C.L.R. 23.
In principle, therefore, even where the delay can be said to be unjustifiable, the imposition of a permanent stay should be the exception rather than the rule.
Still more rare should be cases where a stay can properly be imposed in the absence of any fault on the part of the complainant or prosecution.
Delay due merely to the complexity of the case or contributed to by the actions of the defendant himself should never be the foundation for a stay.
In answer to the second question posed by the Attorney-General, no stay should be imposed unless the defendant shows on the balance of probabilities that owing to the delay he will suffer serious prejudice to the extent that no fair trial can be held: in other words, that the continuance of the prosecution amounts to a misuse of the process of the court.
In assessing whether there is likely to be prejudice and if so whether it can properly be described as serious, the following matters should be borne in mind: first, the power of the judge at common law and under the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 to regulate the admissibility of evidence; secondly, the trial process itself, which should ensure that all relevant factual issues arising from delay will be placed before the jury as part of the evidence for their consideration, together with the powers of the judge to give appropriate directions to the jury before they consider their verdict.
It follows from what we have said that in our judgment the decision of the judge to stay the proceedings in the instant case was wrong.
The delay, such as it was, was not unjustifiable; the chances of prejudice were remote; the degree of potential prejudice was small; the powers of the judge and the trial process itself would have provided ample protection for the respondent; there was no danger of the trial being unfair; in any event the case was in no sense exceptional so as to justify the ruling.
This judgment will, we hope, result in a significant reduction in the number of applications to stay proceedings on the ground of delay.
At the risk of repetition, we emphasise the exceptional nature of the jurisdiction.
In the event of an unsuccessful application to the Crown Court on such grounds, the appropriate procedure will be for the trial to proceed in accordance with the ruling of the trial judge and, if necessary, the point should be argued as part of any appeal to the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division).
Opinion accordingly.
Respondent's costs from central funds.
Solicitors: Crown Prosecution Service, Headquarters; Reynolds Dawson.