

[HOUSE OF LORDS]KIRKLEES METROPOLITAN BOROUGH COUNCIL
APPELLANTS
AND WICKES BUILDING SUPPLIES LTD.
RESPONDENTS
1992 March 2, 3, 4, 5, 9;
June 25
Lord Keith of Kinkel, Lord Ackner,
Lord Goff of Chieveley, Lord Jauncey of Tullichettle and Lord Lowry
Local Government — Powers — Action by local authority — Sunday trading — Local authority seeking interlocutory injunction to restrain breaches of statutory prohibition — Whether local authority to be required to give cross-undertaking in damages — Shops Act 1950 (14 Geo. 6, c. 28), s. 47 — Local Government Act 1972 (c. 70), s. 222 — E.E.C.
Treaty (Cmnd. 5179–II), art.
30
The plaintiffs, a borough council, brought proceedings under section 222 of the Local Government Act 1972 and applied for an interlocutory injunction to restrain the defendants from using shop premises of theirs for trade on Sundays in breach of section 47 of the Shops Act 1950 The defendants resisted the claim against them on the ground, inter alia, that section 47 was in conflict with article 30 of the E.E.C.
Treaty which, as between member states, prohibited quantitative restrictions on imports and measures having equivalent effect.
The plaintiffs indicated they were not prepared to give cross-undertakings in damages as a condition of being granted interlocutory relief, and the judge made the interlocutory order sought without requiring such a cross-undertaking.
On appeal by the defendants, the Court of Appeal allowed the appeal and discharged the injunction, holding that as a matter of domestic law there was no justification for extending to local authorities bringing proceedings under section 222 of the Act of 1972 to enforce the criminal law the privilege enjoyed by the Crown alone of being granted an interlocutory injunction without giving a cross-undertaking as to damages; and that since it had not been established that the defendants had no defence under article 30 of the E.E.C.
Treaty a cross-undertaking as to damages should have been given.
On appeal by the plaintiffs:—
Held , allowing the appeal,(1) that there was no rule that the Crown was exempt from giving a cross-undertaking in damages in law enforcement proceedings, but that the court had a discretion not to require the undertaking and that the discretion extended to other public authorities exercising the function of law enforcement in appropriate circumstances; and that subject to the impact of Community law the courts should have exercised that discretion (post, pp. 173D–F, 181G — 182B, G–H, 190D–E).
Stoke-on-Trent City Council v. B. & Q. (Retail) Ltd. [1984]A.C. 754, H.L. (E.) and F. Hoffmann-La Roche & Co.
A.G. v. Secretary of State for Trade and Industry [1975]A.C. 295, H.L. (E.) applied.
(2) That a requirement that the plaintiffs should give an undertaking had no justification in Community law since any obligation to make good any damage suffered by the defendants in the event of section 47 being found to be in breach of article 30 of the Treaty would fall upon the United Kingdom Government; that accordingly, the question was to be decided on the ordinary principles of English law and it was within the judge's discretion not to require an undertaking in damages; and that in the circumstances, the grant of an interlocutory injunction was fully justified and should be restored (post, pp. 173D–F, 189A–H, 190A–C, D, D–E).
Bourgoin S.A. v. Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food [1986]Q.B.
716, C.A.;Reg v. Secretary of State for Transport, Ex parte Factortame Ltd.
(No. 2)(Case C 213/89)[1991]1 A.C. 603, E.C.J. and H.L. (E.) and Francovich v. Republic of Italy (Case C 6/90 and C 9/90)[1992]I.R.L.R. 84, E.C.J. considered.
Per curiam .
The power to grant injunctions under section 37 of the Supreme Court Act 1981 is a discretionary power which should not be fettered by rules.
Thus the existence of an alleged defence to a criminal prosecution is merely a matter to be taken into account in the exercise of the court's discretion when considering whether it is just and convenient that interlocutory relief should be granted (post, pp. 173D–F, 178H, 179A, 190D–E).
Decision of the Court of Appeal [1991]3 W.L.R. 985;[1991]4 All E.R.
240 reversed.
The following cases are referred to in the opinion of Lord Goff of Chieveley:
American Cyanamid Co. v. Ethicon Ltd. [1975]A.C. 396;[1975]2 W.L.R. 316;[1975]1 All E.R.
504, H.L. (E.)
Amministrazione delle Finanze dello Stato v. Simmenthal S.p.A.
(Case 106/77)[1978]E.C.R. 629, E.C.J.
Bourgoin S.A. v. Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food [1986]Q.B.
716;[1985]3 W.L.R. 1027;[1985]3 All E.R.
585, C.A.
City of London Corporation v. Bovis Construction Ltd. (1988) 86 L.G.R. 660, C.A.
Criminal Proceedings v. A. Marchandise (Case C 332/89), The Times, 6 March 1991, E.C.J.
Francovich v. Republic of Italy (Case C 6/90 and C 9/90)[1992]I.R.L.R. 84, E.C.J.
Gouriet v. Union of Post Office Workers [1978]A.C. 435;[1977]3 W.L.R. 300;[1977]3 All E.R.
70, H.L. (E.)
Hoffmann-La Roche (F.) & Co.
A.G. v. Secretary of State for Trade and Industry [1975]A.C. 295;[1974]3 W.L.R. 104;[1974]2 All E.R.
1128, H.L. (E.)
Newport Borough Council v. Khan (Sabz Ali)[1990]1 W.L.R. 1185, C.A.
Portsmouth City Council v. Richards [1989]1 C.M.L.R. 673, C.A.
Reg. v. Braintree District Council, Ex parte Willingham (1982) 81 L.G.R. 70, D.C.
Reg. v. Secretary of State for Transport, Ex parte Factortame Ltd.
(No. 2)(Case C 213/89)[1991]1 A.C. 603;[1990]3 W.L.R. 818;[1991]1 All E.R.
70, E.C.J. and H.L. (E.)
Smith (W.H.) Do-It-All Ltd. v. Peterborough City Council [1991]1 Q.B.
304;[1990]3 W.L.R. 1131;[1991]4 All E.R.
193, D.C.
Stoke-on-Trent City Council v. B. & Q. Plc. [1991]Ch. 48;[1991]2 W.L.R. 42;[1991]4 All E.R.
221
Stoke-on-Trent City Council v. B. & Q. (Retail) Ltd. [1984]A.C. 754;[1984]2 W.L.R. 929;[1984]2 All E.R.
332, H.L. (E.)
Torfaen Borough Council v. B. & Q. Plc.
(Case 145/88)[1990]2 Q.B.
19;[1990]2 W.L.R. 1330;[1990]1 All E.R.
129, E.C.J.
Union Départementale des Syndicats C.G.T. de l'Aisne v. Sidef Conforama (Case C 312/89), The Times, 6 March 1991, E.C.J.
Zuckerfabrik Sûderdithmarschen A.G. v. Hauptzollamt Itzehoe (Cases C 143/88 and C 92/89), The Times, 27 March 1991, E.C.J.
The following additional cases were cited in argument:
Amministrazione delle Finanze dello Stato v. S.p.A.
San Giorgio (Case 199/82)[1983]E.C.R. 3595, E.C.J.
Amylum (G.R.) N.V. v. Council and Commission of the European Communities (Joined Cases 116/77, 124/77 and 143/77)[1978]E.C.R. 893, E.C.J.
Attorney-General v. Chaudry [1971]1 W.L.R. 1614;[1971]3 All E.R.
938, C.A.
Attorney-General v. Wright [1988]1 W.L.R. 164;[1987]3 All E.R.
579
Blackpool Bourough Council v. W. H. Smith Do-It-All Ltd. (unreported), 28 July 1987, Walton J.
Coventry City Council v. Woolworths Plc. [1991]2 C.M.L.R. 3
D. v. National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children [1978]A.C. 171;[1977]2 W.L.R. 201;[1977]1 All E.R.
589, H.L. (E.)
Derbyshire County Council v. Times Newspapers Ltd. [1991]4 All E.R.
795
Deutsche Milchkontor G.m.b.H. v. Federal Republic of Germany (Joined Cases 205/82 to 215/82)[1983]E.C.R. 2633, E.C.J.
Director General of Fair Trading v. Tobyward Ltd. [1989]1 W.L.R. 517;[1989]2 All E.R.
266
Firma Molkerei-Zentrale Westpalen/Lippe G.m.b.H. v. Hauptzollamt Paderborn (Case 28/67)[1968]E.C.R. 143, E.C.J.
Hammersmith London Borough Council v. Magnum Automated Forecourts Ltd. [1978]1 W.L.R. 50;[1978]1 All E.R.
401, C.A.
Reg v. Secretary of State for Transport, Ex parte Factortame Ltd. [1990]2 A.C. 85;[1989]2 W.L.R. 997;[1989]2 All E.R.
692, H.L. (E.)
Rewe-Zentralfinanz e.G. v. Landwirtschaftskammer fûr das Saarland (Case 33/76)[1976]E.C.R. 1989, E.C.J.
Rochdale Borough Council v. Anders [1988]3 All E.R.
490
Runnymede Borough Council v. Ball [1986]1 W.L.R 353;[1986]1 All E.R.
629, C.A.
Sierbein v. Westminster City Council (1987) 86 L.G.R. 431, C.A.
Smith v. Inner London Education Authority [1978]1 All E.R.
411, C.A.
Solihull Metropolitan Borough Council v. Maxfern Ltd.
(No. 2)(1976) 75 L.G.R. 392
Stafford Borough Council v. Elkenford Ltd. [1977]1 W.L.R. 324;[1977]2 All E.R.
319, C.A.
Waverley Borough Council v. Hilden [1988]1 W.L.R. 246;[1988]1 All E.R.
807
Wychavon District Council v. Midland Enterprises (Special Event) Ltd. [1988]1 C.M.L.R. 397
Appeal from the Court of Appeal.
This was an appeal by leave dated 18 November 1991 of the House of Lords (Lord Bridge of Harwich, Lord Ackner and Lord Browne-Wilkinson) by the appellants, Kirklees Metropolitan Borough Council, from the judgment dated 30 April 1991 of the Court of Appeal (Dillon, Mann and Beldam L.JJ.) allowing the appeal of the respondents, Wickes Building Supplies Ltd., from the judgment dated 14 May 1990 of Mervyn Davies J. granting the appellants an interlocutory injunction to restrain the respondents from trading on Sunday contrary to section 47 of the Shops Act 1950, within the appellants' administrative area.
In the House of Lords the Attorney-General applied for and was granted leave to intervene in the proceedings in order to represent and advance the interests of the Crown.
The facts are stated in the opinion of Lord Goff of Chieveley.
Stuart Isaacs Q.C., Timothy Straker and Neil Calver for the plaintiffs.
Andrew Collins Q.C.
and K.P.E. Lasok for the defendants.
Stephen Richards and Nicholas Paines for the Attorney-General.
Their Lordships took time for consideration.
25 June.
Lord Keith of Kinkel.
My Lords, I have read the speech to be delivered by my noble and learned friend, Lord Goff of Chieveley.
I agree with it, and for the reasons he gives would allow the appeal.
Lord Ackner .
My Lords, I have had the advantage of reading the speech of my noble and learned friend, Lord Goff of Chieveley.
I agree with it and for the reasons he gives I, too, would allow the appeal.
LORD GOFF OF CHIEVELEY .
My Lords, this appeal is about Sunday trading.
In England and Wales, Sunday trading is prohibited by section 47 of the Shops Act 1950 which provides, subject to certain specified exceptions, that ‘Every shop shall…be closed for the serving of customers on Sunday.’
The aim of the legislation is to ensure that, so far as possible, shopkeepers and shop assistants do not have to work on Sunday: see Stoke-on-Trent City Council v. B. & Q. Plc. [1991]Ch. 48, 66,per Hoffmann J. But the prohibition against Sunday trading has become controversial in modern times.
On the one hand, the Church and other religious organisations uphold the traditional principle that Sunday should be kept as a day apart, for religious observance and for rest; they receive support from trade unions and others who fear that those who work in shops may, if Sunday trading is permitted, find themselves under pressure to work on Sunday against their will.
But there are pressures the other way.
Many people consider that, with only a small proportion of the population attending church on Sunday, the whole idea of a prohibition against Sunday trading is now out of date.
This approach is supported for commercial reasons by large retailers, notably do-it-yourself stores, who have discovered that, if their stores are open on Sundays, not merely is this a convenience for their customers but a significant increase in their trade is generated.
There can be little doubt that there are many people in this country who would welcome such a change, as is evidenced by the customers who flock to stores to shop on Sunday when they are given the opportunity to do so; but it might not be so popular with small retailers who could find it more difficult to open their shops regularly on Sundays to remain competitive with their larger and more powerful rivals.
At all events, a recent proposal by the Government to abolish the prohibition against Sunday trading failed; and in consequence section 47 of the Act of 1950 remains in force with the effect that, so far as our domestic law is concerned, the general prohibition against Sunday trading is still the law.
Even so, during the past few years we have seen some large stores opening on Sundays, in apparent defiance of the law.
Prosecutions by local authorities under the Act of 1950 have little deterrent effect, because the increased sales are such that fines at the level presently authorised under the statute can be absorbed by large retailers as a relatively small increase in their costs, though the same is not true of small shops with their much lower sales.
An increase in the level of fines is scheduled to come into effect in the autumn of this year; but in the meantime the temptation remains for large stores to open on Sundays.
The ineffectiveness of prosecution, or the threat of prosecution, to deter large stores from Sunday opening has caused local authorities, who are charged with the enforcement of section 47, to search for a more effective remedy, and as a result they have resorted to seeking injunctions to restrain stores from infringing the section.
In response, the stores appear first to have sought the protection of one of the specified exceptions to the prohibition in section 47, viz. the sale of motor accessories.
The argument was that almost anything could be used in connection with cars or motoring, and so a very wide range of goods fell to be classified as motor accessories for the purposes of the section.
This argument has, not surprisingly, been rejected by the courts.
But now the stores have taken the more formidable step of invoking Community law.
The argument is that section 47 cannot stand because it is inconsistent with article 30 of the Treaty, a provision having direct effect which prohibits between member states quantitative restrictions on imports and all measures having equivalent effect; it is said that the prohibition against Sunday trading in this country has such an effect.
The argument has been considered by the European Court of Justice in Torfaen Borough Council v. B. & Q. Plc.
(Case 145/88)[1990]2 Q.B.
19.
I shall have to consider the effect of the judgment of the court in that case, and two later cases,Union Départmentale des Syndicats C.G.T. de l'Aisne v. Sidef Conforama (Case C 312/89) and Criminal Proceedings v. A. Marchandise (Case C 332/89), The Times, 6 March 1991, at a later stage.
An important issue in the case now before your Lordships' House is the impact of Community law, as interpreted in those three cases, upon our domestic law.
The present case has arisen as follows.
On 14 May 1990 the appellants, the Council of the Metropolitan Borough of Kirklees (‘the council’), obtained from Mervyn Davies J. an interlocutory injunction restraining the respondents, Wickes Building Supplies Ltd.
(‘Wickes’), until trial from using any premises in the Kirklees area as a retail do-it-yourself centre or for the purpose of any other retail trade or business on Sundays, except for the purpose of carrying out transactions excepted under the Act of 1950.
On the evidence before the learned judge, it was plain that Wickes had been trading on Sundays and intended to continue doing so in the future unless restrained by the court; and it was common ground between the parties that Wickes' Sunday trading was in breach of section 47 unless that section had been rendered ineffective by article 30 of the Treaty.
The judge, having referred to the Torfaen case (Case 145/88)[1990]2 Q.B.
19, turned to the question whether it was appropriate to grant the council interlocutory relief.
Applying the principles laid down by this House in American Cyanamid Co. v. Ethicon Ltd. [1975]A.C. 396, he first asked himself whether there was a serious question to be tried; he held that there was, the question being whether or not the facts were such that section 47 was incompatible with article 30.
Turning to the balance of convenience, he was in no doubt that the balance lay in favour of granting an interlocutory injunction.
Finally, applying the principles established in F. Hoffmann-La Roche & Co.
A.G. v. Secretary of State for Trade and Industry [1975]A.C. 295, he held that, since the council was engaged in law enforcement duties, he had a discretion whether or not to require the council to give an undertaking in damages as a prerequisite of the grant of an interlocutory injunction, and he decided to exercise that discretion against requiring such an undertaking.
As a result of Mervyn Davies J.'s decision not to require an undertaking in damages, many other local councils sought and obtained interlocutory injunctions on the same terms restraining Sunday trading by retail stores.
By the time that the present case had reached the Court of Appeal, as many as 100 injunctions had been granted by judges of the Chancery Division, following the approach of Mervyn Davies J. By that time, too, the decision of the European Court of Justice in the Torfaen case had been followed by its decisions in the Conforama and Marchandise cases; and it was the contention of the council that the approach of the court in the former case, upon which Wickes relied, had been tacitly abandoned by the court in the latter two cases.
The Court of Appeal took the view that it remained unclear whether the court had so resiled.
In any event, however, the Court of Appeal decided that the judge had erred in not requiring the council to give an undertaking in damages.
Dillon and Mann L.JJ. held that he had erred in English domestic law, because he had misunderstood the Hoffmann-La Roche case as extending to local authorities a privilege which belonged to the Crown alone; and furthermore that he had erred in Community law because, since it is the duty of the national court to ensure the legal protection which persons derive from the direct effect of provisions of Community law, it was necessary to require an undertaking in damages to protect any current right which Wickes might have, by virtue of article 30, to open their doors for Sunday trading.
Beldam L.J.
considered that, since the court was required to protect rights conferred under Community law, the judge had erred in exercising his discretion not to require an undertaking.
As a result, the council having declined to give an undertaking, the interlocutory injunction was discharged; and your Lordships were informed that the interlocutory injunctions granted in about 100 other cases were likewise discharged for the same reason.
It appears that no council feels able to give an undertaking in damages in cases of this kind, because of the possible serious impact upon their limited financial resources.
The result is that, for the time being, large retail stores are trading on Sundays, up and down the country, undeterred by the threat of criminal prosecution and unrestrained by an injunction.
It is against the decision of the Court of Appeal, and in particular its decision on the undertaking in damages, that the council now appeals, with the leave of your Lordships' House.
At the commencement of the hearing, your Lordships gave leave to the Attorney-General to intervene in the proceedings.
There can be no doubt, since the decision of this House in Stoke-on-Trent City Council v. B. & Q. (Retail) Ltd. [1984]A.C. 754, that a local authority has power, in appropriate circumstances, to proceed in its own name by way of injunction to restrain infringements of section 47 of the Shops Act 1950.
Section 71(1) of the Act provides:
‘It shall be the duty of every local authority to enforce within their district the provisions of this Act and of the orders made under those provisions, and for that purpose to institute and carry on such proceedings in respect of contraventions of the said provisions and such orders as aforesaid as may be necessary to secure observance thereof.
At the time when the Act was passed, there was no power in a local authority to take proceedings in its own name for an injunction.
However, section 222 of the Local Government Act 1972 provided:
‘(1) Where a local authority consider it expedient for the promotion or protection of the interests of the inhabitants of their area —(a ) they may prosecute or defend or appear in any legal proceedings and, in the case of civil proceedings, may institute them in their own name…
On the face of these two statutory provisions, it appears that proceedings in its own name by way of injunction are open to a local authority in order to secure observance of section 47 of the Shops Act.
In Stoke-on-Trent City Council v. B. & Q. (Retail) Ltd .
[1984]A.C. 754, a determined attack on the existence of this power was made by B. & Q., but was rejected by this House.
On the present appeal before your Lordships it was suggested, even so, that the exercise by a local authority of the power under section 222 to institute civil proceedings in its own name was not authorised by section 71(1).
The function of this argument was to suggest that, although the local authority may have had power to institute civil proceedings in its own name under section 222, it had no duty to do so under section 71(1).
The basis of the argument was that since, at the date of the Shops Act 1950, the only proceedings which the local authority could then have instituted to enforce the law against Sunday trading were criminal proceedings, section 71(1) should be read as limited to such proceedings.
I am unable to accept this argument.
Section 71(1) is in very broad terms, and it is well capable of embracing any proceeding necessary to secure observance of the Act, including civil proceedings for an injunction which authorities are subsequently empowered to commence in their own name.
Such was the conclusion of the Divisional Court in Reg. v. Braintree District Council, Ex parte Willingham (1982) 81 L.G.R. 70, a case cited with approval in Stoke-on-Trent City Council v. B. &.
Q. (Retail) Ltd .
[1984]A.C. 754, 768,per Lord Roskill; the same view was expressed by Lord Templeman, at p. 776, in the course of a speech with which the other members of the Appellate Committee expressed their agreement.
He said:
‘The right to invoke the assistance of the civil court in aid of the criminal law is a comparatively modern development.
Where Parliament imposes a penalty for an offence, Parliament must consider the penalty is adequate and Parliament can increase the penalty if it proves to be inadequate.
It follows that a local authority should be reluctant to seek and the court should be reluctant to grant an injunction which if disobeyed may involve the infringer in sanctions far more onerous than the penalty imposed for the offence.
In Gouriet v. Union of Post Office Workers [1978]A.C. 435 Lord Wilberforce said at p. 481, that the right to invoke the assistance of civil courts in aid of the criminal law is ‘an exceptional power confined, in practice, to cases where an offence is frequently repeated in disregard of a, usually, inadequate penalty…or to cases of emergency…
’ In my view there must certainly be something more than infringement before the assistance of civil proceedings can be invoked and accorded for the protection or promotion of the interests of the inhabitants of the area.
In the present case the council were concerned with what appeared to be a proliferation of illegal Sunday trading.
The council was by section 71 of the Shops Act 1950 charged with the statutory duty of ensuring compliance with the Act.
The council received letters from traders complaining of infringements of the Sunday trading legislation by other shops and intimating that the complainants would themselves feel obliged to open on Sundays in order to preserve their trade unless the Act was generally observed.
The council could not treat some traders differently from others.
The council wrote to warn infringing traders some of whom ceased to trade on Sundays as a result of the warnings.
In one case where an ignored warning was followed by the issue of a writ the proceedings resulted in an undertaking to desist.
In these circumstances there was ample justification for the council to take the view that it was expedient in the general interests of the inhabitants to take such steps as were necessary to ensure compliance by the appellants with the laws of Sunday trading.
I have cited this passage in full, because it expresses very clearly the caution which must be exercised before the court grants an injunction to restrain an infringement of the criminal law.
In Gouriet v. Union of Post Office Workers [1978]A.C. 435, it was stressed that the jurisdiction must be exercised with great caution.
In the passage I have just quoted, Lord Templeman said that there must certainly be something more than infringement before the assistance of civil proceedings can be invoked.
It is sometimes said that the offender must have been deliberately and flagrantly flouting the law.
However, quite apart from the fact that such a statement does not accommodate cases of emergency — cases where the defendant's unlawful conduct could, unless restrained, cause serious and irreparable harm before trial, as for example where the defendant threatens to cut down a tree in breach of a tree preservation order — in other cases it is usually not so much the flagrancy of the breach as the fact that the defendant intends to persist in offending unless restrained by an injunction, which justifies the invocation of that form of relief: see City of London Corporation v. Bovis Construction Ltd .
(1988) 86 L.G.R. 660, 682,per Bingham L.J.
It was however submitted before your Lordships, by Mr. Collins on behalf of Wickes, that there was a further, more specific, prerequisite of the exercise of the jurisdiction to grant an injunction in such a case, viz. that the defendant must plainly have no defence to a criminal prosecution.
I have no doubt that, in practice, this is usually the case.
Sometimes, indeed, the injunction will be sought following a series of convictions for an offence which carries a financial penalty so small that it does not deter further infringements.
In other cases, if there is any suggestion that the defendant has a defence, the point can be tested immediately by treating the hearing of the motion as the trial of the action, or by some other means (such as Order 14 proceedings) which result in a final injunction.
Indeed, the authorities upon which Mr. Collins relied in support of his submission proved on examination to be cases in which the possibility of a defence had been disposed of in that way.
But this is not always possible.
In an emergency case, for example, the court may consider it just and convenient to impose an immediate interlocutory injunction, leaving the merits of any defence to be resolved at trial.
Further, as the present case shows, the introduction of a possible Community law defence may transform the situation.
This is because the raising of such a defence may involve the necessity of a reference to the European Court of Justice under article 177 of the Treaty.
Such a reference can, your Lordships were told, involve a delay of as much as 18 months before an answer is received from the court, during which time there can be no final determination of the issue.
It would be startling if the mere fact that the defendant invoked a Community law defence, with sufficient substance (but no more) to escape rejection under the narrowly drawn principle of acte clair, should be capable of itself of excluding this useful jurisdiction, thus providing encouragement to those seeking to profit from law-breaking activities to adopt this method of prolonging what may prove to be a source of illicit profit.
However, I am unable to accept Mr. Collins's submission.
I know of no authority which supports it.
There are cases in which an interlocutory injunction has been granted, despite the fact that the defendant was raising a defence to the alleged crime.
In Portsmouth City Council v. Richards [1989]1 C.M.L.R. 673, the Court of Appeal upheld the grant of an interlocutory injunction restraining the operation of sex shops, despite the fact that the defendant had raised a defence under article 30 of the Treaty.
In City of London Corporation v. Bovis Construction Ltd .,
86 L.G.R. 660, the Court of Appeal upheld the grant of an interlocutory injunction restraining a breach of the Control of Pollution Act 1974, notwithstanding an alleged defence invoked by the defendant which had not been disposed of.
Furthermore, the submission of Mr. Collins ignores the fact that, since an injunction may be granted in an emergency to restrain an infringement of the law, for example the cutting down of a tree in breach of a tree preservation order (see, e.g.,Newport Borough Council v. Khan (Sabz Ali)[1990]1 W.L.R. 1185), it may well be impossible in such circumstances to resolve the issue of a possible defence on the application for an interlocutory injunction.
Mr. Collins sought to accommodate such cases by recognising them as an exception to his suggested rule.
I cannot think that this is right.
The power to grant injunctions, which now arises under section 37 of the Supreme Court Act 1981, is a discretionary power, which should not as a matter of principle be fettered by rules.
In my opinion, the existence of an alleged defence is a matter to be taken into account in the exercise of the court's discretion, when deciding whether it is just and convenient that interlocutory relief should be granted.
I turn next to the question of the undertaking in damages, which lies at the heart of the present appeal.
The Court of Appeal required the council to give such an undertaking, as a condition of the grant of an injunction, first because, as Dillon and Mann L.JJ. held, in English law the discretion to dispense with such an undertaking in cases where an injunction is sought to restrain an infringement of the criminal law is available only to give effect to a privilege of the Crown alone and does not extend to local authorities exercising the function of law enforcement; and second because under Community law an undertaking must be given were necessary to protect any Community law right of direct effect which might possibly be affected.
I first consider the point under English domestic law.
This depends upon a proper understanding of the decision of this House in F. Hoffmann-La Roche & Co.
A.G. v. Secretary of State for Trade and Industry [1975]A.C. 295.
The case was concerned with a claim by the Secretary of State for an injunction restraining Hoffmann-La Roche from charging prices for certain drugs in excess of those specified in an Order, approved by both Houses of Parliament, made following an enquiry and report by the Monopolies Commission in which the Commission concluded that the prices charged by Hoffmann-La Roche were excessive.
Hoffmann-La Roche claimed that the proceedings adopted by the Monopolies Commission were contrary to the rules of natural justice and that in consequence the Order was ultra vires and invalid; it brought proceedings against the Secretary of State claiming a declaration to that effect, and indicated that in the meanwhile it would not comply with the Order.
In the proceedings brought by the Secretary of State for an injunction, the question arose whether the Secretary of State should be required to give an undertaking in damages to recompense Hoffmann-La Roche in the event of the Order being held to be invalid.
This House held that, in the circumstances, he was not required to do so.
The question whether the Crown is required in law enforcement proceedings to give such an undertaking was considered in depth in that case.
Previously, it had been generally accepted that the requirement of an undertaking in damages as a condition of the grant of an interlocutory injunction did not apply in the case of the Crown.
However, the origin of this rule appears to have lain in the fact that, since the Crown was not liable in damages in the ordinary way, a requirement for an undertaking in damages would be inconsistent with the Crown's immunity from liability; and it was concluded that the Crown Proceedings Act 1947 had removed the justification for the rule.
It followed that the House had to consider afresh the principles upon which the court ought to exercise its discretion whether to require an undertaking in damages from the Crown.
It was decided, first, that in actions brought by the Crown to enforce or protect its proprietary or contractual rights, it should be in no different position from the ordinary citizen and so should be required to give an undertaking in the usual way.
But, second, it was held that different principles applied in cases where the Crown brought a law enforcement action, in which an injunction was sought to restrain a subject from breaking a law where the breach would be harmful to the public or a section of it.
Lord Diplock drew a distinction between two types of proceedings.
The first was a relator action in which, once the Attorney-General's consent had been obtained, the relator stood in the shoes of the plaintiff in an ordinary suit between subject and subject, and an undertaking in damages was required from the relator but not from the Attorney-General.
The second was a law enforcement action brought by the Crown; he referred in particular to such an action brought under a statute which provided expressly for enforcement of a provision of the statute by civil proceedings by the Crown, which was the position in the Hoffmann-La Roche case [1975]A.C. 295 where the Crown was proceeding pursuant to a provision of the Monopolies and Restrictive Practices (Inquiry and Control) Act 1948.
Lord Diplock explained the distinction between these two types of case in the following passage, at p. 364:
‘So even before the passing of the Crown Proceedings Act 1947 the fact that the suit was brought to enforce jus publicum was not of itself sufficient to displace the ordinary rule that a defendant was entitled to the usual undertaking in damages as a condition of the grant of any interlocutory injunction against him, though the undertaking was exacted from the relator and not from the Crown on whose behalf the Attorney-General was the nominal plaintiff in the suit.
I see no reason since the passing of that Act why a rigid rule that the Crown itself should never be required to give the usual undertaking in damages should be retained in those law enforcement actions where the Crown now sues without a relator.
‘Nevertheless, the converse does not follow that in this type of action the court in granting an interim injunction ought always to require an undertaking as to damages from the Crown.
A relator owes no duty to the public to initiate any law enforcement action.
He does not usually do so unless he or a section of the public which he represents has some special interest to protect, in enforcing that particular law, that is not shared by the public at large.
Even if he has no special interest — and it is not essential that he should — his action nevertheless is that of an officious, though well-meaning, bystander who is not content merely to stand by.
When, however, a statute provides that compliance with its provisions shall be enforceable by civil proceedings by the Crown for an injunction, and particularly if this is the only method of enforcement for which it provides, the Crown does owe a duty to the public at large to initiate proceedings to secure that the law is not flouted, and not simply to leave it to the chance that some relator may be willing to incur the expense and trouble of doing so.
‘I agree therefore with all your Lordships that the practice of exacting an undertaking in damages from the Crown as a condition of the grant of an interlocutory injunction in this type of law enforcement action ought not to be applied as a matter of course, as it should be in actions between subject and subject, in relator actions, and in actions by the Crown to enforce or to protect its proprietary or contractual rights.
On the contrary, the propriety of requiring such an undertaking from the Crown should be considered in the light of the particular circumstances of the case.
It was decided that, in the circumstances of that case, the discretion should be so exercised as not to require an undertaking in damages from the Crown.
In that case, this House was concerned only with the position of the Crown in law enforcement actions.
It was not concerned with the position of local authorities which have the function of enforcing the law in their districts in the public interest.
Whether the same principle should be held to apply in the case of public authorities other than the Crown charged with the enforcement of the law falls to be decided in the present case.
The majority of the Court of Appeal concluded that the same principle should not apply in the case of such public authorities.
Dillon L.J.
[1991]3 W.L.R. 985, 994G concluded that the discretionary power not to require an undertaking in damages in a law enforcement action was ‘a privilege of the Crown alone.’
In reaching that conclusion, he was much influenced by the fact that, in a relator action brought to enforce public rights or public law, it is accepted practice, where the relator is a local authority, to require an undertaking in damages from the local authority as in the case of any other relator.
Mann L.J.
was impressed by the same consideration.
He continued, at p. 998:
‘I see no reason for such a surprising change.
It was pressed upon us that local authorities were now performing law enforcement functions of their own.
As a general proposition that is unexceptionable, but it by no means follows that the Crown and a local authority should be equated in regard to the requirement of an undertaking.
The decision in the Hoffmann-La Roche case is not about law enforcement actions in general.
It is specifically about actions by the Crown under a statute providing a prescribed means of law enforcement.
The decision may extend to proceedings to enforce a public right brought by the Attorney-General ex officio, and in Attorney-General v. Wright [1988]1 W.L.R. 164, 166G, Hoffmann J. held that it did.
Nevertheless, in my judgment, and granted the consequence to which I have referred, there is no reason to extend the decision in regard to the Crown to some or all actions by a local authority under section 222(1) of the Act of 1972.
I say ‘some or all’ for there is no perceptible limitation.
I express no opinion upon the case where a local or other public authority brings a civil action under a statute which prescribes that action as being the only method of enforcing a law which it is obliged to enforce.
Suffice to say such a case might be closer to the reasoning of Lord Diplock in F. Hoffmann-La Roche & Co.
A.G. v. Secretary of State for Trade and Industry [1975]A.C. 295…
Local Government Act 1972, s. 222: see post, p. 176D–E.
Shops Act 1950, s. 47:
‘Every shop shall, save as otherwise provided by this Part of this Act, be closed for the serving of customers on Sunday: Provided that a shop may be open for the serving of customers on Sunday for the purposes of any transaction mentioned in Schedule 5 to this Act.
E.E.C.
Treaty, art.
30:
‘Quantitative restrictions on imports and all measures having equivalent effect shall…be prohibited between member states.
I do not, however, find this reasoning persuasive.
My main difficulty is that it reduces the principle enunciated by this House in the Hoffmann-La Roche case to the status of an arbitrary rule — what Dillon L.J.
called ‘a privilege of the Crown.’
Yet I do not read the speeches in the Hoffmann-La Roche case as conferring a privilege on the Crown in law enforcement proceedings.
On the contrary, I read them as dismantling an old Crown privilege and substituting for it a principle upon which, in certain limited circumstances, the court has a discretion whether or not to require an undertaking in damages from the Crown as law enforcer.
The principle appears to be related not to the Crown as such but to the Crown when performing a particular function.
It is true that, in all the speeches in that case, attention was focused upon the position of the Crown, for the obvious reason that it was the position of the Crown which was in issue in that case.
But the considerations which persuaded this House to hold that there was a discretion whether or not to require an undertaking in damages from the Crown in a law enforcement action are equally applicable to cases in which some other public authority is charged with the enforcement of the law: see e.g. Lord Reid, at p. 341g, Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest, at p. 352c, and Lord Cross of Chelsea, at p. 371b–g.
In the circumstances, I find it difficult to understand why the same principle should not, in similar circumstances, apply to other public authorities when exercising the function of law enforcer in the public interest.
It is instructive to turn to the position of the local authority in the present case.
Plainly, the function of law enforcement under the Shops Act 1950 is entrusted to the local authority of each district.
Under section 71(1) of the Act, it is the duty of each local authority to enforce within its district the provisions of the Act and ‘for that purpose to institute and carry on such proceedings in respect of contraventions of the said provisions…as may be necessary to secure observance thereof.’
It is true that the section does not expressly refer to proceedings by way of injunction as such; but, as I have previously said, the breadth of the section is such as to embrace injunction proceedings, brought under the power subsequently conferred by section 222 of the Local Government Act 1972, when such proceedings are necessary.
It is also true that proceedings by way of injunction are not the only form of proceedings open to a local authority under the section; but, unlike Mann L.J., I am not impressed by that fact, because, in practice, for reasons I have previously given, the circumstances in which injunction proceedings may be successfully brought by a local authority are such that no other proceedings will be effective to enforce the law.
In these circumstances, I for my part can see no material distinction between the council in the present case and the Crown in the Hoffmann-La Roche case [1975]A.C. 295.
Nor do I feel compelled to depart from that conclusion by the fact that, under the present practice, a local authority which acts as a relator in a relator action is required to give an undertaking in damages even though it is so proceeding in order to enforce the law in the public interest.
I observe that, in the Hoffmann-La Roche case, Lord Diplock distinguished the position of a relator on the ground that he owes no duty to the public to initiate any law enforcement action.
In the present case, however, the Council is indeed charged with such a duty.
That does not prevent the Crown from proceeding to enforce the law under its general powers; but it would be an extraordinary situation if a local authority, acting under a statutory duty, was required to give an undertaking in damages, whereas the Crown was not.
To my mind, the position of the local authority as relator cannot be decisive of the present case.
The essential question is whether the court's discretion to require an undertaking in damages in law enforcement actions is confined to cases in which the Crown is plaintiff, or should be held to apply to other public authorities exercising the function of law enforcement in the circumstances specified in the Hoffmann-La Roche case.
In my opinion, for the reasons I have given, it should be held so to apply.
It follows that, apart from the question of the impact of Community law, such is the discretion which the courts should have exercised in the present case.
I turn therefore to the issue of Community law.
The conclusion of the majority of the Court of Appeal was that the court was bound by Community law to require an undertaking in damages from the council if an interlocutory injunction was to be granted.
This conclusion was based on the premises that (1) it is the duty of the national court to ensure the legal protection which persons derive from the direct effect of a provision of Community law;(2) article 30 was such a provision;(3) if Wickes is right that section 47 of the Act of 1950 is incompatible with article 30, it has a current right to open its stores for Sunday trading, and it is the duty of the national court to protect that right;(4) in the absence of an undertaking in damages, Wickes will have been restrained from opening on Sundays, without any right to compensation;(5) there is no need for this purpose to assess the strength of Wickes' challenge to section 47 on the basis of article 30, it being enough that the challenge is not without foundation: see [1991]3 W.L.R. 985, 993,per Dillon L.J., and pp. 999–1000,per Mann L.J.
Beldam L.J.
also concluded that the court was required to protect rights conferred by Community law; and in the circumstances he concluded that the exercise of the judge's discretion against requiring an undertaking in damages from the council could not be justified (see pp. 1004–1005).
It is, I consider, desirable that the present case should be set in its European context.
Your Lordships were much assisted by counsel, who undertook an examination of the decision of the European Court of Justice on a reference by the Cwmbran Justices (the Torfaen case (Case 145/88)[1990]2 Q.B.
19) on the issue whether section 47 of the Act of 1950 is inconsistent with article 30, together with the European jurisprudence which formed the background of that decision, and the subsequent very similar (if not precisely identical) cases of Conforama (Case C 312/89) and Marchandise (Case C 332/89), The Times, 6 March 1991.
The decision of the European Court of Justice in the Torfaen case has been the subject of exposition in two cases in this country,W. H. Smith Do-It-All Ltd. v. Peterborough City Council [1991]1 Q.B.
304 and Stoke-on-Trent City Council v. B. & Q. Plc. [1991]Ch. 48.
In both cases there are illuminating judgments on the subject, in the former by Mustill L.J.
and Schiemann J., and in the latter by Hoffmann J. The W. H. Smith case took the form of an appeal to the Divisional Court from the Crown Court, by way of case stated, against the conviction of the two defendant stores for Sunday trading; the Torfaen decision was published after the hearing before the Crown Court and before the hearing before the Divisional Court and, it being plain that the Crown Court had misdirected itself on the effect of article 30, the Divisional Court quashed the convictions.
The Stoke-on-Trent case was heard shortly after judgment was given in the W. H. Smith case.
In that case, Hoffmann J. [1991]Ch. 48 interpreted and applied the decision of the European Court of Justice in the Torfaen case, and decided to grant a final injunction restraining B. & Q. from Sunday trading in breach of the Act of 1950.
That decision has been regarded as definitive, by judges of first instance, as to the application of the Torfaen principle in this country; but of course matters have changed following the collapse of injunction proceedings by local authorities after the decision of the Court of Appeal now under consideration.
The decision of Hoffmann J. in the Stoke-on-Trent case came before your Lordships' House on appeal under the leapfrog procedure last year.
By that time, the Torfaen case had been followed by the Conforama and Marchandise decisions.
It was the submission of the appellant, B. & Q., that your Lordships were bound to refer the matter to the European Court of Justice, whereas the respondent councils submitted that, following the Conforama and Marchandise decisions, the conclusion reached by Hoffmann J. could not possibly be disturbed so that no reference was required.
This House, despite a formidable argument advanced by Mr. Isaacs for the councils, nevertheless felt compelled to make the reference for which B. & Q. contended.
For present purposes I shall consider again, as briefly as I can, the impact of the two later cases on the earlier Torfaen case (Case 145/88)[1990]2 Q.B.
19.
The first question posed by the Cwmbran Justices in the Torfaen case [1990]2 Q.B.
19, 23 took the following form:
‘(1) Where a member state prohibits retail premises from being open on Sunday for the sale of goods to customers, save in respect of certain specified items sales of which are permitted, and where the effect of the prohibition is to reduce in absolute terms the sales of goods in those premises including goods manufactured in other member states, and correspondingly to reduce the volume of imports of goods from other member states, is such a prohibition a measure having equivalent effect to a quantitative restriction on imports within the meaning of article 30 of the Treaty?
The court's reply [1990]2 Q.B.
19, 53 to the question was as follows:
‘17.…article 30 of the Treaty must be interpreted as meaning that the prohibition which it lays down does not apply to national rules prohibiting retailers from opening their premises on Sunday where the restrictive effects on Community trade which may result therefrom do not exceed the effects intrinsic to rules of that kind.
Hoffmann J. considered that the effect of this decision was to raise an issue of proportionality which had to be determined by the national court as an issue of fact.
That issue he determined in favour of the councils, and he accordingly granted the final injunction requested by them.
Before the appeal in that case came before your Lordships' House, the Conforama and Marchandise decisions were published.
It is right to observe that, until the decision of Hoffmann J., the interpretation and application of the Torfaen case was causing great problems in numerous prosecutions for Sunday trading in magistrates' courts and Crown Courts up and down the country.
Of these prosecutions, Hoffmann J. said [1991]Ch. 48, 65:
‘In many of these [prosecutions], evidence has been led on the question of proportionality.
A troupe of experts has toured the country giving their views over periods of several days and as a result some courts have convicted and others have acquitted.
If the question depends simply on the oral evidence led at the trial, even a decision of the House of Lords on appeal from one of these cases need not settle the matter.
The prosecution will fail if the local authority's travelling expert fails to turn up, or if his evidence is different.
We shall have the absurd state of affairs that the Sunday trading laws will be valid on one day and invalid on another: enforceable in Wellingborough but not in Pendle.
The summary prosecution of offences under section 47 will in practice become impossible because local authorities will have excessive demands made on their resources.
Hoffmann J. took the robust course of solving this problem on the basis that all the relevant facts were properly matters of judicial notice.
At all events, when the Conforama and Marchandise cases came before the European Court of Justice, Mr. Advocate General W. van Gerven (who had also been Advocate General in the Torfaen case) urged caution upon the European Court.
Those two cases were concerned not with Sunday trading but with restrictions upon working hours on Sundays; but the Advocate General was plainly influenced by the strong similarity between those cases and the Torfaen case.
He urged the court to accept the argument of the commission that the assessment of the need for and proportionality of specific legislation cannot be left to the national courts.
When he came to consider the classic requirements of necessity and proportionality, he had this to say, at para. 14:
‘In my view, the criterion applied by the court in the B. & Q. judgment, according to which an obstacle to intra-Community trade may not exceed what is necessary for the attainment of the objective pursued, reflects both aspects of the criterion of necessity: the restrictive national legislation is relevant with regard to the objective pursued, since it is necessary for the attainment of that objective and has therefore been enacted with that end in view; the legislation may not go beyond what is necessary for the attainment of that objective, which implies that a less restrictive alternative is not available.
However, the criterion of proportionality is not incorporated in that, since on the basis of that criterion legislation which is necessary for the attainment of the objective in question, and therefore does not exceed what is necessary, must nevertheless be set aside by the member state.
Does this mean that in the B. & Q. judgment the court abandoned the criterion of proportionality and thus went back on its earlier case law?
I think not: in Case 145/88 the court had no need to rely on the criterion of proportionality — any more than it does in these cases — since it was immediately apparent, as it is now in these proceedings, that the obstacles created by the national legislation in question certainly were not, and are not, of such a kind as to compel the member state to dispense with a measure necessary for the attainment of a justified objective.
If, on the other hand, the obstacle is of such a kind as to jeopardize the integration of the market, it may seriously be doubted whether it is still proportionate to be in itself the legitimate objective pursued by the measure.
Hence I take the view that the absence of any reference to the criterion of proportionality in the B. & Q. judgment is not of fundamental importance and that the reason for the omission lay in the specific circumstances of the case, from which it was clear that any obstacles which might be created were not particularly serious.
In accordance with that view, the final conclusion expressed by the Advocate General was that, in the circumstances of the Conforama and Marchandise cases, it could not be concluded that the obstacles created exceeded what was necessary for the attainment of the objective pursued or that they were out of proportion thereto.
He therefore expressed the opinion that the national legislation in question was compatible with article 30.
The Conforama and Marchandise cases came before the full court, whereas the Torfaen case had been heard by a chamber of the court.
The court gave judgment to the same effect in both cases.
Paragraphs 10 to 12 of the judgment in the Conforama case read as follows:
‘10.
In the Torfaen judgment the Court ruled, in relation to similar national legislation prohibiting the opening of retail shops on Sundays, that such a prohibition was not compatible with the principle of the free movement of goods provided for in the Treaty unless any obstacles to Community trade thereby created did not exceed what was necessary in order to ensure the attainment of the objective in view and unless that objective was justified with regard to Community law.
‘11.
That being so, it must first be stated that legislation such as the legislation at issue pursues an end which is justified with regard to Community law.
The Court has already held, in its judgment of 23 November 1989 in the Torfaen case, that national rules governing the opening hours of retail premises reflect certain political and economic choices in so far as their purpose is to ensure that working and non-working hours are so arranged as to accord with national or regional socio-cultural characteristics, and that, in the present state of Community law, is a matter for the member states.
‘12.
It must further be stated that the restrictive effects on trade which may stem from such rules do not seem disproportionate to the end pursued.
The first question posed in the Conforama case was whether provisions prohibiting the employment of workers on Sundays constituted a measure having an equivalent effect to quantitative restrictions within the meaning of article 30 of the Treaty.
The answer of the court was that ‘the prohibition contained in article 30 of the Treaty, properly construed, does not apply to national legislation prohibiting the employment of staff on Sundays.’
It was on the basis of the decision in those two cases that Mr. Isaacs for the two councils in the Stoke-on-Trent case [1991]Ch. 48 submitted that, following those decisions, it was no longer appropriate for the national courts to investigate any issue of proportionality, and that the Torfaen case (Case 145/88)[1990]2 Q.B.
19 should no longer be understood as requiring any such investigation in the Sunday trading cases.
Since the point has now been referred by your Lordships' House to the European Court of Justice in that case, I am most reluctant to become involved in any discussion upon it.
It is enough for me to say that, on the basis of those two cases, the arguments of the two councils in the Stoke-on-Trent case struck your Lordships as being very powerful, but not sufficiently powerful to persuade your Lordships' House that it need not refer the matter to the European Court of Justice under article 177.
It follows however that, so far as is relevant for the purposes of the present appeal, I do not consider that much weight can be attached to the argument of Wickes that section 47 is inconsistent with article 30.
It is against that background that I return to the conclusion of the majority of the Court of Appeal that the mere fact that Wickes might be able to advance such an argument founded upon article 30, which was at least not a groundless argument, compelled the Court of Appeal to require an undertaking in damages from the council.
In so holding, the court relied in particular upon the decision of the European Court of Justice in Amministrazione delle Finanze dello Stato v. Simmenthal S.p.A.
(Case 106/77)[1978]E.C.R. 629, 645–646 dated 9 March 1978, in which the court ruled that:
‘A national court which is called upon, within the limits of its jurisdiction, to apply provisions of Community law is under a duty to give full effect to those provisions, if necessary refusing of its own motion to apply any conflicting provisions of national legislation, even if adopted subsequently, and it is not necessary for the court to request or await the prior setting aside of such provisions by legislative or other constitutional means.
I only pause to observe at this stage that the decision, although obviously of great importance, was not concerned with the terms upon which interim relief in the form of an interlocutory injunction should be granted.
Before your Lordships, it was submitted by Mr Isaacs on behalf of the council that the Court of Appeal had erred in requiring the council to give an undertaking in damages.
He submitted that, if a national court is considering whether to grant an interlocutory injunction in a case such as the present, where the validity of the law sought to be enforced is challenged by the defendant on the ground that it is inconsistent with Community law, the question whether the court should require an undertaking in damages from the plaintiff as a condition of the grant of an injunction is to be decided on the principles applicable to that question under the national law, being a question of procedure which, on established principles of Community law, is left to the national law.
In support of this submission, he relied in particular on the approach of the European Court of Justice in Reg. v. Secretary of State for Transport, Ex parte Factortame Ltd.
(No. 2)(Case C 213/89)[1991]1 A.C. 603.
There the European Court, consistently with the opinion of the Advocate General (see p. 663), declined to regulate the manner in which the national court should decide whether to grant interim relief following upon the European Court's ruling on the main question concerned with the power of the national court to grant relief in the circumstances of the case.
In particular, the European Court did not answer the second question posed for its consideration by this House, which was concerned with the criteria to be applied by the national court in deciding whether or not to grant interim protection of the rights claimed.
I have however come to the conclusion that this submission of Mr Isaacs is too sweeping in its effect.
No doubt it is part of the function of the national court to assess the strength of the challenge to the national law in question, and to weigh both the possibility of damage in the interim to the subject if the law in question is enforced against him, and the possibility of damage to the public interest if the law is not so enforced.
But the question of the terms upon which an injunction may be granted to enforce, or to restrain the enforcement of, a law which is under challenge on Community law grounds, cannot in my opinion necessarily be regarded as a matter of procedure for the national law where the imposition of the term under consideration is directed towards preserving rights which may arise under Community law.
This appears from the decision of the European Court of Justice in Zuckerfabrik Sûderdithmarschen A.G. v. Hauptzollamt Itzehoe (Cases C 143/88 and C 92/89), The Times, 27 March 1991 (judgment delivered on 21 February 1991) where the court laid down conditions for the grant of a stay of execution of a national administrative Act based on a Community Regulation because of doubts on the part of the national court as to the validity of the Regulation (see paragraphs 22–23 of the judgment of the court).
On the other hand it was the submission of Mr. Collins for Wickes that the function of the undertaking in damages required of the council by the Court of Appeal was to protect the right of Wickes which flowed from the direct effect of article 30, in the event of the European Court of Justice holding, on the reference to it of the Stoke-on-Trent case [1991]Ch. 48, that section 47 of the Shops Act 1950 was invalid because it was inconsistent with article 30.
Accordingly, submitted Mr. Collins, such an undertaking was required to give immediate effect to Community law.
However this submission, which was accepted by the Court of Appeal, appears to me, with all respect, to be misconceived.
I approach the matter as follows.
In Bourgoin S.A. v. Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food [1986]Q.B.
716, it was held by the Court of Appeal (Parker and Nourse L.JJ., Oliver L.J.
dissenting) that a breach of article 30 would not of itself give rise to a claim in damages by the injured party.
However, since the decision of the European Court of Justice in Francovich v. Republic of Italy (Case C 6/90 and C 9/90)[1992]I.R.L.R. 84 (judgment delivered on 1 November 1991), there must now be doubt whether the Bourgoin case was correctly decided.
It is true that the Francovich case was concerned with the situation where a member state fails to implement an E.E.C.
Directive, the court holding that in such a case the member state is obliged to make good damage suffered by individuals as a result of its failure so to do.
But the court spoke in more general terms, as follows, at p. 88, paras.
33 to 37:
‘33.
It should be stated that the full effectiveness of Community provisions would be affected and the protection of the rights they recognise undermined if individuals were not able to recover damages when their rights were infringed by a breach of Community law attributable to a member state.
‘34.
The possibility of obtaining damages from the state is particularly essential where, as in the present case, the full effect of Community provisions is conditional on the state taking certain action, and, in consequence, in the absence of such action being taken, individuals cannot rely on the rights accorded to them by Community law before national courts.
‘35.
It follows that the principle of the liability of the state for damage to individuals caused by a breach of Community law for which it is responsible is inherent in the scheme of the Treaty.
‘36.
The obligation on member states to make good the damage is also based on Article 5 of the Treaty, under which the member states are bound to take all appropriate measures, whether general or particular, to ensure fulfilment of the obligations arising under Community law….
‘37.
It follows from the foregoing that Community law lays down a principle according to which a member state is obliged to make good the damage to individuals caused by a breach of Community law for which it is responsible.
It is not necessary for the purposes of the present case for your Lordships' House to decide whether the Bourgoin case [1986]Q.B.
716 was correctly decided, and indeed no argument was addressed to your Lordships on that question.
But, having regard to the passage from the judgment of the European Court in the Francovich case which I have just quoted, it is in my opinion right that in the present case your Lordships should proceed on the basis that if, on the reference to it in the Stoke-on-Trent case [1991]Ch. 48, the court should hold that section 47 of the Shops Act 1950 is invalid as being in conflict with article 30 of the Treaty, the United Kingdom may be obliged to make good damage caused to individuals by the breach of article 30 for which it is responsible.
It does not however follow that, in the present case, the council should be obliged to give an undertaking in damages as a condition of the grant of an injunction restraining Wickes from acting in breach of section 47.
This is because the obligation (if any) on the United Kingdom to make good any damage suffered by Wickes will arise irrespective of any undertaking in damages given by the council.
In the circumstances, such an undertaking would be superfluous.
But there are two other subsidiary matters which reinforce the conclusion that the council should not be required to give such an undertaking.
The first is that the effect of such an undertaking would be to impose an obligation on the council to indemnify Wickes against damage suffered by it, in the event of section 47 being held to be invalid as inconsistent with article 30, irrespective of whether in such circumstances Wickes has a right to damages — i.e., irrespective of whether the Bourgoin case is wrongly decided.
In other words, that question is pre-empted by the requirement of such an undertaking from the council.
The second is that if, following the Francovich case, there was held to be a right to damages in such circumstances, the effect of requiring an undertaking from the council would be to impose liability in damages on the council instead of on the United Kingdom which, as I understand the position, would properly be the party so liable.
That it is the member state which is liable in such circumstances appears from the passage from the judgment in the Francovich case which I have quoted.
This is no doubt because it is the Government which would, on the hypothesis that section 47 was invalid because inconsistent with article 30, have failed to take the necessary steps to ensure that section 47 was amended or repealed as necessary.
If so, it would be wrong that the council, because it has performed its statutory duty under the national law to enforce section 47, was to find itself under a liability in damages as a result of performing that duty.
For these reasons, I am of the opinion that Wickes' argument that the council should be required to give an undertaking in damages has no justification in Community law.
It follows that the judge was right to decide the question on the ordinary principles of English law.
Of course, having regard to the weakness of Wickes' challenge to the validity of section 47, the grant of an interlocutory injunction was fully justified on the principles stated by this House in the second Factortame case (Case C 213/89)[1991]1 A.C. 603.
For the reasons I have given, I am of the opinion that he was also correct to hold that it was a matter within his discretion to decide whether or not to require the local authority to give an undertaking in damages.
In so deciding, he had to take into account the fact that it was plain that Wickes would, unless restrained, continue to act in contravention of section 47 of the Shops Act 1950; and that, in practical terms, proceedings by way of injunction were the only means open to the council to perform its duty to enforce the provisions of section 47.
He could also have taken into account, if he was aware of it, that the effect of requiring an undertaking in damages from the council would be to cause the collapse of the law enforcement process in this area of law; and further that the enforcement of the law was not merely desirable as such in the public interest, but that small retailers could well suffer if large retailers such as Wickes were able to continue to trade with impunity during a significant period in contravention of what might well prove to be a perfectly valid law.
On the facts of the present case the judge was, in my opinion, fully entitled to decide that, in the exercise of his discretion, no undertaking in damages should be required of the council.
I for my part can see no error in the exercise of his discretion in this respect.
It was suggested by Wickes that this was an appropriate case for a reference to the European Court of Justice on the issue raised by the decision of the Court of Appeal that Community law required an undertaking in damages.
I for my part am unable to accept this submission.
In my opinion, there was no basis in Community law for that decision.
For these reasons, I would allow the appeal with costs, and restore the order of the learned judge.
Lord Jauncey of Tullichettle .
My Lords, I have had the advantage of reading the speech of my noble and learned friend, Lord Goff of Chieveley.
I agree with it and for the reasons he gives I, too, would allow the appeal.
Lord Lowry .
My Lords, I have had the opportunity of reading in draft the speech of my noble and learned friend, Lord Goff of Chieveley.
I agree with it and, for the reasons given by my noble and learned friend, I, too, would allow the appeal and restore the order of Mervyn Davies J. 
Appeal allowed with costs.
Solicitors: Sharpe Pritchard for Michael R.G. Vause, Huddersfield; Edwin Coe for Metcalfe Copeman & Pettefar, Peterborough; Treasury Solicitor.