

[CHANCERY DIVISION]
In re DENNIS (A BANKRUPT)
[Ch.
No. 2953 of 1982]
1992 April 10
Sir Donald Nicholls V.-C.
Bankruptcy — Property passing to trustee — Joint tenants — Husband and wife joint tenants of property — Bankruptcy of husband — Wife dying after act of bankruptcy but before adjudication order — Whether joint tenancy severed before wife's death — Bankruptcy Act 1914 (4 & 5 Geo. 5, c. 59), ss. 37, 38(a)
A husband and wife owned two properties as beneficial joint tenants.
On 21 September 1982 the husband committed an act of bankruptcy by failing to comply with the requirements of a bankruptcy notice and on 20 December a bankruptcy petition was presented.
On 24 February 1983 the wife died, having devised her property to her two children.
On 23 May a receiving order was made and on 11 November 1983 the husband was adjudicated bankrupt.
On the application of the trustee in bankruptcy for declarations that the properties were vested in him:—
Held , granting the declarations, that it was the moment of adjudication of bankruptcy that caused the property of a bankrupt to vest in his trustee thereby causing an involuntary alienation of his property which resulted in the severance of any joint tenancy he might then be beneficially entitled to; that the combined effect of sections 37(1) and 38 (a ) of the Bankruptcy Act 1914 was not to vest title in the trustee retrospectively but rather to vest in the trustee when adjudication occurred title to property which was identified by reference to the property which belonged to the bankrupt at the commencement of the bankruptcy; and that, accordingly, since the joint tenancy had not been severed before the wife's death, on her death the husband, as survivor, became entitled to the whole beneficial interest in the properties, which on his adjudication as bankrupt vested in his trustee in bankruptcy (post, pp. 206A, F–H, 207C).
The following cases are referred to in the judgment:
Ponsford, Baker & Co. v. Union of London and Smith's Bank Ltd. [1906]2 Ch. 444, C.A.
Rhodes v. Dawson (1886) 16 Q.B.D. 548, C.A.
The following additional cases were cited in argument:
Butler's Trusts, In re, Hughes v. Anderson (1888) 38 Ch.D. 286, C.A.
Calcott and Elvin's Contract, In re [1898]2 Ch. 460, C.A.
MOTION
By a notice of motion dated 11 September 1985 George Albert Auger, the trustee in bankruptcy of Winston Lloyd Dennis sought against Stuart Bernard Goodman and Hilgay Archer, the executors of the will of the wife of the bankrupt, and the bankrupt (1) a declaration that the trustee was in the events which, had happened solely and beneficially entitled as trustee of the property of the bankrupt to the property situate at and known as 100, Gurney Road, West Ham, London E.15 registered at H.M. Land Registry and comprised in Title No.
NGL 107060;(2) possession of 100, Gurney Road;(3) a declaration that the trustee was in the events which happened solely and beneficially entitled to the proceeds of sale of 11, Stork Road, London E.7.
The facts are stated in the judgment.
Stephen Moverly Smith for the trustee in bankruptcy.
Robin Patton for the wife's executors.
The bankrupt in person.
Sir Donald Nicholls V.-C.
This application raises a novel point on the old Bankruptcy Act 1914.
It concerns the severance of a beneficial joint tenancy.
The bankrupt is Mr. Winston Lloyd Dennis.
He and his late wife, Roksareh, owned two properties as beneficial joint tenants: 11, Stork Road, London E.7 and 100, Gurney Road, West Ham, London E.15.
On 21 September 1982 Mr. Dennis committed an act of bankruptcy by failing to comply with the requirements of a bankruptcy notice.
On 20 December a bankruptcy petition founded on that act of bankruptcy was presented.
Then, unhappily, Mrs. Dennis died on 24 February 1983.
She made a will and I understand she left her property to the two children of the marriage.
Her executors are two of the respondents to this application.
On 23 May 1983 a receiving order was made, and on 11 November 1983 Mr. Dennis was adjudicated bankrupt.
The question which has arisen is whether in these circumstances the beneficial joint tenancy was severed before Mrs. Dennis' death.
If it was, her children have a half share in the two properties.
Before me it was not disputed that if the joint tenancy was severed, she and her husband thereafter were beneficially interested in the two properties in equal shares.
Conversely, and inevitably, if the joint tenancy was not severed before Mrs. Dennis' death, Mr. Dennis as the survivor became entitled to the whole beneficial interest in both properties which in due course vested in his trustee in bankruptcy.
By this application before me the trustee seeks a decision on this question and, in any event, an order for sale of 100, Gurney Road.
No. 11, Stork Road has already been sold and the dispute regarding that property concerns the destination of the net proceeds of sale, namely, the sum of £16,000 with some accruing interest.
The equity in 100, Gurney Road is valued in the region of £50,000.
A joint tenancy is severed if a joint tenant disposes of his interest inter vivos.
Such a disposition may be voluntary, for example a gift or a sale; it may be involuntary, as occurs upon bankruptcy when the bankrupt's property vests in his trustee.
In the present case the position when Mrs. Dennis died was that her husband had not yet been adjudicated bankrupt.
He had committed an act of bankruptcy and a petition had been presented.
The petition had been followed by a receiving order.
This was after Mrs. Dennis' death, but in any event a receiving order does not operate to divest a debtor of his property.
If authority is needed for that proposition, it can be found in the decision of the Court of Appeal in Rhodes v. Dawson (1886) 16 Q.B.D. 548.
Thus, by the moment of Mrs. Dennis' death on 24 February 1983, there had been no alienation by her husband of his interest in the joint tenancy.
Subsequently he became bankrupt.
At that moment he was divested of his property.
At that moment there was therefore an involuntary alienation by him of his property.
The concluding words of section 18(1) of the Bankruptcy Act 1914 provide for the consequence of an adjudication in these terms: ‘and thereupon the property of the bankrupt shall become divisible among his creditors and shall vest in a trustee.’
To the like effect is section 53 which provides:
‘(1) Until a trustee is appointed, the official receiver shall be the trustee for the purposes of this Act, and, immediately on a debtor being adjudged bankrupt, the property of the bankrupt shall vest in the trustee.
(2) On the appointment of a trustee, the property shall forthwith pass to and vest in the trustee appointed.
Both these statutory provisions provide that there vests in the trustee ‘the property of the bankrupt.’
Section 38 specifies what the expression means.
By way of introduction to section 38 I should refer to the familiar provisions in section 37 concerning relation back of a trustee's title.
The material part of section 37(1) provides:
‘The bankruptcy of a debtor…shall be deemed to have relation back to, and to commence at, the time of the act of bankruptcy being committed on which a receiving order is made against him…
Section 38 provides:
‘The property of the bankrupt divisible amongst his creditors, and in this Act referred to as the property of the bankrupt, shall not comprise the following particulars.…’
— Two types of property are then specified which I need not refer to.
The section then continues —‘But it shall comprise the following particulars:—(a ) All such property as may belong to or be vested in the bankrupt at the commencement of the bankruptcy, or may be acquired by or devolve on him before his discharge;…
It is clear, therefore, that the property which vests in the trustee when an adjudication order is made includes property which was vested in the bankrupt at an earlier date.
Here, when the relevant act of bankruptcy occurred, Mr. Dennis was a beneficial joint tenant of the two properties.
In my view, however, the effect of section 38 (a ) is not to vest title in the trustee retrospectively in the sense that under the Act he is deemed to have had title at the commencement of the bankruptcy; the effect of section 38 (a ) is to vest in the trustee, when adjudication occurs, title to property which is identified by reference to the property which belonged to the bankrupt at the commencement of the bankruptcy.
The consequence of this may be, and in some cases will be, to divest a third party of title to property which since the commencement of the bankruptcy he has acquired from the bankrupt.
That divesting occurs when the adjudication order is made, not before.
Hence in the present case Mr. Dennis had not been divested of his interest under the joint tenancy when his wife died.
When she died the joint tenancy still subsisted.
The point is a short one of statutory construction which appears to be free from authority.
My attention was drawn to certain observations in a judgment of the Court of Appeal given by Fletcher Moulton L.J.
in Ponsford, Baker & Co. v. Union of London and Smith's Bank Ltd. [1906]2 Ch. 444.
Fletcher Moulton L.J.
examined the legal position of a man who has committed an act of bankruptcy and said, at p. 452:
‘Until commission of the act of bankruptcy he was, of course, the beneficial owner of whatever assets he possessed, but by the act of bankruptcy his title to be regarded as such beneficial owner is no longer absolute, but is contingent on no bankruptcy petition being presented within three months of the date of the act of bankruptcy which leads to a receiving order being made.
If such receiving order be made the whole of the assets vest in his trustee as from the date of the act of bankruptcy.
Those observations do not assist on the point with which I am concerned.
They were not addressed to this particular issue.
In the result, therefore, the adjudication of Mr. Dennis as bankrupt after the death of his wife did not have the effect of severing retrospectively the joint tenancy before her death.
On the contrary, upon adjudication there vested in Mr. Dennis' trustee the entire beneficial interest in the two properties which, on Mrs. Dennis' death, had passed to Mr. Dennis as the surviving joint tenant.
I shall therefore make the declarations sought.
I turn to the further question concerning an order for possession of 100, Gurney Road with a view to its sale.
Mr. Dennis is living in the house with one of his children, now aged 18, and with his second wife.
He has appeared before me in person.
He seeks more time and he has asked for a year or more.
I do not feel able to postpone an order for possession for more than a very short time indeed.
Mr. Dennis has had the benefit of living in the house, despite his bankruptcy, for over eight years since he was adjudicated bankrupt.
I am told that he has now been adjudicated bankrupt for a second time.
I shall make an order that possession be given up two months from today's date.
Orders accordingly.
Solicitors: Denton Hall Burgin & Warrens; Bowling & Co.