

[COURT OF APPEAL]
MOHRAM ALI v. TOWER HAMLETS LONDON BOROUGH COUNCIL
1992 March 9;
April 2
Parker, Farquharson and Nolan L.JJ.
Local Government — Homeless person — Civil action — Housing authority's offer of permanent accommodation refused as being unsuitable — Claim in county court for breach of statutory duty — Whether judicial review appropriate remedy — Housing Act 1985 (c. 68), s. 69(1) (as substituted by Housing and Planning Act 1986 (c. 63), s. 14(3))
The plaintiff and his family were homeless and in priority need of accommodation.
The council, the local housing authority, seeking to comply with the duty imposed on them by section 65 of the Housing Act 1985 to make accommodation available, offered him the tenancy of a sixth-floor flat.
The plaintiff refused the offer, challenging the suitability of the accommodation.
He began proceedings against the council in the county court alleging breach of their statutory duty and seeking an injunction ordering them to fulfil their duty to provide him with suitable accommodation and damages.
At the hearing in the county court the preliminary issue was raised whether issues as to the proper discharge of the duty imposed on the council by section 69 of the Act of 1985 could only be challenged by way of proceedings in the High Court for judicial review.
The assistant recorder determined that issue in the plaintiff's favour.
On appeal by the council:—
Held , allowing the appeal, that section 69(1) of the Housing Act 1985 imposed a duty on housing authorities to exercise their discretion in deciding what constituted suitable accommodation for persons whom they had a duty to house under section 65(2) of the Act; that any decision on suitability necessarily depended on the circumstances prevailing at the time and called for a subjective judgment by a housing authority to be made before the performance of the executive act of securing suitable accommodation for an applicant; and that the duty imposed by section 69(1) was to be exercised by housing authorities subject only to challenge by way of proceedings for judicial review in the High Court, and not on their merits by an action in the county court (post, pp. 213E–H, 214B–C, 218A–C).
Cocks v. Thanet District Council [1983]2 A.C. 286, H.L. (E.)
Roy v. Kensington and Chelsea and Westminster Family Practitioner Committee [1992]1 A.C. 624, H.L. (E.) distinguished.
The following cases are referred to in the judgments:
Cocks v. Thanet District Council [1983]2 A.C. 286;[1982]3 W.L.R. 1121;[1982]3 All E.R.
1135, H.L. (E.)
De Falco v. Crawley Borough Council [1980]Q.B.
460;[1980]2 W.L.R. 664;[1980]1 All E.R.
913, C.A.
O'Reilly v. Mackman [1983]2 A.C. 237;[1982]3 W.L.R. 1096;[1982]3 All E.R.
1124, H.L. (E.)
Reg. v. Westminster City Council, Ex parte Tansey (1988) 21 H.L.R. 57, C.A.
Roy v. Kensington and Chelsea and Westminster Family Practitioner Committee [1992]1 A.C. 624;[1992]2 W.L.R. 239;[1992]1 All E.R.
705, H.L. (E.)
South Holland District Council v. Keyte (1985) 84 L.G.R. 347, C.A.
Wandsworth London Borough Council v. Winder [1985]A.C. 461;[1984]3 W.L.R. 1254;[1984]3 All E.R.
976, H.L. (E.)
The following additional cases were cited in argument:
Parr v. Wyre Borough Council (1982) 2 H.L.R. 71, C.A.
Reg. v. Brent London Borough Council, Ex parte Omar (1991) 23 H.L.R. 446
Reg. v. East Hertfordshire District Council, Ex parte Smith (1990) 23 H.L.R. 26, C.A.
Reg. v. Hillingdon London Borough Council, Ex parte Puhlhofer [1986]A.C. 484;[1986]2 W.L.R. 259;[1986]1 All E.R.
467, H.L. (E.)
APPEAL from Mr. Christopher Lockhart-Mummery Q.C.
sitting as an assistant recorder at Bow County Court.
The plaintiff, Mr. Mohram Ali, a homeless person under the provisions of Part III of the Housing Act 1985, brought proceedings in the Bow County Court against the local housing authority, Tower Hamlets London Borough Council, claiming an injunction ordering them to fulfil their statutory duty under sections 65 and 69 of the Act of 1985 and damages.
On 17 December 1991 the assistant recorder on a preliminary issue held that the question of suitability of accommodation for the purpose of sections 65 and 69 fell to be determined in the county court by way of proceedings for breach of statutory duty so that the judge could substitute his discretion for that of the local housing authority.
By a notice of appeal dated 13 January 1992 the council appealed on the grounds that the assistant recorder (1) misdirected himself in holding that the question of suitability of given future accommodation for the purpose of sections 65 and 69 was one of fact and fell to be determined by the county court in proceedings for breach of statutory duty, and (2) ought to have held that the plaintiff should have proceeded by way of an application for judicial review.
The facts are stated in the judgment of Nolan L.J.
Ashley Underwood and Lisa Giovannetti for the council.
David Watkinson and Frances Webber for the plaintiff.
2 April.
The following judgments were handed down.
NOLAN L.J.
The plaintiff is a married man with three young children.
At all material times he and his family have been homeless within the meaning of section 58 of the Housing Act 1985 and have been living in temporary accommodation provided by the council, the local housing authority, under section 63 of the Act.
On 8 March 1991 the council sent him a standard form letter in terms reflecting those of sections 64 and 65.
In effect, the letter conveyed the decision of the council that he was homeless, that he was in priority need of accommodation, that he had not become homeless intentionally, and that they did not propose to refer his application for accommodation to another housing authority.
By virtue of section 65(2), that decision imposed on the council a duty to secure that accommodation became available for the occupation of the plaintiff and his family.
Section 69(1) sets out three ways in which the duty imposed by section 65(2) may be performed.
In its original form the subsection provided:
‘A local housing authority may perform any duty under section 65 or 68 (duties to persons found to be homeless) to secure that accommodation becomes available for the occupation of a person —(a ) by making available accommodation held by them under Part II (provision of housing) or under any other enactment,(b ) by securing that he obtains accommodation from some other person, or (c ) by giving him such advice and assistance as will secure that he obtains accommodation from some other person.
A new section 69(1) was substituted for the original subsection by section 14(3) of the Housing and Planning Act 1986.
It provides:
‘A local housing authority may perform any duty under section 65 or 68 (duties to persons found to be homeless) to secure that accommodation becomes available for the occupation of a person —(a ) by making available suitable accommodation held by them under Part II (provision of housing) or any enactment, or (b ) by securing that he obtains suitable accommodation from some other person, or (c ) by giving him such advice and assistance as will secure that he obtains suitable accommodation from some other person, and in determining whether accommodation is suitable they shall have regard to Part IX (slum clearance), X (overcrowding) and XI (houses in multiple occupation) of this Act.
Thus since the Act of 1986 came into force local authorities such as this council are obliged to secure not merely accommodation, but suitable accommodation.
And in determining what is suitable they must have regard to the matters referred to in the last three lines of the substituted subsection.
In early September 1991 the council purported to discharge their duty under section 69 by offering the plaintiff the tenancy of 42, Carradale House, which is on the sixth floor of a block of flats.
He refused the offer.
He says in his affirmation, with the support of letters from his doctor, that he and his wife suffer from heart conditions and other ailments which make it undesirable for them to occupy accommodation above the level of the ground floor.
He also says that he fears that he and his family, as members of the Bengali community, would be in danger of racial harassment if they lived in Carradale House, and this he supports with an affidavit on the subject of such harassment sworn by a former employee of his solicitors.
The council considered his objections by way of an informal internal appeal procedure, but wrote to him on 27 November 1991 in these terms:
‘42, Carradale House, Poplar, E.14.
‘Your appeal against the above offer of permanent accommodation made available to you on 12-9-91 has been considered carefully but I regret to inform you that the appeal has not been allowed and you should sign for the tenancy at the local housing office by 2-12-91.
As you have been informed, my council makes one offer only to homeless persons.
If you are in temporary accommodation and do not accept the tenancy, this provision will cease as the council, by making a reasonable offer of permanent accommodation, will have discharged its responsibility to you under the provisions of the Housing Act 1985, Part III and you will have to make your own arrangements for housing yourself and your family.
In the circumstances I must advise you that it would be in your best interest to accept this offer with no further delay.
The plaintiff persisted in his rejection of the offered accommodation, and began proceedings against the council in the Bow County Court alleging breach of statutory duty on their part, and claiming an injunction ordering them to fulfil their duty under sections 65 and 69 of the Act, and also claiming damages.
On 17 December 1991 the case came before Mr. Assistant Recorder Lockhart-Mummery Q.C.
for him to determine as a preliminary issue whether the county court had jurisdiction to deal with the matter, or whether, as the council claim, the question whether they had discharged their statutory duty under section 69 could only be raised by way of proceedings for judicial review in the High Court.
The assistant recorder determined the preliminary issue in favour of the plaintiff, and the council now appeal to this court against his decision.
The issue is of considerable general importance.
If the council are right, then the manner in which a local housing authority performs its duty under section 69 can only be challenged by the restricted methods for which R.S.C., Ord. 53 provides.
The dissatisfied applicant for accommodation cannot challenge the suitability of the accommodation offered on its merits, nor even as of right.
He must first obtain leave to move for judicial review and then, if he obtains leave, must succeed in persuading the court to help him in the exercise of its supervisory jurisdiction.
On the assumption that the local authority has acted in good faith, and has followed the statutory procedures correctly, this will require him to satisfy the court not merely that the court itself would regard the accommodation as unsuitable, but that no reasonable council could regard it otherwise than as unsuitable.
Mr. Watkinson, representing the plaintiff, urged us to reject the submissions of the council.
He argued that as soon as the council acknowledged their duty to secure accommodation for the plaintiff which they did by writing their letter of 8 March 1991, the plaintiff acquired a private law right to the provision of suitable accommodation, which right he could enforce in the county court.
It would be for the court to determine whether or not the accommodation was in fact suitable.
In support of that argument he produced no less an authority than the speech of Lord Bridge of Harwich, with which the other members of the House of Lords agreed, in Cocks v. Thanet District Council [1983]2 A.C. 286.
The House of Lords in that case was concerned with provisions in the Housing (Homeless Persons) Act 1977 which were in substantially the same terms as those to which I have referred in the Housing Act 1985, as originally enacted.
There, as here, the applicant for accommodation had begun proceedings in the county court, claiming that the local authority were in breach of their duty to provide accommodation for him.
But his claim raised broader issues.
It evidently included an assertion that the local authority had wrongly decided that he was intentionally homeless.
He relied on the decision of the Court of Appeal in De Falco v. Crawley Borough Council [1980]Q.B.
460 in which it was held that an applicant for accommodation who wished to challenge the housing authority's decision that he was intentionally homeless could do so either by action or by application for judicial review.
The relevant passage in the speech of Lord Bridge of Harwich reads, at pp. 292–293:
‘The procedural issue on which the appeal turns will naturally fall for decision in the light of the principles expounded in the speech of my noble and learned friend, Lord Diplock, in O'Reilly v. Mackman [1983]2 A.C. 237 in which judgment has just been delivered.
But before attempting to apply those principles, it is necessary to analyse the functions of housing authorities under the Housing (Homeless Persons) Act 1977.
These functions fall into two wholly distinct categories.
On the one hand, the housing authority are charged with decision-making functions.
It is for the housing authority to decide whether they have reason to believe the matters which will give rise to the duty to inquire or to the temporary housing duty.
It is for the housing authority, once the duty to inquire has arisen, to make the appropriate inquiries and to decide whether they are satisfied, or not satisfied as the case may be, of the matters which will give rise to the limited housing duty or the full housing duty.
These are essentially public law functions.
The power of decision being committed by the statute exclusively to the housing authority, their exercise of the power can only be challenged before the courts on the strictly limited grounds (i) that their decision was vitiated by bias or procedural unfairness;(ii) that they have reached a conclusion of fact which can be impugned on the principles set out in the speech of Lord Radcliffe in Edwards v. Bairstow [1956]A.C. 14; or (iii) that, in as far as they have exercised a discretion (as they may require to do in considering questions of reasonableness under section 17(1) (2) and (4)), the exercise can be impugned on the principles set out in the judgment of Lord Greene M.R. in Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd. v. Wednesbury Corporation [1948]1 K.B.
223.
All this is trite law and the contrary has, so far as I know, never been argued in any case which has come before the courts under the Act of 1977.
‘On the other hand, the housing authority are charged with executive functions.
Once a decision has been reached by the housing authority which gives rise to the temporary, the limited or the full housing duty, rights and obligations are immediately created in the field of private law.
Each of the duties referred to, once established, is capable of being enforced by injunction and the breach of it will give rise to a liability in damages.
But it is inherent in the scheme of the Act that an appropriate public law decision of the housing authority is a condition precedent to the establishment of the private law duty.
Lord Bridge then gave his reasons for acknowledging that the Court of Appeal, of which he had been a member, in De Falco v. Crawley Borough Council was wrong to hold that a challenge to a housing authority's decision on intentional homelessness could be made by action as well as by judicial review, and continued, at p. 294:
‘I have already indicated my agreement with the views of my noble and learned friend, Lord Diplock, as expressed in O'Reilly v. Mackman [1983]2 A.C. 237, and I gratefully adopt all his reasons for the conclusion that: ‘it would…as a general rule be contrary to public policy, and as such an abuse of the process of the court, to permit a person seeking to establish that a decision of a public authority infringed rights to which he was entitled to protection under public law to proceed by way of an ordinary action and by this means to evade the provisions of Order 53 for the protection of such authorities.’
It followed that in Cocks v. Thanet District Council , since the applicant for accommodation was apparently asserting a breach by the local authority of public law as distinct from private law duties, he was not entitled to proceed by action in the county court, but only by means of an application for judicial review.
Mr. Watkinson submitted that in the present case, by way of contrast, in the words of Lord Bridge ‘a decision has been reached by the housing authority which gives rise to the…full housing duty.’
In consequence of that decision, rights and obligations were immediately created in the field of private law.
The duty of the council has been established and is capable of being enforced by injunction and any breach of it will give rise to a liability in damages.
Hence, the county court is the appropriate forum.
This brings me at once to the crucial issue in the case.
The critical distinction drawn by Lord Bridge of Harwich was one between the decision making functions of the local authority and its executive functions, by which I take Lord Bridge to mean the administrative acts to be performed in giving effect to the relevant decision.
The breach of statutory duty alleged by the plaintiff against the council is that they have failed to carry out their duties under sections 65 and 69 of the Act.
The particular allegation is directed to the failure of the council, as it is said, to secure the suitable accommodation for which section 69(1) provides.
Having regard to the terms of that subsection in its substituted and current form I would for my part place the duty which it imposes on the local authority on the decision-making, as distinct from the executive, side of the line.
The closing words of the subsection as it now stands, providing that‘in determining whether accommodation is suitable they shall have regard to Part IX (slum clearance), X (overcrowding) and XI (houses in multiple occupation) of this Act’ seem to me to call unmistakably for the exercise by the local authority of a subjective judgment as to what constitutes suitable accommodation.
This judgment has to be made before the executive act of securing the suitable accommodation for the applicant can be performed.
I take this view of the matter the more readily because of the subject matter of the judgment which is required.
In many if not most cases the suitability of particular accommodation for a particular applicant is a matter on which differing views may honestly and reasonably be held.
The particular accommodation offered will inevitably depend on what is available to the local authority from its own resources, or from the accessible resources of others.
The amount of available accommodation will constantly vary.
It is of the greatest importance that the suitable accommodation required by the homeless applicant should be provided with the least possible delay.
All of these factors seem to me to point to the desirability of the judgment being exercised by the local authority, with their unique knowledge of the facts, rather than by the courts.
In this connection it is worth noting that in another context, and in another part of the same Act, Parliament has made express provision for cases in which the suitability of particular accommodation is to be determined by the court in the course of ordinary litigation.
Part IV of the Act of 1985, which deals with secure tenancies and the rights of secure tenants, provides by section 84(2) (b ) that the court shall not make an order for the possession of a dwelling house let under a secure tenancy on the grounds set out in Part II of Schedule 2 ‘unless it is satisfied that suitable accommodation will be available for the tenant when the order takes effect.’
There is a similar provision in section 84(2) (c ).
The subsection concludes by providing that Part IV of Schedule 2 is to have effect for determining whether suitable accommodation will be available.
Part IV makes comprehensive and detailed provision for the matters which the court is to take into account in deciding the question of suitability.
The absence of any similar provision in relation to section 69(1) further reinforces my belief that the section 69(1) duty was intended to be exercised, subject to the supervisory jurisdiction of the courts, by the local authority.
It is, I think, also of interest to note that section 84 will normally come into play for the benefit of a defendant to action already begun by the local authority in the county court.
I shall return to this point with reference to the decision of the House of Lords in Wandsworth London Borough Council v. Winder [1985]A.C. 461.
Mr. Watkinson accepted that the closing words of section 69(1) place a difficulty in his way, but he maintained that this difficulty cannot be allowed to outweigh the clear words of Lord Bridge of Harwich.
He pointed out that even in the original form which it took when Cocks v. Thanet District Council was decided, section 69(1) conferred a measure of discretion on the local authority since in principle at least the local authority could choose between the three methods of discharging its duty which were set out in paragraphs (a ),(b ) and (c ).
Yet, said Mr. Watkinson, Lord Bridge can hardly have had it in mind that the private law right which he plainly regarded as coming into existence when the duty laid down in section 65(2) arose could give rise to a public law duty as to the manner in which the private law right was to be satisfied.
Lord Bridge did not in fact refer to section 6(1) of the Act of 1977 which was the precursor to section 69(1), but I accept that he must be assumed to have had it in mind.
I would also accept that the section 65(2) duty to secure accommodation and the section 69(1) duty as to the manner of securing accommodation cannot belong to different categories.
They are inseparable elements of the same composite duty.
That composite duty is either a private law duty or a public law duty.
It cannot be both.
The assumption that Lord Bridge included the original composite duty, incorporating the original section 69(1) duty in the private law category does not, however, in my judgment, justify the assumption that he would regard the composite duty incorporating the substituted section 69(1) duty as falling into the same category.
The difference in language is too great to permit the latter assumption.
It follows that in my judgment the public law duties of the council were not discharged until they had completed the process of deciding on the suitable accommodation which they were obliged to secure for the plaintiff.
If this process was properly carried out as a matter of public law, then the consequential private law right of the plaintiff was simply a right to the accommodation which the council had decided to be suitable.
Mr. Watkinson referred us to three other decided cases in support of the contrary view, but to my mind they do not assist him.
The first was South Holland District Council v. Keyte (1985) 84 L.G.R. 347.
In that case, as in the present, the applicant for accommodation was judged by the local authority to be homeless, to be in priority need, and not to be intentionally homeless.
The local authority provided her with temporary accommodation.
It then gave her notice to quit the temporary accommodation, and offered her alternative accommodation elsewhere which she refused.
The local authority brought proceedings in the county court for possession of the temporary accommodation.
The applicant, as defendant to those proceedings, sought at a late stage to introduce a counterclaim for a declaration that the alternative accommodation offered by the local authority was unsuitable and unreasonable, and for damages.
The assistant recorder, sitting in the county court, refused leave to introduce the counterclaim and made an order for possession.
He took the view that the matters raised by the counterclaim would better have been raised by judicial review.
The defendant appealed, and sought in the Court of Appeal for the first time to raise the issue that the notice to quit was bad.
The court held that it was not open to the defendant to raise at that stage the question of the validity of the notice to quit.
The court also upheld the decision of the assistant recorder to reject the counterclaim which the defendant sought to introduce.
Commenting on this last decision, Sir John Donaldson M.R. said, at p. 353:
‘Bearing in mind that the essence of the proceedings is whether or not this lady had to give up these premises, it seems to me that, although he may not have been correct in thinking that the relief sought in the counterclaim was a matter for judicial review, the issue could without doubt be better dealt with by separate proceedings.
On the same page of the report Parker L.J.
is quoted as saying:
‘Firstly, on the basis of the passage from Lord Bridge's speech in Cocks v. Thanet District Council , with which the other four members of the Judicial Committee agreed, it is clearly the case that, having made their decision on 24 June 1983 [viz that she was homeless, in priority need, and not intentionally homeless]the council came under a statutory duty to secure that accommodation became available.
That created a private right in Mrs. Keyte.
That is a matter which, it would appear from Cocks v. Thanet District Council read as a whole, she would have been entitled to pursue by a separate action.
Bearing in mind that these remarks were made before the new section 69(1) was introduced by the Act of 1986, I do not see that they can be regarded as carrying the matter any further.
It is also worth noting that they were concerned with an attempt by a defendant in proceedings brought in the county court by a local authority to challenge the relevant decision of that authority.
It is well established that a public law decision by a local authority may be open to challenge by way of defence or counterclaim to an action brought by the local authority in the High Court or the county court, notwithstanding the fact that if the defendant had sought to begin the proceedings he would have had to do so by way of judicial review: see Wandsworth London Council v. Winder [1985]A.C. 461.
Secondly Mr. Watkinson referred to Reg. v. Westminster City Council, Ex parte Tansey (1988) 21 H.L.R. 57.
This was another case which homeless persons occupying temporary accommodation.
The local authority had resolved that its director of housing be authorised to offer to them, in cases which he judged to be appropriate, accommodation in hostels or hotels by way of permanent accommodation.
The homeless persons sought judicial review of that resolution by the local authority.
At first instance Simon Brown J. declined to determine the application for judicial review in advance of any actual decision by the director of housing on the individual cases.
He went on to consider, however, whether the court's jurisdiction over the question whether the housing authority had provided was only supervisory, or could be challenged in private law proceedings.
He concluded — on broadly similar grounds to those which I have set out in this judgment — that the jurisdiction of the court was purely supervisory, or, in other words, that the decision of the local authority on the suitability of the accommodation provided could only be challenged by way of proceedings for judicial review.
The Court of Appeal declined to adjudicate on this matter, holding that the views expressed by the judge as to the nature of the court's jurisdiction were both obiter and academic.
Lloyd L.J.
added, however, that the offers of accommodation which were expected to be made pursuant to the resolution of the local authority could ‘be made the subject of fresh proceedings under Order 53 or by way of writ, as the recipients may be advised by counsel.’
It seems to me that, by this remark, Lloyd L.J.
was doing no more than leaving open the question which this court has now to decide.
Finally we were referred to the recent decision of the House of Lords in Roy v. Kensington and Chelsea and Westminster Family Practitioner Committee [1992]1 A.C. 624.
In that case the plaintiff, Dr. Roy, had begun an action in the Queen's Bench Division against his family practitioner committee seeking, amongst other things, payment of part of his basic practice allowance which had been withheld by the committee, following their decision that he had failed to devote a substantial amount of his time to general practice as required by the relevant regulations.
The committee applied to strike out his claim as an abuse of the process of the court on the ground that their decision was made in the exercise of a public law duty, and could only be challenged by way of judicial review.
The House of Lords held that the plaintiff's relationship with the committee conferred on him private law rights to remuneration in accordance with his statutory terms of service: that a litigant possessed of a private law right could seek to enforce that right by ordinary action notwithstanding that the proceedings would involve a challenge to a public law decision; and that accordingly the action brought by the plaintiff in the Queen's Bench Division did not constitute an abuse of process.
Lord Lowry said, at p. 653:
‘Dr. Roy's printed case contained detailed arguments in favour of a contract between him and the  committee , but before your Lordships Mr. Lightman simply argued that the doctor had a private law right, whether contractual or statutory.
With regard to O'Reilly v. Mackman [1983]2 A.C. 237 he argued in the alternative.
The ‘broad approach’ was that the rule in O'Reilly v. Mackman did not apply generally against bringing actions to vindicate private rights in all circumstances in which those actions involved a challenge to a public law act or decision, but that it merely required the aggrieved person to proceed by judicial review only when private law rights were not at stake.
The ‘narrow approach’ assumed that the rule applied generally to all proceedings in which public law acts or decisions where challenged, subject to some exceptions when private law rights were involved.
There was no need in O'Reilly v. Mackman to choose between these approaches, but it seems clear that Lord Diplock considered himself to be stating a general rule with exceptions.
For my part, I much prefer the broad approach, which is both traditionally orthodox and consistent with the Pyx Granite principle [1960]A.C. 260, 286, as applied in Davy v. Spelthorne Borough Council [1984]A.C. 262, 274 and in Wandsworth London Borough Council v. Winder [1985]A.C. 461, 510.
It would also, if adopted, have the practical merit of getting rid of a procedural minefield.
I shall, however, be content for the purpose of this appeal to adopt the narrow approach, which avoids the need to discuss the proper scope of the rule, a point which has not been argued before your Lordships and has hitherto been seriously discussed only by the academic writers.
Lord Lowry continued, at pp. 654–655:
‘My Lords, I have already disclaimed the intention of discussing the scope of the rule in O'Reilly v. Mackman but, even if I treat it as a general rule, there are many indications in favour of a liberal attitude towards the exceptions contemplated but not spelt out by Lord Diplock.
For example:(1) the Law Commission, when recommending the new judicial review procedure, contemplated the continued co-existence of judicial review proceedings and actions for a declaration with regard to public law issues.
Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd. v. Wednesbury Corporation [1948]1 K.B.
223 is a famous prototype of the latter.
(2) This House has expressly approved actions for a declaration of nullity as alternative to applications for certiorari to quash, where private law rights were concerned:Wandsworth London Borough Council v. Winder [1985]A.C. 461, 477,per Robert Goff L.J.
(3): ‘The principle remains intact that public authorities and public servants are, unless clearly exempted, answerable in the ordinary courts for wrongs done to individuals.
But by an extension of remedies and a flexible procedure it can be said that something resembling a system of public law is being developed.
Before the expression ‘public law’ can be used to deny a subject a right of action in the court of his choice it must be related to a positive prescription of law, by statute or by statutory rule.
We have not yet reached the point at which mere characterisation of a claim as a claim in public law is sufficient to exclude it from consideration by the ordinary courts: to permit this would be to create a dual system of law with the rigidity and procedural hardship for plaintiffs which it was the purpose of the recent reforms to remove:’Davy v. Spelthorne Borough Council [1984]A.C. 262, 276,per Lord Wilberforce.
In conclusion, my Lords, it seems to me that, unless the procedure adopted by the moving party is ill suited to dispose of the question at issue, there is much to be said in favour of the proposition that a court having jurisdiction ought to let a case be heard rather than entertain a debate concerning the form of the proceedings.
The speech of Lord Lowry, with which the other members of their Lordships' House agreed, is a salutary reminder that the protection from action in the ordinary courts which is conferred on local authorities and others by the rule in O'Reilly v. Mackman must not be carried too far.
But the applicant in the present case is unable to rely on the decision in Roy unless he can establish a breach of a private law right, and this, in my judgment, he has failed to do.
Further, for the reasons which I have given, the action which the applicant has begun in the Bow County Court appears to me to be, in Lord Lowry's words, ‘ill suited to dispose of the question at issue.’
I would allow the appeal.
FARQUHARSON L.J.
I agree.
PARKER L.J.
I also agree and have nothing further to add.
Appeal allowed.
No order for costs.
Leave to appeal refused.
Solicitors: Borough Solicitor, Tower Hamlets London Borough Council; T. V. Edwards & Co.