

[COURT OF APPEAL]
In re A. AND OTHERS (MINORS)(RESIDENCE ORDERS: LEAVE TO APPLY)
1992 April 30;
May 11
Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R., Balcombe and Mann L.JJ.
Children — Residence order — Leave to apply — Applications by former foster mother — Children in care of local authority — Mother not notified of applications — Whether leave to be granted — Children Act 1989 (c. 41), s. 10(9)
In 1989 the local authority placed four siblings with the foster mother for long term fostering.
In 1991 the children were removed and placed elsewhere, where they maintained regular contact with their mother.
On the foster mother's application under section 10(9) of the Children Act 1989 for leave to apply for residence orders under section 8 of the Act in respect of the children, no direction was made that the children's natural mother be notified, and she remained unaware of the application until it had been determined.
The judge, concluding that the court's paramount consideration on such an application was the children's welfare, in accordance with section 1(1) of the Act, and that its power to interfere with the local authority's proposals for the children was not confined to exceptional circumstances, granted the foster mother leave to apply for residence orders in respect of the children.
On appeal by the local authority, supported by the mother, and on their applications to adduce further evidence:—
Held , allowing the appeal and granting the applications, that since on an application for the grant of leave under section 8 no question with regard to a child's upbringing was determined, and since section 10(9) stipulated particular matters, including parental wishes, to which the court was to have regard on such an application, section 1(1) did not apply so as to make the children's welfare the paramount consideration on an application for leave to apply for a residence order made by a person other than the child concerned; and that, accordingly, the judge had applied the wrong test; that as a result of his failure to require that the mother be notified of the application the judge had been deprived of additional material necessary to the proper exercise of his discretion; and that in the exercise of a fresh discretion, having regard to the new evidence and to the circumstances of the case, the foster mother's application for leave would be refused (post, pp. 428G — 429F, 430F, 431C–E).
Per curiam .
The principle that the courts will not interfere with any decision of a local authority relating to a child in its care save in the most exceptional circumstances relates to the law as it was before the Children Act 1989.
While that principle is maintained by the Act in relation to most matters concerning a child in a local authority's care, a residence order under section 8 is expressly excepted by section 9(1).
The court should approach an application for leave under section 10(9) on the basis that the local authority's plans for the child's future are designed to safeguard and promote the child's welfare and that any departure therefrom might disrupt the child's life to the extent of harming him (post, pp. 429H — 430D).
The following cases are referred to in the judgment of Balcombe L.J.:
A. v. Liverpool City Council [1982]A.C. 363;[1981]2 W.L.R. 948;[1981]2 All E.R.
385, H.L. (E.)
F. v. S. (Adoption: Ward)[1973]Fam. 203;[1973]2 W.L.R. 178;[1973]1 All E.R.
722, C.A.
M. and H. (Minors)(Local Authority: Parental Rights),In re [1990]1 A.C. 686;[1988]3 W.L.R. 485;[1988]3 All E.R.
5, H.L. (E.)
W. (A Minor)(Wardship: Jurisdiction), In re [1985]A.C. 791;[1985]2 W.L.R. 892;[1985]2 All E.R.
301, H.L. (E.)
The following additional cases were cited in argument:
American Cyanamid Co. v. Ethicon Ltd .
[1975]A.C. 396;[1975]2 W.L.R. 316;[1975]1 All E.R.
504, H.L. (E.)
Pioneer Shipping Ltd. v. B.T.P. Tioxide Ltd .
[1982]A.C. 724;[1981]3 W.L.R. 292;[1981]2 All E.R.
1030, H.L. (E.)
Winch v. Jones [1986]Q.B.
296;[1985]3 W.L.R. 729;[1985]3 All E.R.
97, C.A.
The following cases, although not cited, were referred to in the skeleton arguments:
Becker v. Teale (Practice Note)[1971]1 W.L.R. 1475;[1971]3 All E.R.
715, C.A.
Ladd v. Marshall [1954]1 W.L.R. 1489;[1954]3 All E.R.
745, C.A.
P. (A Minor)(Education), In re [1992]1 F.L.R. 316, C.A.
Practice Direction (Ward: Adoption)[1985]1 W.L.R. 924;[1985]2 All E.R.
832
Reg. v. Newham London Borough Council, Ex parte McL.
(Note)[1988]1 F.L.R. 416
INTERLOCUTORY APPEAL from Sir Gervase Sheldon sitting as an additional judge of the Family Division.
By an order dated 5 August 1991 Waite J. granted the foster mother leave to apply for judicial review of the decision of the local authority to remove from placement with her the four children D., born on 5 June 1978, T., born on 2 January 1980, A., born on 23 April 1981, and K., born on 21 November 1982, who were in the care of the local authority.
By applications dated 13 December 1991 pursuant to section 10(9) of the Children Act 1989 the foster mother sought leave to apply for residence orders under section 8 of the Act of 1989 in respect of the children.
By agreement between the foster mother and the local authority the hearing of the substantive application for judicial review commenced on 11 December 1991 was to be treated as the hearing of the applications under section 10(9) of the Act of 1989, and the foster mother agreed to the formal dismissal of her application for judicial review if leave were granted.
On 20 December the judge granted the applications under section 10(9).
By a notice of appeal dated 24 December 1991 the local authority appealed with leave of the judge on the grounds that (1) the judge had erred in law or misdirected himself as to the criteria to be applied to the decision whether leave should be granted in respect of an application by a former foster parent;(2) the judge should have applied the test whether (a) there were quite exceptional circumstances disclosed necessitating the ousting of the local authority and the consequent discharge of the care order, and (b) there was a real likelihood that the applicant could persuade the court to adopt that course and (c) such a course was in the interests of the children;(3) alternatively, if the judge had adopted the correct test, his exercise of his discretion had been plainly wrong in that he had failed to give any or sufficient weight to (a) the disturbing effects on the children of further investigation,(b) the fact that if residence orders were made the care order would be discharged,(c) the shared responsibility between the foster mother and the mother resulting from section 12(2) of the Act of 1989,(d) the fact that the foster mother's proper remedy was her application for judicial review, and (e) the wishes of the children and the mother.
By an amended respondent's notice the natural mother supported the local authority's appeal on the grounds advanced by their notice of appeal and further or alternatively sought to contend that the judge (1) had been wrong in law, fact or both to hear and determine the applications for leave when the mother was not a party to the applications and was not aware of them and the judge had not been apprised properly or at all of her wishes in the matter;(2) had acted contrary to the rules of natural justice and to section 10(9) (d )(ii) of the Act of 1989; and (3) ought to have required the mother to be notified of the application pursuant to rule 4.3(2) (b ) of the Family Proceedings Rules 1991, rule 4.4 and Appendix III.
By a respondent's notice dated 21 January 1992 the foster mother sought to contend that the judge's grant of leave under section 10(9) of the Act of 1989 should be affirmed on the grounds that if the Court of Appeal accepted the local authority's test for the grant of leave to apply under section 10(9) the evidence justified the judge's order.
By applications made to the Court of Appeal the local authority and the natural mother sought to adduce further evidence.
The facts are stated in the judgment of Balcombe L.J.
Allan Levy Q.C.
and Simon Brilliant for the local authority.
Judith Parker Q.C.
and Melanie den Brinker for the natural mother.
James Munby Q.C.
and Alison Ball for the foster mother.
11 May.
The following judgments were handed down.
BALCOMBE L.J.
This appeal is by the local authority, with the leave of the judge, from an order made by Sir Gervase Sheldon, sitting as an additional judge of the High Court, on 20 December 1991, whereby he granted to the foster mother, who had been the foster mother of four children in the care of the local authority, leave to apply for a residence order in respect of those children.
The local authority's appeal is supported by the mother of the children.
The appeal raises questions under the Children Act 1989 which have not been previously considered by this court.
All subsequent references to the Act or to statutory provisions are to the Act of 1989 and its provisions unless otherwise stated.
The mother has six children in all: B., born 14 March 1975 and now aged 17; P., born 21 December 1976, aged 15; D., born 5 June 1978, aged 13; T., born 2 January 1980, aged 12; A., born 23 April 1981, aged 11; and K., born 21 November 1982, aged nine.
The father of these children are one or other of the mother's first two husbands, the first of whom (from whom she was divorced in 1976) has played no part in their lives at least since 1980, and the second of whom committed suicide in 1984.
The mother has since been married again and divorced and now has a co-habitee of three years' standing.
This appeal concerns the four younger children, although the two elder boys played a part in the events which led up to the present situation.
After unsettled early histories all six children came into the care of the local authority in June 1989.
D., T. and A. were placed with the foster mother on 15 June 1989 and K., following his discharge from hospital after a road accident, on 30 June 1989.
All the children were at that time highly disturbed and were placed with the foster mother on a long term fostering basis.
B. and P. were also placed with the foster mother on 6 August 1989.
Full care orders under section 1 of the Children and Young Persons Act 1969 in respect of all six children in favour of the local authority were made on 7 November 1989.
The judge described the foster mother and her home in the following passage from his judgment:
‘She is an unmarried middle-aged lady who, after having worked for some while as a district nurse and in health care nursing, in 1968 began fostering children.
Since then with the encouragement of a number of local authorities she has devoted her life, with the help of others by means of fostering and adoption, to the care of children from very disturbed and difficult backgrounds for whom in most, if not all, cases other placements were difficult to find.
Thus her household, which is unusual if not unique and which is financed at least partly by a charitable trust, in July this year totalled 39 individuals including adult helpers and some 12 children under the age of 16.
Clearly also she is a lady of character and determination who is, or can be, fiercely protective of her charges.
The reports prepared by the local authority's social workers indicate that initially all the children made good progress with the foster mother and at one time their adoption by her was contemplated.
However, the relationship between the local authority and the foster mother subsequently deteriorated, and the local authority became concerned about the placement of the children with her.
These concerns were fuelled by allegations made by P. and B., who respectively ran away from the foster mother's home in August and September 1990.
B.'s placement with the foster mother ended in November 1990; P.'s in May 1991.
For the purposes of this judgment it is unnecessary to set out in detail the concerns felt by the local authority about the placement of the four children with the foster mother.
A wealth of affidavit evidence filed by and on behalf of the foster mother strenuously denies that there is any substance in those concerns and asserts that the four children who remained with her continued to make excellent progress.
There is also substantial affidavit evidence filed by the local authority setting out their concerns and the reasons for them.
Matters came to a head on 19 June 1991 when the local authority decided to remove the four children for assessment on 26 June, whereupon the foster mother required that they be removed immediately.
They left the foster mother's home on 19 June, and after a period in a children's home they have been placed with different foster parents.
P., B. and D. are together with one family, T. and A. were initially together although A. has since had to be moved to a small children's home, and K. is with a third family.
All six children see their mother and each other monthly.
Since leaving her home, none of the children has had any contact with the foster mother or the members of her ‘family.’
On 19 July 1991 the foster mother applied for leave to apply for judicial review of the local authority's decision to remove the four children from her, that being at the time the only procedure which was open to her.
She was granted leave to make that application by Waite J. on 5 August 1991, and her substantive application for judicial review came before Sir Gervase Sheldon on 11 December 1991.
To that application the local authority was the only respondent.
However, on 19 December 1991 the period of six months from the date when the children left the foster mother's home and she ceased to be their foster parent was due to expire, and she would then be free to apply for a residence order under section 8 in respect of the four children, without the local authority's consent under section 9(3) (a ).
(This consent was necessary because the children had not lived with her for at least three years: see section 9(3) (c ) and (4).)
Since a residence order was in substance what the foster mother sought, it was agreed between counsel for her and the local authority:(a) that the local authority would not object to the foster mother's application for a residence order being made before the expiry of the six months period;(b) that the hearing before the judge should be treated as the hearing of that application;(c) that if, in the event, the foster mother were to be given leave to apply for a residence order she would agree to the formal dismissal of her application for judicial review without any penalty as to costs; but (d) that, if leave under the Act were to be refused, it would be open to the foster mother to continue the judical review proceedings.
The mother knew of the foster mother's application for judicial review, but was told (correctly) that she was not directly involved with those proceedings.
She was not told of the foster mother's application for leave to apply for a residence order and knew nothing about it until after leave had been granted.
The foster mother's application for leave to apply for a residence order under section 8 was governed by section 10(9) which provides:
‘Where the person applying for leave to make an application for a section 8 order is not the child concerned, the court shall, in deciding whether or not to grant leave, have particular regard to —(a ) the nature of the proposed application for the section 8 order;(b ) the applicant's connection with the child;(c ) any risk there might be of that proposed application disrupting the child's life to such an extent that he would be harmed by it; and (d ) where the child is being looked after by a local authority —(i) the authority's plans for the child's future; and (ii) the wishes and feelings of the child's parents.
‘Harm’ for the purpose of paragraph (c)is defined by the combined effect of sections 105(1) and 31(9) and (10) as ‘ill-treatment or the impairment of health or development.’
‘Development’ is also defined as meaning ‘physical, intellectual, emotional, social or behavioural development’and, where the question whether harm suffered by a child is significant turns on the child's health or development, his health or development shall be compared with that which could reasonably be expected from a similar child.
The procedure for an application for leave to commence proceedings is governed by rule 4.3 of the Family Proceedings Rules 1991 (S.I.
1991 No. 1247 (L. 20)), paragraph (2) of which provides:
‘On considering a request for leave filed under paragraph (1), the court shall —(a ) grant the request, whereupon the proper officer shall inform the person making the request of the decision, or (b ) direct that a date be fixed for the hearing of the request, whereupon the proper officer shall fix such a date and give such notice as the court directs to the person making the request and to such other persons as the court requires to be notified, of the date so fixed.
The judge referred to the provisions of section 10(9) and the meaning of ‘harm;’ he did not refer to the procedural rules.
He also referred to section 1(1) which provides:
‘When a court determines any question with respect to—(a ) the upbringing of a child;…the child's welfare shall be the court's paramount consideration.
He held that, even on an application for leave, the court must have regard to the child's welfare as the paramount consideration.
The substance of his approach to the application before him is to be found in the following passages from his judgment:
‘The first question to be decided by the court is whether on the undisputed or incontrovertible facts there appears to be a question deserving fuller investigation and whether it might reasonably be held on the substantive hearing that it would be in the interests of the child for a ‘residence order’ to be made.
In my opinion, moreover, if the answers to both those questions are in the affirmative, leave ought to be given for such a substantive hearing unless, taking into account the other matters to which I have referred, the court is clearly of the opinion that such further proceedings would not be in the child's best interests.
Adopting that approach to the facts and circumstances of the present application I am satisfied that it raises a question deserving a fuller investigation, and, if that investigation were to favour [the foster mother], that it might reasonably be held on the substantive hearing that it would be in the interests of the children (or one or more of them) for a ‘residence order’ to be made.
He then went on to consider whether the further proceedings would be against the children's interests under four heads:(1) the disturbing effects on the children of further investigation;(2) the fact that, under section 91(1), if in respect of any child a residence order were made in favour of the foster mother, the existing care order to the local authority would be discharged;(3) the shared parental responsibility between the foster mother and the mother which would result from section 12(2) conferring parental responsibility upon the foster mother if a residence order were to be made in her favour;(4) the time that would be likely to elapse before any substantive order could be made.
While stating that none of these were matters which could be ignored, they were not such as to outweigh the possible value to the children of a thorough and independent investigation of the case.
Accordingly, he granted leave to the foster mother to apply for a residence order in respect of the four children.
In order that there should be no undue delay, the order of 20 December 1991 contemplated that the foster mother's application for a residence order should be made, and the necessary preparatory steps taken notwithstanding the pendency of this appeal.
The application was duly made, the proceedings were brought up into the High Court, and on 27 January 1992 the Official Solicitor was appointed guardian ad litem of the four children who, together with the mother and the local authority, were respondents to the foster mother's application.
On 26 March 1992 the Official Solicitor made a report, whose purpose was to consider the question of interim contact between the foster mother and the children prior to the substantive hearing of her application.
At the outset of the hearing of the appeal, both the mother and the local authority applied for leave to put in evidence before us the Official Solicitor's report.
The mother also sought leave to put in her own statement; the local authority sought leave to put in a statement by D.'s foster mother.
We did not rule on the applications at the time, as they were opposed by Mr. Munby, for the foster mother, but he agreed that we should look at the evidence de bene esse and make our ruling as part of our judgment.
It was common ground that in granting leave to the foster mother to apply for a residence order the judge was exercising a judicial discretion.
Accordingly, we should only interfere with his decision if we are satisfied that he applied an incorrect test, or was deprived of material which was necessary for the proper exercise of his discretion or was plainly wrong.
If we are so satisfied, then we are free to exercise our own discretion.
In my judgment the judge was wrong in holding that on an application for leave to apply for a section 8 order by a person other than the child concerned, the child's welfare is the paramount consideration.
I reach that conclusion for the following reasons.
(1) In granting or refusing an application for leave to apply for a section 8 order, the court is not determining a question with respect to the upbringing of the child concerned.
That question only arises when the court hears the substantive application.
The reasoning of this court in F. v. S. (Adoption: Ward)[1973]Fam. 203 supports this conclusion.
(2) Some of the express provisions of section 10(9) — for example paragraphs (c ) and (d )(i)— as to the matters to which the court is to have particular regard in deciding an application for leave to apply for a section 8 order would be otiose if the whole application were subject to the overriding provisions of section 1(1). (3) There would have been little point in Parliament providing that the court was to have particular regard to the wishes and feelings of the child's parent, if the whole decision were to be subject to the overriding (paramount) consideration of the child's welfare.
Thus in my judgment the judge applied the wrong test in approaching the exercise of his discretion, and on that ground alone we are entitled to interfere with his decision.
The application of this incorrect test may have materially affected the judge's decision, since he may well have considered that the children's welfare overrode the mother's wishes and feelings, a matter to which he should have had particular regard under section 10(9) (d )(ii).
The judge's failure to apply the correct test in this respect was compounded by the fact that he was deprived of the material which was necessary for the proper exercise of his discretion because of his failure to require that the mother be notified of the foster mother's application for leave under rule 4.3(2) (b ) of the Family Proceedings Rules 1991.
I accept that it was not mandatory upon the judge to require that the mother be given notice of the foster mother's application, but he knew in general terms from the evidence before him that the mother had maintained an active interest in the children and that she was unhappy about the children's placement with the foster mother.
In fairness to the mother he should have directed that she be given notice of the foster mother's application; had he done so he would have learned — as we have learned from the mother's statement which clearly should be admitted in evidence before us for this purpose at least— that if the matters to which she spoke were correct (viz. the foster mother's preventing her having access to and contact with the children, and allegations which she says the children made to her of their physical and emotional abuse by the foster mother and other members of her ‘family’), then the mother's wishes and feelings were not lightly to be ignored.
In my judgment therefore the exercise of his discretion was vitiated on the additional ground that by failing to require that the mother be given notice of the foster mother's application, he was deprived of material which was necessary for the proper exercise of his discretion.
In the circumstances it is not strictly necessary for me to express an opinion on the other submission made by Mr. Levy, for the local authority, as to why the judge applied the wrong test in exercising his discretion.
However, as the matter was fully argued before us, and as it raises a point of some general interest, I propose to do so.
Mr. Levy's submission was that because of the decisions of the House of Lords in A. v. Liverpool City Council [1982]A.C. 363;In re W. (A Minor)(Wardship: Jurisdiction)[1985]A.C. 791 and In re M. and H. (Minors)(Local Authority: Parental Rights)[1990]1 A.C. 686 the court should approach the exercise of its discretion in the case where (as here) the child is in the care of a local authority on the basis that, Parliament having entrusted the care of the child to the local authority, the court should not interfere with the local authority's care of the child save in the most exceptional circumstances.
In my judgment the fallacy behind this submission lies in the fact that the principle of A. v. Liverpool City Council [1982]A.C. 363 and the other cases cited relate to the law as it was before the substantial changes introduced by the Act.
Before the Act the courts would not interfere with any decision by a local authority relating to a child in its care under statutory authority unless the local authority had itself brought the matter before the court, or the facts were such as to entitle the local authority's decision to be challenged by way of judicial review:A. v. Liverpool City Council [1982]A.C. 363, 373,per Lord Wilberforce.
However, while that principle is maintained by the Act in relation to most matters concerning a child in the care of a local authority, a residence order under section 8 is expressly excepted by section 9(1).
This represents a fundamental change in the law, and the Act, by sections 9(3) and 10(9), introduces its own limitations upon the persons who, and in the circumstances in which they, may apply for leave.
However, that does not mean that on the application for leave the court gives no weight to the views of the local authority.
On the contrary, section 10(9) (d )(i) provides that the court is to have particular regard to the authority's plans for the child's future.
And section 22(3) provides that it is the duty of a local authority to safeguard and promote the welfare of any child in its care.
Accordingly, the court should approach the application for leave on the basis that the authority's plans for the child's future are designed to safeguard and promote the child's welfare and that any departure from those plans might well disrupt ‘the child's life to such an extent that he would be harmed by it.’
Mr. Levy also sought to rely in support of this submission on paragraph 4.53 of the Law Commission Report, Review of Child Law: Guardianship and Custody (1988)(Law Com.
No. 172)(H.C.
594), that on an application for leave to apply for a residence order with respect to a child in the care of a local authority: ‘Only in quite exceptional cases would leave be granted against the wishes of the local authority.’
That expression of opinion by the Law Commission can have no relevance to the construction of the Act, whilst any bearing it might otherwise have had on the matters which the court should take into account in exercising its discretion whether to grant leave to apply for a residence order in respect of a child in the care of a local authority has clearly been superseded by the express provisions of the Act.
As I am satisfied that the judge applied an incorrect test to the foster mother's application, and was also deprived of material necessary for the proper exercise of his discretion, it follows that we are free to exercise our own discretion and it is to that question that I now turn.
On this issue we should, in my judgment, admit the Official Solicitor's report, the mother's statement and the statement of D.'s foster mother.
The Official Solicitor's report is particularly relevant because, although made for the limited purpose mentioned above, it is the report of an independent guardian ad litem which makes clear that all the children are opposed to any suggestion that they should return to the foster mother and her ‘family.’
That is supported by the statements of the mother and D.'s foster mother.
It is now nearly a year since the children left the foster mother.
If there is to be a full hearing of her application for a residence order it seems improbable that it could now be heard before the end of July at the earliest.
Because of the nature of the allegations and counter-allegations it would be necessary for all the children to be subjected to psychiatric examination: the Official Solicitor recognises this but has postponed arranging any such examination pending the result of this appeal.
Again, because of the nature of the allegations and counter-allegations, it seems probable that the hearing would be lengthy and bitter, and in view of their ages it seems to me impossible that the children would not know all about the hearing and the issues raised by it and be caught up in that bitterness.
And, if they maintain their attitude expressed freely to the Official Solicitor's representative and to their mother, it would be all to no purpose, since no court would make a residence order in favour of the foster mother against the wishes of the children concerned who are of an age to know their own minds.
I agree with the judge that the paper evidence discloses matters which require investigation.
Since quite serious charges have been made against the foster mother and her ‘family,’ it might be said that fairness to her requires that such an investigation should take place.
If this had been ordinary civil litigation I would have agreed.
But this is not ordinary civil litigation: it concerns children.
In cases concerning children it is often necessary to subjugate justice to the adults to the interests of the children.
Thus in ordinary custody disputes between father and mother the status quo often dictates the answer which the court has to give, notwithstanding that the status was achieved in circumstances which the court may regard with disfavour.
In the present case we have the advantage of evidence which the judge lacked: in particular the mother's statement and the Official Solicitor's report.
On a consideration of all the evidence and having regard to the matters to which section 10(9) enjoins us to have particular regard, I am fully satisfied that this is a case where we should exercise our discretion so as to refuse leave.
I would allow this appeal.
MANN L.J.
I agree.
LORD DONALDSON OF LYMINGTON M.R. I also agree.
Applications for leave to address fresh evidence granted.
Appeal allowed.
No order for costs save legal aid taxation.
Solicitors: Ackroyd and Aina; John Pearson; Official Solicitor.