

[COURT OF APPEAL]In re J. (A MINOR)(CHILD IN CARE: MEDICAL TREATMENT) 1992 June 3; 10
Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R.,
Balcombe and Leggatt L.JJ.
Children — Court's inherent jurisdiction — Medical treatment — Profoundly handicapped baby suffering intermittent convulsions — Clinical decision precluding future resuscitation by mechanical ventilation — Order directing health authority to require adoption of such procedures pending full hearing — Whether mandatory injunctive relief appropriate
As a result of serious head injuries sustained when he was one month old J., who was born in January 1991, became profoundly mentally and physically handicapped, suffering from microcephaly, cerebral palsy, cortical blindness and severe epilepsy and requiring to be fed by a nasogastric tube.
By a consensus of medical opinion, he was considered unlikely to develop greatly beyond his present state and had an uncertain but shortened life expectancy.
His intermittent convulsive attacks required resuscitative treatment in hospital and by December 1991 the consultant paediatrician, whose view was supported by the health authority and by other medical opinion, considered that it was medically inappropriate to use mechanical ventilation procedures in any future resuscitation.
The local authority, which shared parental responsibility for J. in consequence of a care order made under the Children Act 1989, obtained leave under section 100 of the Act to invoke the court's inherent jurisdiction to determine whether artificial ventilation and/or other life-saving measures should be administered to J. if he were to suffer a life-threatening event.
On the substantive hearing the mother indicated her desire to seek medical opinion in support of her view that such measures should be used.
The judge concluded that pending a further hearing the status quo should be preserved by an interim injunctive order.
He therefore directed that if J. were to suffer a life-threatening event while in the health authority's care and the required drugs and equipment were or could reasonably be made available, the health authority should cause such measures (including artificial ventilation) to be applied so long as they were capable of prolonging his life.
On the health's authority's appeal:—
Held , allowing the appeal, that in the exercise of its inherent jurisdiction the court would not order a medical practitioner to treat his patient in a manner contrary to his clinical judgment and professional duty; that the proper approach, pending any final decision, was for the court to consider the options available to it in exercising its inherent powers and to make such order as best served the child's true interests, and it would be wrong to apply the principles governing the grant of interlocutory injunctions in civil proceedings; that, further, the judge's order was defective in that it failed to specify the precise requirements imposed on the health authority and to take sufficient account of that authority's distribution of resources in its patient care; and that, accordingly, the order would be set aside (post, pp. 516B–G, 517D–F, 518E–F, H — 519C, E–H, 520B–C, E–F).
Dicta of Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R. in In re J. (A Minor)(Wardship: Medical Treatment)[1991]Fam. 33, 41, C.A. and in In re R. (A Minor)(Wardship: Consent to Treatment)[1992]Fam. 11, 22, 26, C.A. applied.
American Cyanamid Co. v. Ethicon Ltd. [1975]A.C. 396, H.L. (E.) distinguished.
The following cases are referred to in the judgments:
A. v. Liverpool City Council [1982]A.C. 363;[1981]2 W.L.R. 948;[1981]2 All E.R.
385, H.L. (E.)
American Cyanamid Co. v. Ethicon Ltd. [1975]A.C. 396;[1975]2 W.L.R. 316;[1975]1 All E.R.
504, H.L. (E.)
J. (A Minor)(Wardship: Medical Treatment), In re [1991]Fam. 33;[1991]2 W.L.R. 140;[1990]3 All E.R.
930, C.A.
R. (A Minor)(Wardship: Consent to Treatment), In re [1992]Fam. 11;[1991]3 W.L.R. 592;[1991]4 All E.R.
177, C.A.
X. (A Minor)(Wardship: Jurisdiction), In re [1975]Fam. 47;[1975]2 W.L.R. 335;[1975]1 All E.R.
697, C.A.
The following additional cases were cited in argument:
B. (A Minor)(Wardship: Medical Treatment), In re [1981]1 W.L.R. 1421;[1990]3 All E.R.
327, C.A.
B. (A Minor)(Wardship: Sterilisation), In re [1988]A.C. 199;[1987]2 W.L.R. 1213;[1987]2 All E.R.
206, H.L. (E.)
Brophy v. New England Sinai Hospital Inc. (1986) 497 N.E. 2d. 626
C. (A Minor)(Wardship: Jurisdiction), In re [1991]2 F.L.R. 168, C.A.
C. (A Minor)(Wardship: Medical Treatment), In re [1990]Fam. 26;[1989]3 W.L.R. 240;[1989]2 All E.R.
782, C.A.
C. (A Minor)(Wardship: Medical Treatment)(No. 2), In re [1990]Fam. 39;[1989]3 W.L.R. 252;[1989]2 All E.R.
791, C.A.
D. (A Minor)(Wardship: Sterilisation), In re [1976]Fam. 185;[1976]2 W.L.R. 279;[1976]1 All E.R.
326
P. (A Minor), In re [1986]1 F.L.R. 272
United States of America v. George (1965) 239 F.Supp. 752
W. (A Minor)(Wardship: Jurisdiction), In re [1985]1 A.C. 791;[1985]2 W.L.R. 892;[1985]2 All E.R.
301, H.L. (E.)
The following additional cases, although not cited, were referred to in the skeleton arguments:
Belchertown State School (Superindendent of) v. Saikewicz (1977) 370 N.E. 2d. 417
Bolam v. Friern Hospital Management Committee [1957]1 W.L.R. 582;[1957]2 All E.R.
118
Conroy, In the matter of (1985) 486 A. 2d. 1209
Farrell, In the matter of (1987) 529 A. 2d. 404
J. (A Minor), In re , The Times, 14 May 1992, Thorpe J.
J. v. C. [1970]A.C. 668;[1969]2 W.L.R. 540;[1969]1 All E.R.
488, H.L. (E.)
John F. Kennedy Memorial Hospital v. Heston (1971) 279 A. 2d. 670
K. (Minors)(Wardship: Criminal Proceedings), In re [1988]Fam. 1;[1987]3 W.L.R. 1233;[1988]1 All E.R.
214
Mohamed Arif (An Infant), In re [1968]Ch. 643;[1968]2 W.L.R. 1290;[1968]2 All E.R.
145, C.A.
Norwood Hospital v. Munoz (1991) 564 N.E. 2d. 1017
Schloendorff v. Society of New York Hospital (1914) 105 N.E. 92
Warren v. Mendy [1989]1 W.L.R. 853;[1989]3 All E.R.
103, C.A.
Interlocutory Appeal from Waite J.
By an order dated 30 March 1992 Waite J. granted the local authority's application under section 100(3) of the Children Act 1989 for leave to invoke the court's inherent jurisdiction to determine whether artificial ventilation and/or other life-saving measures should be given to J., an infant for whom the local authority shared parental responsibility pursuant to a care order made under the Act of 1989, if he were to suffer a life-threatening event.
Following the grant of such leave, the local authority served on J.'s parents, the Official Solicitor as J.'s guardian ad litem and the health authority an originating summons claiming the court's determination of that issue.
By his order dated 12 May 1992 Waite J. directed that in the interim pending a further hearing in the events that (1) J.'s medical condition changed so that his life was threatened but was capable of being prolonged by intensive therapeutic measures including artificial ventilation, and (2) he was at that time in the health authority's care and (3) the required drugs and equipment were or could reasonably be made available, the health authority were to cause such measures, including artificial ventilation, to be applied to J. for so long as they were capable of prolonging his life.
Following the judge's decision on 12 May 1992 the Court of Appeal (Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R., Balcombe L.J.
and Sir John Megaw) stayed his order until the hearing of the health authority's proposed appeal.
By a notice of appeal dated 20 May 1992 the health authority appealed on the grounds that (1) the court had no jurisdiction to grant a mandatory injunction requiring a health authority to cause specified medical treatment to be given, alternatively, no jurisdiction to order it to cause such treatment to be given against the professional judgment of its servants or agents;(2) the judge had erred in holding that he was not bound by the decision in In re J. (A Minor)(Wardship: Medical Treatment)[1991]Fam. 33 to hold that there was no such jurisdiction;(3) there had been no material before the court to justify the judge granting a mandatory interlocutory injunction since (a) there was no evidence that the health authority owed J. any enforceable duty to provide the ordered treatment, or that such treatment would be in his best interests;(b) there was uncontradicted evidence before the court that the treatment ordered would be painful and ineffective to give J. a prospect of long term survival and (c) there was no material establishing that there was a reasonable or any prospect of a final order being granted in the terms of the interlocutory order;(4) if the court had jurisdiction to make the order the judge erred in the exercise of his discretion in that (a) he had failed to give sufficient weight to the uncontradicted medical evidence or to the undesirability of seeking to force a doctor to act against his professional judgment and/or requiring the employer of the doctor to do so,(b) he had failed to consider that the order was capable of interfering with the health authority's duty to care for other patients, and (c) by its terms the order was too imprecise to enable the health authority to be able to ascertain how it should be complied with.
On the hearing of the appeal the Court of Appeal imposed an injunction restraining (1) publication of the identification of J., his parents, his carers, any establishment at which he was being cared for and the local and health authorities, and of any other matter in a manner calculated to lead to their identification, and (2) the soliciting of any such information.
At the conclusion of argument Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R. announced that the appeal would be allowed for reasons to be given later.
The facts are stated in the judgment of Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R. 
Robert Francis Q.C.
and Huw Lloyd for the health authority.
Robin Barda for the Official Solicitor.
Joanna Dodson for the local authority.
Allan Levy Q.C.
and Graham Hulme for the mother.
Allan Levy Q.C.
and Diana Cooper for the father.
10 June.
The following judgements were handed down.
Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R. J. is 16 months old, having been born on 22 January 1991.
When he was one month old he suffered an accidental fall, hitting his head.
As a result he is profoundly handicapped, both mentally and physically.
He is severely microcephalic, his brain not having grown sufficiently following the injury.
He has a severe form of cerebral palsy.
He has cortical blindness.
He also has severe epilepsy and indeed has suffered as many as seven attacks in one day.
In a relatively short period earlier this year he suffered 43 epileptic attacks lasting between 10 minutes and 2½ hours.
He has largely to be fed by a nasogastric tube.
Medical opinion is unanimous that J. is unlikely to develop much beyond his present level of functioning, that this level may well deteriorate and that his expectation of life, although uncertain, must be short.
One might perhaps have expected that it would have been impossible to discharge him from hospital, but the local authority, which shares parental responsibility for him, has been able to place him with devoted foster parents whose dedication and skill are of the highest possible order.
Largely unassisted, they attend to all his needs.
J. requires constant attention day and night and is fitted with an alarm which operates should he stop breathing.
His nasogastric tube has from time to time to be removed or re-inserted.
Secretions which block or threaten to block his airway have to be removed by suction.
Antibiotics and other drugs have to be administered.
His breathing has on occasion to be assisted by the administration of oxygen.
Last, but by no means least, the foster parents have to reach decisions, sometimes in crisis conditions, as to whether J. should be returned to hospital as has in fact happened on numerous occasions.
May I join in the admiration and respect which all concerned, including J.'s mother, have expressed for what the foster parents have done for J.
In December 1991 the consultant paediatrician in charge of J. (Dr. I.) wrote a report in which she expressed the view:
‘[J.]has been under my care since he sustained serious injuries in February 1991.
He is now 10.5 months old and has made no developmental progress since the time of his injury which he sustained at the age of four weeks.
He now has severe cerebral palsy, is unable to roll over, sit or crawl.
He cannot feed himself and at present is fed by a nasogastric tube.
He suffers from severe fits.
It is uncertain whether he recognises his carers.
He occasionally responds to sound.
A CT scan performed in May 1991 shows a shrunken brain surrounded by chronic subdural effusions.
He is on regular medication for his fits.
Under these circumstances it would not be medically appropriate to intervene with intensive therapeutic measures such as artificial ventilation if [J.]were to suffer a life-threatening event.
It is possible that [J.]could inhale vomit during either a nasogastric feed or an epileptic fit.
It would be appropriate to offer ordinary resuscitation with suction, physiotherapy and antibiotics.
It would not, however, be appropriate to subject [J.]to the more intensive measures that would be required if he was unable to breathe spontaneously.
For reasons which are both obscure and immaterial, there was considerable delay in this report coming to the attention of the local authority having the care of J. When in January 1992 it did come to the authority's notice, Dr. I. was asked to provide a further up to date report and in addition the authority obtained a second opinion from Dr. R., a consultant paediatric neurologist with a London teaching hospital.
On 30 March 1992 the local authority sought and were granted leave under section 100 of the Children Act 1989 to invoke the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court to ‘determine whether artificial ventilation and/or other life-saving measures should be given to the minor if he suffers a life-threatening event.’
The substantive application came before Waite J. on 11 and 12 May 1992.
The judge in giving judgment quoted from Dr. I.'s latest report (16 April 1982) as follows:
‘it would not be medically appropriate to intervene with intensive therapeutic measures such as artificial ventilation if [J.]were to suffer a life-threatening event.
It is possible that [J.]could inhale vomit during either a nasogastric feed or an epileptic fit.
It would be appropriate to offer ordinary resuscitation with suction, physiotherapy and antibiotics.
[J.]should not be placed on prolonged life support using a ventilator in an intensive care unit.
If he is unable to breathe spontaneously it would be cruel to subject him to positive pressure ventilation to prolong his life artificially.
He would be unlikely to survive the procedure but could well remain dependent on machinery for life support for weeks if not months before his heart stopped beating.
Since it is impossible to communicate with him to reassure him he would have to be kept sedated.
This type of care is very unpleasant for the patient and is not undertaken in the United Kingdom unless the outlook is likely to be a return to healthy life.
Since [J.]has made very little development progress since the accident he has no potential to return to a healthy life and thus intensive care would not only be cruel but would artificially prolong his vegetative state.
Waite J. also recorded that Dr. N., a consultant paediatrician and paediatric cardiologist with another London teaching hospital who had been consulted by the Official Solicitor, was broadly in agreement with Dr. I. The judge no doubt also had in mind the report of Dr. R., who had confirmed all Dr. I.'s findings, but had not in terms expressed a view on the appropriateness of positive pressure ventilation.
In these circumstances it can fairly be said that there was no medical evidence favouring such ventilation, although it was clearly possible that within the paediatric medical speciality some consultant of repute could be found who took a different view.
Between the hearing before Waite J. and the hearing of the appeal, such a consultant was in fact found, namely B., a professor of child health at a third London teaching hospital medical school.
The basis of this professional disagreement was I think that Professor B. did not regard artificial ventilation as being a ‘cruel treatment’ and took a much more optimistic view than Dr. I. as to the likelihood of it being possible to wean J. from such ventilation if it were ever undertaken.
At the time of the hearing the health authority supported Dr. I.'s view that artificial ventilation was inappropriate in J.'s case.
Indeed it would have been quite impossible for it to have adopted any other attitude.
Health authorities are supported by medical and by administrative staff.
In the context of medical decisions, it would be perverse for it to act otherwise than in accordance with the advice of its medical staff when that advice was unanimous as it was in this case, the two other paediatric consultants on its staff wholly agreeing with Dr. I. The Official Solicitor, as J.'s guardian ad litem, was of the same view on the strength of the independent advice of Dr. N.
The local authority social work team concerned with J. would have accepted Dr. I.'s advice, but in view of the seriousness of the decision rightly referred the matter to the case review sub-committee consisting of elected councillors.
That committee by a majority of three to two decided to ask the court to require the health authority to continue to provide all available treatment to J. including ‘intensive resuscitation.’
J.'s mother understandably supported the stance of the local authority.
J.'s parents are divorced but J.'s father is as concerned as his mother for J.'s welfare.
In the situation which had developed he, again understandably, did not feel able to form a firm view on what was in J.'s best interests.
On 12 May 1992 Waite J. made the following order whose terms had been formulated by leading counsel then appearing for J.'s mother:
‘It is ordered that in the interim and an injunction is hereby granted ordering that in the events (i) that the medical condition of [J.]changes in such a way that his life is threatened but is capable of being prolonged by the application to him of intensive therapeutic measures including artificial ventilation, and (ii) that he is at that time in the care of the…
Area Health Authority,(iii) that the required drugs and equipment are or could reasonably be made available, the…
Health Authority do cause such measures (including, if so required to prolong his life, artificial ventilation) to be applied to [J.]for so long as they are capable of prolonging his life.
There be liberty to the…
Area Health Authority to apply on four hours' notice to all parties (such notice to be sufficiently given by telephone) to vary or discharge this injunction.
This order was stayed by this court later on the same day.
On 3 June 1992 at the conclusion of the argument the appeal was allowed and this order set aside.
However, in view of the importance of the issues raised, we said that we would put our reasons into writing and deliver them at a later date.
This we now do.
The health authority appealed to this court with the support of the Official Solicitor.
The local authority, which had sought the guidance of the court and had supported the mother's successful efforts to obtain the order, had in the meanwhile reconsidered its position.
Its case review sub-committee had reversed its previous decision and unanimously decided to accept Dr. I.'s advice.
Accordingly the local authority supported the health authority.
This did not render the appeal in any way academic because, quite apart from its inherent importance in the context of other cases, J.'s parents share parental responsibility with the local authority and J.'s mother was fully entitled to seek to uphold the order.
This Mr. Allan Levy did on her behalf.
It may seem a little strange that this matter should have been dealt with by means of an interim order intended to regulate the position until a further hearing later this month.
The explanation is apparently that the proceedings were launched with little notice and J.'s mother and those advising her wished to have an opportunity of acquiring further expert evidence which would, they hoped, support her view and that which was then the view of the local authority, namely, that artificial ventilation should be used if necessary.
However, the fact that what was being sought was an interim order undoubtedly coloured the judge's approach.
As judgment was not given in open court, I think that the operative part of Waite J.'s reasoning should be given in full.
It was as follows:
‘The only outstanding matter is this.
What should happen if [J.]suffers an episode before then which should require ventilation to be applied mechanically to save or prolong his life?
The judge then set out the terms of the order sought and in the event obtained and continued:
‘Interim relief on that footing is opposed by the local health authority on two grounds.
Firstly, it is said that this is not a case in which interim relief is appropriate or possible at all.
The relief claimed by the mother at this interlocutory stage is precisely what the mother will ask for at the main trial.
If she fails at the substantive hearing, that will be because the court will then have decided that it would not be in [J.'s]best interest for his life to be artificially saved or prolonged.
It could not, so the argument goes, be in [J.'s]interest today to have such a decision pre-empted and defeated by an interlocutory decision which would obtain the contrary result, namely mechanical ventilation which the court at trial would wish to avoid.
So powerful is that consideration, it is argued, that it lifts this case out of the ordinary Cyanamid considerations (see American Cyanamid Co. v. Ethicon Ltd. [1975]A.C. 396), in which the concern of the court is to preserve the subject matter and accept the risk that if the court should refuse the child may die before final decision, as a result of an intervening choking fit from which only ventilation could save him.
Secondly and/or alternatively, it is argued that even if this is a case where the conventional Cyanamid principles fall to be applied, the mother's claim to interlocutory relief falls at the first hurdle, namely the establishment of an arguable prima facie case.
The issue raised by the local authority's summons is, so it is claimed, simply not justiciable.
The law is clear.
The question whether artificial ventilation should or should not be applied is, so the argument proceeds, an entirely medical one with which the courts will not interfere.
Two passages are relied on to support that view from judgments of Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R. in recent cases.
In In re J. (A Minor)(Wardship: Medical Treatment)[1991]Fam. 33, 48, he said: ‘neither the court in wardship proceedings, nor, I think, a local authority having care and control of the baby is able to require the authority to follow a particular course of treatment.
What the court can do is to withhold consent to treatment of which it disapproves and it can express its approval of other treatment proposed by the authority and its doctors.’
The other is In re R. (A Minor)(Wardship: Consent to Treatment)[1992]Fam. 11, 26 where he said: ‘No doctor can be required to treat a child, whether by the court in the exercise of its wardship jurisdiction, by its parents, by the child or anyone else.
The decision whether to treat is dependent upon an exercise of his own professional judgment, subject only to the threshold requirement that, save in exceptional cases usually of emergency, he has the consent of someone who has authority to give that consent.’
‘These two submissions have been most impressively argued by Mr. Lloyd for the local health authority.
They have, moreover, received significant support from an independent and experienced source in that they are supported by the Official Solicitor's counsel Mr. Barda.
He has added a further submission, namely that what is sought here is an extreme exercise of judicial power, namely the right to force doctors to administer treatment against their will.
This is something no ordinary parent could even begin to enforce and no judicial parent stands in a better position than a natural parent.
It is, in my judgment, putting it too high to say that the interim relief claimed covering only five weeks before the main hearing, must be treated as pre-empting the court's powers of decision at the eventual hearing.
Of course, there is a risk that if a crisis develops and mechanical ventilation is applied, the child may suffer or even die.
The question, however, is whether that risk is worth taking in the interests of preserving the prospect of an informed decision when the question arises for mature consideration.
I have no evidence one way or another as to the extent of risk of an episode occurring within five weeks but realism and commonsense tell me that there is a reasonable possibility that it will not and that even if he does unfortunately suffer such a trauma, he will if his life has to be preserved by artificial means, recover sufficiently for a decision at the main hearing as to further mechanical ventilation for the future.
I regard [J.'s]best interests as well as the interests of justice in preserving his life as both pointing in favour of granting relief.
‘As far as the second submission is concerned, I am not able to accept, especially at the interlocutory stage, the extreme view of medical autonomy advanced by the local health authority and the Official Solicitor.
Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R.'s quoted words, when read in isolation, do indeed send a strong note of medical independence.
But Mr. Holman is right to point out that they are strictly obiter and were in neither case supported by any corresponding observation on behalf of the other members of the court.
More persuasively, it has to be borne in mind that these are passages which need to be read in the context not only of the cases in which they were concerned but also of the judgments as a whole.
That is a context which includes such passages found in the same judgment of Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R. in In re J. [1991]Fam. 33 as the following, at p. 41: ‘No one can dictate the treatment to be given to the child — neither court, parents nor doctors.
There are checks and balances.
The doctors can recommend treatment A in preference to treatment B. They can also refuse to adopt treatment C on the grounds that it is medically contra-indicated or for some other reason is a treatment which they could not conscientiously administer.
The court or parents for their part can refuse to consent to treatment A or B or both, but cannot insist on treatment C. The inevitable and desirable result is that choice of treatment is in some measure a joint decision of the doctors and the court or parents.’
As to the argument advanced by Mr. Barda on an analogy between ordinary and judicial parents, my understanding of the prerogative function of wardship, also applicable to the residual prerogative, is that it is a frequent justification for the exercise of such jurisdiction in the first place, that parents' rights are insufficient and that the court's greater powers are necessary for an objective decision as to the best interests of the child concerned.
Such a view is seen in the judgment of Staughton L.J.
in In re R. [1992]Fam. 11, 28, where he said: ‘Faced with such a substantial consensus of opinion among judges who have to deal with this problem from day to day, I have to conclude that the powers of a wardship judge do indeed include power to consent to medical treatment when the ward has not been asked or has declined.
If that means that the wardship judge has wider powers than a natural parent (on the extent of which I have declined to express an opinion), it seems to me to be warranted by the authorities to which I have referred.’
It has to be borne in mind also that during the interval between now and the main hearing the mother may find doctors who take a different view from Drs.
I., N. and R. It may be indeed that such doctors will be willing to say that they would give the very authority for mechanical intervention which the doctors who have so far given evidence did not support.
If such were to be the case, the court would be confronted with a difference of medical opinion, very similar to the case in In re B. (A Minor)(Wardship: Medical Treatment)[1981]1 W.L.R. 1421.
For these reasons, I decide that the objections to the interim relief claimed fail, and an injunction will accordingly be granted as prayed.
Let me say at once that in a matter of this nature, there is absolutely no room for the application of the principles governing the grant of interlocutory relief which were laid down by Lord Diplock in American Cyanamid Co. v. Ethicon Ltd. [1975]A.C. 396, 408.
The proper approach is to consider what options are open to the court in a proper exercise of its inherent powers and, within those limits, what orders would best serve the true interests of the infant pending a final decision.
There can be no question of ‘balance of convenience.’
There can be no question of seeking, simply as such, to preserve the status quo, although on particular facts that may well be the court's objective as being in the best interests of the infant.
There can be no question of ‘preserving the subject matter of the action.’
Manifestly there can be no question of considering whether damages would be an adequate remedy.
The fundamental issue in this appeal is whether the court in the exercise of its inherent power to protect the interests of minors should ever require a medical practitioner or health authority acting by a medical practitioner to adopt a course of treatment which in the bona fide clinical judgment of the practitioner concerned is contra-indicated as not being in the best interests of the patient.
I have to say that I cannot at present conceive of any circumstances in which this would be other than an abuse of power as directly or indirectly requiring the practitioner to act contrary to the fundamental duty which he owes to his patient.
This, subject to obtaining any necessary consent, is to treat the patient in accordance with his own best clinical judgment, notwithstanding that other practitioners who are not called upon to treat the patient may have formed a quite different judgment or that the court, acting on expert evidence, may disagree with him.
It is said that the views which I expressed in my judgments in In re J. (A Minor)(Wardship: Medical Treatment)[1991]Fam. 33 and In re R. (A Minor)(Wardship: Consent to Treatment)[1992]Fam. 11, 26 which are relevant to this were obiter and did not receive the express assent of those sitting with me.
So be it but, remaining as I am of the view that they were a correct expression of the law, I repeat them as part of the ratio of my decision in this case.
In In re J. [1991]Fam. 33, 41, I said:
‘No one can dictate the treatment to be given to the child — neither court, parents nor doctors.
There are checks and balances.
The doctors can recommend treatment A in preference to treatment B. They can also refuse to adopt treatment C on the grounds that it is medically contra-indicated or for some other reason is a treatment which they could not conscientiously administer.
The court or parents for their part can refuse to consent to treatment A or B or both, but cannot insist upon treatment C. The inevitable and desirable result is that choice of treatment is in some measure a joint decision of the doctors and the court or parents.
This co-operation is reinforced by another consideration.
Doctors nowadays recognise that their function is not a limited technical one of repairing or servicing a body.
They are treating people in a real life context.
This at once enhances the contribution which the court or parents can make towards reaching the best possible decision in all the circumstances.
In In re R. [1992]Fam. 11, 22, I said:
‘It is trite law that in general a doctor is not entitled to treat a patient without the consent of someone who is authorised to give that consent.
…However consent by itself creates no obligation to treat.
It is merely a key which unlocks a door.
And, at p. 26:
‘No doctor can be required to treat a child, whether by the court in the exercise of its wardship jurisdiction, by the parents, by the child or anyone else.
The decision whether to treat is dependent upon an exercise of his own professional judgment, subject only to the threshold requirement that, save in exceptional cases usually of emergency, he has the consent of someone who has authority to give that consent.
The order of Waite J. was wholly inconsistent with the law as so stated and cannot be justified upon the basis of any authority known to me.
Furthermore it was, in my judgment, erroneous on two other substantial grounds, only slightly less fundamental than that to which I have just adverted.
The first is its lack of certainty as to what was required of the health authority.
The second is that it does not adequately take account of the sad fact of life that health authorities may on occasion find that they have too few resources, either human or material or both, to treat all the patients whom they would like to treat in the way in which they would like to treat them.
It is then their duty to make choices.
The court when considering what course to adopt in relation to a particular child has no knowledge of competing claims to a health authority's resources and is in no position to express any view as to how it should elect to deploy them.
Although the order is subject to the condition precedent that ‘the required drugs and equipment are or could reasonably be made available,’ it makes no reference to the availability of staff and it has to be borne in mind that artificial ventilation of a young child in an intensive care unit is highly intensive of highly skilled staff.
It gives no guidance as to what is meant by the concept of being reasonably available, yet it is not difficult to imagine circumstances in which there could be bona fide differences of opinion as to whether equipment or staff was reasonably available.
The health authority is entitled to object and does object to being subject to an order of the court with penal consequences in the event of disobedience when it does not know precisely what is required of it.
There remains the very real problem of what is to happen if it appears that Professor B. or some other suitably qualified practitioner was willing, should the need arise, to subject J. to mechanical ventilation and had the facilities for doing so.
What should then happen would depend upon a number of considerations upon which I am in no position to speculate or express a view.
The local authority exercising its parental responsibility would certainly have to consider very carefully whether it accepted that practitioner's advice and any advice as to the risks of the transfer of J. from one hospital to another before giving its consent to such different treatment.
So too would the parents and, in the event of a difference of opinion, the local authority would have to consider whether or not to exercise its powers under section 33(3) (b ) of the Children Act 1989.
The health authority would have a legitimate interest in the decision in the light of its current responsibility towards J. and towards other patients for whose care its necessarily limited resources have to be used.
I would hope that each would adopt an understanding attitude towards the other's problems in circumstances in which the checks and balances of consent and willingness and ability to treat of which I spoke in In re J. [1991]Fam. 33 could come under considerable strain.
In announcing the decision of the court at the conclusion of the argument I stressed, and I repeat, that the effect of setting aside the order leaves the health authority and its medical staff free, subject to consent not being withdrawn, to treat J. in accordance with their best clinical judgment.
This does not mean that we thought, and still less required, that in no circumstances should J. be subjected to mechanical ventilation.
The view expressed by Dr. I. in April 1992 that this should not happen was supported by independent medical opinion, but I have no doubt that all the doctors concerned would agree that situations can change and that, if and when a decision whether or not to use mechanical ventilation has to be taken, it must be taken in the light of the situation as it then exists.
This is what clinical judgment is all about.
What we were saying is that so long as those with parental responsibilities consent to J. being treated by the medical staff of the health authority, he must be treated in accordance with their clinical judgment.
Balcombe L.J.
I have had the advantage of reading in draft the reasons for judgment given by Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R. I agree with those reasons in their entirety but, because of the fundamental importance of the issues raised and because we are differing from the judgment of a very experienced judge, I add some words of my own.
The inherent jurisdiction of the High Court with respect to children, whether or not exercised through the procedure of wardship, is in theory without limit: see In re X. (A Minor)(Wardship: Jurisdiction)[1975]Fam. 47, 51.
Nevertheless, the courts have long recognised that, whatever may be the theoretical position, there are far-reaching limitations in principle on the exercise of that jurisdiction.
In re X. (A Minor)was an example of one such limitation: where the welfare of the particular child is outweighed by the right of free publication.
Another well known example is the line of cases headed by A. v. Liverpool City Council [1982]A.C. 363, where the House of Lords said that the court should not exercise its inherent jurisdiction to supervise the exercise of a discretion within an area committed by statute to a local authority.
So, recognising that there are limits to the exercise of this inherent jurisdiction, I agree with Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R. that I can conceive of no situation where it would be a proper exercise of the jurisdiction to make such an order as was made in the present case: that is to order a doctor, whether directly or indirectly, to treat a child in a manner contrary to his or her clinical judgment.
I would go further.
I find it difficult to conceive of a situation where it would be a proper exercise of the jurisdiction to make an order positively requiring a doctor to adopt a particular course of treatment in relation to a child, unless the doctor himself or herself were asking the court to make such an order.
Usually all the court is asked, or needs, to do is to authorise a particular course of treatment where the person or body whose consent is requisite is unable or unwilling to do so.
It will be apparent from what I have already said that I agree with the views expressed by Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R. in In re J. (A Minor)(Wardship: Medical Treatment)[1991]Fam. 33, 41–42.
Since the point has now been taken that in my judgment in that case I did not support that particular passage from the Master of the Rolls' judgment, I should state that the reason was because I did not find it necessary to do so in the particular circumstances of that case.
I did then, and do now, agree with what is there stated as well as with the passages to the like effect in In re R. (A Minor)(Wardship: Consent to Treatment)[1992]Fam. 11, 22, 26.
Apart from the obvious reasons for this limitation of the exercise of the jurisdiction, there is one other matter which should not be overlooked.
The court is not, or certainly should not be, in the habit of making orders unless it is prepared to enforce them.
If the court orders a doctor to treat a child in a manner contrary to his or her clinical judgment it would place a conscientious doctor in an impossible position.
To perform the court's order could require the doctor to act in a manner which he or she genuinely believed not to be in the patient's best interests; to fail to treat the child as ordered would amount to a contempt of court.
Any judge would be most reluctant to punish the doctor for such a contempt, which seems to me to be a very strong indication that such an order should not be made.
I would also stress the absolute undesirability of the court making an order which may have the effect of compelling a doctor or health authority to make available scarce resources (both human and material) to a particular child, without knowing whether or not there are other patients to whom those resources might more advantageously be devoted.
Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R. has set out in his reasons the condition of J. and his very limited future prospects.
The effect of the order of Waite J., had it not been immediately stayed by this court, might have been to require the health authority to put J. on a ventilator in an intensive care unit, and thereby possibly to deny the benefit of those limited resources to a child who was much more likely than J. to benefit from them.
At the very least it would in those circumstances have required the health authority to make a further application to the court to vary or discharge the injunction.
Mr. Levy, for J.'s parents, sought to persuade us that the particular order here could be justified because it was only an interim order, designed to ‘hold’ the situation for a short period until a full hearing.
In my judgment, this was an order which ought never to have been made at any stage of the case.
Leggatt L.J.
This court had to decide in In re J. (A Minor)(Wardship: Medical Treatment)[1991]Fam. 33 whether to withhold consent to abstain from giving mechanical ventilation in the interests of artificially prolonging life, whatever pain and suffering would thereby be caused to the child.
Now the question for decision is whether the court should require a health authority to provide for a child treatment involving the performance by doctors of services requiring the exercise of professional skill against the will of the doctors concerned.
For present purposes it does not matter whether the court has no power to order specific treatment to be given contrary to the doctors' will or has power but will in practice not exercise it in such circumstances.
Before Waite J. the doctors were unanimous that mechanical ventilation should not be provided, if the occasion for it arose.
Now Professor B. would be prepared to provide it.
But the essential distinction remains: whether the court should positively order treatment to be given or not to be given, or whether it should do no more than consider whether or not to authorise it, where authority is needed.
I can myself envisage no circumstances in which it would be right directly or indirectly to require a doctor to treat a patient in a way that was contrary to the doctor's professional judgment and duty to the patient.
A court can give or withhold a consent or authority such as might be given or withheld by a patient or a child's parent.
But no reported case has been cited to the court in which any judge in any jurisdiction has ever purported to order a doctor to treat a patient in a particular way contrary to the doctor's will until Waite J. made his order in the present case.
The order which he in fact made was against the health authority requiring it to ‘cause such measures (including, if so required to prolong his life, artificial ventilation) to be applied to [the child]for so long as they are capable of prolonging his life.’
That was an order with which it was probably impossible for the health authority to comply, because it has no power, contractual or otherwise, to require doctors to act in a way which they do not regard as medically appropriate.
If it could comply, it would be obliged to accord to this baby a priority over other patients to whom the health authority owes the same duties, but about whose interests the court is ignorant.
In the context of immediate decisions such as doctors may be called upon to make, the concept of doing what the judge called ‘preserving the prospect of an informed decision’ is wholly inapposite.
I therefore concur with both the judgments that have been delivered.
I would add that since our decision was announced it has been rendered in headlines such as‘Court gives doctors right to refuse life support.’
But the reality is that the court has not given to doctors any right that they did not previously have: it has merely declined to deprive them of a power which it is for them alone to exercise.
Appeal allowed.
Health authority's costs against local authority.
Official Solicitor's costs in originating summons.
Leave to appeal refused.