

[FAMILY DIVISION]
HILLINGDON LONDON BOROUGH COUNCIL v. H.
1992 May 21;
June 11
Johnson J.
Children — Family proceedings court — Reasons for decision — Justices failure to give adequate reasons or findings of fact at time of making order — Appeal — Whether permissible for justices to supply appellate court with fuller statement of reasons — Family Proceedings Courts (Children Act 1989) Rules 1991 (S.I.
1991 No. 1395 (L. 17)), r. 21, Children — Family proceedings court — Costs — Justices awarding costs against local authority — Assessment — Solicitors to supply statement of costs — Whether costs to be awarded against local authority — Family Proceedings Courts (Children Act 1989) Rules 1991, r. 22
In May 1991, justices made an order committing two children, who had been living with their mother following the separation of their parents, to the care of the local authority.
The father, who had established a stable relationship with another woman, wanted the children to live with him.
The local authority was considering that request when it had to move the children and decided to place them with foster parents.
On 22 November 1991, the father, having learnt of the placement, applied for residence orders under section 8 of the Children Act 1989.
The local authority indicated that it would oppose the application.
The guardian ad litem prepared a report in which she recommended that the children live with their father and, in the body of the report, stated that for the local authority to carry out an assessment of the father at the same time as the children were being prepared for a long-term placement did not ‘enable an open and honest working relationship.’
A few days before the hearing of the father's application, the local authority informed his solicitors that they would not be opposing the application.
The solicitors informed the local authority that they would be applying for an order for costs against the authority.
The justices made the residence orders, stated that they adopted the guardian ad litem 's view of the local authority's actions, and ordered the authority to pay the father's costs assessed at £7,171.
The local authority appealed and the clerk to the justices subsequently sent to the court extended reasons for the justices' decision.
On the hearing of the appeal:—
Held , allowing the appeal,(1) that rule 21 of the Family Proceedings (Children Act 1989) Rules 1991 required justices to give reasons and state their findings of fact on making orders under the Children Act 1989; that where a party appealed their order, justices could not remedy their failure to comply with rule 21 by supplying to the appellate court a more detailed statement of reasons and findings of fact; and that, accordingly, the appellate court could only consider the reasons given by the justices at the time of the decision (post, p. 527A–C, E–G).
(2) That, although there was power under rule 22 of the Rules of 1991 to order the local authority to pay costs, orders for costs in cases involving children were unusual; that the justices' findings and reasons, even taking into account their extended reasons, were insufficient to sustain their order for costs; that the local authority's exercise of its statutory role in the changing circumstances affecting the children could not be criticised; and that, accordingly, the award of costs should be set aside (post, pp. 527H, 528H, 530D–E, 531B–D).
Per curiam .
Solicitors making a claim for a large sum in costs in this jurisdiction should provide for the court a detailed statement of those costs, prepared with proper care, and make the statement available to the other parties well in advance of the hearing (post, p. 528B–D).
The following cases are referred to in the judgment:
B. v. Derbyshire County Council [1992]1 F.L.R. 538
Bolton Metropolitan Borough Council v. B. and H. [1989]2 F.L.R. 349
G. (Minors)(Wardship: Costs), In re [1982]1 W.L.R. 438;[1982]2 All E.R.
32, C.A.
G. v. G. (Minors: Custody Appeal)[1985]1 W.L.R. 647;[1985]2 All E.R.
225, H.L. (E.)
Gojkovic v. Gojkovic [1992]Fam. 40;[1991]3 W.L.R. 621;[1992]1 All E.R.
267, C.A.
Havering London Borough Council v. S. [1986]1 F.L.R. 489
Reg. v. Tottenham Justices, Ex parte Dwarkados Joshi [1982]1 W.L.R. 631;[1982]2 All E.R.
507, D.C.
Scherer v. Counting Instruments Ltd.
(Note)[1986]1 W.L.R. 615;[1986]2 All E.R.
529, C.A.
The following additional cases were cited in argument:
Leary v. Leary [1987]1 W.L.R. 72;[1987]1 All E.R.
261, C.A.
Reg. v. North Yorkshire County Council, Ex parte M. [1989]Q.B.
411;[1988]3 W.L.R. 1344
Reg. v. Salisbury and Tisbury and Mere Combined Juvenile Court, Ex parte Ball (1985) 149 J.P.
346
APPEAL from Uxbridge Family Proceedings Court.
On 28 January 1992 the justices made orders that two boys should live with their father until the age of 16 and that the father's costs of £7,171.50 be paid by Hillingdon London Borough Council.
By a substituted notice of appeal the local authority appealed against the order for costs.
The grounds of appeal were, inter alia, that (1) the justices had exercised their discretion to award costs on the wrong principles as it had not been shown that the local authority had acted in bad faith or unreasonable in the performance of its statutory duties or had acted unreasonably in the conduct of the proceedings before the court;(2) there were no circumstances which justified the making of the costs order;(3) the justice should have found that there were good reasons for the local authority to be concerned about the father's ability to care for the children, the local authority was not bound to adopt the view of the guardian ad litem and the local authority had communicated the decision not to oppose the father's application within a reasonable time on receiving the report of the guardian ad litem ;(4) the justices had been wrong to assume that the change in the view of the local authority amounted to an admission that the views of the local authority had been wrong all the time.
Further, on making the order for costs in the sum of £7,171.50, the justices paid no regard to the fact that there was no machinery for costs to be taxed and no power for the local authority to intervene on an assessment by the area director of the father's legal aid costs pursuant to the Civil Legal Aid (General) Regulations 1989 (S.I.
1989 No. 339) and the amounts of the costs put forward by the father's solicitors exceeded those properly allowable under the Legal Aid in Family Proceedings (Remuneration) Regulations 1991 (S.I.
1991 No. 2038).
By a respondent's notice dated 28 February 1992 the father contended that in the event of the appeal being allowed in part the order should be varied so that the local authority pay to the father a sum representing the costs incurred by the father in the family proceedings court and that sum to be calculated by a costs draftsman by reference to the Legal Aid in Family Proceedings (Remuneration) Regulations 1991 or alternatively, to an order that the local authority pay to the father a sum representing in relating to the proceedings below calculated in the same way but excluding all or part of the costs incurred on 27 and 28 January 1992.
The grounds on which the father relied were, inter alia, that (1) the justices heard evidence from which they could properly conclude that his costs had been incurred as a result of the actions and omissions of the local authority;(2) as there was no machinery for taxation of costs the justices were correct to assess the amount of the costs;(3) the father was entitled to his costs incurred in the Family Proceedings court to the extent allowable under the Legal Aid in Family Proceedings (Remuneration) Regulations 1991 and the justices were correct to hold that the actions of the local authority justified making the costs order which included the costs of the hearing on 27 and 28 January 1992.
The facts are stated in the judgment.
Judith Parker Q.C.
for the local authority.
Lord Meston and Susan Castle for the father.
11 June.
JOHNSON J. delivered the following judgment.
This is an appeal to the High Court from an order of justices sitting in the Family Proceedings Court at Hillingdon.
The order is an unusual one in that in proceedings under the Children Act 1989 the justices ordered that the local authority involved in those proceedings should pay to another party the costs of that party in the sum of no less than £7,171.50.
The factual background is as follows.
The proceedings concern two children aged now seven and eight.
The marriage of their parents had ended by separation in September 1989 and subsequently in divorce.
After the separation the children had lived with the mother and her new man friend.
Social workers became involved, as later did the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children.
Eventually it became necessary for a place of safety order to be made and for care proceedings to be instituted.
The final hearing of those proceedings was on 15 May 1991.
As had been proposed to the court, both by the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children and by the guardian ad litem appointed by the court to act on behalf of the children, the court made a full care order.
At that time the guardian's report had spoken of the intense conflict between the mother and the father and the consequent effect upon the children of that conflict.
Before the justices on that occasion the local authority had proposed that further attempts be made to improve the ability of the mother to care adequately for the children so that their future could be with her.
The submission of the father had been to the effect that the court should leave open the opportunity for him to apply for custody of the children in the divorce proceedings then pending.
By its order then made the court clearly rejected that possibility and moreover rejected the submission of the local authority to which I have referred.
The day following the hearing of 15 May the local authority social worker concerned with the children wrote to the father a letter which referred to periodic reviews taking place and concluded:
‘These reviews will be held every six months.
During these meetings we must have a serious look at whether the children should be coming home to live with you in the future.
On 17 July 1991 the children were removed from the care of the mother and placed with friends of the family.
Unhappily, in August 1991, those friends informed the social worker that they no longer felt able to care for the children.
The consequence was that the local authority had to consider the situation of the children, including carrying out an assessment of the prospect of the children making their permanent home with their father who, by now, had a new partner.
In my view, this local authority has shown itself throughout conscious of its duty to keep an open mind about the future of these children and to consider all the potential options in what was often an extremely difficult and fraught situation.
Notwithstanding the making of the care order on 15 May 1991 and the implications of that order, the local authority, in my view, continued to have in mind the possibility of placing the children within their natural family, and specifically with the father and his new partner.
The father, however, was dissatisfied with what he thought to be the inadequacy of the local authority's endeavours in this regard and he instructed solicitors.
By a letter of 17 October 1991 those solicitors asked the local authority to keep them informed about the progress of the assessment that was being undertaken of the father and his partner.
Most unhappily and regrettably there was no answer to that letter.
One must be conscious of the pressures under which local authority social workers operate, particularly in boroughs such as that with which this case is concerned, but nonetheless one might have hoped that the letter would have received at least some acknowledgement.
My impression — and without a full inquiry such as might be carried out by the social service inspectorate it can be little more — is that the assessment of the father and his partner had scarcely advanced.
What is, however, a matter of concern is that within days of receiving and failing to reply to that letter, on 23 October 1991, the local authority moved the children from the family friends with whom they had lived since 17 July 1991 and placed them with foster parents.
I was told that the local authority were still maintaining an open mind about the possibility of placing the children with the father and that the choice of foster parents made in October was intended to cover the possibility of the children being returned to the father, but also to cover the possibility of a need for the children to be with foster parents for some longer time, in the event of the assessment of the father proving unsatisfactory.
The father found out what had happened and on 22 November 1991 issued an application in the local family proceedings court asking for a residence order, the effect of which would be to revoke the care order.
In response to that application the local authority social worker filed a statement opposing the father's application and proposing instead that the children be placed with long-term foster parents.
It is to be borne in mind that the children had not lived with their father since September 1989.
The social worker's reasons were set out in a statement extending to some 12 pages which concluded:
‘Given the acrimony between the parents who both vie for the children's affection and blacken each other 's characters and motives in the process, I am of the view that the children have become pawns in their game of hurt and ascendency.
I believe that this application for a residence order is yet another step in this game and that neither parent has been able or willing to see matters from the children's point of view or in terms of their feelings, experiences and level of understanding.
I feel that these difficulties have gone on too long for there to be a realistic prospect of change in time for these children and given their improvement whilst in foster care, where they are not brought up in their parents' conflict, it is not in the children's interests for them to go and live with the father and that they need to be placed in an environment with permanent substitute parents, who can meet the boys' physical, emotional, educational and social needs.
On 23 December 1991 the directions hearing contemplated by the Children Act 1989 procedure was held in the family proceedings court and the hearing of the father's application fixed for 27 and 28 January 1992.
Both the court and the father's solicitors were aware that the principal social worker involved on behalf of the local authority would be on leave and unable to play any significant part in the preparation of the hearing before 20 January 1992.
On 3 January 1992 the father's solicitors, apparently taking exception to something said by the local authority's solicitor in correspondence, wrote to the local authority giving notice that they would be asking the court to consider the question of costs, whether their client was successful or not.
Meanwhile, the guardian ad litem appointed on behalf of the children was preparing her report.
That became available to the parties on 19 January 1992.
By that report the guardian ad litem recommended that a residence order be made in favour of the father and her report contained passages critical of the local authority.
I have read that report now on several occasions and I have its contents fully in mind, but I quote:
‘In October 1991, when the local authority negotiated a long-term foster home placement in Windsor it seems reasonable to suppose then they had already embarked on a plan to move towards adoption.
There are inevitably tensions and pressures created for social workers who are responsible for making long-term plans for children which may include separation from parents when working with natural parents.
However, to suggest to a parent that an assessment should start at the same point in time as the children are prepared for removal to a long-term placement, does not enable an open and honest working relationship.
I have already referred to the fact that the need to move the children had been precipitated by the announcement by the friends of the family with whom the children were staying that they could not keep the children any longer.
In the light of that report the local authority carried out what has been referred to as a radical re-examination of the position.
The principal social worker involved having returned from leave, on 22 January 1992 the local authority informed all the parties by telephone that they no longer intended to oppose the father's application.
On 24 January 1992 the local authority confirmed that decision in writing.
Moreover, they informed the parties of their decision to place the children with the father forthwith, in advance of the hearing.
The 24 January was a Friday and the hearing was due to begin on the following Monday.
It seems that the guardian ad litem expressed some reservations about that decision to move the children in advance of the hearing, but by a letter of 24 January the father's solicitors said that it seemed to them that the view of the guardian ad litem was ‘quite wrong as a matter of law.’
They insisted that the children be transferred as had been previously suggested by the local authority.
The hearing began on 27 January 1992.
Miss Castle, in opening the case on behalf of the father, no doubt acting under compelling instructions, indicated that at the conclusion of the proceedings she would be pressing the justices to make an order for costs against the local authority.
It is to be borne in mind that the justices were no mere rubber stamp.
The father's solicitors appear to have thought perhaps otherwise and that the hearing on 27 January would be nothing more than a formality.
That, of course, is not the case.
Justices who exercise this delicate jurisdiction are under a statutory duty to carry out the inquiry expected of them by the Children Act 1989.
That is a mandatory duty imposed upon the justices and one that the law does not permit them to relinquish, albeit the parties appearing before them are in agreement as to the order that shall be made.
The responsibility for the order is that of the justices.
By section 1(3) of the Act of 1989 Parliament has required a court exercising this jurisdiction to have regard to a number of considerations and by subsection (5) has directed the court to make no order, notwithstanding an agreement between the parties, unless it considers that doing so would be better for the child than making no order at all.
Moreover, in this particular case the justices were hearing this application on 27 January 1992 against the background which included the making of a full care order on 15 May 1991, an order which, as I have already indicated, was made after hearing submissions by the guardian ad litem and by the local authority which might seem to be in marked distinction to the submissions being made now, only a few months later.
The hearing occupied the justices on 27 and 28 January 1992, the second day being occupied largely with a consideration of the mother's application for a contact order.
On 28 January 1992 a residence order was made, with the order for costs which is the subject of this appeal.
Before me the argument has covered three main areas.
The first area is one that was raised by me rather than by counsel.
It relates to the reasons given for the justices' decision.
Prior to the Children Act 1989 coming into operation on 14 October 1991, the practice was for justices to announce their decision in the most simple terms, saying that they made a care order or a custody order, as the case might be.
They were required to give no detailed reasons and seldom did so.
If, however, that order was the subject of an appeal to the Divisional Court, then the practice was that they thereafter drafted reasons, usually in quite considerable detail.
Now, of course, the practice is entirely different.
The Children Act 1989 and the regulations made under that Act have imposed upon the justices a new and very substantial burden and one which I am aware is sometimes causing difficulty, as justices are not accustomed to giving a judgment or a detailed explanation of their findings and their reasons.
The matter is now covered by the Family Proceedings Courts (Children Act 1989) Rules 1991, of which rule 21 imposes upon the justices the following duty:
‘(5) Before the court makes an order or refuses an application or request, the justices' clerk shall record in writing —(a ) the names of the justice or justices constituting the court by which the decision is made, and (b ) in consultation with the justice or justices, the reasons for the court's decision and any findings of fact.
(6) When making an order or when refusing an application, the court, or one of the justices constituting the court by which the decision is made, shall state any findings of fact and the reasons for the court's decision.
In this case the findings of the justices and their reasons, so far as concerns the making of the order for costs, were announced by them in the following terms:
‘We adopt the guardian ad litem 's view of the local authority's actions and order the father's full costs to be paid by the local authority, assessed at £7,171.50.
I have read the report of the guardian ad litem and such information as I have which would indicate her view of the local authority's actions now on several occasions and I have to say that I do not understand what findings the justices believed that they were making or what reasons they were giving for their decision in that brief statement, which I have just quoted in full.
In accordance with the former practice but, as I hold, contrary to what should now be the practice under the Children Act 1989, the justices have provided further reasons extending to three pages.
I raised with counsel the question whether, on an appeal such as this, it was appropriate or permissible for me to have regard to those additional findings and reasons.
I hold that on an appeal to the High Court under the Children Act 1989 the only findings of fact and the only reasons that may be relied on to support the decision of the justices under appeal, are those announced by the justices in accordance with rule 21.
Undoubtedly in applying this rule the High Court will seek to avoid undue rigidity and technicality.
Nonetheless, it seems to me that the rule requires the justices to record and to announce the facts which they judged to be significant in the making of their decision and also the salient considerations which have led them to their conclusion.
Order for costs
There is provision in the Rules of 1991 for justices to make an order for costs.
Rule 22 provides:
‘(1) In any relevant proceedings, the court may, at any time during the proceedings in that court, make an order that a party pay the whole or any part of the costs of any other party.
(2) A party against whom the court is considering making the costs order shall have an opportunity to make representations as to why the order should not be made.
Before me there was an analysis of the arrangements that are available in other jurisdictions exercised by justices for the making of costs' orders and for the assessment of those costs.
The conclusion of counsel, with which I agree, was that in this jurisdiction no mechanism has been provided for the assessment of costs and the matter seems to be left to the justices themselves.
Justices, of course, are accustomed, as part of their day-to-day work, to assessing costs of comparatively small amounts.
However, a claim for costs of £7,171.50 was, I suspect, outside the experience of most justices.
I doubt whether a judge, either of the High Court or of the county court, would have regarded himself as qualified to make an assessment of so substantial a claim.
Accordingly, it was the duty of the solicitors who were instructing counsel to make this claim and who, in correspondence, had evinced an intention to seek an order for costs against the local authority because of the supposed failure of the local authority to discharge its duty properly, to provide for the court a detailed statement of those costs; moreover, to prepare that statement with proper care.
It would, I think, be appropriate for that detailed statement to be made available to the other parties well in advance of the hearing, to enable the claim and the detail of it to be considered.
It is plain that the solicitors' claim was not prepared with proper care.
For example, it included costs which ought more properly to have been included in their bill relating to the divorce proceedings, in which they were acting for the father.
That, I was told, led to their claim, by agreement, being reduced now from £7,171.50 to £6,439.72 but, moreover, the claim that they put forward took no account of the fact that the second day of the hearing was occupied in consideration of the mother's claim for a contact order as to which no possible complaint could be made against the local authority.
In a case in which a solicitor is privately instructed, the solicitors would, of course, be able to assess the profit costs and if counsel had been engaged then, of course , the brief fee and other fees would have been agreed in advance of the hearing.
However, in proceedings under the Children Act 1989 it is almost always the case that the parents are represented by virtue of a legal aid certificate.
Such was the case here.
The Legal Aid Act 1974 provides that solicitor and counsel may receive their remuneration only from the fund.
The extent of that remuneration can be known only when the assessment has been carried out that is provided by the legal aid scheme.
In such an assessment, of course, some items are the subject of fixed costs, but many and usually the most significant, are the subject of a discretion.
Accordingly, in the present case it would have been, I think, impossible for the solicitors, however careful they had been, to make an assessment which accurately reflected the remuneration which would have been paid to them and to counsel after the matter had been considered under the arrangements provided by the legal aid board.
I think from this unhappy tale there are a number of lessons to be learned.
It is, of course, unusual for an order for costs to be made in proceedings such as this.
I have been helpfully referred to a number of authorities relating to costs, beginning with the decision of the Court of Appeal in Scherer v. Counting Instruments Ltd.
(Note)[1986]1 W.L.R. 615, where, at p. 621 et seq., Buckley L.J.
set out a number of considerations.
Undoubtedly, there will be cases under the Children Act 1989 in which it is appropriate for orders for costs to be made.
By way of example I was referred to the decision of Bush J. in Havering London Borough Council v. S. [1986]1 F.L.R. 489, 491, where he said:
‘I accept that the local authority and the social workers behaved in the way in which they did in error, but it is an important constitutional matter, and to mark the position, and so that local authorities shall not be under any misapprehension about their powers, I order that the costs of this application be paid by the local authority.
Similarly, in Bolton Metropolitan Borough Council v. B. and H. [1989]2 F.L.R. 349, Ewbank J. ordered a local authority to pay the costs of the Official Solicitor to mark his disapprobation of the delay on the part of the local authority in appointing a social worker.
A delay which he described, at p. 350, as ‘inexcusable and deplorable.’
More recently in Gojkovic v. Gojkovic [1992]Fam. 40, 56, Butler-Sloss L.J.
asked:
‘What are the principles governing costs in applications for financial relief in the Family Division and, in particular, in cases where open offers and Calderbank offers are made?
In particular, what is the starting-point of entitlement to costs?
Butler-Sloss L.J.
then referred to R.S.C., Ord. 62, r. 3(3), and continued, at p. 57:
‘However, in the Family Division there still remains the necessity for some starting-point.
That starting-point, in my judgment, is that costs prima facie follow the event…but may be displaced much more easily than, and in circumstances which would not apply, in other Divisions of the High Court.
One important example is, as the judge pointed out, that it is unusual to order costs in children cases.
In reading the bundle of documents relating to this appeal, both before, during and since the hearing before me, I have wondered whether attention was not focused almost as much on the father's wish to obtain an order for costs against the local authority as upon the important question of making for these children the best decision that was available.
I wish to echo the words of Sir Stephen Brown P. in B. v. Derbyshire County Council [1992]1 F.L.R. 538, 546, where he said:
‘On 14 October 1991 the Children Act 1989 is going to become effective and, when that takes place, I very much hope that the adversarial approach to care proceedings will disappear to a very large extent.
What has happened in this case is symptomatic of the adversarial approach, where technical points are taken in order to secure a particular result.
What will become more apparent from 14 October 1991 is that what the court is concerned with is the whole welfare of the child and that its task is to investigate, in an inquisitorial manner if necessary, the interests of the child.
As I have already indicated, it is undoubtedly the case that there may be circumstances in which it is appropriate for a court to make an order for costs in a case relating to children.
Moreover, in an appeal to the High Court relating to such an order, the principle to be adopted is that set out by Lord Lane C.J. in Reg. v. Tottenham Justices, Ex parte Dwarkados Joshi [1982]1 W.L.R. 631.
In effect, the principle is the same as that laid down in G. v. G. (Minors: Custody Appeal)[1985]1 W.L.R. 647.
Finally, I was referred to the judgment of Ormrod L.J.
in In re G. (Minors)(Wardship: Costs)[1982]1 W.L.R. 438, 443:
‘Where the proceedings are between the parents, both of whom are acting bona fide in the interests of the child, it is not uncommon to make no order as to costs of the proceedings.
Where a local authority has initiated the proceedings there seems to be no reason to approach the question of costs in any special way.
He concluded, at p. 444:
‘If this judgment is less helpful than the parties hoped, as it almost certainly is, the reason lies in the terms of the statute, which places the discretion so unequivocally on the trial judge that it leaves little or no room for an appellate court to lay down principles or even guidelines.
I turn then to consider whether this order for costs made by the justices was justified and whether it is one with which this court can interfere, having regard to the familiar principles of G. v. G. (Minors: Custody Appeal)[1985]1 W.L.R. 647.
I have already referred to the findings and the reasons given by the justices at the time that they announced their decision on 28 January 1992.
Those findings, such as they be, and those reasons such as they be, are in my judgment wholly insufficient to sustain their order.
If, however, I were to consider the more elaborate findings and reasons which they gave subsequently, then again I would hold their findings and their reasons to be unsustainable.
By way of illustration I refer to the following.
The submission of the father's counsel is recorded:
‘In summary she submitted that the local authority should bear the costs of the application of the father because at the time of his application the local authority either had access to all the information or they had access to all the information available to the guardian.
She also submitted that either the social worker had assessed him or ought to have assessed him.
The local authority's decision to agree to his application was an admission that they had been wrong all the time.
In their elaborated reasons the justices expressed their conclusion in the following terms:
‘At the time the [father]made his application to the court the local authority had decided that it was in the best interests of the children that they be placed with long-term foster parents.
The [father]was forced to go to law to seek a residence order.
That was, of course, plainly wrong.
The children had been committed to the care of the local authority by the order made by the justices on 15 May 1991.
If the father wished there to be a residence order and thus revocation of the care order it was, of course, necessary for him to have that order from the justices.
It was not an order that was available simply by way of agreement.
Moreover, as I indicated earlier in my judgment, there were reasons why the justices might be particularly cautious in considering the proposal agreed between all the parties that there should now be the fundamental reversal of the future of these children, so soon after the making of the care order in 1991.
I have considered the grounds advanced before me on behalf of the father.
In effect, the suggestion is that the sudden change of mind on the part of the local authority after receipt of the guardian's report in January 1992 constituted an admission that their previous decision about the children was wholly wrong and, moreover, it is suggested that they have mismanaged their care of these children in specific regards.
I have considered each of those submissions and I reject each of them.
There have been a number of changes of mind since May 1991 on the part not only of the local authority.
Moreover, it seems to me that a local authority is to be commended for a decision such as this, made in the light of the report of an independent person of the qualification and experience of a guardian ad litem.
It would be a sad day if it was thought that a change of mind on the part of a local authority in any question relating to children was an admission of past error.
In almost every case relating to children — and certainly in this particular case — circumstances change, often frequently.
Far from condemning this local authority I hold that they behaved properly and that their exercise of their difficult statutory role was properly performed.
It seems to me that when one looks at the brief findings and reasons of the justices given at the conclusion of the hearing, or even if one were to look at the more elaborate reasons which they have compiled subsequently for the purpose of his appeal, then their decision was plainly wrong.
It is certainly not a decision that is justified by their findings and their reasons.
I have considered whether this is a case which I should remit for hearing before the justices.
It seems to me that that would be wholly inappropriate — it would involve further analysis of the history relating to the local authority's care of these children and that, I think, can be in the interests of no one, certainly not of the children.
Accordingly, I allow the appeal and set aside the order.
Appeal allowed.
No order for costs.
Legal aid taxation.
Solicitors: F. Craig Pile, Borough Solicitor, Uxbridge; W. H. Matthews & Co., Staines.