

[COURT OF APPEAL]REGINA v. GRAFTON 1992 March 13;
April 7
Taylor L.J., Waterhouse and Ian Kennedy JJ.
Crime — Practice — Prosecution, discontinuance of — Prosecution witness confirming defence statement — Prosecution offering no further evidence — Judge refusing to allow discontinuance of prosecution — Whether judge entitled to call remaining witnesses
Following a fight outside a public house in which the complainant was injured, the appellant was charged with causing grievous bodily harm with intent, contrary to section 18 of the Offences against the Person Act 1861.
At the trial, the prosecution called the complainant and another witness, whose evidence supported the statement previously made by the appellant to the police that the complainant had started the fight by attacking the appellant with a bottle.
Counsel for the prosecution then stated that he would offer no further evidence.
The judge made it clear that he thought the complainant was the truthful witness and that the case should continue.
Prosecution counsel took no further part.
The judge called the remaining witness for the Crown, a police officer who proved the notes of the appellant's interview.
The appellant did not give evidence.
He was convicted of causing grievous bodily harm contrary to section 20 of the Act of 1861.
On appeal, on the question whether the judge was entitled to refuse to allow the prosecution to discontinue the case at that stage and whether he was entitled to call the remaining witness:—
Held , allowing the appeal, that, although a judge had the power to call a witness where justice and fairness required that witness to give evidence, a judge could neither refuse to permit the prosecution to discontinue its case nor direct whether the trial should continue until the close of the prosecution's case; and that, accordingly, the judge had erred in directing the prosecution to continue and in calling the police officer to give evidence for the prosecution (post, p. 536B, C–G).
Reg. v. Tregear [1967]2 Q.B.
574, C.A. considered.
The following cases are referred to in the judgment:
Reg. v. Roberts (John Marcus)(1984) 80 Cr.App.R. 89, C.A.
Reg. v. Tregear [1967]2 Q.B.
574;[1967]2 W.L.R. 1414;[1967]1 All E.R.
989, C.A.
The following additional cases were cited in argument:
Reg. v. Broad (1978) 68 Cr.App.R. 281, C.A.
Reg. v. Cristini [1987]Crim.L.R. 504, C.A.
Reg. v. Galbraith [1981]1 W.L.R. 1039;[1981]2 All E.R.
1060, C.A.
Reg. v. Jenkins (Malcolm)(1986) 83 Cr.App.R. 152, C.A.
Reg. v. Llewelyn (1978) 67 Cr.App.R. 149, C.A.
Reg. v. Maxwell [1990]1 W.L.R. 401;[1990]1 All E.R.
801, H.L. (E.)
Reg. v. Renshaw [1989]Crim.L.R. 811, C.A.
Reg. v. Smith (William)(1986) 85 Cr.App.R. 197, C.A.
Appeal against conviction.
The appellant, John Peter Grafton, was convicted in the Crown Court at Snaresbrook, before Judge Owen Stable Q.C.
and a jury, of causing grievous bodily harm, contrary to section 20 of the Offences against the Person Act 1861, and was sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment, suspended for two years, and was ordered to pay £1,500 compensation.
He appealed against conviction by certificate of the trial judge on a point of law namely:
‘Is a trial judge entitled to refuse to permit the Crown to discontinue a prosecution after the Crown has called evidence which in his judgment could properly sustain a conviction if the jury believed it and provided he has first ascertained in the absence of the jury that the Crown were not in possession of facts of which the judge is unaware, which would justify discontinuance: and when counsel for the Crown decides to take no further part in the case, to call himself the one remaining prosecution witness whose evidence was merely to produce signed and initialled notes of an interview the police had with the defendant?
On 13 March 1992, the court allowed the appeal for reasons to be given later.
The facts are stated in the judgment.
Graham Parkins Q.C.
and Richard Kovalevsky (assigned by the Registrar of Criminal Appeals) for the appellant.
Michael Stuart-Moore Q.C.
and Alistair Keith for the Crown.
Hugh Carlisle Q.C.
as amicus curiae.
7 April.
Taylor L.J.
read the following judgment of the court.
Trials on indictment in England and Wales are adversarial.
The prosecution decides who to charge and with what offences.
They present the case for the Crown.
Counsel for the defence presents the case for the accused.
The judge is there to hold the ring impartially and to direct the jury on the law.
These simple propositions are truisms, but their importance and the dangers of departing from them are highlighted by this appeal, which we allowed on 13 March 1992.
We now give our reasons.
On 4 March 1991, in the Crown Court at Snaresbrook, the appellant was convicted of causing grievous bodily harm, contrary to section 20 of the Offences against the Person Act 1861, having been charged on the indictment with the offence of causing grievous bodily harm with intent, contrary to section 18 of the same Act.
On 3 April he was sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment suspended for two years and was ordered to pay £1,500 compensation.
Mr. Gilbert, the complainant, gave evidence that on the evening of 22 April 1990 he was in a public house.
A group of three men including, he said, the appellant, were being rowdy.
When he asked one to sit down, the appellant said, ‘We'll get you when you come out.’
Mr. Gilbert deliberately hung around at closing time to give the three men a chance to go away.
When he finally left, he saw them waiting for him.
They attacked him immediately.
He was hit in the face, he thought by the appellant, and fell to the ground.
Someone jumped on his right leg and he was kicked four or five times on the head before the three men ran away.
He suffered a broken leg, a displaced ankle and lacerations to his head which required five stitches.
Two teeth were knocked out and a third was cracked.
The appellant was arrested on 2 July.
In interview, he said he was outside the public house when Mr. Gilbert pulled a bottle out and swung it at him.
He punched Mr. Gilbert in self-defence and both fell to the ground.
Mr. Gilbert hit him on the head several times with the bottle and they were both kicked.
The appellant suffered bruises and a lump on his head.
On 28 July, a Mr. Everett gave a statement to the police.
He was a friend or acquaintance of the appellant.
At the committal proceedings, Mr. Gilbert gave his account.
The prosecution also called Mr. Everett whose evidence, in accordance with his statement, supported the appellant's story about the bottle.
Despite that conflict of evidence for the Crown, the case was committed for trial.
Furthermore, despite the conflict, both Mr. Gilbert and Mr. Everett were called on behalf of the Crown at the trial.
Again Mr. Everett said he saw Mr. Gilbert produce a bottle but went back inside the pub and saw no violence.
When Mr. Gilbert and Mr. Everett had given evidence, prosecuting counsel, after consulting those instructing him, said he would offer no further evidence.
This prompted an unusually animated argument between counsel and the judge, who was clearly outraged at what he expressly called the crass incompetence of the Crown Prosecution Service in serving and making part of the prosecution case a witness they knew would support the defendant and then seeking to discontinue when predictably he did just that.
Expressing his view that the case should go on, the judge made clear that he thought Mr. Gilbert was ‘a witness of truth and a very accurate and careful one,’ whereas Mr. Everett was ‘patently false.’
He told prosecuting counsel it would be ‘utterly, utterly wrong to chuck your hand in at this stage.’
Nevertheless, prosecuting counsel maintained his position and took no further part.
The judge then decided that the case should not stop and that he would call a police officer who was the remaining witness for the Crown.
He referred to that witness's testimony as ‘only a formal piece of evidence.’
The officer proved the notes of the appellant's interview.
Admittedly the notes were signed by the appellant and not disputed but the evidence was necessary to link him with the assault.
At the conclusion of the prosecution it may be that a submission of no case was made and rejected.
Certainly, the judge had indicated in the earlier argument that if such a submission were made he would reject it.
The appellant did not give evidence on his own behalf.
We are told that his decision not to do so was influenced by his impression that the judge was hostile to him so that he was reluctant to be questioned by the judge.
He signed a statement to that effect.
Counsel for the defence addressed the jury and the judge summed up.
After a three-hour retirement, the jury acquitted the appellant of the offence charged under section 18, but convicted him of the lesser offence under section 20.
The judge then granted a certificate of appeal on a point of law which he expressed as follows:
‘Is a trial judge entitled to refuse to permit the Crown to discontinue a prosecution after the Crown has called evidence which in his judgment could properly sustain a conviction if the jury believed it and before the case for the Crown has been closed, provided he has first ascertained in the absence of the jury that the Crown were not in possession of facts of which the judge is unaware, which would justify discontinuance; and when counsel for the Crown decides to take no further part in the case, to call himself the one remaining prosecution witness whose evidence was merely to produce signed and initialled notes of an interview the police had with the defendant?
On this appeal, we have had the assistance of leading counsel for both the appellant and the Crown.
Moreover, the single judge directed that an amicus curiae be appointed and Mr. Carlisle has appeared in that role.
We are grateful to all three counsel.
In the event, their arguments have all been to like effect.
Mr. Parkins, for the appellant, submitted that the answer to the questions posed in the certificate is ‘No.’
That submission is supported by Mr. Stuart-Moore for the Crown and by Mr. Carlisle as amicus.
If it is correct, Mr. Parkins needs no other grounds.
However, he also relied upon a number of criticisms of the judge's summing up.
There is no decided case bearing directly on the main and important issue.
However, we were referred to the Farquharson Committee Report on the Role of Prosecuting Counsel (1986), set out in full in Archbold, Criminal Pleading, Evidence and Practice , 44th ed. (1992), para. 4–71, p. 449.
The committee was set up to consider the role of prosecuting counsel and Farquharson J. was appointed chairman by Lord Lane C.J. In the section of the report headed ‘Prosecution counsel and the judge’ the questions raised by the certificate were addressed as follows:
‘Sometimes a decision has to be made to offer no evidence during the course of the trial; and similarly pleas of guilty may be tendered to lesser counts.
While the prosecution case is being presented the decision as to what course to take in these circumstances remains with counsel.
After the prosecution case is completed, once the judge has ruled that there is a case to answer or where he has not been invited to do so but the case is proceeding, then in our view the prosecution cannot be discontinued nor pleas of guilty to lesser charges be accepted without the consent of the judge.
Ex hypothesi there is at this stage a case to answer and it would, in our view, be an abuse of process for the prosecution to discontinue without leave.
In such a situation while the judge may rule that the case shall proceed and be considered by the jury it would not be the duty of counsel to cross-examine the defence witnesses or address the jury if he was of the view that it would not be proper to convict.
The only exception to this rule is when the Attorney-General enters a nolle prosequi which can be done at any stage of the proceedings.
That passage was cited to the judge.
He took the view that what mattered was whether at the stage when the prosecution wanted to discontinue, the judge thought there was a case fit for the jury to consider.
If the judge thought the evidence already given sufficient to raise a prima facie case, he could refuse to allow the prosecution to discontinue even if their case was incomplete.
Here the judge sought to justify the course he took by saying, in effect, that the prosecution case was all but complete.
The remaining police officer contributed ‘only a formal piece of evidence.’
The judge therefore called that officer.
In fact, the witness was not merely formal.
The victim had not firmly identified the appellant as an assailant and only the police interviews with the appellant disposed of any issue as to identity.
So the judge was calling a witness who was an important link in the prosecution case and was thereby assisting in making that case.
It is well established that the judge in a criminal trial has power to call a witness.
It is, however, a power which should be used most sparingly and rarely exercised: see Reg. v. Roberts (John Marcus)(1984) 80 Cr.App.R. 89, and the cases therein cited, at p. 96.
Where the power is exercised, it should be for achieving the ends of justice and fairness.
Thus in Reg. v. Tregear [1967]2 Q.B.
574, a judge's decision to call a witness at a late stage of the trial was upheld because he was ‘not seeking to supplement the prosecution.’
Here by calling the last witness, the judge was not only supplementing the prosecution; he was in effect taking it over.
It cannot in our judgment be right that a judge can refuse to allow the prosecution to discontinue before their case is concluded if he believes the evidence already called raises a prima facie case.
The effect would be that after a complainant gave evidence which the judge thought credible, if the prosecution at that point decided on due reflection to discontinue, the judge could go on to call all the remaining prosecution witnesses himself.
In doing so, he would inevitably have descended into the arena in a totally unacceptable way.
Further problems would arise if the defendant chose to give evidence himself or call witnesses.
That situation was avoided in the present case, because the appellant chose not to give evidence for the reason already stated.
If he had testified the alternatives would have been either for the judge to cross-examine him or for his evidence to remain untested and unchallenged.
These actual and possible consequences make it clear that the course adopted by the judge was wrong.
We can well understand and sympathise with the judge's concern that where serious injuries had been inflicted on Mr. Gilbert, who gave credible evidence implicating the appellant, the prosecution case should have been prejudiced by inappropriately calling a witness who should have been tendered to the defence.
It is conceded that this was a mistake, flowing from a desire to be fair to the defence.
However, by proceeding as he did, the judge was no longer holding the ring.
He took over the prosecution.
There was no other prosecutor.
The reaction of any neutral bystander could only be that the judge had become the adversary of the defence.
Before the completion of the case for the Crown, the decision whether to continue or not must be that of the prosecution.
No doubt the judge, if he does not agree with the course proposed, is fully entitled to convey that to counsel and discuss it in the absence of the jury.
One would hope and expect that cases where any disagreement remains after such discussion will be rare.
In such a case, however, we can see no way in which the judge could properly continue to call evidence for the Crown consistently with his judicial role.
In our judgment, the formulation quoted from the report of the Farquharson Committee is correct and we cannot improve upon it.
We would add only this.
Counsel for the Crown conceded, in our view rightly, that in a case where the prosecution has been completed and the judge thereafter refuses leave to the Crown to discontinue, it is counsel for the prosecution's duty to remain in the case.
Whilst, then, as the committee's report states, ‘it would not be the duty of counsel to cross-examine the defence witnesses or address the jury if he was of the view that it would not be proper to convict,’ he would be free to do so if the prosecution view changed, perhaps after hearing the defendant's evidence.
For completeness, we should mention the further grounds of appeal concerning the summing up.
The complaints shortly were as follows.
(1) Although the judge dealt with the standard of proof, he at no stage specifically directed the jury that the burden of proof was on the prosecution.
(2) For as long as they were presenting the case, the prosecution had done so on the footing that it was section 18 or nothing.
Yet the judge left as alternative verdicts open to the jury, guilty of causing grievous bodily harm, contrary to section 20 or guilty of assault occasioning actual bodily harm, contrary to section 47, without indicating to counsel his intention of doing so or giving the defence the opportunity to deal with such alternatives.
(3) In seeking to explain the unusual course the case had taken, the judge gave excessive expression to his own views in a manner which, although critical of the prosecution, was hostile to the defence.
(4) He explicitly introduced the fact that the committing justices had found a case to answer whereby the jury may have been influenced adversely to the appellant.
In our judgment there is force in each of those complaints and especially considering their cumulative effect.
However, it is unnecessary to examine them in detail since in our view the questions posed in the certificate must be answered in the negative and on that ground alone this appeal must be allowed.
Appeal allowed.
Solicitors: Crown Prosecution Service, North London; Treasury Solicitor.
[Reported by Mrs. Clare Barsby, Barrister]