

[COURT OF APPEAL]
GOMBA HOLDINGS (U.K.) LTD.
AND OTHERS v. MINORIES FINANCE LTD.
AND OTHERS (No. 2)
1991 Nov. 25, 26, 27;
1992 Jan. 30
Sir Stephen Brown P., Stocker and Scott L.JJ.
Costs — Taxation — Costs on indemnity basis — Mortgagee contractually entitled to full indemnity for all costs, charges and expenses — Costs in litigation to be taxed on standard basis — Mortgagor objecting to items in account as being unreasonable — Whether contractual charges to be taxed — Whether basis of taxation for all charges and legal costs to be on indemnity basis — R.S.C., Ord. 62, r. 12(2)
The plaintiff group of companies borrowed sums of money from the defendant bank secured, inter alia, by mortgages and it was a term of the mortgage deeds that the plaintiffs would pay on demand and on a full indemnity basis all costs, charges and expenses however incurred by the bank or by a receiver under the mortgage or in enforcing the security.
Demands for repayment were not met and the bank appointed the second and third defendants as receivers.
The plaintiffs issued an originating summons for account of the moneys owed and redemption on payment of those sums.
During the litigation orders were made for certain of the defendants' costs to be taxed on a standard basis.
The plaintiffs were able to raise sufficient moneys to meet their liabilities and the receivers were discharged.
The plaintiffs disputed the defendants' accounts for their costs, charges and expenses and the taxing master directed that there be a trial of preliminary issues.
The judge in determining those issues held, inter alia, that under the terms of the mortgage deeds and other securities the defendants were entitled to a full indemnity against their costs, charges and expenses and the plaintiffs could not object to the items in the accounts on the ground that they were unreasonable except where the items referred to costs in the litigation subject to an order for taxation.
On the plaintiffs' appeal and the defendants' cross-appeal on the ground that the plaintiffs were not entitled to object to the amount of any costs in the accounts unless the court had deprived the defendants of the relevant costs:—
Held , allowing the appeal and the cross-appeal, that under the terms of the mortgage and other deeds the defendants were entitled to recover their actual costs, charges and expenses except for any costs that had not been reasonably incurred or were unreasonable in amount; that both litigation and non-litigation costs could be referred to a taxing for quantification; that the defendants were contractually entitled to payment on an indemnity basis as defined by R.S.C., Ord. 62, r. 12(2); that the court's discretion as to the basis of taxation of a mortgagee's costs, charges and expenses should normally be exercised so as to correspond with the contractual entitlement; and that, accordingly, the master had power to order that the contractual costs, charges and expenses and the costs incurred in the litigation be taxed on an indemnity basis including those costs ordered to be taxed on a standard basis (post, pp. 735E–F, 736B–C, 737E–F, 739A–C, 741H — 742D, E–H).
Parker-Tweedale v. Dunbar Bank Plc.(No. 2)[1991]Ch. 26, C.A. applied.
In re Adelphi Hotel (Brighton) Ltd. [1953]1 W.L.R. 955 considered.
Decision of Vinelott J. reversed.
The following cases are referred to in the judgment:
A.N.Z. Banking Group (New Zealand) Ltd. v. Gibson [1981]2 N.Z.L.R. 513
Adelphi Hotel (Brighton) Ltd., In re [1953]1 W.L.R. 955;[1953]2 All E.R. 498
Allen v. Jarvis (1869) L.R. 4 Ch.App. 616
Bank of Baroda v. Panessar [1987]Ch. 335;[1987]2 W.L.R. 208;[1986]3 All E.R. 751
Beddoe, In re; Downes v. Cottam [1893]1 Ch. 547, C.A.
Cotterell v. Stratton (1872) L.R. 8 Ch.App. 295
Cuckmere Brick Co. Ltd. v. Mutual Finance Ltd. [1971]Ch. 949;[1971]2 W.L.R. 1207;[1971]2 All E.R. 633, C.A.
E.M.I. Records Ltd. v. Ian Cameron Wallace Ltd. [1983]Ch. 59;[1982]3 W.L.R. 245;[1982]2 All E.R. 980
Forsinard Estates Ltd. v. Dykes [1971]1 W.L.R. 232;[1971]1 All E.R. 1018
Kestrel, The (1866) L.R. 1 A. & E. 78
Leighton's Conveyance, In re [1937]Ch. 149;[1936]3 All E.R. 1033, C.A.
Mansfield v. Robinson [1928]2 K.B.
353
National Provincial Bank of England v. Games (1886) 31 Ch.D. 582, C.A.
Parker-Tweedale v. Dunbar Bank Plc.(No. 2)[1991]Ch. 26;[1990]3 W.L.R. 780;[1990]2 All E.R. 588, C.A.
Queen's Hotel Co.(Cardiff) Ltd., In re [1900]1 Ch. 792
Ramsden v. Langley (1705) 2 Vern. 536
Seavision Investment S.A. v. Evennett [1992]2 Lloyd's Rep. 26, C.A.
Shanahan, In re (1941) 58 W.N. (N.S.W.) 132
Sinfield v. Sweet [1967]1 W.L.R. 1489;[1967]3 All E.R. 479
Tse Kwong Lam v. Wong Chit Sen [1983]1 W.L.R. 1349;[1983]3 All E.R. 54, P.C.
The following additional cases were cited in argument:
Bank of New South Wales v. O'Connor (1889) 14 App.Cas. 273
Barnett v. Eccles Corporation [1900]2 Q.B.
423, C.A.
Detillin v. Gale (1802) 7 Ves. 583
Gallie v. Lee (No. 2)[1971]A.C. 1039;[1971]2 W.L.R. 349;[1971]1 All E.R. 243, H.L. (E.)
Longbotham & Sons, In re [1904]2 Ch. 152, C.A.
Wallis, In re; Ex parte Lickorish (1890) 25 Q.B.D. 176, C.A.
APPEAL and CROSS-APPEAL from Vinelott J.
The plaintiffs, Gomba Holdings U.K. Ltd., Gomba U.K. Group Ltd., Duchess Theatre Co.
Ltd., Garrick Theatre Co.
Ltd., Gomba Exim Ltd., Routestone Ltd., Rathbone Hotel Ltd. and Gomba Mansions Ltd., were advanced substantial sums of money secured on a number of security documents by the first defendant, Minories Finance Ltd., then known as Johnson Mathey Bankers Ltd.
Demand for repayment of the moneys were not met.
The second and third defendants, Mr. Andrew Mark Homan and Mr. Colin Graham Bird were appointed joint receivers of the assets.
On 11 February 1987 the plaintiffs succeeded in raising a sufficient sum to meet the liabilities and the receivers were discharged.
Accounts were submitted to the plaintiffs by the first defendant and the receivers.
On 28 June 1988 the plaintiffs served notice of objection to the accounts on the ground, inter alia, that items in the account were unreasonable.
On 13 October 1988, Chief Master Munrow ordered that the question whether the plaintiffs could object to certain items in the account on the ground that they were unreasonable should be tried as a preliminary issue.
On 19 December 1989 Vinelott J. declared that the plaintiffs were not entitled to object to items in the accounts on the ground that the items were unreasonable in amount except where the items challenged formed part of litigation costs that had been directed to be taxed on an indemnity basis, in which case the plaintiffs could make objections appropriate to a taxation on an indemnity basis unless (a) the court had deprived the first defendant (as mortgagee) of any relevant costs; or (b) the court had ordered taxation of any relevant costs on some other basis save where there was no inconsistency between such an order and the first defendant contractual right to payment of such costs.
By a notice of appeal dated 12 December 1990 the plaintiffs appealed on the grounds, inter alia,(1) that the judge erred in law in holding that the first defendant was entitled to add to any security, all the costs charges and expenses, however unreasonable they were;(2) the judge failed to follow the decision in In re Adelphi Hotel (Brighton) Ltd. [1953]1 W.L.R. 955;(3) the judge erred in law in construing the charging covenants of the legal mortgage which were all in similar terms that all costs charges and expenses howsoever incurred by the first defendant or any receiver under or in relation to the mortgage or such indebtedness or liabilities on a full indemnity basis as allowing the first defendant to charge as it pleased however unreasonable such a charge might be; and (4) the judge erred in law in not construing that provision as a provision providing for taxation or computation on an indemnity basis of the first defendant's costs, charges and expenses.
By a respondent's notice dated 1 July 1991 the first defendant cross-appealed, seeking an order that on the taking of accounts and inquiry ordered to be taken by Chief Master Munrow on 14 March 1988, the plaintiffs were not entitled to raise an objection to the defendants' accounts on the ground that the items were unreasonable in amount unless the court had deprived the first defendant as mortgagee of relevant costs.
The grounds of the cross-appeal were that (1) the judge had correctly held that a mortgagee's right to costs, charges and expenses whether founded on equitable principles or an implied contract could always be varied, restricted or enlarged by the express terms of the mortgage and that the first defendant was entitled a full indemnity against the costs, charges and expenses on a true construction of the words used in the mortgage deeds other than the guarantee and mortgage debenture dated 6 June 1986.
The judge erred in law in holding that in mortgage proceedings if a mortgagee failed to seek an order for costs then the mortgagor could apply for the costs to be taxed on an appropriate basis; if no order was made the mortgagor could require that the costs of the mortgage proceedings be referred by the master taking the account to the taxing master for taxation pursuant to R.S.C., Ord. 62, r. 24;(3) that a provision in the mortgage deed providing expressly or by implication the basis on which costs were to be taxed was not then binding on the court and the judge also erred when he held that in mortgage proceedings a provision entitling the mortgagee to an indemnity against all costs, charges and expenses was void so far as it purports to exclude the jurisdiction of the court under section 51 of the Supreme Court Act 1981.
The facts are stated in the judgment.
Terence Cullen Q.C.
and Anthony Trace for the plaintiffs.
Robin Potts Q.C.
and Robin Knowles for the defendant bank.
30 January 1992.
The following judgment of the court was handed down.
SCOTT L.J.
This is an appeal, brought with the leave of the judge, against an order made by Vinelott J. on 19 December 1989.
The appeal raises important and, to our minds, difficult questions of principle regarding the right of a mortgagor on the taking of a mortgage account to object to the level of costs, charges and expenses which the mortgagee claims to be entitled to charge against or retain out of the mortgaged property.
There are eight corporate plaintiffs.
Each is a member of the group of companies known as the Gomba Group.
The first defendant, Minories Finance Ltd., made substantial advances to the plaintiffs.
The repayment of the advances was secured by a number of security documents.
The second and third defendants, Mr. Andrew Homan and Mr. Colin Bird, were appointed receivers pursuant to those security documents.
The circumstances in which this litigation arose are described in the judgment delivered by Vinelott J. on 19 December 1989 as follows:
‘Between 30 October 1984 and 9 January 1985 each of the first four plaintiffs entered into a mortgage debenture charging its assets to secure repayment of moneys advanced to it by the first defendant, which was then known as Johnson Matthey Bankers Ltd.
By two mortgages dated 18 February 1985 and 25 October 1985 respectively, the sixth plaintiff entered into legal mortgages, charging specific assets to secure moneys owed to the first defendant by the second plaintiff and its subsidiaries.
On 17 July 1985, the seventh plaintiff, and on 26 July 1983 and 17 July 1985 the eighth plaintiff, also entered into legal mortgages charging specific assets to secure moneys owed to the first defendant by the second plaintiff and its subsidiaries.
Lastly, on 6 June 1985 the first five plaintiffs entered into a guarantee and debenture charging all their assets to secure moneys owed by them, or by others of the first five plaintiffs, to the first defendant.
‘Demands were made for the repayment of the moneys advanced to companies in the group, and when the demands were not met, the second and third defendants were appointed joint receivers of the assets of the first five plaintiffs, and of the assets specifically charged by the sixth and seventh plaintiffs.
On 18 March 1986 the first six plaintiffs issued an originating summons seeking accounts of the moneys owed under these debentures and mortgages, and redemption on payment of the moneys found due.
Between that date and 11 February 1987 the plaintiffs succeeded in raising a sum sufficient to meet the liabilities, the maximum amount of which had been quantified in the course of proceedings by Mr. Shamji who had sought unsuccessfully to set aside the appointment of the receivers.
The receivers were then discharged, as regards the first five plaintiffs on 19 December 1986, as regards to the sixth and seventh plaintiffs on 11 February 1987.
‘However, there were outstanding disputes as to the accounts submitted by the defendants and the receivers.
On 3 March 1987 the originating summons was amended by adding the seventh and eighth plaintiffs, and on 19 March 1987 it was further amended to seek accounts of all transactions entered into, and of all dealings with the property of the plaintiffs by the first defendant, and of all moneys received by or payment made by the first defendant or by the second or third defendants, and an inquiry whether any sums were due from the first defendant to the plaintiffs.
Redemption has been delayed pending the taking of these accounts and the inquiry.
Mortgage accounts having been submitted to the plaintiffs by the first defendant and by the receivers an order for various accounts and inquiries was made in Chancery chambers by Master Munrow on 14 March 1988.
One of these was:
‘An inquiry whether anything and if so what is due to the first defendant for any and what costs charges and expenses properly incurred under or in respect of the said mortgage debentures and mortgages including the costs of this action.
Another was ‘An account of all payments made by the second and third defendants as receivers as aforesaid.’
The 14 March 1988 order recorded that accounts had already been supplied to the plaintiffs and that those accounts had discharged the first defendant's accounting obligations ‘subject only to the plaintiffs' rights under Ord. 43, r. 5 of the Rules of the Supreme Court 1965 and their rights to require vouching of the said accounts.’
R.S.C., Ord. 43, r. 5 provides:
‘Any party who seeks to charge an accounting party with an amount beyond that which he has by his account admitted to have received or who alleges that any item in his account is erroneous in respect of amount or in any other respect must give him notice thereof stating, so far as he is able, the amount sought to be charged with brief particulars thereof or, as the case may be, the grounds for alleging that the item is erroneous.
The 14 March 1988 order provided a timetable for service by the plaintiffs of notice of objection and for the defendants to reply thereto.
The accounts which had been submitted to the plaintiffs had dealt not only with the first defendant's costs, charges and expenses but also with the receivers' receipts and payments.
On 22 June 1988 the plaintiffs served notice of objection to these accounts.
It is worth noting that at this stage the plaintiffs were in possession of no details other than the bare figures in the accounts.
Their objections were made under four numbered heads, namely: ‘1.
Unreasonable and/or improper amount.
2.
Breakdown of figure required.
3.
Vouching required.
4.
Amount not chargeable to plaintiff.’
In addition, the notice of objection stated that in respect of any sum properly chargeable to the plaintiffs, i.e. any sum in respect of which objection number 4 could not be maintained, the plaintiffs required ‘taxation as to the amount thereof and/or that such be referred to the inquiry directed by Chief Master Munrow in the said order.’
The notice of objection was expressly stated to be ‘without prejudice to any challenge that may be made in any subsequent proceedings, for instance by way of an action in negligence.’
Several of the items in the accounts were made the subject of the objection numbered 1, i.e., ‘unreasonable and/or improper amount.’
The majority of these items related to solicitors' charges, other professional advisers' charges or receivers' remuneration.
The total amount under challenge is, I understand, a sum in the region of £1.8m.
On 13 October 1988 an order was made by Master Munrow directing the trial as a preliminary issue of certain questions arising out of the plaintiffs' notice of objection.
The questions were answered by Vinelott J. in his judgment and order of 19 December 1989.
There is no appeal against some of the answers.
The question relevant to this appeal, as posed by the order of 13 October 1988, was:
‘Whether…(c) the plaintiffs are entitled…to raise an objection to the defendants' accounts…of the nature…specified in objection number 1…namely, that the items were unreasonable in amount…
Before referring to the manner in which the judge dealt with this question it is convenient to refer to some of the provisions of the security documents.
The mortgage deeds, other than the guarantee and debenture of 6 June 1985, are in similar, although not in identical, terms.
It is not necessary to refer to more than one of them.
Vinelott J. chose the legal mortgage dated 18 February 1985 granted by the sixth plaintiff.
We will do the same.
By clause 2 of this mortgage, the mortgagor guaranteed to pay to the first defendant on demand:
‘(c) All costs charges and expenses howsoever incurred by the bank or any receiver under or in relation to this mortgage…on a full indemnity basis including (but without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing) all costs charges and expenses which the bank or any receiver may incur in enforcing this security…
Under clause 7 the first defendant was given power to appoint a receiver and ‘either at the time of his appointment or any time thereafter [to]fix his remuneration…
’ Clause 8 provided:
‘All moneys received by the receiver shall be applied by him in the following order of priority;(1) In satisfaction of all costs charges and expenses of and incidental to the appointment of the receiver and the exercise of any of his powers and all outgoings paid by him and his remuneration.
(2) In or towards satisfaction of the indebtedness hereby secured.
So the first defendant was entitled to ‘all costs charges and expenses…on a full indemnity basis’ and the receivers were entitled to retain out of the mortgaged property their remuneration as fixed by the first defendant.
The corresponding language of the guarantee and debenture dated 6 June 1985 is somewhat different.
Clause 7 thereof gave power to the first defendant, inter alia, to ‘determine the remuneration of the receiver.’
Clause 9 directed that moneys received by the receiver be applied:
‘(a) in satisfaction of all costs charges and expenses properly incurred and payments properly made by the bank or the receiver and of the remuneration of the receiver;(b) in or towards satisfaction of the moneys outstanding and secured by this deed.
And clause 12 provided:
‘All costs charges and expenses incurred hereunder by the bank or by the receiver in perfecting or otherwise in connection with this security or in respect of the property hereby charged including (without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing) all costs of all proceedings for the enforcement of the security hereby constituted or for obtaining payment of the moneys hereby secured or arising out of or in connection with the acts authorised by clause 7 hereof (whether or not such costs charges and expenses and moneys or part thereof would be allowable on a party and party or solicitor and own client taxation by this court) shall be recoverable from the companies as a debt…and shall be charged on the premises comprised herein…
It is clear that the ‘costs charges and expenses’ referred to both in the legal mortgage of 18 February 1985 (which may be taken as typical of all the mortgage deeds) and in the guarantee and debenture of 6 June 1985 may include both costs charges and expenses of or incidental to litigation (which we will for convenience refer to as ‘litigation costs’) and costs, charges and expenses incurred otherwise than in connection with litigation (‘non-litigation costs’).
There is an issue between the plaintiffs and the defendants as to whether the contractual provisions to which we have referred entitle the receivers to retain out of the moneys they have received ‘costs, charges and expenses’ which are of an unreasonable amount or which have been unreasonably incurred.
This is primarily an issue of construction but it may involve also a question as to how far, if at all, the powers of the court in respect of litigation costs can curtail a contractual right of recovery.
There is also an issue arising out of orders for costs that have already been made in the proceedings.
Orders have been made for costs to be paid by the plaintiffs to the defendants with a direction that the costs be taxed on the standard basis, if not agreed.
In one case at least the costs have already been taxed.
The contractual right of the defendants to retain out of the moneys in hand a sum in respect of costs disallowed on the standard basis taxation is in issue.
The order made by Vinelott J. and now under appeal dealt with these issues by declaring that the plaintiffs were not entitled to object to items in the accounts on the ground that the items were unreasonable in amount except where the items challenged formed part of the litigation costs that had been directed to be taxed on an indemnity basis, in which case the plaintiffs could make objections appropriate to a taxation on an indemnity basis: see R.S.C., Ord. 62, r. 12(2).
But the declaration included a qualification in the following form:
‘unless…(a) the court has deprived the first defendant (as mortgagee) of any relevant costs; or (b) the court has ordered taxation of any relevant costs on some other basis save where there is no inconsistency between such an order and the preservation of the first defendant's contractual right to payment of such costs (for example, where such an order has been, or is hereafter, made against the mortgagors or any of them and other persons joined as co-plaintiffs or co-defendants with the mortgagors or any of them).
In their notice of appeal the plaintiffs ask for that order to be set aside and, in its place, for an order declaring that they are entitled to object to items in the accounts, whether litigation costs or non-litigation costs, on the ground that the items are unreasonable in amount, and for an order declaring that the first defendant is not entitled to have its litigation costs taxed on an indemnity basis if and to the extent that the court has deprived the first defendant, as mortgagee, of any costs nor in respect of litigation costs already the subject of an order for taxation on some other basis.
The first defendant has cross-appealed.
It seeks, in place of the order made by the judge, an order declaring that the plaintiffs are not entitled to object to any items in the accounts, whether in respect of litigation costs or non-litigation costs, on the ground that the costs are unreasonable in amount unless the court has deprived the first defendant, as mortgagee, of the relevant costs.
An understanding of what lies between the parties may be made easier if we refer to some of the statutory provisions in the Rules of the Supreme Court regarding the taxation of costs.
The relevant provisions are to be found in Order 62.
The order is headed ‘Costs’ and rule 1(4) provides:
‘References to costs shall be construed as including references to fees, charges, disbursements, expenses and remuneration and, in relation to proceedings (including taxation proceedings), also include references to costs of or incidental to those proceedings.
The natural meaning of rule 1(4) seems to us to give the expression ‘costs’ a meaning that is not confined to litigation costs.
Rule 3(2) provides:
‘No party to any proceedings shall be entitled to recover any of the costs of those proceedings from any other party to those proceedings except under an order of the court.
The rule is, obviously, confined to litigation costs.
It should be read in conjunction with section 51(1) of the Supreme Court Act 1981 which provides:
‘Subject to the provisions of this or any other Act and to rules of court, the costs of and incidental to all proceedings in the civil division of the Court of Appeal and in the High Court…shall be in the discretion of the court, and the court shall have full power to determine by whom and to what extent the costs are to be paid.
So the court has full discretion over litigation costs incurred in proceedings between mortgagor and mortgagee.
Note 62/3/2 in The Supreme Court Practice 1991 explains that rule 3(2) only applies to a right of a party to recover costs ‘from any other party to the proceedings’ and will not apply to the right of a mortgagee to retain costs out of a mortgaged property on redemption or to any other contractual right to costs out of a fund or from persons who are not parties to the proceedings.
Rule 6(2) provides that in respect of a mortgagee's litigation costs, the mortgagee is entitled to take his costs out of the mortgaged property ‘and the court may order otherwise only on the ground that he has acted unreasonably.’
And note 62/6/2 emphasises that ‘the right of a mortgagee to his costs of a redemption or foreclosure suit is a matter of contract and not in the discretion of the court, except where he has ‘unreasonably instituted or carried on or resisted any proceedings.’’
Part III of Order 62 is headed ‘Taxation and assessment of costs.’
Rule 12, headed ‘Basis of taxation’ provides:
‘(1) On a taxation of costs on a standard basis there shall be allowed a reasonable amount in respect of all costs reasonably incurred and any doubts which the taxing officer may have as to whether the costs were reasonably incurred or were reasonable in amount shall be resolved in favour of the paying party; and in these rules the term ‘the standard basis' in relation to the taxation of costs shall be construed accordingly.
(2) On a taxation on the indemnity basis all costs shall be allowed except in so far as they are of an unreasonable amount or have been unreasonably incurred and any doubts which the taxing officer may have as to whether the costs were reasonably incurred or were reasonable in amount shall be resolved in favour of the receiving party; and in these rules the term ‘the indemnity basis' in relation to the taxation of costs shall be construed accordingly.
(3) Where the court makes an order for costs without indicating the basis of taxation or an order that costs be taxed on a basis other than the standard basis or the indemnity basis, the costs shall be taxed on the standard basis.
This rule was brought into being following the judgment of Megarry J. in E.M.I. Records Ltd. v. Ian Cameron Wallace Ltd. [1983]Ch. 59 and substituted ‘the standard basis’ and the ‘indemnity basis’of taxation for the party and party, solicitor and own client, indemnity and other bases that had previously been employed.
As a consequence of rule 12 an order for costs cannot now lead to a taxation other than on a standard basis or indemnity basis.
Both the standard basis and the indemnity basis of taxation under rule 12 are based on concepts of reasonableness or unreasonableness.
The indemnity basis allows objections to be made on the ground that items are ‘of an unreasonable amount’ but, in directing that ‘any doubts shall be resolved in favour of the receiving party,’imposes a very rigorous criterion.
It may be noted that there is nothing in rule 12 which, in terms at least, prevents a taxation on the standard basis or the indemnity basis of non-litigation costs.
Part IV of Order 62 is headed ‘Powers of taxing officers’ and rule 19 provides:
‘(1)…a taxing master and a registrar (other than a district registrar) shall have power to tax —(a ) the costs arising out of any proceedings to which this order applies…(c ) any other costs the taxation of which is ordered by the court.
Sub-paragraph (a ) is dealing with litigation costs.
Sub-paragraph (c ) appears to us to be dealing with non-litigation costs.
Finally, we should refer to rule 24 which provides:
‘(1) Where the court orders an account to be taken and the account consists in part of costs, the court may direct a taxing officer to tax those costs and the taxing officer shall after taxation of the bill of costs return it, together with his report on it, to the court.
(2) A taxing officer taxing a bill of costs in accordance with a direction under paragraph (1) shall have the same powers, and the same fee shall be payable in connection with the taxation, as if an order for taxation of the costs had been made by the court.
In this rule, too, there is nothing that confines ‘costs’ to litigation costs.
The terms of these rules give body to the parties' respective stances before Vinelott J. and on this appeal.
The plaintiffs would like all the costs, litigation costs and non-litigation costs, to be dealt with on the footing that costs in respect of which it is clear that the amount is excessive should, to the extent of the excess, be disallowed.
The defendants contend that their contractual right to indemnity costs entitles them to recover or retain all costs actually incurred save only those that are incurred otherwise than bona fide or are incurred for an improper motive.
The defendants accept that, in relation to any costs which are ordered by the court to be taxed, the taxation cannot be conducted on a basis more favourable to themselves than the indemnity basis.
And they accept that on an indemnity basis taxation the plaintiffs are entitled, by reason of the language used in R.S.C., Ord. 62, r. 12(2), to raise objections based on the alleged unreasonableness in amount of items of costs.
But the defendants insist that the result of an indemnity basis taxation does not correspond with their contractual rights.
They accept however, that where an indemnity basis taxation has been ordered, the result of the taxation will, of necessity, quantify the sum that they are able to recover or retain out of the mortgage receipts.
They accept, that is to say, that the order of the court and the taxation consequent thereon will effectively quantify their contractual right.
They deny however, that non-litigation costs can be dealt with in such a manner.
Those costs, they contend, are not subject to taxation.
The quantification of the amount they are entitled to retain must be carried out by the Chancery master and cannot be referred by him to a taxing master.
There are, in our opinion, three interlocking and overlapping issues.
First, there is an issue of construction.
What level of recovery, or retention of costs and expenses actually incurred do the mortgage deeds, including the guarantee and debenture, permit?
Second, there is the issue of the manner in which the defendants' entitlement is to be quantified in relation to(a) litigation costs and (b) non-litigation costs.
Third, there is the issue as to the extent to which, if at all, the court's powers as to costs under section 51(1) of the Supreme Court Act 1981 and the rules of Order 62 can curtail the recovery, or retention to which the defendants are contractually entitled.
It must be borne in mind that the issues between the plaintiffs and the defendants are, for present purposes, issues of principle only.
There may, and probably will, come a time when individual items in the accounts which the defendants have submitted will be the subject of an objection on which the court must adjudicate.
But the preliminary questions put to Vinelott J., and the issues argued on this appeal, relate to issues of principle.
We propose, for convenience, to deal in turn with the three issues to which we have just referred.
Construction
In Cotterell v. Stratton (1872) L.R. 8 Ch.App. 295, 302, Lord Selborne L.C. said:
‘The contract between mortgagor and mortgagee, as it is understood in this court, makes the mortgage a security, not only for principal and interest, and such ordinary charges and expenses as are usually provided for by the instrument creating the security, but also for the costs properly incident to a suit for foreclosure or redemption.
…These rights, resting substantially upon contract, can only be lost or curtailed by such inequitable conduct on the part of a mortgagee…as may amount to a violation or culpable neglect of his duty under the contract.
These remarks were made in a case in which the mortgage, so far as the report reveals, was silent about costs, charges and expenses.
The mortgagor had no express contractual obligation to pay them: see Sinfield v. Sweet [1967]1 W.L.R. 1489.
But Lord Selborne L.C. treated the mortgagee's right to add his costs, charges and expenses to the security as an implied term of the mortgage contract.
In In re Beddoe [1893]1 Ch. 547, a case dealing with costs incurred by a trustee, Lindley L.J., referring to the statutory predecessor of Ord. 62, r. 6(2), said, at p. 555: ‘It is right, of course, that [mortgagees]should be allowed costs, charges, and expenses properly incurred…’ and at p. 558: ‘the words ‘properly incurred’in the ordinary form of order are equivalent to ‘not improperly incurred.’’
In the same case, Bowen L.J.
said, at p. 562:
‘A trustee can only be indemnified out of the pockets of his cestuis que trust against costs, charges, and expenses properly incurred for the benefit of the trust — a proposition in which the word ‘properly’ means reasonably as well as honestly incurred.
The principle that a mortgagee is entitled to add to the secured debt his costs, charges and expenses properly incurred is, therefore, firmly embedded in the law and is the principle underlying express contractual provisions such as those that must be construed in the present case.
There are two additional points worth making.
First, it is not all costs, charges and expenses properly incurred which a mortgagee can, without express contractual justification, add to the security.
The recent Court of Appeal decision in Parker-Tweedale v. Dunbar Bank Plc.
(No. 2)[1991]Ch. 26 has confirmed the law.
Nourse L.J.
said, at p. 33:
‘A mortgagee is allowed to reimburse himself out of the mortgaged property for all costs, charges and expenses reasonably and properly incurred in enforcing or preserving his security.
Often the process of enforcement or preservation makes it necessary for him to take or defend proceedings.
In regard to such proceedings three propositions may be stated.
(1) The mortgagee's costs, reasonably and properly incurred, of proceedings between himself and the mortgagor or his surety are allowable.
The classical examples are proceedings for payment, sale, foreclosure or redemption, but nowadays the most common are those for possession of the mortgaged property preliminary to an exercise of the mortgagee's statutory power of sale out of court.
(2) Allowable also are the mortgagee's costs, reasonably and properly incurred, of proceedings between himself and a third party where what is impugned is the title to the estate.
In such a case the mortgagee acts for the benefit of the equity of redemption as much as for that of the security.
(3) But where a third party impugns the title to the mortgage, or the enforcement or exercise of some right or power accruing to the mortgagee thereunder, the mortgagee's costs of the proceedings, even though they be reasonably and properly incurred, are not allowable.
Second, the many judicial references to costs ‘properly incurred’ make it clear that the court will examine the costs, charges and expenses sought to be added to the security and disallow those that it considers have not been ‘properly incurred.’
But here, too, express contractual provisions may alter what would otherwise have been the position.
R.S.C., Ord. 62, r. 12(2): see post, p. 731C–D.
Finally, before turning to the security documents themselves, mention should be made of In re Adelphi Hotel (Brighton) Ltd. [1953]1 W.L.R. 955, a decision of Vaisey J.
The case concerned a mortgage in which there was express contractual provision securing payment to the bank mortgagee of, inter alia:
‘all costs, charges and expenses incurred or paid by the bank in relation to the negotiation for and preparation, completion, realisation and enforcement of’ the mortgage.
There was a dispute as to whether this contractual provision required the bank's costs, charges and expenses to be taxed on an indemnity basis or on a party and party basis.
Vaisey J. referred to The Kestrel (1866) L.R. 1 A. & E. 78 and In re Queen's Hotel Co.(Cardiff) Ltd. [1900]1 Ch. 792, in which it had been held that an order for a mortgagee to receive its costs ‘properly incurred’ required that the costs be taxed on a party and party basis, and held that both the costs of the proceedings and the mortgagee's other costs, charges and expenses should be taxed on a party and party basis.
He said [1953]1 W.L.R. 955, 958:
‘I think that a mortgagee is entitled, as against a mortgagor and against the mortgaged property, to his ‘full costs,’ but that the expression means ordinary party and party costs…
and, at pp. 959–960:
‘what a mortgagee is entitled to is that which is covered by the words ‘costs charges and expenses properly incurred,’ and it is for the taxing masters to say what these are…if the parties desire to depart from such a rule, they must express themselves in plain and unequivocal language.
It is against this background of law and authority that the security documents in the present case must be construed.
Clause 2(1) (c), clause 7 and clause 8 of 18 February 1985 mortgage deed have already been set out.
The question is whether, on their true construction, these clauses entitle the defendants to retain out of the fund that now represents the mortgaged property costs, charges or expenses which have been unreasonably incurred or which are unreasonable in amount.
In our judgment, treating the question simply as one of construction, they clearly do not.
It would appear from the judgment of Vinelott J. that this opinion is one which corresponds with his own.
Vinelott J. said that ‘No doubt the court can disallow…costs, charges and expenses which are wholly unreasonable in amount.’
He expressed the opinion that the first defendant would be in breach of its duty to the plaintiffs ‘if it were to agree to pay remuneration to the receiver which was plainly excessive.’
Indeed the contrary seems to us almost unarguable.
The reference in clause 2(1) (c) to ‘all costs charges and expenses however incurred’ cannot, in our opinion, be read as ‘all costs charges and expenses, whether or not unreasonably incurred.’
The words, ‘however incurred’ presumably avoid the exclusion of the third category of costs, charges and expenses referred to by Nourse L.J.
in Parker-Tweedale v. Dunbar Bank Plc.
(No. 2)[1991]Ch. 26.
The reference to ‘a full indemnity basis’ would avoid the risk of a taxation being ordered on a party and party basis or, now, on a standard basis.
But nothing in the language used justifies the conclusion that the mortgagor was agreeing to pay, or to permit to be charged on the mortgaged property, costs, charges and expenses that had been unreasonably incurred or that were unreasonable in amount.
The language used does, in our opinion, justify an approach that would hold the mortgagee prima facie entitled to recover or retain the full amount of its actual costs, charges and expenses; but the language leaves open, in our opinion, the right of the mortgagor to have excluded any costs, charges and expenses that were incurred in bad faith or were unreasonably incurred or were unreasonable in amount.
Vinelott J., in the passages from his judgment that we have cited, used the adjectives ‘wholly’ and ‘plainly.’
He intended by this, we are sure, to indicate that the mortgagor must show a clear case of unreasonableness if actual costs, charges and expenses are to be excluded.
We agree with this.
We do not think the criterion can be put any better or more clearly than it is put in R.S.C., Ord. 62, r. 12(2) and would hold that, on the true construction of the 18 February 1985 mortgage, the defendants are entitled to be paid or to retain out of the mortgaged property all their actual costs, charges and expenses (including the receivers' remuneration) except in so far they are of an unreasonable amount or have been unreasonably incurred and with any doubts as to whether the costs have been reasonably incurred or are reasonable in amount being resolved in favour of the defendants.
We would give the same construction to the comparable provisions in the other mortgage deeds.
The language of the guarantee and debenture of 6 June 1985 is more difficult.
There is no particular difficulty about the language used in clause 9(a).
‘Costs charges and expenses properly incurred and payments properly made…’ is similar to comparable expressions construed in a number of reported cases.
There is no warrant for construing clause 9(a) in such a manner as to cover costs, charges and expenses of an unreasonable amount or unreasonably incurred.
But clause 12 presents more difficulty.
It clearly excludes the limitations imposed by a party and party taxation.
But it appears also to exclude the limitations imposed by a solicitor and own client taxation.
It would be possible to take the view that clause 12 covered all costs, charges and expenses whether or not improperly incurred.
But that construction would be inconsistent with the reference in clause 9 to ‘costs…properly incurred and payments properly made,’ and would be inconsistent with the general duty of a mortgagee in the exercise of his various powers to pay proper regard to the interests of the mortgagor.
This duty was referred to by Vinelott J. and is established, with its limitations, by such cases as Cuckmere Brick Co. Ltd. v. Mutual Finance Ltd. [1971]Ch. 949 and Tse Kwong Lam v. Wong Chit Sen [1983]1 W.L.R. 1349.
If the very wide construction of clause 12 were right, questions of public policy might well arise.
In our opinion, however, clause 12 must be read in the context of clause 9.
The function of clause 12 was, we think, twofold; first, it imposed a personal payment obligation on the various companies and, second, it dealt with the manner in which the costs, charges and expenses referred to in clause 9 were to be quantified.
Reading the two clauses together, the quantification direction did, in our opinion, entitle the defendants to quantification on an indemnity basis but did not entitle the defendants to recover costs, charges and expenses that had been unreasonably incurred or were of an unreasonable amount.
Accordingly, we would construe the guarantee and debenture in the same way that we have construed the mortgage deeds.
We would only add this.
It is difficult to contemplate that a mortgage deed would ever be construed as entitling a mortgagee to charge against the mortgaged property, or to require the mortgagor to pay, all costs charges and expenses even if improperly or unreasonably incurred or improper or unreasonable in amount unless the mortgage deed had expressly in terms so provided.
But if a mortgage deed did expressly so provide, the enforceability of such a provision would, in our opinion, be open to serious question on public policy grounds.
However, we do not think any of the security documents in the present case should be so construed.
Quantification
It is quantification that has produced most of the difficulty in the present case.
Vinelott J. expressed reservations about the correctness of Vaisey J.'s decision in In re Adelphi Hotel (Brighton) Ltd. [1953]1 W.L.R. 955.
Vinelott J. doubted whether a party and party taxation would have done justice to the contractual right of the mortgagee to recover ‘all costs charges and expenses incurred or paid…
’ Nor did Vinelott J. think that a taxation on the indemnity basis under Ord. 62, r. 12(2) would do justice to the contractual right of the defendants in the present case.
He said that ‘the parties must have intended that the first defendant would be entitled to a full indemnity in respect of all costs incurred by it or by the receiver.’
We were told that on a taxation on the indemnity basis the result is usually a recovery of a high percentage of the costs actually incurred but that some percentage is always taxed off.
Vinelott J. was probably told the same.
If the result of an indemnity basis taxation is, as we were told, the invariable loss of some percentage of actual costs, that may be a criticism of the taxing masters' approach to taxation (although it may also be a criticism of the excessive level of the fees and disbursements that are submitted for taxation); but it is not a valid criticism of the indemnity basis criterion set out in Ord. 62, r. 12(2).
Whatever the extent of the contractual right of recovery to which a mortgagee is entitled under the mortgage deed some means of quantification must be adopted.
It is clear that the court has jurisdiction to quantify the amount recoverable both under its inherent jurisdiction as well as pursuant to such statutory provisions and rules as may apply to a particular case.
This familiar process of quantification must take place not only in respect of litigation costs but also in respect of non-litigation costs as well as in respect of damages claims and a variety of other claims.
The Rules of Court provide machinery for the quantification.
They provide, in particular, for accounts to be taken and inquiries to be made.
And they provide, also, for costs to be taxed by the taxing masters.
It is accepted by Mr. Potts, for the defendants, that the quantification of litigation costs must be by means of a taxation carried out by a taxing master and that the taxation must be conducted on one or other of the two bases prescribed by Ord. 62, r. 12.
But he has submitted that non-litigation costs are not subject to taxation and can only be quantified by the taking of an account, with or without supplementary inquiries.
Mr. Cullen, for the plaintiffs, accepted that this was correct and that non-litigation costs could not be subjected to a process of taxation, whether on the standard basis or on the indemnity basis.
This view seems to have been shared by Vinelott J.
The proposition that non-litigation costs cannot be subjected to a process of taxation in order to quantify the recoverable amount is, in our judgment, unsound both in principle and on authority.
‘Taxation’ is no more than the name given to the quantification process whereby the amount of recoverable costs and disbursements is ascertained.
A special cadre of judicial officers, the taxing masters, has been established to carry out this process.
R.S.C. Ord. 62, r. 19 authorises taxing masters to tax (a) costs of proceedings and (b) any other costs the taxation of which is ordered by the court.
‘Costs’ includes ‘fees, charges, disbursements, expenses and remuneration.’
Rule 24 enables a Chancery master taking an account to request a taxing master to tax any items of ‘costs’ comprised in the accounts.
The request is treated as an order of the court: see note 62/24/1 in The Supreme Court Practice 1991 .
The effect of these provisions is, in our judgment, that if an account contains items of litigation costs or non-litigation costs the items can be referred to a taxing master for taxation i.e. for the taxing master to decide what amount is recoverable in respect thereof.
The taxing master must, of course, be told on what basis he is to conduct the taxation.
The argument that would draw a sharp line between quantification of litigation costs which may be done by taxation, on the one hand, and quantification of non-litigation costs, which must be done by the Chancery master taking the account without the assistance of a taxing master, on the other hand, is, in our judgment, misconceived.
Taxation is no more than a quantification machinery by means of which the recoverable amount of costs, disbursements, expenses, etc. is ascertained.
So much for principle.
We now turn to authority.
In Allen v. Jarvis (1869) L.R. 4 Ch.App. 616 a solicitor-executor drew up a bill of costs amounting to £691 and paid himself out of the testator's assets.
These costs were not litigation costs.
Twenty-six years later, after the solicitor-executor had died, an account was ordered.
The accounting party was the solicitors-executor's own executor.
The costs bill was included in the account as a disbursement.
The question arose whether the costs bill could be subjected to taxation.
Selwyn L.J.
referred to a statutory predecessor of Ord. 62, r. 24 and said: ‘Where an account consists in part of a bill of costs, the judge may direct the taxing master to assist him in settling such costs.’
He proposed that a direction be given
‘that the taxing master shall inquire and state whether any and which of the disputed items marked in red ink in the bill are fair and proper to be allowed, and to what amount respectively.
Gifford L.J.
concurred.
This authority makes clear the propriety of using taxing masters as part of the machinery of the court to quantify disputed items of costs in an account being taken by the court.
In National Provincial Bank of England v. Games (1886) 31 Ch.D. 582 an issue arose in a foreclosure action as to the sum to be paid by the mortgagor in order to avoid foreclosure.
It was ordered that the mortgagee's costs ‘including therein any charges and expenses properly incurred by them as mortgagees…be taxed by the taxing master…
’ The mortgagee's bill of costs submitted for taxation included both litigation costs and non-litigation costs.
The taxing master disallowed a number of items on the ground that they were ‘not mortgagee's costs, that is, such costs as mortgagees are entitled to against the property in mortgage.’
The mortgagee took out a summons to review the taxing master's certificate.
Pearson J. referred to the various items in dispute, allowed some and disallowed others.
A further appeal was successful on some items but unsuccessful on others.
Some of the costs that were eventually allowed were costs incurred in conducting correspondence with a surety in an unsuccessful attempt to obtain payment of the mortgage debt i.e. non-litigation costs.
The upshot of the litigation was that the non-litigation costs, together with the litigation costs, were taxed by the taxing master.
No suggestion was made that non-litigation costs were not amenable to being quantified by taxation.
In re Adelphi Hotel (Brighton) Ltd. [1953]1 W.L.R. 955 the order that Vaisey J. had to consider was an order that the costs, charges and expenses of the mortgagee be taxed.
The issue was as to the basis on which the taxation should be conducted.
The plaintiff bank sought an indemnity basis taxation ‘in respect of the whole of its costs charges and expenses as mortgages.’
This, plainly, would include non-litigation costs, Vaisey J. at p. 958, referred to the costs of the action before him, i.e. litigation costs, and said that they should be party and party costs.
He then said: ‘But what about the other costs, charges and expenses?
It would certainly be very strange if they were taxable on any different basis.’
In the event, he ordered all costs charges and expenses to be taxed on a party and party basis.
No one suggested that non-litigation costs were not amenable to taxation.
It is true that the point was not adverted to, but the defendant's counsel was Mr. Denys Buckley.
In Forsinard Estates Ltd. v. Dykes [1971]1 W.L.R. 232 a mortgaged property in Scotland had been sold and an issue arose as to the costs which the mortgagee's London solicitors were entitled to retain out of the proceeds of sale.
Stamp J. said, at p. 238:
‘If the account between the mortgagor and the mortgagee is not a settled account, the mortgagor is prima facie entitled to have an account as against the mortgagee of the proceeds of sale, which would include an account of the mortgagee's costs, charges and expenses properly incurred in relation to the mortgage.
And if, on the taking of that account, the mortgagee relied on payment of the bill in question, there could, as I understand it, be an order for taxation of the bill in the course of taking the account.
The items of costs in the solicitors' bill that Stamp J. was considering did not fall into the category of litigation costs.
Mr. Cullen, we notice, appeared for the defendants.
On the basis of these authorities, we would hold that both litigation costs and non-litigation costs can be referred for quantification to a taxing master to be taxed.
The basis of taxation and section 51 of the Supreme Court Act 1981
In the present case the defendants are contractually entitled to recover or retain their costs charges and expenses on an indemnity basis.
For the reasons we have given we think their contractual entitlement corresponds with the indemnity basis of taxation set out in Ord. 62, r. 12(2).
Prima facie, in our judgment, the basis of taxation of a mortgagee's costs, charges and expenses should correspond with the contractual entitlement of the mortgagee under the mortgage deed.
Nevertheless, in relation to costs to which section 51(1) of the Supreme Court Act 1981 applies, the court has a statutory discretion.
These two propositions may give rise to some difficulties of implementation.
Two difficulties in particular, are relevant to the arguments that have been addressed to us in this case.
First, suppose the contractual entitlement of a mortgagee to costs charges and expenses does not correspond either to the standard basis of taxation set out in rule 12(1) or to the indemnity basis of taxation set out in rule 12(2).
What directions should, in such a case, be given to the taxing master?
Second, if an order for payment of a mortgagee's litigation costs, made as a matter of discretion, is less favourable than the mortgagee's contractual right under the mortgage deed, does the mortgagee have any residual rights in respect of the balance of the costs not recoverable under the order?
As to the first difficulty, Ord. 62, r. 12(3) provides:
‘Where the court makes an order for costs without indicating the basis of taxation or an order that costs be taxed on a basis other than the standard basis or the indemnity basis, the costs shall be taxed on the standard basis.
This would seem to preclude any direction being given to a taxing master other than for a taxation on a standard basis or an indemnity basis.
Whether the draftsman of sub-rule (3) had in mind the possibility that costs might, for contractual reasons, need to be taxed on some other basis than standard or indemnity seems to me doubtful.
However in the present case the defendants' contractual entitlement corresponds, in our view, to the indemnity basis set out in sub-rule (2).
If that is right, the difficulty to which we have referred does not arise and we need not grapple with the implications of sub-rule (3).
We must, however, deal with the implications of section 51(1).
Orders for payment by the plaintiffs of costs to be taxed on the standard basis have already been made in this action.
We need to decide what, if any, residual rights the defendants can claim.
There is a certain amount of authority to which reference should be made.
In Ramsden v. Langley (1705) 2 Vern. 536 a mortgagee had successfully defended an action brought by the mortgagor.
The mortgagor had been ordered to pay the mortgagee's costs which had been taxed at £60.
In a redemption action the mortgagee was allowed full costs ‘not tied down to the costs taxed.’
Sir Nathan Wright, the Lord Keeper, said:
‘And the mortgagee having sworn he paid and expended above £120 in defending his mortgage at law, although he had but £60 costs allowed him there…shall not be held down to the taxation at law, but shall against the account be allowed all he laid out, or expended.
This case was, of course, decided long before the fusion of law and equity.
Costs had been taxed in the action at law but it was no business of the courts of law to decide on the amount that, in equity, the mortgagee would be allowed in a redemption action.
The contrast seems to me, for present purposes, to be a very useful one.
On the one hand an ordinary order for a successful litigant to have his taxed costs is made by a court of law.
On the other hand, a court of equity addresses itself to the amount of costs that the mortgagee should be allowed as a condition of redemption.
Since fusion, courts have been able to administer both law and equity but the distinction between, on the one hand, the costs to be allowed to a successful mortgagee/litigant and, on the other hand, the costs that should be allowed to a mortgagee on the taking of an account in a redemption or foreclosure action remains a real one.
The discretionary power as to costs conferred by section 51(1) of the Supreme Court Act 1981 applies to costs ‘of and incidental to proceedings’ and applies for the purpose of determining ‘by whom and to what extent the costs are to be paid.’
This discretionary power does not extend to non-litigation costs.
Nor, in our opinion, does it affect the contractual or equitable right of a mortgagee to retain his costs out of the mortgaged property.
In In re Leighton's Conveyance [1937]Ch. 149 it was held by the Court of Appeal that a statutory provision providing that‘a poor person shall not be ordered to pay any costs’ did not affect a mortgagee litigant's right to add his litigation costs to the mortgage security.
This case shows that statutory provisions regarding payment of costs need not impinge upon the right of a party to litigation to recover his costs by means that do not involve payment.
Set-off is another example of such means.
There is, of course, no doubt but that the court has power to disallow items of costs sought to be retained by a mortgagee out of the mortgaged property.
Taxation will be the normal means of quantifying the amount of the costs that can be retained.
As to the interaction between a contractual right to litigation costs and the court's discretionary power under section 51(1) of the Supreme Court Act 1981, there are several judicial dicta to which reference should be made.
In Bank of Baroda v. Panessar [1987]Ch. 335, a mortgage case, Walton J. said, at p. 355:
‘it seems to me that it is not possible for a person in the position of the bank to exclude the discretion of the court, but one nevertheless starts from the position that the contractual position between the parties is that the costs will be paid on an indemnity basis.
I cannot think that the words ‘all costs’ mean anything other than that.
So one starts from the position that that is the contractual position but not, as I venture to think, binding on the court.
In A.N.Z. Banking Group (New Zealand) Ltd. v. Gibson [1981]2 N.Z.L.R. 513, also a mortgage case, Holland J. said, at p. 531:
‘The court is given a discretion as to the costs to award.
I am satisfied that the fact that the parties have by contract agreed to pay costs on a solicitor/client basis is a factor to be taken into account by me in the exercise of my discretion.
Vinelott J. in his judgment of 19 December 1991 said:
‘If the parties have agreed the basis of taxation it would, I think, be an improper exercise of the court's discretion to direct the taxation on some other basis, unless satisfied that there had been some conduct on the part of the mortgagee disentitling him to costs or to costs on the agreed basis.
On the other hand, in Mansfield v. Robinson [1928]2 K.B.
353 the parties to an arbitration had agreed beforehand that the successful party should have costs on the High Court scale.
The arbitrator, not knowing of this agreement, made no order as to costs.
An action was then brought to enforce the costs agreement.
The county court judge held that in view of certain statutory provisions which provided that the costs of the arbitration were to be in the discretion of the arbitrator, the costs agreement was invalid.
An appeal to the Divisional Court succeeded.
Salter J. posed the question ‘whether it is allowable to parties to an arbitration of this kind to make their own agreement as to costs,’ and said: ‘I am unable to distinguish the position of such an arbitrator from that of a judge in this respect,’and, at p. 359, said:
‘With regard to the discretion of a judge as to costs, which is given by Order LXV, r. 1, of the Rules of the Supreme Court, it is, I think, common practice for parties to make their own agreements as to the costs…and such agreements are perfectly valid and enforceable.
Talbot J. agreed.
The costs agreement was held to be valid and enforceable.
In In re Shanahan (1941) 58 W.N. (N.S.W.) 132, another mortgage case, Street J. said, at p. 134:
‘the parties are free to make any arrangements which they like dealing with the subject matter of costs; and it seems to me to make no difference whether that agreement is made before or after the court takes the matter into its consideration.
…It has been held that even if a court, having full discretion in the matter of the costs of any proceeding, deals in its order with such costs, a party can still enforce an antecedent agreement in relation thereto inconsistent with the court's order:Mansfield v. Robinson .
These dicta are not entirely reconcilable.
In any event, none binds this court.
There is, however, a recent decision of this court in Seavision Investment S.A. v. Evennett [1992]2 Lloyd's Rep. 26 in which Parker L.J.
expressed the opinion, concurred in by the other members of the court, that a contractual right of one party to an action to have the costs of the action paid by another party to the action could not override the discretion as to costs given to the court by Ord. 62, r. 3(2) and section 51(1) of the Act of 1981, but that where an order for payment of the costs was sought, the discretion should ordinarily be exercised so as to reflect the contractual right.
This opinion accords with that of Vinelott J. that I have cited.
In our opinion, the following principles emerge from the cases and dicta to which I have referred.
(i)
An order for the payment of costs of proceedings by one party to another party is always a discretionary order: section 51 of the Act of 1981.
(ii)
Where there is a contractual right to the costs, the discretion should ordinarily be exercised as to reflect that contractual right.
(iii)
The power of the court to disallow a mortgagee's costs sought to be added to the mortgage security is a power that does not derive from section 51 but from the power of courts of equity to fix the terms on which redemption will be allowed.
(iv)
A decision by a court to refuse costs, in whole or in part, to a mortgage litigant may be a decision in the exercise of the section 51 discretion or a decision in the exercise of the power to fix the terms on which redemption will be allowed or a decision as to the extent of a mortgagee's contractual right to add his costs to the security or a combination of two or more of these things.
The pleadings in the case and the submissions made to the judge may indicate which of the decisions to which we have referred has been made.
(v)
A mortgagee is not, in our judgment, to be deprived of a contractual or equitable right to add costs to the security merely by reason of an order for payment of costs made without reference to the mortgagee's contractual or equitable rights and without any adjudication as to whether or not the mortgagee should be deprived of those costs.
We must now try to draw the threads together.
For the purposes of this present appeal the following propositions can, in our judgment, be stated.
(1) The defendants have a contractual right to retain out of the mortgage funds in hand their costs, charges and expenses, including the receivers' remuneration, on an indemnity basis.
(2) On the taking of the account the plaintiffs are entitled to object to items therein contained on the ground that they have been unreasonably incurred or are of an unreasonable amount.
(3) To make good any particular objection, the plaintiffs must satisfy the Chancery master, or the taxing master, as the case may be, of the unreasonableness contended for with any doubts being resolved in favour of the defendants.
(4) The Chancery master taking the account has power under Ord. 62, r. 24 to request a taxing master to tax any of the items of costs, including fees, charges, disbursements, expenses and remuneration, contained in the account.
The taxation must be on the contractual basis, that is to say, the indemnity basis.
(5) In respect of any orders for payment of standard basis costs by the plaintiffs to the defendants that have already been made it is, as we understand it, common ground that the court was not thereby purporting to deprive the defendants of any costs which they were contractually entitled to add to their security.
Accordingly, in our judgment, the defendants remain entitled on the taking of the account to their costs on an indemnity basis.
An indemnity basis taxation of costs that have already been taxed on the standard basis would seem to us to lead to the conclusion that the costs of the standard basis taxation were unnecessarily and unreasonably incurred and should be disallowed on the taking of the account.
But that is not before us for decision.
(6) We should add that we do not agree with Vinelott J. that a complaint about the fixing of the receiver's remuneration at an unreasonably high level could only be pursued in a separate action.
In our judgment the plaintiffs are entitled, if so advised, to object to the remuneration on the ground that it is, to use the judge's words, ‘plainly excessive’ or, as we think is the same criterion, unreasonably high.
The issue can be dealt with by the Chancery master.
He can, in relation to this or any other issue on the account, direct points of claim and points of defence; or he can refer the issue to the taxing master.
A separate action is not, in our opinion, necessary.
The effect of this judgment would be to substitute rather different declarations for those made by Vinelott J. The declarations should, in our opinion, subject to any comments on the drafting that may be made by counsel, be in the following form:
‘Declare:(1) That on the taking of the accounts and inquiry order to be made and taken herein by Chief Master Munrow on 14 March 1988 the plaintiffs are entitled to raise objection to items in the defendants' said accounts on the grounds that the items were and are unreasonable in amount but so that any doubts are to be resolved in favour of the defendants.
(2) That for the purpose of the taking of the said accounts the master has power under Ord. 62, r. 24 to direct that any items of costs, fees, charges, disbursements, expenses and remuneration in the said accounts be taxed by a taxing officer on the indemnity basis.
(3) That on the taking of the said accounts and inquiry costs of and incidental to proceedings on an indemnity basis are not to be disallowed on the ground that an order has already been made for costs of and incidental to those proceedings to be taxed on a standard basis unless it should appear that in making the said order the court intended thereby to deprive the defendants of the right to add those costs or some part thereof to the mortgage security.
To the extent indicated, we would allow the appeal and the cross-appeal.
Appeal and cross-appeal allowed.
Leave to appeal.
Solicitors: Holman, Fenwick & Willan; Freshfields.