

[HOUSE OF LORDS]1992 July 16, 20;
Oct. 29
Lord Templeman, Lord Roskill, Lord Bridge of Harwich, Lord Goff of Chieveley and Lord Jauncey of Tullichettle
Extradition — Committal proceedings — Evidence — Alleged  accomplice's statement before Swedish court implicating accused — Accomplice retracting statement in committal proceedings — Whether statement capable of forming basis for committal — Whether magistrate required to consider Swedish court's jurisdiction — Extradition Act 1989 (c. 33), Sch.
1, para. 7(1) — Sweden (Extradition) Order 1966 (S.I.
1966 No. 226), Sch.
1, arts.
1, 3
The Swedish government sought the extradition of the applicant to face trial for drug trafficking offences in respect of which P., an alleged accomplice who had been convicted of similar offences, had made a statement to the Swedish court implicating the applicant.
The Secretary of State issued the order to proceed, but at the first hearing of the extradition proceedings before the stipendiary magistrate P. repudiated his statement.
The magistrate made a committal order.
The applicant applied to the Divisional Court for a writ of habeas corpus.
The court granted the order, holding that as a result of the retraction by P. of his statement, and his being an alleged accomplice, there was insufficient evidence against the applicant for the purposes of paragraph 7(1) of Schedule 1 to the Extradition Act 1989 In the circumstances the court did not find it necessary to deal with arguments that no evidence had been adduced that the applicant had, at the time of the offences, been ‘within the territory of the requesting party’ as required by article 1 of the Extradition Treaty between the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Government of Sweden contained in Schedule 1 to the Sweden (Extradition) Order 1966 and that the magistrate had failed to consider whether the Swedish court had power to try the applicant for participation in offences in Sweden committed from outside its territory.
On appeal by the Swedish government:—
Held , allowing the appeal, that the retraction by a witness in extradition proceedings of evidence previously given in the requesting state did not in itself discredit that evidence and, unless it was worthless, the magistrate was entitled to act upon it in deciding whether there was sufficient evidence to justify an order for committal; that, equally, a witness's evidence was not to be automatically discredited by virtue of that witness having been an alleged accomplice of the accused; and that the magistrate had given proper consideration to the retraction of P.'s evidence and to his being an alleged accomplice when deciding if there was sufficient evidence to justify the applicant's committal; that, further, since the provision in article 1 of the Treaty allowing for extradition in respect of offences ‘committed within the territory of the requesting party’ having been extended by article 3(2) to cover participation in extradition offences punishable by the laws of both states, the lack of evidence of the applicant's presence in Sweden at the relevant time did not take the offences outside the ambit of the Treaty; that under Schedule 1 to the Act of 1989 the magistrate was concerned only with committal proceedings under English procedure in relation to the English crimes specified in the order to proceed and not with the jurisdiction of the Swedish court; and that, accordingly, the magistrate had been entitled to commit the applicant (post, pp. 846D–F, 850F — 851A, E — 852C, 853A).
Reg. v. Galbraith [1981]1 W.L.R. 1039, C.A. and Reg. v. Governor of Pentonville Prison, Ex parte Sinclair [1991]2 A.C. 64, H.L. (E.) applied.
Reg. v. Golder [1960]1 W.L.R. 1169, C.C.A.
and Reg. v. Oliva [1965]1 W.L.R. 1028, C.A. considered.
Decision of the Divisional Court of the Queen's Bench Division reversed.
The following cases are referred to in the opinion of Lord Goff of Chieveley:
Atkinson v. United States of America Government [1971]A.C. 197;[1969]3 W.L.R. 1074;[1969]3 All E.R.
1317, H.L. (E.)
Driscoll v. The Queen (1977) 51 A.L.J.R. 731
Haw Tua Tau v. Public Prosecutor [1982]A.C. 136;[1981]3 W.L.R. 395;[1981]3 All E.R. 14, P.C.
Reg. v. Donat (1985) 82 Cr.App.R. 173, C.A.
Reg. v. Galbraith [1981]1 W.L.R. 1039;[1981]2 All E.R.
1060, C.A.
Reg. v. Golder [1960]1 W.L.R. 1169;[1960]3 All E.R.
457, C.C.A.
Reg. v. Governor of Brixton Prison, Ex parte Kotronis [1971]A.C. 250;[1969]3 W.L.R. 1107;[1969]3 All E.R. 1337, H.L. (E.)
Reg. v. Governor of Brixton Prison, Ex parte Schtraks [1964]A.C. 556;[1962]3 W.L.R. 1013;[1962]3 All E.R. 529, H.L. (E.)
Reg. v. Governor of Pentonville Prison, Ex parte Osman [1990]1 W.L.R. 277;[1989]3 All E.R. 701, D.C.
Reg. v. Governor of Pentonville Prison, Ex parte Sinclair [1991]2 A.C. 64;[1991]2 W.L.R. 1028;[1991]2 All E.R. 366, H.L. (E.)
Reg. v. Oliva [1965]1 W.L.R. 1028;[1965]3 All E.R. 116, C.C.A.
Reg. v. Pestano [1981]Crim.L.R. 397, C.A.
Rex v. Zossenheim (1903) 20 T.L.R. 121, D.C.
The following additional cases were cited in argument:
Liangsiriprasert (Somchai) v. Government of the United States of America [1991]1 A.C. 225;[1990]3 W.L.R. 606;[1990]2 All E.R. 866, P.C.
Muldoon v. Herron , 1970 S.L.T. 228
Nielsen, In re [1984]A.C. 606;[1984]2 W.L.R. 737;[1984]2 All E.R. 81, H.L. (E.)
Paterson v. H.M. Advocate , 1974 J.C.
35
Rees, In re (unreported), 7 March 1985, D.C.;[1986]A.C. 937;[1986]2 W.L.R. 1024;[1986]2 All E.R. 321, H.L. (E.)
Reg. v. Governor of Brixton Prison, Ex parte Armah [1968]A.C. 192;[1966]3 W.L.R. 828;[1966]3 All E.R. 177, H.L. (E.)
Reg. v. Horseferry Road Stipendiary Magistrate, Ex parte Adams [1977]1 W.L.R. 1197;[1978]1 All E.R. 373, D.C.
Appeal from the Divisional Court of the Queen's Bench Division.
This was an appeal by the Director of Public Prosecutions on behalf of the Government of Sweden against the order of the Divisional Court of the Queen's Bench Division (Stuart-Smith L.J.
and Popplewell J.) on 20 March 1992 issuing a writ of habeas corpus ad subjiciendum on the motion of the applicant, David Thomas Alves, who, on 16 August 1990, had been committed to custody by the Metropolitan Stipendiary Magistrate sitting at Bow Street to await extradition to Sweden at the request of the Government of Sweden in respect of a number of charges relating to the smuggling of cannabis into Sweden in 1984 and 1986.
At the conclusion of the hearing Lord Templeman announced that the appeal would be allowed for reasons to be given later.
The facts are stated in the opinion of Lord Goff of Chieveley.
Clive Nicholls Q.C.
and Clare Montgomery for the Crown Prosecution Service.
Alan Newman Q.C.
and Donald Broatch for the applicant.
29 October.
Lord Templeman.
My Lords, I have had the advantage of reading the speech of my noble and learned friend, Lord Goff of Chieveley.
I agree with the reasons given for having allowed the appeal.
Lord Roskill .
My Lords, I have had the advantage of reading the speech of my noble and learned friend, Lord Goff of Chieveley.
I, too, agree with the reasons given for having allowed the appeal.
Lord Bridge of Harwich .
My Lords, I have had the advantage of reading the speech of my noble and learned friend, Lord Goff of Chieveley.
I, too, agree with the reasons given for having allowed the appeal.
Lord Goff of Chieveley .
My Lords, the Director of Public Prosecutions, acting on behalf of the Government of Sweden, appealed to this House against a decision of a Divisional Court (Stuart-Smith L.J.
and Popplewell J.) by which the court granted an application by the applicant, David Thomas Alves, for habeas corpus following upon the committal of the applicant by the Metropolitan Stipendiary Magistrate to custody pending extradition to Sweden at the request of the Swedish Government.
The appeal was brought by leave of this House.
On 20 July, this House allowed the appeal, stating that the reasons for so doing would be given later.
I now set out the reasons for which I agreed that the appeal should be allowed.
The matter arose as follows.
On 10 April 1985, Stephen John Price pleaded guilty in Sweden to aggravated drug offences relating to the distribution in Sweden of a substantial quantity (believed to be about 140 kilogrammes) of cannabis imported from abroad, and was sentenced to imprisonment for seven years.
On 4 September 1989, while serving that sentence, Price, who had previously made a statement to the police, appeared before Senior District Judge Barbro Sjôsten sitting in the Gôteborg City Court, and was examined by the district prosecutor.
Public defending counsel was present, as was an interpreter.
The examination of Price took place in the context of proceedings for the remand in absentia of the applicant.
Although Price did not give his evidence on oath (because under Swedish law an accomplice cannot be required to give evidence on oath), he was reminded of his duty to speak the truth when questioned in court, and he declared himself to be aware of his duty of truthfulness.
The evidence then given, consisting of both the questions of the prosecutor and Price's answers to those questions, was recorded on tape.
A transcript of this evidence in English was available in the present proceedings, running to 21 pages.
In his evidence, Price described in detail the dealings in cannabis in which he had been involved.
Throughout his evidence, Price implicated the applicant (whom he identified from a photograph) in those dealings as the man who had informed him of the consignment of cannabis in Sweden, and had asked him and a man named Ryan (who had also been sentenced to seven years' imprisonment) to deliver it to customers in Sweden.
Throughout his dealings with the cannabis in Sweden Price was, as he explained, answerable to the applicant; and he described in detail his conversations with the applicant during which he received instructions from him.
In 1989, the Swedish government commenced proceedings for the extradition of the applicant from this country on charges relating to the importation of cannabis into Sweden, and the distribution of cannabis in Sweden.
On 31 January 1990, the Secretary of State issued his order to proceed.
In early April 1990, Price was released from prison in Sweden after serving approximately five years of his sentence.
On 6 April 1990 he returned to this country, but at Dover he was found to be in possession of cannabis and was arrested.
For that offence, he was sentenced to six months' imprisonment.
On 1 June 1990 the applicant was arrested in London and, following the first hearing of the extradition proceedings at Bow Street Magistrates' Court, he was remanded in custody.
On 6 July, Price was released from prison in this country.
The committal proceedings, following upon the Secretary of State's order to proceed, took place at Bow Street on 16 August 1990.
Meanwhile, on 20 July, at the request of the applicant's solicitors, Price had sworn an affidavit repudiating his Swedish evidence in so far as it implicated the applicant.
At the hearing before the stipendiary magistrate on 16 August, the transcript of Price's evidence before the court in Sweden was admitted in evidence without objection.
Price was then called to give evidence in person on behalf of the applicant, and he again repudiated his evidence before the Swedish court in so far as it implicated the applicant, on the ground that his evidence had been obtained by pressure exerted upon him by officers of the Swedish and Norwegian police.
The magistrate however decided to commit the applicant.
On the applicant's application for habeas corpus, the Divisional Court decided to allow the application.
It was common ground that the transcript of Price's evidence before the Swedish court was admissible in extradition proceedings under paragraph 12 of Schedule 1 to the Extradition Act 1989.
However, impressed in particular by the fact that Price was an accomplice who had retracted his Swedish evidence before the magistrate, the court decided to discharge the order made by the magistrate.
I turn first to the governing statute, which is now the Extradition Act 1989.
The Act provides for two procedures for extradition between the United Kingdom and foreign states, the new and the old.
The new procedure is set out in Part III of the Act, which is applicable where the new procedure is available as between this country and the relevant foreign state.
Where however, as in the present case, there is an Order in Council under section 2 of the Extradition Act 1870 (33 & 34 Vict. c. 52) in force in relation to a foreign state, Schedule 1 to the Act of 1989 (which derives from the Act of 1870 and certain associated enactments) applies, subject to the terms of the Order in Council which embodies the relevant Treaty.
This is, of course, the old procedure, which was the procedure applicable in the present case.
For that procedure, we have therefore to turn to Schedule 1.
The most relevant paragraph of Schedule 1 is paragraph 7(1), which provides:
‘In the case of a fugitive criminal accused of an extradition crime, if the foreign warrant authorising the arrest of such criminal is duly authenticated, and such evidence is produced as (subject to the provisions of this Schedule) would, according to the law of England and Wales, justify the committal for trial of the prisoner if the crime of which he is accused had been committed in England or Wales, the metropolitan magistrate shall commit him to prison, but otherwise shall order him to be discharged.
The applicable law, if a person is accused of committing a crime in this country, is to be found in section 6(1) of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980, which provides that:
‘if a magistrates' court inquiring into an offence as examining justices is of opinion, on consideration of the evidence and of any statement of the accused, that there is sufficient evidence to put the accused on trial by jury for any indictable offence, the court shall commit him for trial; and, if it is not of that opinion, it shall…discharge him.
In the present case, the foreign warrant was duly authenticated.
The evidence produced included a transcript in English of Price's evidence before the City Court of Gôteborg; and it was not disputed that this evidence was admissible under paragraph 12 of the Schedule 1.
That evidence was, prima facie, of itself sufficient to justify the decision of the magistrate that the applicant should be committed.
However, as I have recorded, Price gave evidence before the magistrate in the course of which he retracted his Swedish evidence in so far as it implicated the applicant.
Moreover Price was, on the case for the Swedish government, an accomplice of the applicant.
Even so, the magistrate decided to commit; and the question arises whether he was, in those circumstances, entitled to do so.
Before the Appellate Committee Mr. Nicholls submitted, on behalf of the Swedish government, that in committal proceedings in this country the same test is applicable as in the case of a submission by the defendant of no case to answer at the end of the prosecution evidence at his trial.
In this connection he relied in particular on the statement of principle by Lord Lane C.J., delivering the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Reg. v. Galbraith [1981]1 W.L.R. 1039, 1042, where he said:
‘How then should the judge approach a submission of ‘no case?’(1) If there is no evidence that the crime alleged has been committed by the defendant, there is no difficulty.
The judge will of course stop the case.
(2) The difficulty arises where there is some evidence but it is of a tenuous character, for example because of inherent weakness or vagueness or because it is inconsistent with other evidence.
(a) Where the judge comes to the conclusion that the prosecution evidence, taken at its highest, is such that a jury properly directed could not properly convict upon it, it is his duty, upon a submission being made, to stop the case.
(b) Where however the prosecution evidence is such that its strength or weakness depends on the view to be taken of a witness's reliability, or other matters which are generally speaking within the province of the jury and where on one possible view of the facts there is evidence upon which a jury could properly come to the conclusion that the defendant is guilty, then the judge should allow the matter to be tried by the jury.
…There will of course, as always in this branch of the law, be borderline cases.
They can safely be left to the discretion of the judge.
Mr. Nicholls, referring to the speech of Lord Diplock in Haw Tua Tau v. Public Prosecutor [1982]A.C. 136, 151, reserved for the future the argument that this test was too favourable to the defendant.
I wish only to comment that, in extradition cases, it appears to have been the practice, at least since Rex v. Zossenheim (1903) 20 T.L.R. 121, that the magistrate, when deciding whether to commit, will take account not only of evidence tendered on behalf of the requesting state, but also of evidence given on behalf of the accused.
At all events, Mr. Nicholls was content in the present case to proceed on the basis of the law as stated in Reg. v. Galbraith , and on that basis he submitted that the magistrate was entitled, on the evidence before him, to conclude that there was such evidence before him as would justify the committal of the applicant, the question of the reliability of Price's evidence being a matter for the Swedish court.
In support of this submission, Mr. Nicholls relied on the decision of the Court of Appeal in Reg. v. Donat (1985) 82 Cr.App.R. 173, in which the Court of Appeal held that, on the facts of that case, in which a prosecution witness under cross-examination retracted evidence which he had given in chief implicating the defendant, the judge did not err in declining to withdraw the case from the jury on a submission of no case to answer, the credibility of the witness being essentially a matter for the jury.
I wish to add that, in the course of his submissions, Mr. Nicholls referred the Appellate Committee to Reg. v. Golder [1960]1 W.L.R. 1169, 1172–1173, in which Lord Parker C.J., delivering the judgment of the Court of Criminal Appeal, stated:
‘In the judgment of this court, when a witness is shown to have made previous statements inconsistent with the evidence given by that witness at the trial, the jury should not merely be directed that the evidence given at the trial should be regarded as unreliable; they should also be directed that the previous statements, whether sworn or unsworn, do not constitute evidence upon which they can act.
This statement was subsequently applied in Reg. v. Oliva [1965]1 W.L.R. 1028, 1036–1037, and was relied on by Mr. Newman in the course of his submissions on behalf of the applicant as applicable by analogy in the present case.
In my opinion, however, too much can be read into it.
It would, I consider, be wrong to read it as requiring that in every case where a witness is shown to have made a previous statement inconsistent with his evidence at the trial, the jury should be directed that such evidence should be regarded as unreliable: see Driscoll v. The Queen (1977) 51 A.L.J.R. 731, 740,per Gibbs J., with whom Barwick C.J. agreed, at p. 734.
Thus in Reg. v. Pestano [1981]Crim.L.R. 397 it was held by the Court of Appeal that the credibility of evidence given by a witness inconsistent with a statement previously made by him was a matter for the jury to consider, subject to a proper warning by the judge as to the weight to be attached to the evidence.
In any event, as appears from the context in both Golder and Oliva , the burden of Lord Parker C.J.'s statement is to be found in the second part of it, under which the jury is to be directed that the witness's previous statement will not as such be evidence upon which the jury can act.
For the applicant, Mr. Newman did not dispute that the applicable test was to be found in Reg. v. Galbraith [1981]1 W.L.R. 1039.
He however submitted that the magistrate was obliged to look at the whole of the evidence emanating from Price and that, since Price had retracted his Swedish evidence in so far as it implicated the applicant, that evidence must be regarded as worthless and wholly unreliable, and so incapable of forming the basis of a committal.
In my opinion, that submission was too sweeping.
There can, after all, be more than one possible explanation why a witness may retract evidence given by him on a previous occasion; and, as must have been contemplated in Reg. v. Donat , 82 Cr.App.R. 173, one possibility may be that it is the later retraction, rather than the earlier evidence, which is not worthy of belief.
At all events in the present case the question whether, in the light of Price's subsequent retraction before the magistrate, his Swedish evidence was sufficient to justify the applicant's committal, was essentially a matter for the decision of the magistrate, who had heard Price give evidence before him.
Indeed, if Mr. Newman was right, retraction in this country of evidence previously given in the requesting state would ipso facto discredit the evidence so given and so deprive the magistrate of any power to commit on that basis.
I do not think that that can be right.
If the magistrate concludes, on the evidence before him, that the previous evidence is such that a jury properly directed could not properly convict upon it, then, on the principle stated in Reg. v. Galbraith [1981]1 W.L.R. 1039, he should not commit.
This was the approach adopted by the Divisional Court in Reg. v. Governor of Pentonville Prison, Ex parte Osman [1990]1 W.L.R. 277, 299–300, where it was stated that the magistrate should reject any evidence which he considers to be worthless.
But otherwise, on the principle stated by Lord Lane C.J. in Reg. v. Galbraith [1981]1 W.L.R. 1039, if the prosecution evidence is such that its strength or weakness depends on the view to be taken of its reliability, the magistrate is entitled to act upon that evidence in deciding whether there is sufficient evidence to justify an order for committal.
That was evidently the conclusion reached by the magistrate in the present case.
In my opinion, it was a conclusion which he was entitled to reach on the evidence before him.
The same approach must apply to the fact that Price was, on the Swedish government's case, an accomplice of the applicant, a matter upon which Mr. Newman also relied.
Such a fact cannot ipso facto render Price's evidence worthless, even where, as here, the evidence of the accomplice is uncorroborated: see Reg. v. Governor of Brixton Prison, Ex parte Schtraks [1964]A.C. 556, 580,per Lord Reid.
This is no doubt a matter which the magistrate should take into account when considering whether a witness's evidence is to be rejected as worthless; and I have no doubt that in the present case the magistrate did take it into account, together with the fact that Price had retracted his earlier evidence implicating the applicant, when deciding whether to make an order for committal.
The Divisional Court, in holding that the magistrate erred in committing the applicant, also referred to the fact that Price had stated before the magistrate that he would not return to Sweden to give evidence at the trial of the applicant if he was extradited to Sweden.
It is not clear what reliance the court placed on this point, which they described as ‘an additional difficulty.’
However, before the Appellate Committee Mr. Newman placed no reliance upon it.
Certainly, it is not easy to see on what basis the magistrate could have taken that fact into account when deciding whether or not to commit the applicant; for the point only arises if there was sufficient evidence to justify the committal, in which event the magistrate was bound under paragraph 7(1) of Schedule 1 to commit the applicant.
In fact, on the evidence available, it appears that the Swedish court, under the procedure applicable in that country, could admit in evidence Price's retraction in this country of the evidence previously given by him in Sweden.
Before the Appellate Committee Mr. Newman however relied on certain additional points which had apparently been raised by him before the Divisional Court, but which the court did not in the circumstances find it necessary to consider in its judgment.
His first point related to the jurisdiction of the Swedish courts.
He relied upon the fact that the evidence of Price, although (if accepted) it implicated the applicant in the commission of the relevant offences, did not provide any evidence that the applicant was himself in Sweden at the time when those offences were committed.
On that basis he submitted that, having regard to the terms of the Treaty between Sweden and the United Kingdom, set out in Schedule 1 to the Sweden (Extradition) Order 1966, the crimes of which the applicant was accused were not extradition crimes within the definition of that expression in paragraph 20 of Schedule 1 to the Act of 1989.
This was because, under article 1, the Treaty related only to persons being accused or convicted of offences committed within the territory of the requesting party.
The submission however ignores article 3(2) of the Treaty.
Article 3(1) specifies offences for which extradition is to be reciprocally granted; but article 3(2) provides that extradition is also to be granted for participation in those offences, provided that the participation was punishable by the laws of both high contracting parties.
I for my part cannot see why, subject to compliance with the proviso, a person should not be liable to be extradited under the terms of the Treaty if he was party to a crime committed in Sweden, such as, for example , the importation of drugs into Sweden, even if he was not himself in Sweden at the time of the importation.
In such circumstances it cannot in my opinion be enough for the applicant simply to rely, without more, upon lack of evidence of his presence within the territory of the requesting state at the time of the commission of the relevant offence.
Mr. Newman however went on to submit that, before the magistrate could commit the applicant, there must be evidence before him to the effect that the courts of the requesting state had jurisdiction, under its own laws, to try the applicant for his participation in the offences committed in Sweden, when he himself was not in Sweden at the relevant time.
The submission was however inconsistent with the law as stated by this House in Reg. v. Governor of Pentonville Prison, Ex parte Sinclair [1991]2 A.C. 64, 81–92, in which it was made clear in the speech of Lord Ackner (with which the remainder of the Appellate Committee agreed) that, under the provisions of the Extradition Act 1870, the powers of the magistrate are specifically laid down in sections 3(1), 8, 9 and 10 of the Act; and that in consequence, apart from consideration where appropriate whether the offence in question was an offence of a political character, the magistrate is not concerned with questions of foreign law at all, being concerned only with committal proceedings under English procedure in relation to an English crime or crimes specified in the Secretary of State's order to proceed.
The same principle must apply to the old procedure as stated in Schedule 1 to the Act of 1989.
It follows that the magistrate in the present case committed no error in failing to ascertain the scope of the jurisdiction of the Swedish courts.
I wish to add that, even if it had been suggested that the Secretary of State had erred in law in this respect in the present case (and no such suggestion was made), any such submission would have had to be founded upon evidence of the relevant provisions of Swedish law, and no such evidence was before the Divisional Court in the present case.
Mr. Newman also sought to invoke section 11(3) of the Act of 1989, which confers upon the High Court jurisdiction to order a person's discharge if, having regard to certain matters specified in the subsection, it would be unjust or oppressive to return him to a foreign state.
It was Mr. Newman's submission that the matters to which regard should be had in the present case were (1) the lapse of time between the commission of the alleged offences and the request for extradition, and (2) the fact that the accusation against the applicant was contrary to the interests of justice, in that it would lead to the trial of the applicant in Sweden on the basis of the record of Price's evidence, despite the fact that Price had subsequently retracted that evidence in this country in so far as it implicated the applicant.
However it is plain from the Act of 1989 that section 11(3) applies only to the new procedure for extradition, set out in Part III of the Act, and has no application to the old procedure, set out in Schedule 1, which is applicable in the present case.
Mr. Newman also submitted that in the above circumstances the order for committal of the applicant was an abuse of the process of the court, and for that reason the court should exercise its discretion to refuse to make such an order.
But it is well established by authority of this House (see Atkinson v. United States of America Government [1971]A.C. 197, and Reg. v. Governor of Brixton Prison, Ex parte Kotronis [1971]A.C. 250) that, until the enactment of section 11(3) of the Act of 1989, no such discretion was vested in the English courts in extradition matters, the relevant discretion being vested in the Secretary of State: see Ex parte Sinclair [1991]2 A.C. 64, 80–81,per Lord Ackner.
It is of course open to the applicant to make such representations as he thinks fit in this regard to the Secretary of State.
It was for these reasons that I was unable to accept any of the submissions advanced on behalf of the applicant, and that I therefore concluded, in agreement with the other members of the Appellate Committee, that the appeal should be allowed.
Lord Jauncey of Tullichettle .
My Lords, I have had the advantage of reading the speech of my noble and learned friend, Lord Goff of Chieveley.
I, too, agree with the reasons given for having allowed the appeal.
Appeal allowed.
Solicitors: Crown Prosecution Service Headquarters; M. Julius Melchior & Co.