

[FAMILY DIVISION]
NORTHAMPTONSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL v. S. AND OTHERS
1992 Aug. 7, 10
Ewbank J.
Children — Care proceedings — Threshold conditions — Child in voluntary care placed with foster parents — Child previously at risk with mother — Local authority seeking care order — Whether condition that child ‘is suffering’ significant harm satisfied — Whether harm attributable to care given or likely to be given to child if order not made — Children Act 1989 (c. 41), s. 31(2)
The mother of two children, a girl born in 1986 and a boy born in 1989, was living with the father of the boy when both children suffered minor non-accidental injury.
The children went into voluntary care in June 1991 and were placed together with foster parents.
In December 1991, following an assessment report which indicated that the children were at risk with the mother, the local authority applied for care orders pursuant to section 31 of the Children Act 1989.
The boy's father and paternal grandmother applied, inter alia, for an order for the boy to reside with the grandmother.
The family proceedings court made care orders in favour of the local authority in respect of both children.
On appeal by the boy's father against the care order in respect of the boy on the grounds that the threshold conditions of section 31(2) had not been made out:—
Held , dismissing the appeal, that the expression ‘is suffering…significant harm’ in section 31(2) (a ) of the Children Act 1989 referred to the point in time immediately before the process of protecting the child began, so that, in determining whether the first threshold condition of section 31(2) was satisfied, the court had to consider the position before the commencement of the voluntary care when the children were with the mother; that the condition in section 31(2) (b ) related to care by the parent or carer whose lack of care had caused the significant harm to the child and not to the care which might be given by other carers if no care order were to be made, which only became relevant once the threshold conditions under section 31(2) had been satisfied in deciding whether or not a care order should be made; and that it could not be said that the family proceedings court had been wrong in concluding, first, that the threshold conditions were satisfied and, secondly, on the evidence, that a care order to the local authority was the appropriate order (post, pp. 1013H — 1014A, E–F, H — 1015B).
In re D. (A Minor)[1987]A.C. 317, H.L. (E.) applied.
The following case is referred to in the judgment:
D. (A Minor), In re [1987]A.C. 317;[1986]3 W.L.R. 1080;[1987]1 All E.R.
20, H.L. (E.)
The following additional case was cited in argument:
G. v. G. (Minors: Custody Appeal)[1985]1 W.L.R. 647;[1985]2 All E.R.
225, H.L. (E.)
APPEAL from Corby Family Proceedings Court.
On 7 May 1992, the Corby justices granted to Northamptonshire County Council care orders in respect of two children, a girl born in May 1986, whose father took no part in the proceedings, and a boy born in October 1989 whose father was granted parental responsibility and contact orders.
The boy's paternal grandmother had unsuccessfully applied for a residence order.
The father appealed against the making of a care order relating to the boy and sought a residence order that he should live with his paternal grandmother.
The grounds of the appeal were, inter alia, that (1) there was no sufficient evidence that the requirements of section 31 of the Children Act 1989 had been satisfied;(2) the justices had made the order on the ground that to do otherwise would cause harm to the boy, when the Act required the justices to find that ‘significant harm’ would be caused before making the order; and (3) the justices failed to state their reasons adequately.
The facts are stated in the judgment.
Roderick Blyth for the father.
Caroline Streets for the local authority.
Andrew Neaves for the mother.
Martine Kushner for the guardian ad litem.
EWBANK J. This appeal raises two questions concerning the making of care orders under section 31 of the Children Act 1989.
The first question is the effect of the present tense being used in section 31(2) (a ), particularly in reference to children already accommodated by the local authority.
The second question concerns the care referred to in section 31(2) (b )(i), namely, whether the care can refer to care by a third party, in this case a grandmother, who is offering to take over the care of the child.
The appeal relates to two children: a girl, E., who is six and a boy, C., who is 2¾.
The mother gave birth to E. in 1986.
The father of E. is not involved in these proceedings.
The mother met the father of C. in 1988 and bore C. in 1989.
I shall refer to the father of C. as ‘the father’ although he is only the stepfather of E.
The father is now 22 and the mother is 25.
The father joined the army after meeting the mother and was away a good deal.
The mother found two children too much to cope with and C. spent most of his life with his grandmother, the father's mother.
In October 1990 the father left the army.
In 1991 the children were with the mother and the father and there were concerns about them.
In February 1991 E. was bruised and it was thought to be a non-accidental injury.
In March 1991 both children were put on the child protection register, E. because of physical abuse and C. because of suspicion of physical abuse.
Later in March 1991 C. was injured when there was violence between the mother and father.
In May 1991 E. was injured again.
She had a bruised hip.
On 10 June 1991 E. and C. came into the care of the local authority and went to foster parents.
There was an assessment by the N.S.P.C.C. in September 1991 and the report indicates that both children were at risk with the mother.
Accordingly, on 18 December 1991 there was an application by the local authority to the family proceedings court at Corby for a care order.
It will be noted that the children had already been effectively in care on a voluntary basis for the previous six months.
The father applied for parental responsibility, residence and contact.
C.'s paternal grandmother applied for residence and contact.
E.'s maternal grandparents applied for residence and contact orders and on 18 February 1992 all the applications were consolidated.
The case came on for hearing at the beginning of April 1992.
There was a considerable volume of evidence and the hearing took place on 7, 8 and 9 April 1992, then had to be adjourned until 6 May and came to an end on 7 May 1992.
The fact that there was a month's gap between the early part of the hearing and the second part of the hearing is clearly undesirable and, if the justices had had any idea that the case was going to take five days and involve a gap of a month, I imagine they would have ordered the case to be transferred.
At the end of the hearing a care order was made to the local authority in relation to both children.
An order for parental responsibility was granted to the father and contact orders were made.
I am told that there has been an agreement that some of the contact orders should be varied now but that does not form part of the appeal.
The father appeals against the care order and asks for a residence order to his mother.
The local authority support the order of the justices.
The mother also supports that order and so does the guardian ad litem.
The relevant decisions of the justices on the facts are these.
First, the physical injuries suffered by the children were relatively minor but the incidents which caused them were significant.
Second, though no medical evidence was offered on the cause of C.'s speech delay and ailments, the justices took particular notice of his good progress in foster care.
Third, the justices were strongly of the opinion that to separate the children would be harmful to them.
Fourth, the justices were undecided as to the degree of the father's violence towards the children, but were satisfied that the relationship between the mother and father was violent.
Fifth, the justices had no doubt that the mother was an inadequate parent.
Having made those findings, the justices then gave the following reasons for deciding that the threshold criteria under section 31 were satisfied.
First, the mother lacked parenting skills which had given rise to emotional harm caused to the children.
Second, if the children were returned to the mother, they would be likely to suffer further physical and emotional harm.
Third, the mother could not cope with the children especially, as the justices say, with another child on the way.
I am told that a baby is due to be born in September 1992.
Fourth, if the children were placed with the grandparents the mother would cause problems with contact in view of the past relationships.
Fifth, the children were happy and making good progress in care.
Sixth, there had been a very close bond established between the children which the justices felt very strongly should be preserved in the long term.
Seventh, the justices had no doubts as to the care the grandparents could give the children but that would result in the children being separated and the justices felt very strongly that that should not happen.
The justices found that the threshold criteria were satisfied and that the appropriate order was a care order to the local authority with various provisions for contact.
They also granted the father's application for parental responsibility.
The first point which has been raised on this appeal is the use of the present tense in section 31(2) of the Children Act 1989.
This provides that a court may only make a care order if it is satisfied that the child concerned is suffering significant harm.
Similar words were considered in In re D. (A Minor)[1987]A.C. 317.
That was an appeal in the House of Lords concerning section 1 of the Children and Young Persons Act 1969.
The condition which had to be satisfied under that Act before a care order could be made was that ‘his proper development is being avoidably prevented or neglected.’
So that the present tense was used in that Act, as it is in section 31 of the Children Act 1989.
Lord Brandon of Oakbrook said, at p. 346:
‘it is, in my view, clear that the court, in considering whether a continuing situation of one or other of the kinds described in section 1(2) (a ) exists, must do so at the point of time immediately before the process of protecting the child concerned is first put into motion.
To consider that matter at a point of time when the child has been placed under protection for several weeks, first by a place of safety order and then by one or more interim care orders, would, as pointed out by Bush J. in M. v. Westminster City Council [1985]F.L.R. 325, 340, defeat the purpose of Parliament.
I would answer the second question relating to the expression ‘is being’ accordingly.
In my judgment, the words ‘is suffering’ in section 31(2) (a ) of the Children Act 1989 relate to the period immediately before the process of protecting the child concerned is first put into motion, just as in the Children and Young Persons Act 1969.
That means that the court has to consider the position immediately before an emergency protection order, if there was one, or an interim care order, if that was the initiation of protection, or, as in this case, when the child went into voluntary care.
In my judgment, the family proceedings court was quite entitled to consider the position when the children were with the mother prior to going into care and was correct in doing so.
On behalf of the father and the grandmother it is pointed out that the justices have specifically found that they have no doubt as to the care the grandparents could give the children and the second question raised by this appeal depends on that finding.
Section 31(2) (b ) of the Children Act 1989 provides that the justices must be satisfied:
‘that the harm, or likelihood of harm, is attributable to —(i) the care given to the child, or likely to be given to him if the order were not made, not being what it would be reasonable to expect a parent to give to him;…
It is submitted on behalf of the father and the grandmother that, if an order were not made, C. would go to the grandmother and the care which would then be given to him would not be care which would cause suffering of harm and that, therefore, the second limb of the threshold condition is not made out.
The local authority, on the other hand, say that ‘the care given to the child’ in section 31(2) (b )(i) means the care given by the mother to the child in this case and that, in any event, it is not clear that the child would go to the grandmother's if a care order was not made, because the mother is still claiming, or was still claiming, that the care should be given to her.
Assuming however that the mother's claim was not valid, or that she did not make it, the question arises whether the justices ought to consider the care being offered by the grandmother in assessing the threshold condition rather than the care which is actually being provided by the mother.
The answer, in my judgment, is clearly ‘No.’
The threshold test relates to the parent or other carer whose lack of care has caused the harm referred to in section 31(2) (a ).
The care which other carers might give to the child only becomes relevant if the threshold test is met.
The fact that the threshold test is met does not mean that the family proceedings court have to make a care order.
They have the choice once the threshold conditions are met of making a care order, of making a supervision order, or of making any other order under the Children Act 1989.
Under section 1(4) (b ) of the Children Act 1989, the court has to consider the guidelines under section 1 in deciding whether to make a care order or supervision order.
The court has to consider the child's welfare as the court's paramount consideration, and also has to consider the various aspects referred to under section 1(3), that is they have to consider the wishes of the children, their needs, the likely effects on the children of change, the characteristics of the children, the nature of the harm they have suffered and the capability of the parents or anybody else offering themselves as carers, which would include of course the grandparents in this case.
The justices have not set out in terms their findings under section 1 but they have considered all the aspects of the case in so far as I can see.
They have come to the conclusion that, from the point of view of the welfare of the children, it is more important to the children that they should not be separated from each other than that either child should go to one of the grandmothers.
This is a matter which is particularly in the province of the justices who are deciding the case after hearing five days of evidence and it is impossible to suggest, in my judgment, that they were wrong in coming to the conclusion that the children ought not to be separated.
They have, in my judgment, considered all the significant aspects of the case and they have decided, first of all, that the threshold conditions have been satisfied and, secondly, that the appropriate order in the circumstances of the case was to grant a care order to the local authority.
In my judgment, it is impossible to say that that decision is wrong and this appeal will be dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
Legal aid taxation.
Solicitors: Toller Hales & Collcutt, Corby; Principal Solicitor, Northamptonshire County Council, Northampton; Wilson Browne, Corby; Smith Chamberlain, Wellingborough.