

GENERAL BACKGROUND AND MAIN PARTICIPANTS
"There was one very difficult principle that we were up against which I did not really know about to start with…that in accordance with the general surrender everyone was supposed to surrender to the Allied Army against whom they had been fighting.
Everyone in this part of the world had obviously been fighting against either the Russians or the Yugoslavs, but the devil of it was that they were prepared to do anything rather than surrender to either of these armies."
[Brig T P D Scott, 38 Irish Bde in southern Austria May 1945]
As the war in Europe neared its end in the last week of April and the first week of May 1945, Allied armies were closing in on Austria from west, east and south.
From the west, forces under General Eisenhower advanced from Bavaria into northern Austria.
From the east, forces under Soviet command had taken Vienna on 13 April and troops of the Third Ukrainian Front under Marshal Tolbukhin were advancing into the eastern part of what it had been agreed would be the British Zone of Austria.
From the south forces under Field Marshal Alexander were preparing to enter Austria from north-east Italy.
From Yugoslavia Tito's regular and partisan troops were poised to enter the same southern part of Austria as the British.
Caught in the shrinking area between the Allied forces were hundreds of thousands of German troops and their allies, and a huge mass of refugees of all kinds fleeing the advance of various forces under Communist command.
On 2 May German forces in northern Italy surrendered and on 7 May Gen Jodl surrendered the main German forces in central Europe to Eisenhower at his headquarters (SHAEF) at Rheims, to take effect at midnight on 8 May.
Our report concerns events which took place in the days immediately following the end of the war in southern Austria, the area of mountains and valleys making up the province of Carinthia.
The southern border of Austria at this point is the Alpine chain dividing it from Italy and Yugoslavia.
To the north of these mountains along the length of Carinthia flows the Drau, which, as it enters Yugoslavia between Lavamund and Dravograd, becomes the Drava.
To the east of Klagenfurt the mountains diminish in size, but the western Carinthia/eastern Tyrol border around Lienz contains the highest peaks in Austria and is an area of Alpine valleys surrounded by forests and mountains rising to more than 10,000 feet.
In the first week of May 1945, four groups were converging on Carinthia.
The Forces & Fugitives Converging on Austria
From northern Italy over the Alps came the British 5 Corps, under the command of Lt-Gen Charles Keightley.
Under his command were three divisions, plus ancillary units: 6 Armoured Division, Maj-Gen Horatius Murray (this included 1st Guards Brigade, Brig Gerald Verney) 46 Infantry Division, Maj-Gen Steven Weir 78 Infantry Division, Maj-Gen Robert Arbuthnott (this included 36 Infantry Brigade, Brig Geoffrey Musson).
5 Corps was part of Eighth Army, commanded by Gen Richard McCreery, who established his headquarters at Treviso, just north of Venice.
Also part of Eighth Army was 13 Corps, commanded by Lt-Gen John Harding, with his headquarters at Monfalcone just north-west of Trieste, whose forces were deployed in north-east Italy (Venezia Giulia).
The British
Eighth Army was part of 15 Army Group, commanded by US Gen Mark Clark.
All these forces were under the overall command of Field Marshal Harold Alexander, Supreme Allied Commander Mediterranean Forces, who had established his headquarters at Caserta, north of Naples.
He had two political advisers: Harold Macmillan, the British Resident Minister in the Mediterranean (holding Cabinet rank), whose role was to act as British political adviser and to liaise with the British Government.
He was directly answerable to the British Foreign Secretary, Anthony Eden, but also reported to the Prime Minister, Winston Churchill, and the Secretary of State for War, Sir James Grigg.
Alexander C Kirk the US political adviser who was responsible to the Secretary of State, Washington.
At first light on Tuesday 8 May advance units of 6 Armoured Division crossed the frontier into Austria and at 10 am [KP 54]they entered the provincial capital of Carinthia, Klagenfurt.
Other units rapidly followed establishing British control over the main lines of communication throughout most of Carinthia and by 10 May Gen Keightley had set up his 5 Corps HQ near Klagenfurt.
Also in the first week of May, the 3rd Ukrainian Front, commanded by Marshal Tolbukhin, including both Soviet and Bulgarian forces, had advanced within Austria from the east and north-east, after fighting in Hungary and around Vienna.
Tolbukhin's forces advanced into the British Zone and only stopped when, on 9 May, they met troops of Gen Keightley's 5 Corps.
The Soviets
On 10 May, on Soviet invitation, Gen Keightley went to Voitsberg to confer with the Commander of the Soviet 6 Guards Corps.
A temporary demarcation line between British and Soviet forces was agreed, subject to further detailed arrangements over the next few days and later political discussions on a more permanent boundary line between the British and Soviet Zones.
A major complication to the military and political situation in the area was now provided by the advance of Marshal Tito's regular and guerilla forces.
In Yugoslavia itself, Tito's 3rd and 4th Armies and associated partisan units were advancing from the south and east through Slovenia, the north-western province of Yugoslavia (bordering Italy and Austria), in pursuit of the retreating German forces and of Yugoslav anti-communist formations and groups retreating with them.
Tito's Yugoslavs
But Tito's forces also began penetrating in considerable numbers over the pre-war Yugoslav frontier into southern Austria and north-east Italy (Venezia Giulia, including the port of Trieste).
Because these areas contained many people of Slovenian stock, Tito was claiming them as parts of a "Greater Yugoslavia" .
On 2 May the New Zealand Division and Yugoslav troops entered Trieste almost simultaneously.
Tito's troops entered Carinthia on 6 May and on 8 May only just lost to 5 Corps the race to be the first to enter the provincial capital Klagenfurt.
The Yugoslav advance into both these areas immediately created a situation of potential crisis between Tito and the Allies.
As the advancing British, Soviet and Yugoslav forces closed in on southern Austria, this left enormous numbers of fugitives being squeezed into an ever smaller area.
These included, retreating through northern Yugoslavia, the remains of the German Army Group E, which had controlled south-eastern Europe under the command of Gen Alexander Loehr, and which, with its anti-Communist allies, were anxious to surrender to the British rather than to Communist forces.
The Defeated Germans, their Allies and Other Fugitives
Almost immediately after 5 Corps entered southern Austria, it found itself responsible for hundreds of thousands of surrendered enemy personnel, camp followers and civilian refugees, of many different nationalities.
Although the greatest number of these were Germans, they also included more than 100,000 Hungarians, Italians, Poles, Romanians, Ukrainians, Cossacks, Yugoslavs and others.
War Diaries, situation reports and other records of the time vividly convey the chaos prevailing throughout the area in those days immediately following the end of the war, as British units encountered this mass of fugitives fleeing, blocking roads or -seeking to surrender, mixed in with the Tito's partisans and in eastern Carinthia with the advancing Bulgarians of Tolbukhin's 3rd Ukrainian Front.
Amongst all these fugitives seeking to surrender to the British in those first few days were the two groups whose fate is the particular concern of this report.
Between 8 and 12 May in different parts of Carinthia, the units under 5 Corps took the surrender of six bodies of Cossacks and others who had originated from territories controlled by the Soviet Union.
These were: Unit Commander Strength Domanov Cossacks Gen Domanov 22,500 Cossack "Training Unit" Gen Shkuro 1,400 Caucasians Gen Kelich Ghirei 4,800 1555 Cossack Cavalry Corps Gen von Pannwitz 25,000 1st Ukrainian Division Gens Shandruk and Freytag11,000 White Russian Schutzkorps Col Rogozhin4,500 In those same first few days of the British occupation of southern Austria there also surrendered to the British various groups of anti-Tito Yugoslavs, including Croats.
But the largest of these was a group made up of assorted Yugoslav military formations, mainly Slovenes and Serbs, who had retreated over the Harawanken Alps from Slovenia on 7 May, together with German units, the White  Russian Schutzkorps, camp followers and civilian refugees.
This heterogeneous group, initially totalling over 30,000 and loosely under the command of a German colonel, von Seeler, surrendered to 5 Corps on 12 May and was concentrated in a large open encampment at Viktring, south-west of Klagenfurt.
1.
Cossacks etc
2.
The Anti-Tito Yugoslavs
Who were these groups, and where had they come from?
(approx 22,500, including some 8,000 civilians).
The main part of this group consisted of Cossacks from the Soviet Union, who, because of their fierce anti-Communism, had sided with the Germans during the advance towards the Caucasus in 1942.
They joined the German retreat in early 1943, and were given a place of settlement in the Novogrodek area of Belorussia.
The men of military age had been commanded by Ataman (Cossack "Headman" ) Pavlov until his death in June 1944, and then by Gen Domanov, who had been a serving officer in the Red Army.
These men were accompanied by thousands of women, children, old men and priests.
During their stay in Belorussia, the Cossacks had provided a military force, some 10,000 strong, to be used by the local SS commander von Gottberg in operations against Soviet partisans.
They had also been joined here by a number of "White" emigres from outside the USSR, that is to say anti-Communists who had gone into exile during or after the Civil War of 1918–20 and had subsequently lived in various European countries.
During this time the term "Kazachi Stan" (Cossack Settlement) came into use to designate the Domanov Cossacks, military and civilian, taken as a whole.
Cossacks etc
The "Domanov Cossacks" 
In September 1944, as the Red Army advanced into Belorussia, Domanov's Cossacks had been moved across Europe and assigned to an area around Tolmezzo in northern Italy, then under the control of Italian partisans.
Here they were under the direction of Obergruppen-fuehrer Globocnik, the SS commander responsible for security in the area known as the Adriatic Littoral.
In October 1944, Domanov passed word to the allies that he and his Cossacks would be prepared to change sides in exchange for a promise of immunity from repatriation to the Soviet Union.
But the Supreme Allied Commander and the British Chiefs of Staff saw no military advantage in accepting this proposal, and also foresaw that it would create difficulties with the Soviet government, and therefore ignored it.
By the late autumn of 1944, in joint operations with the German forces, the Cossacks had cleared the Italian partisans out of their area, which they continued to garrison until nearly the end of the war.
Resistance to foraging Cossacks led to clashes in which many Italian civilians were killed.
In Tolmezzo Domanov was joined by General Peter Krasnov, who had played a prominent part in the Russian Civil War, first as Ataman of the Don Cossacks and later in the Baltic States.
Krasnov had lived in Germany since 1938, and his anti-Bolshevik activities had the approval of Himmler, who in  February 1944 authorised his appointment as Head of the newly-formed Chief Administration of the Cossack Forces; but because of his advancing years (he was born in 1869) his status in Tolmezzo was that of an honoured guest rather than that of an active commander.
The SS leadership found him useful because the Cossacks were loyal to him and he was loyal to Germany.
On 6 February 1945 Himmler's deputy, Berger, reported that on 30 January all the men commanded by Domanov had enthusiastically sworn loyalty to Hitler (for a more detailed record of the Cossacks' relations with Himmler, see Appendix II).
On 28 April 1945, the Domanov Cossacks retreated north from Tolmezzo across the border into Austria via the Ploeckenpass.
By 4/5 May they had arrived in the Drau valley, near Lienz (nearly 100 miles west of Klagenfurt).
On 8 May they formally surrendered to 78 Infantry Division, commanded by Maj-Gen Arbuthnott.
Following their surrender they remained in a series of open encampments between Lienz and Oberdrauberg.
Many of the women and children were placed in a barracks at Peggetz, just east of Lienz.
The Cossack Training Regiment (approximately 1,400); otherwise known as General Shkuro's Training Unit.
This relatively small group, nominally under 15 SS Cossack Cavalry Corps (see below) was commanded by another celebrated Cossack commander in the Russian Civil War, Gen Andrei Shkuro, who had also lived outside the Soviet Union since 1920 in Germany, Yugoslavia, Austria and elsewhere.
This group surrendered to the British 56th Recce Regiment at Rennweg on 10 May, and was transferred a week later to the camps near Lienz in the 78 Division area where Domanov's Cossacks were already held.
The "Caucasians" (approximately 4,800).
Like Domanov's Cossacks, this heterogeneous group, made up from the various peoples around the Caucasus, including Georgians, Armenians and Azerbaidjani Moslems, had originally joined the German retreat westwards in 1942–3.
By early 1945 the "Caucasians" (with a large number of women, children and camp followers) were also in north Italy, near Tolmezzo and had been joined by a number of emigres, one of whom, Gen Sultan Kelich Ghirei, took command in April 1945 after the departure of their former German commander.
On 28 April, the Caucasians joined Domanov's Cossacks on the retreat into Austria, surrendered with them to the British 78 Div on 8 May and remained encamped east of Lienz near Dellach.
The 15 SS Cossack Cavalry Corps (approximately 25,000).
This was a completely separate fighting unit, part of the Wehrmacht/Waffen SS armies, and one of the seven army- Corps under Gen Loehr's Army Group E. It had originally been established in March 1943 under German command, when Cossacks of military age had been summoned from all over the occupied USSR to Kherson on the Dnieper.
It  comprised 3 (later 6) regiments with German senior officers under Gen Helmuth von Pannwitz.
In April 1943 they moved to Poland for training and in September 1943 were sent to Yugoslavia as part of Gen Loehr's Army Group E to fight Tito partisans.
They acquired a reputation for ferocity and committed many atrocities.
Their discipline markedly improved during 1944 and they became an efficient fighting force which, from the autumn of 1944, scored some successes against Bulgarian and Soviet troops.
The von Pannwitz Cossacks included not only 1,000 German officers and NCO's, and a number of emigre officers, but also a regiment of Kalmucks, nomads of Buddhist faith.
Around 10 May 1945, comprising two divisions, the Corps withdrew into Austria in front of the Bulgarian army in the south-east of the 5 Corps area, hoping to surrender to the British.
Between 10 and 12 May they surrendered to 6 Armoured Division and were placed in two camps near St Veit, 12 miles north of Klagenfurt.
The "Ukrainian No 1 Division" (approximately 11,000).
In quite a different category from any of the above, this military formation was a successor to the 14 Grenadier Division der Waffen SS (Galizien), which had suffered very heavy losses at Brody in July 1944.
The division consisted largely of recruits from both the Soviet Ukraine and from areas of pre-1939 Poland incorporated into the USSR by the Nazi-Soviet Pact.
In April 1945, while the division was stationed near Graz under the command of the SS Gen Freytag, it was joined from Berlin by Gen Pavel Shandruk, President of the German-sponsored Ukrainian National Committee and Commander-in-Chief of the Ukrainian National Army (of which the 1st Ukrainian Division was the most important component).
Shandruk later claimed in his memoirs, Arms of Valor (1959), that he sent a personal appeal to Gen Anders, the Polish commander in Italy, for permission to march to the rear of British forces.
Although no record of this has been found, on 10 May the division split into two groups.
The smaller of these, some 1,300 strong, headed by Gen Shandruk himself and Gen Freytag (who shot himself on 11 May), travelled from Judenburg into the US Zone of Austria.
Shandruk and his immediate entourage were permitted to proceed via Salzburg into Bavaria.
The larger group under Col Krat was recorded by 6 Armoured Div on 10 May as among "Enemy Formations" which had surrendered to the division and as having been concentrated in the area of Voelkermarkt, to the east of Klagenfurt.
The White Russian Schutzkorps (approximately 4,500).
The "Russkii Korpus" , nominally the last surviving unit of the Imperial Russian army, was again in quite a different category from any of the formations mentioned above.
This had originated in a Cossack military formation which withdrew from Russia to Yugoslavia at the end of the Russian Civil War in 1920.
Given asylum by King Alexander, it had remained in being as a military unit and on the German invasion of Yugoslavia in 1941 had offered its services in defence of Yugoslavia  against the Germans, although it did not take part in that brief campaign.
After attacks by Tito partisans, the Russkii Korpus was formed into 5 regiments in 1942 as the Schutzkorps, under German command, as part of Army Group E, and was used against Tito partisans and briefly the Red Army.
On the death of its German commander, Col Anatoly Rogozhin, a former member of the Imperial Russian Bodyguard, succeeded to the command and the unit made a fighting withdrawal to Ljubljana, the capital of Slovenia.
On 5–7 May the Schutzkorps took part in the mass exodus via the Loibl Pass into Austria where it formally surrendered on 12 May to 1st Guards Brigade, under 6 Armoured Div, and settled in Viktring camp, a few miles south-west of Klagenfurt, with other Yugoslav refugees (see below).
Although the majority of each of these groups were soldiers, organised with varying degrees of cohesion and discipline on military lines, and had fought either as part of German armies or under German overall command, there were also large groups of women, children, priests, camp followers etc, most notably with Domanov's Cossacks, where these totalled some 8,000.
It is important to note here that there is no single term which can accurately be used as a brief but comprehensive designation for all these heterogeneous groups.
In no sense were they all Cossacks.
They were not all Russians, since they included Caucasians, Kalmucks and Ukrainians (many of whom had Polish nationality).
They were not all Soviet citizens or Soviet nationals, since they included Germans and emigres.
Although the emigres had originated in territories included in the USSR, they had subsequently become passport holders of other countries or stateless.
This important proviso must be borne in mind, not just in the context of descriptions used in this report, but when considering the various descriptions used in documents of the time.
Included among those who had surrendered to 5 Corps by 12 May were various groups of Yugoslavs.
These reflected the extraordinary complexity of the political situation which had developed in Yugoslavia during the years of the German occupation, when different ethnic, religious and political groups had formed shifting alliances, according to whether their main enemy at any time had seemed to be the occupying Germans or Tito's partisans working to establish a Socialist state in post-war Yugoslavia.
As the war neared its end, with the imminent prospect of a complete victory for Tito's forces, all these groups had a common interest to escape and preferably to surrender to the non-Communist allies in Italy or Austria.
Anti-Tito Yugoslavs
Precisely this eventuality had been considered at the highest level in the days just before the war ended.
On 27 April the British Ambassador in Belgrade, Ralph Stevenson, had cabled the British Resident Minister's office in Caserta [KP 40], pointing out that Allied troops might very soon make contact with "anti-partisan Yugoslav forces" .
 "These anti-partisan units are without exception completely compromised by open collaboration with the Germans' he wrote, but he recommended that in view of the complexity of the situation they should not be" handed over to the Yugoslav army "but" should be disarmed and placed in refugee camps!
This telegram was sent on to the Prime Minister's office in London and on 29 April Winston Churchill ruled [HP 41]that all anti-partisans (including by inference "Croats" and "Slovenian White Guards" who were mentioned to Churchill in an accompanying minute by Sir Orme Sargent) should, as Stevenson urged, "be disarmed and placed in refugee camps" .
US Government agreed in respect of the anti-partisan troops in Venezia Giulia.
FM Alexander's Allied Force Headquarters was informed accordingly and, on 3 May, Eighth Army issued an Operation Instruction No 1465 [KP 49]which ordered: "Chetniks, troops of Mihailovitch and other dissident Yugoslavs…will be regarded as surrendered personnel and will be treated accordingly.
The ultimate disposal of these personnel will be decided on Government levels."
In fact the day before this instruction was issued to all units, 6 Armoured Division in Italy had already taken the surrender of a group headed by Gen Damjanovic of some 10,000 men describing themselves as Chetniks and Royalists, accompanied by upwards of a thousand civilians, including women and children [KP 48].
These were all, in accordance with the Eighth Army Instruction, sent to a camp at Palmanova, near Udine.
On 5–7 May, as Tito's forces neared the Slovene capital Ljubljana, the mass exodus referred to earlier, which included many civilians, took place over the nearby Austria border to the north.
These fugitives, more than 30,000 in number, formally surrendered to 1st Guards Brigade under 6 Armoured Division on 12 May.
In a situation report at 2300 hrs that evening, the Brigade's Intelligence Officer Capt Nigel Nicolson recorded: "In dealing with the surrender of the German troops south of the River Drau, the Grenadiers are faced with one of the most formidable problems yet encountered.
These troops have been fighting TITO up till 8 May, when an armistice was agreed on, and by a subterfuge, they have contrived to cross the Drau and accept internment in British prison camps.
The German comd of these forces, Oberst von Seeler, has planned the organisation of his surrender with some care, and the first of his officers to cross the river arrived with marked maps showing  how, in the German comd's view, the various nationalities should be disposed.
The conc areas he had arranged conflicted severely with the dispositions of our own Bde, and he was ordered to assemble the whole force in a camp at VIKTRING.
This conc has been in progress all today.
The number of PW involved is colossal, amounting, in von Seeler's own estimate, to some 30,000 men, composed as follows 10,000 Germans…13,000 Slovenes All front line fighters.
There is said to be a Slovene General 4,000 Serbs 4,000 White Russians Probably the same as those which attempted to surrender to us two nights ago.
At one time this column stretched for some ten miles along the road to Viktring, together with their horses and lorries, supplies and women…
It seems that the whole force has been under the direct comd of General Loehr, until contact with him was lost many days ago."
The 1st Guards Brigade War Diary later summarised this episode in its entry for 12 May: "Oberst von SEELER, in command of a Corps of 10,000 Germans, 13,000 Slovenes, 4,000 Serbs and 4,000 White Russians, coming from JUGOSLAVIA by LOIBL PASS, surrenders to the Bde and is conc at vast camp at Viktring, under comd 3 Gren Gds.
Germans made responsible for internal arrangements…"
The entry for the following day, 13 May, began: "Organisation of VIKTRING cage our main responsibility, taking a whole Grenadier coy.
Slovenes protest against being put under German Commander."
Apart from the Germans and White Russians (the Schutzkorps) who were later transferred to other camps, the main contingents at Viktring comprised units of the Slovene Home Guard (Domobranci), under Gen Krenner (approx 13,000 including camp followers), three regiments of Serbian Volunteers (approx 4,000) plus a smaller number of Montenegrin Royalist (Chetnik) troops, Croats and several thousand Slovene and other civilian refugees from various parts of Yugoslavia.
Most of the civilians, eventually totalling some 6,000, were placed in a separate camp next to the main military encampment at Viktring.
The one thing all these Yugoslavs had in common was their fierce opposition to and fear of Tito's partisans.
Both the main groups in Viktring, the Slovenes and the Serbs, were also anxious to make clear to the British that, despite having arrived under the command of a German colonel, they were not "collaborators" and did not regard themselves as opposed to the Allies.
Nevertheless, as Ambassador Stevenson had put it in his telegram on 27 April, "these anti-partisan units are without exception completely compromised by open collaboration with the Germans" .
The most obviously "compromised" of all groups in Yugoslavia during the war had been the Croat Ustachi, troops of the puppet state set up in Croatia under Anton Pavelic, and in many cases led by men who even before the war had shown pro-Fascist and anti-Yugoslav Royalist sympathies.
The Slovene Domobranci (or Home Guard) were a militia set up by the Germans to take part in operations against Tito's partisans.
The Serbian Volunteers were a force recruited under the puppet government of Gen Nedic to serve Serbian interests, although this meant that they frequently had to act in concert with the Germans.
One of their chief commanders, Ljotic, was a fascist and his followers acquired an evil reputation.
The Royalists (Chetniks) under Mihailovitch had played a major part in anti-German resistance through much of the war, although increasingly they had been in direct conflict with Tito's partisans, who saw them as the main enemy in establishing a Communist post-war Yugoslavia, and this had also led to them acting on occasion in concert with German forces.
Yet the allied policy arrived at on Stevenson's and Churchill's initiative was the same in respect of all these groups, even including the Croat Ustachi.
They should not be handed over to Tito, but should be "disarmed and placed in refugee camps" until their "ultimate disposal" was decided at Government level.
The policy agreed by the UK and US Governments at the beginning of May was not based on any detailed consideration of these distinctions.
All surrendering Yugoslav armed groups were to be disarmed and interned pending a decision by Governments as to their disposal.
Such were the main groups of Cossacks and anti-Tito Yugoslavs who had come into 5 Corps hands by 12 May.
In addition to these groups, the 5 Corps areas also contained vast numbers of surrendered Germans, in addition to many thousands of troops of other nationalities and hordes of miscellaneous civilian refugees.
To cope with all these people, whom FM Alexander later referred to as "multitudes" , Gen Keightley had under his command in Austria fewer than 25,000 men.
We must now turn our attention to the wider situation in which 5 Corps found itself on 10–12 May.
26 APRIL–13 MAY THE YUGOSLAV CRISIS
 "The Trieste crisis blew up with an intensity which at the time suggested that it might lead to the last battle of the Second World War or the first of the Third World War." 
[Jackson and Gleave, the Official History of the Second World War, HMSO, Vol VI, Part III]
It is still not generally appreciated just how serious a threat to the peace of Europe was posed by the situation developing in north-east Italy and southern Austria in the days immediately following the end of the European war in 1945.
So important a part did this crisis play in determining the events which are the subject of this report that they cannot be properly understood without an appreciation of the extent to which the crisis overshadowed everything else that was happening in the area at the time.
In previous accounts of the repatriations this has not been sufficiently brought out.
Since early April, tension had been growing between Tito and the Western Allies over Tito's claim that the whole of the area of north-east Italy known as Venezia Giulia should become part of a "Greater Yugoslavia" .
This area extended down the eastern shore of the Adriatic, past the port of Trieste, as far south as Zara (the present Zadar).
Towards the end of April, Alexander's Eighth Army was approaching this area from the west, while Tito's Yugoslav troops were already advancing into it from the south, in pursuit of the disintegrating German 97th Army Corps.
On 26 April, Alexander informed the Combined Chiefs of Staff that, subject to their agreement, he would use a combined Anglo-US task force to seize areas of military importance in Venezia Giulia, including the key port of Trieste and the lines of communication to Austria in the north.
On 28 April Alexander was instructed to seize the whole of Venezia Giulia, except for Zadar in the south.
But it was soon obvious that this would not be feasible because of the rapid advance being made into the area by Tito's forces.
Furthermore, on -0 April, it seemed  that the American support Alexander was counting on would not be forthcoming, as President Truman cabled Churchill: I wish to avoid having American forces being used to fight Yugoslav forces or being used in combat in the Balkan arena On 1 May Alexander returned to his original objective of seizing Trieste and the lines of communication, and on 2 May the New Zealand Division under 13 Corps arrived in Trieste almost simultaneously with Tito's troops.
On the same day Churchill instructed Alexander that it was important that his forces should use no violence against Tito's men, except in self-defence.
The quarrel with the Yugoslavs should be "a matter for the peace table" .
By now, however, Tito's resolve was hardening in the light of his troops' successes.
On 3 May he protested that Alexander's troops were entering areas already liberated by his forces, and requested that these should be withdrawn behind the line of the river Isonzo.
It was agreed that there should be a Chief of Staffs' meeting to discuss the matter and, on 8 May, by which time Alexander estimated that Tito had some 60,000 troops in Venezia Giulia, his Chief of Staff, General Morgan, flew to Belgrade to meet Tito.
He put to Tito a written proposal that the Western allies should control Trieste and the lines of communication to Austria, and that Tito's forces should withdraw.
This proposal Tito flatly rejected.
On the same day, 8 May, the crisis acquired a new dimension, as General Keightley's 5 Corps entered Klagenfurt and found southern Austria also swarming with Tito's partisans, with units of the Yugoslav 4th Army pouring into reinforce them.
The Yugoslavs were attempting to seize public buildings and key installations, and issuing proclamations to the effect that Carinthia, like Venezia Giulia, was part of Yugoslavia and now under Yugoslav administration.
As units of 6 Armoured Division advanced into eastern Carinthia they encountered Bulgarian units of Tolbukhin's army group, who were delegating local administration to the Yugoslavs.
On 9 May Harold Macmillan, the British Resident Minister at AFHQ, cabled Churchill to say that the situation in Austria was very "embarrassing" for the British commanders.
It seemed undesirable to use force against the Yugoslavs at the moment, but incidents could occur or be provoked, and clear instructions should be issued soon as to whether Alexander should order Eighth Army to close the Austrian frontier to the Yugoslavs and eject them from Carinthia, which would of course mean by force.
Faced with the scale of this crisis, on the morning of 10 May Alexander called a top level conference at AFHQ, Caserta, attended by all the senior British and American members of his staff.
He informed them of Gen Morgan's visit to Belgrade two days earlier, and Tito's refusal to back down on his claim to sovereignty over Venezia Giulia.
It now seemed that military action to push Tito's forces out of the area might be the only course.
But three  considerations made the situation confronting Alexander and his colleagues seem particularly grave.
Firstly, Allied troops, after years of war, would not take well to a renewal of fighting, against forces whom they had been repeatedly told were our brave allies.
Secondly, President Truman had ruled, with his eye on the continuing war in the Far East, that he did not wish US troops to get involved in a war in the Balkans (this point was underlined to the conference by the senior American military representative, Gen McNarney).
Thirdly, if war did break out with Tito, what would be the response of Tito's Communist ally, the Soviet Union, with its immensely powerful forces stationed nearby?
Despite all these considerations, Tito's intransigence left Alexander with no option — as Harold Macmillan, present at the conference, later put it in his diary — but to give "instruction to the planners for a full appreciation of the forces required to throw out the Yugoslavs" , while referring the matter to "his two Governments" .
The following day, 11 May, Alexander sent a long telegram to the Combined Chiefs of Staff [KP 69]arguing on operational grounds against any compromise with Tito's demands, and discussing the implications of a decision to use force to oust his troops.
The forces he would need would depend on "whether or not the Russians intend to back Tito" .
If they did, the resources required would "clearly be beyond all that I have available in this theatre" .
Permission would be required from all the governments whose troops were under his command, New Zealand, South Africa, India, Poland, Brazil.
And in addition, Alexander underlined, "under the current directive US forces could not be employed" .
On the same day, however, Macmillan received an indication from London that the United States opposition to Tito's demands was hardening, and that a firmer US policy might soon be announced.
But this only confirmed the importance of AFHQ's view, reflecting that of Churchill, that nothing should be done to provoke the Yugoslavs or exacerbate the tense situation until all military preparations had been made for full-scale action if necessary.
It was at this moment that there arrived at AFHQ a "personal" and "urgent" signal for Alexander from Gen McCreery, the Commander of Eighth Army, whose 13 Corps and 5 Corps were directly involved in the front line in North-East Italy and Austria.
In this signal, AC/173 [KP 70], McCreery reported on the serious problems being posed by the Yugoslav presence in both areas.
In Venezia Giulia he reported that attempts to set up Allied Military Government (AMG) were being "flouted by Yugoslavs" and went on It is my considered opinion that unless we can support AMG in these areas by force if necessary we must withdraw rather than be flouted."
He continued with a report on the worsening situation in Austria: HQ 14 Yugoslav Div is established KLAGENFURT and KEIGHTLEY reports that there is no sign of a stop to the Northerly move of Yugoslav forces into our zone of Austria.
They have reached Volkermarkt and are approaching 5.
Veit.
In Austria I consider it most important that the situation in VENEZIA GIULIA should not be repeated.
May I have full authority to support our AMG by force of arms if necessary.
Unless Yugoslav commanders receive some clear indication that we mean business in Austria their infiltration tactics will lead to an impossible situation."
Gen McCreery repeated to AFHQ a sitrep from Gen Harding at 13 Corps, stating that "full control of the area mentioned could now only be effected by full scale military operations" .
What he did not repeat was a signal from Gen Keightley in Austria, sent on 10 May [KP 59], in which Keightley had specifically requested permission "to be able to shoot at Yugoslavs who categorically disobey orders from British commanders." 
Alexander's response to McCreery was immediate.
He signalled [KP72]: I have seen your telegram AC/1 73 of 11 May.
I am afraid you do not realise the very serious implications of this affair.
At this very moment I am in direct communication with London, Washington and Belgrade.
The affair is now on the highest level.
Macmillan will explain it to you when he arrives."
What Alexander had decided to do was to send the British Resident Minister, who had been intimately involved in the crisis, up to Venezia  Giulia to brief the senior army commanders on every aspect of the delicate political situation which surrounded it.
As Macmillan himself put it in a telegram to the Foreign Office on 11 May [KP 78], Alexander had asked him to make"a short visit to Eighth Army Headquarters and 13th Corps tomorrow to put Gens McCreery and Harding fully in the picture.
I hope to be (back early?) on the morning of 13th."
So important a part of our story does Macmillan's visit to the north become that we must deal with it in some detail, and our main contemporary source for what happened is Macmillan's own diary entries of the time for 12 and 13 May.
On 12 May Macmillan arrived at Eighth Army headquarters at Treviso with his assistant Philip Broad at about 10.30 am.
He held a two-and-a-half hour conference with the Eighth Army commander Gen McCreery, his Chief of Staff Brig Floyd and the senior representative on Eighth Army staff at Allied Military Government Air Cdre Benson.
It quickly became "clear to me" , Macmillan wrote,
"that the General was rather worried and sore over his lack of information.
So I thought it best to let him and the Chief of Staff and Benson explain all their problems and difficulties".
These centred on Eighth Army's dealings with the Yugoslavs, including their inability "to exercise authority by force of arms" .
The main area under discussion seems to have been Venezia Giulia and Trieste.
 "After about and hour-and-a-half or so of questions etc" Macmillan spent the last hour summing up "the political and military situation; the problems confronting the Field Marshal and HMG and the equivocal and uncertain attitude of the Americans" .
He showed them "the most recent and relevant…telegrams from different capitals in the world" and concluded "I think this did a lot of good from the psychological point of view and put the General and his staff thoroughly" in the picture "" .
If he showed them the latest Washington telegram which he had seen before his departure [KPs 66 and 85], they would have been made aware that although they had to exercise the utmost restraint for the time being, a new and firmer policy might soon be adopted.
After lunch Macmillan and Broad flew on to visit the commander of 13 Corps, Gen Harding, at Monfalcone.
They found him in robust mood, "his morale seemed higher than at Eighth Army HQ" and he seemed confident that he could "maintain" the "uneasy position" in Venezia Giulia "for several weeks if necessary, while negotiations proceed and decisions are taken on a government level" .
When Macmillan had first been planning his flight north on 11 May, he had only intended to visit Eighth Army and 13 Corps and then to return to Caserta "early" on 13th.
He had not at that time known that specific request for permission to shoot at Yugoslavs in support of Military Government had come from Gen Keightley at 5 Corps in Austria.
We assume that he would have been informed of this during his briefing at Eighth Army, and obviously it was no less important for Macmillan to brief Keightley than for him to brief Harding.
Macmillan's "War Diaries" do not indicate when the decision that he should visit Klagenfurt was taken, but they do show that on the morning of 13 May, instead of returning to Caserta, he flew on to Klagenfurt.
His diary records that he was accompanied by Broad, Brig Floyd (COS Eighth Army) and Air Commodore Benson (Head of Military Government) all of whom had been present at his meeting with McCreery.
We believe that they were present at his meeting with Keightley not least because of KP 79 which records that COS Eighth Army was to visit the Commander of 5 Corps on 13 May.
They began their discussions immediately at the airfield at 10 am and the conference was concluded by noon.
No official minutes survive of Macmillan's conference with 5 Corps at Klagenfurt on 13 May and therefore our main evidence for what was discussed is the account he gave in his diary, written shortly afterwards.
We may here take each of its main passages in turn.
Macmillan's Conference with 5 Corps at Klagenfurt
1.
Tito's Yugoslavs: Macmillan's account of the conference opens by summarising the problems posed to 5 Corps by Tito's Yugoslavs: "Here again, the Yugoslav's (under Tito's orders) are a source of trouble and anxiety.
They claim part, if not all, of the province of Carinthia.
With the same idea as in Venezia Giulia — that possession is nine tenths of the law — they have raced us into Austria.
They actually reached Klagenfurt a few hours after us, so we could secure the best buildings and put sentries in them.
We have, however, not enough men to occupy and guard every place.
The Yugoslavs are bringing in considerable numbers — partly regulars and partly irregular forces — and repeating the Venezia Giulia tactics.
We put up AMG notices.
They pull ours down and put up their own.
They requisition and loot and arrest so-called Nazis and Fascists.
We have to look on, more or less helplessly, since our present plan is not to use force and not to promote an incident".
2.
German PoWs: "In addition to the Yugoslavs" Macmillan continues,"Gen Keightley has to deal with nearly 400,000 surrendered or surrendering Germans, not yet disarmed (except as to tanks and guns) who must be shepherded into some place or other, fed and given camps etc.
3.
The Soviets: on Gen Keightley's right flank, Macmillan goes on: "Marshal Tolbukhin's armies have spread out into what is supposed to be the British Zone in Austria, including the important city and road centre of Graz.
With the Russians are considerable Bulgar forces."
4.
Cossacks and "White Russians" : Macmillan immediately runs on, in this catalogue of Gen Keightley's problems: "Moreover, among the surrendered Germans are about 40,000 Cossacks and" White"Russians, with their wives and children.
To hand them over to the Russians is condemning them to slavery, torture and probably death.
To refuse, is deeply to offend the Russians, and incidentally break the Yalta agreement.
We have decided to hand them over (Gen Keightley is in touch and on good terms with the Russian general on his right), but I suggested that the Russians should at the same time give us any British prisoners or wounded who may be in his area.
The formal procedure is that they should go back through Odessa (which I understand means great hardship).
I hope we can persuade the local Russian to hand them over direct (we think he has 1,500–2,000) and save them all this suffering, in exchange for the scrupulous adherence to the agreement in handing back Russian subjects".
5.
Anti-Tito Yugoslavs: after a paragraph describing the evacuation of British PoWs found in the Klagenfurt area, Macmillan concludes his catalogue of 5 Corps' problems with this paragraph:
"To add to the confusion, thousands of so called Ustachi or Chetniks, mostly with wives and children, are fleeing in panic into this area in front of the advancing Yugoslavs.
These expressions, Ustachi or Chetnik, cover anything from  guerrilla forces raised by the Germans from Slovenes and Croats and Serbs to fight Tito, and armed and maintained by the Germans — to people who, either because they are Roman Catholics or Conservative in politics, or for whatever cause are out of sympathy with revolutionary Communism, and therefore labelled as Fascists or Nazis.
(This is a very simple formula, which in a modified form is being tried, I observe, in English politics.)"
Macmillan briefly concluded: "We had a conference with the general and his officers covering much the same ground as those with Gens McCreery and Harding yesterday.
He gave us his story and we gave him ours.
I feel sure it was useful and helpful all round."
Macmillan then flew back to Treviso to drop off the various Eighth Army officers who had been with him at the conference, had "a short chat" with Gen McCreery, and returned with Philip Broad to Caserta.
When he arrived, he found a telegram sent the previous day, 12 May, by President Truman to Churchill, which showed a complete change of American policy towards Tito: "The Americans have suddenly hardened; the President will not be" pushed about"any more.
He proposes a stiff note to Tito, amounting almost, if not quite, to an ultimatum.
This, of course, entirely alters the position from last Thursday (when Gen McNarney told us categorically that his orders were that American troops were not to be used in the Yugoslav affair.)!"
The only way this impinged on the message Macmillan had been taking up to the generals in the front-line was that they might now have to prepare even more urgently for military operations to reinforce allied policy.
Macmillan concludes his diary entry for 13 May: "I at once telegraphed to Churchill saying that the position seemed to me radically changed (I wonder for how long?)…
Drove up to FM's Lodge at about 6.30 pm, had a bath there and changed my clothes.
A pleasant dinner; after dinner we listened to Churchill on radio.
It was good, but I thought he seemed tired — as well he may be.
Drove back to Naples, where I got to bed about 11pm."
During the evening, while Macmillan was dining with FM Alexander, back at HQ 5 Corps in Austria a development had taken place which further added to the problems facing Gen Keightley and his staff.
Although Macmillan's diary entries for 12 and 13 May provide the main direct contemporary source for what was discussed on his visits to Eighth Army, 13 Corps and 5 Corps (there is no military source reflecting the contents of those discussions), it should be stated that Macmillan's account tallies directly with all the contextual evidence for the range of problems which must have been put forward by each side.
Macmillan himself provided tow further lengthy reports on the discussions, after his return to Caserta.
Addendum
The first of these consisted of two telegrams to the Foreign Office.
On 14 May he reported on his conversations with Gen McCreery and Gen Harding [KP 109].
He said that these visits had given him "the opportunity to give personally an explanation of the political background" to the dispute with Tito.
The general had in turn given him a picture of their problems with the Yugoslavs in Venezia Giulia: "General Harding was convinced that he could force out the Jugoslavs in their present numbers but it would of course entail an operation of Importance.
General Harding did not foresee difficulty in holding the situation on its present basis if so desired for several weeks…"
On 15 May, in a second telegram continuing from the first [KP 120], he reported on his "brief flying visit to General Keightley at Headquarters 5th Corps at Klagenfurt" .
This echoed his diary entry in reporting the problems with Tito's Yugoslavs ( "General Keightley described the military situation there as" fairly lively "" ) and the establishing of a demarcation line with Tolbukhin.
The only mention of surrendered personnel was a sentence stating "In the north of Carinthia there is a pocket of some 30,000 Cossacks, including women and children" .
Macmillan's second report was a letter dated 18 May"to Sir James Grigg, Secretary of State for War, also found at Birch Grove [KP 178].
This informally described his visits to 13 Corps and 5 Corps ( "I must say the troops are behaving with amazing self-control and good humour in a very difficult situation; but…the utter confusion in these areas is really astonishing" ).
In listing the various problems faced by 5 Corps, Macmillan includes "Dealing with the White Russians and Cossacks, together with their wives and families, serving in these German forces' and" Dealing with Ustachis, Chetniks and other Yugoslav refugees, deciding which, if any, are to be handed over to the Tito troops etc".
This is the only reference to the possibility that some anti-Tito Yugoslavs might be handed over, and there is no mention, either to the Foreign Office or to Grigg, of any discussions or decisions about the future of the Cossacks.
5 CORPS FACES A NEW EMERGENCY: 13/14 MAY
"Present situation approx 300,000 PW, surrendered personnel and refugees in Corps area.
Further 800,000 reported moving north to Austria from Yugoslavia…should this number materialize food and guard situation will become critical.
I therefore suggest that all possible steps are taken to dispose soonest of all surrendered personnel in this area either to Italy or their homes whichever may be the policy."
[Gen Keightley to Eighth Army, night of 13/14 May 1945]
On the evening of 13 May, only a few hours after Macmillan's departure a visitor arrived at 5 Corps headquarters at Klagenfurt.
He was Maj-Gen Erich Schmidt-Richberg, the Chief of Staff to Gen Alexander Loehr, the commander of German Army Group E and, since 15 March, the commander of all German forces in south-east Europe (OB Sudost).
Schmidt-Richberg reported that, as from the previous day, Army Group E's HQ had been set up at Feistritz, in 5 Corps area on the north side of the Alps, and that a huge force under his command, comprising some 300,000 German and 200,000 Groat troops, most of them armed, was approaching the frontier with Austria from the south.
Army Group E was unable to stop the northward advance of these formations, which included 25–30,000 horses and only had rations for another 48 hours.
Gen Loehr wished to surrender all his forces to the British.
Also with the advancing columns were a mass of Croatian civilian refugees, equally desperate to enter Austria to escape from Tito's forces.
The formations under Gen Loehr's command represented the main part of all the German forces remaining in Yugoslavia as the war approached its end.
Army Group E had included seven army corps, one of which, the 15 SS Cossack Cavalry Corps, had already broken through to Austria and surrendered to the British.
The rest were scattered across various parts of northern Yugoslavia, although the largest concentration had been around and to the west of Zagreb, the capital of Croatia.
This had also been the headquarters of the  two armed forces of the Croatian puppet state, the notorious Ustachi and the Croatian Home-Guard, or Domobranci.
In addition the Germans had listed many Croats in the Wehrmacht as members of three so-called German-Croat divisions.
As the war neared its end, Gen Loehr had already sent an emissary to 13 Corps in Northern Italy, asking the Western allies to accept the surrender of all the forces under his command, including the Croats.
As the British Resident Minister at AFHQ, Harold Macmillan, reported to the Foreign Office [KP63]: "Thirteen Corps have received a message from General Loehr's headquarters in Croatia brought by the hand of a German Foreign Office official.
This is to the effect that General Loehr prefers to surrender his forces to an Anglo-American command and not to Marshal Tito or Russian command in order to "save members of Croat armed forces and his own troops from Tito and the Bolsheviks" "On 7 May this appeal had been firmly rejected.
Gen Mark Clark, commanding 15th Army Group, had instructed Gen McCreery at Eighth Army [KP 53]: "Reference the message brought to 13 Corps by the German emissary from Croatia you will inform him that you can accept the surrender only of those forces in contact with Eighth Army.
German forces in contact with the Russians must surrender to the Red Army.
Those facing TITO forces must surrender to TITO."
On the same day, 7 May, in Rheims, in the course of surrendering all German forces in Europe, Gen Jodl had claimed that "no force on earth" could stop Gen Loehr's forces in south-east Europe breaking through to surrender to the British and Americans.
In fact on 9 May, virtually surrounded by Tito's armies in northern Yugoslavia, Gen Loehr negotiated for the surrender of all his forces to Tito, and many individual units had begun to lay down their arms.
Now, however, four days later, having escaped into Austria himself, Loehr was making a final attempt to surrender his forces to the British, saying that he was not longer able to control the movement northwards into Austria either of his own German troops, or of a huge column of Croat troops and civilian refugees advancing from Zagreb on the frontier town of Dravograd, south-east of Klagenfurt.
On the evening of 13 May on top of all his other preoccupations particularly the dangerously weak operational position of his Corps Gen Keightley suddenly found himself threatened by the possibility that within 48 hours Carinthia would be swamped by a further huge mass of some 600,000 surrendered personnel and refugees, without food.
His immediate response was to tell Maj-Gen Schmidt-Richberg to make further attempts to contact Tito's forces moving north to stand fast for 24 hours; and to return to HQ 5 Corps for further orders at 1600 hrs the following afternoon, 14 May.
In the meantime, however, Gen Keightley had to consider the possibility that 5 Corps would be unable to prevent the Army Group E forces entering Austria.
The only way to avert complete chaos would be to accept their surrender as "formed bodies" .
And for this he would require authorization from Gen McCreery at Eighth Army, to override the previous instruction from Gen Clark on 7 May that "German forces…facing TITO forces must surrender to TITO" .
On the night of 13 May Gen Keightley accordingly sent off two signals to Gen McCreery.
The first of these, 0.410, was despatched at 15 minutes after midnight and dealt with the general situation in the 5 Corps area [KP 93]"Personal Army Comd from Corps Comd.
Present situation approx 300,000 PW surrendered personnel and refugees in Corps area.
Further 600,000 reported moving north to Austria from Yugoslavia.
I am taking all possible steps to prevent their mov. along rds. but this will NOT completely prevent them as they are short of food and being harassed.
Should this number materialize food and guard situation will become critical.
I therefore suggest that all possible steps are taken to dispose soonest of all surrendered personnel in this area whether German, Austrian or Russian by moving them to northern Italy or their homes whichever may be the policy.
Certain SS troops already causing trouble but this being dealt with.
On advice Macmillan have today suggested to Soviet General on Tolbukhin's HQ that Cossacks should be returned to Soviets at once.
Explained that I had no power to do this without your authority but would be glad to know Tolbukhin's views and that if they coincided with mine I would ask you officially.
Cannot see any point in keeping this large number Soviet nationals who are clearly great source contention between Soviets and ourselves.
This area now becoming clearing house for all stragglers, straggling formations and refugees of all nationalities who require food and shelter.
Understand reason for this move due to NO organisation in Jugoslavia to deal with them…
A copy of this part of the signal, plus reference to the "relief of Partisans" in Corps area by "more organised troops" , was sent to AFHQ at Caserta, marked "Please Inform MACMILLAN" [KP 94].
In this first signal Gen Keightley thus alerted Eighth Army and AFHQ to the emergency with which 5 Corps was being faced by the approach of the 600,000 additional fugitives from the south, on top of the problems posed by the "300,000 surrendered personnel and refugees" already in the Corps area.
Keightley warned that if these fugitives or any substantial number of them entered Austria, the "food and guard situation will become critical" .
He was therefore asking as a matter of urgency that "all possible steps" should be taken "to dispose  soonest of all surrendered personnel in this area whether German, Austrian or Russian" by "moving them to northern Italy or their homes whichever may be the policy" .
In particular, as a first step towards clearing the area, he was suggesting that, as Macmillan had advised, the Cossacks should be handed over to the Soviet authorities, although, as he had made clear to Tolbukhin's HQ, he could not do this without Gen McCreery's authorization.
Two-and-a-half hours later, at 0245 hrs Gen Keightley sent his second signal to Gen McCreery.
This spelt out in more detail what 5 Corps had learned from Maj-Gen Schmidt-Richberg about the approach of the Army Group E forces from the south, and asked for the specific authorization 5 Corps required to accept the surrender of these enormous numbers of fugitives as "formed bodies" .
The first four paragraphs of this signal, 0.413 [KP 95], summarised the "points made by Maj-Gen Schmidt-Richberg" on his "visit to this HQ today" .
These included the information that Army Group E had been able to establish a road block on the frontier, and was: "in touch with 21 and 19 Corps and other troops south of DRA VA consisting of 300,000 Germans and 200,000 Croats greater part armed.
All these troops moving north directed towards VOLKERMARKT KLAGENFURT area.
ARMY GP NOT able to stop this."
5 Corps further reported that the Yugoslavs had not attempted to stop this northward advance, and therefore that it had "arranged to guide up ARMY GROUP E formations tomorrow" to receive them in Austria.
The Germans and Croats only had sufficient rations for 48 hours.
Schmidt-Richberg had been ordered to try to make contact again with Tito forces, meanwhile to order all "troops moving NORTH to stand fast for 24 hours" and to return to "HQ 5 Corps for order 1600hrs 14May" .
Finally 5 Corps stated to Eighth Army: "it would appear that unless these formations are taken over by us as formed bodies and disarmed they will force their way across border as individual bandits plunder the country disorganise economic life our zone and threatened our security.
It is therefore considered we should accept the surrender through ARMY GROUP E of all these troops as they move into Austria if you agree.
In view of food situation and imminent arrival main bodies early decision essential."
This signal, 0.413, did not arrive at Gen McCreery's Eighth Army headquarters until 0815 hrs on the morning of 14 May.
But already McCreery had noted the critical situation building up in 5 Corps area reported in the earlier signal, 0.410, and had begun to take action.
At 0800 hrs the contents of 0.410 had been passed on as AC/188 [KP 96], to 15th Army Group, with a copy for information to Gen Morgan, the Chief of Staff at AFHQ.
And at 0815 hrs a signal (AC/189)[KP 97]went from Gen McCreery at Eighth Army to Gen Clark at 15th Army Group"Personal for Gen Clark from Gen McCreery.
Surrendered personnel, refugees and PW situation in 5 Corps area becoming unmanageable on account of numbers.
Materially deteriorating from the operational capacity of the Corps.
Realise that large numbers of surrendered personnel from Army Group SE not foreseen in original plans.
Would be grateful if immediate steps could be taken to deal with this problem.
Consider negotiations should be opened with Marshal Tolbukhin for the return of 20,000 plus Cossacks to Russian lines.
This policy was advocated by Macmillan when here.
Alternatives for remainder surrendered personnel and refugees appear to be either (a) they should be concentrated in the area Radstadt and responsibility for their final disarmament and picketing be assigned to 12 Army Group.
This course would enable 5 Corps to be tactically disposed in the light of new policy, or (b) a proportion at least of the numbers should be returned to Italy and concentrated under the same arrangements that are being made for surrendered personnel of Army Group SW.
Alternative (a) seems to be the quicker and simpler course."
In this signal AC/189, against the background of "the situation in 5 Corps area becoming unmanageable" , Gen McCreery was asking for decisions from above on three distinct issues.
Firstly he asked that "immediate steps" be taken to deal with the "large numbers of surrendered personnel" of Army Group E, whom McCreery assumed were about to enter 5 Corps area.
Secondly, he asked for authority to begin negotiations with Tolbukhin for the hand-over of the Cossacks.
And thirdly, he suggested that the "remainder surrendered personnel and refugees" in 5 Corps area should be "concentrated in the area Radstadt" — ie evacuated to the American zone of Austria to the north, under the control of 12 Army Group, which was under Gen Eisenhower's SHAEF.
After he had sent off this AC/189, Gen McCreery took steps to deal with the second signal he had received from Gen Keightley that morning, the 0.413 in which Keightley had reported in more detail on the imminent arrival in Austria of the 300,000 German and 200,000 Croat troops, and had asked for authorization to accept the surrender of these forces as "formed bodies" .
McCreery gave Keightley the authorization he had asked for, and at 1450 hrs that afternoon he  sent a further signal to Gen Clark at 15th Army Group, AC/190 [KP 102], reporting"Approx 300,000 Germans and 200,000 Croats moving towards area Villach-Klagenfurt.
Have authorised Keightley to take over formed bodies as they cross border.
Ask AFHQ to ask Tito how many enemy he eventually wishes to retain.
Suggest Croats become Tito's show…"
This signal shows that McCreery was assuming that the forces advancing from the south were already in the process of becoming a 5 Corps responsibility.
He wished AFHQ to make a formal request to Tito to ask how many of these surrendering personnel should eventually be returned to Yugoslavia.
But, whatever happened to the Germans, McCreery was suggesting that the 200,000 Croats at least should be sent back to Tito.
This signal AC/190 was not sent on to AFHQ until much later in the day on 14 May, and a copy marked "Personal for General Morgan" , the Chief of Staff, was received in Caserta just after midnight, at 0005 hrs.
In the meantime, however, AFHQ had received McCreery's earlier signal AC/189, containing his requests for decisions on three distinct issues, to assist him in dealing with the emergency now threatening 5 Corps.
The decisions Gen McCreery was asking for could only be taken at a senior level, and during the day of 14 May they were considered at Caserta by Gen Brian Robertson, the Chief Administrative Officer at AFHQ.
At 1836 hrs that evening he sent off his reply in a signal to Gen McCreery, FX 75383 [KP 103].
This contained three paragraphs, as follows: "Ref Eighth Army AC/189 of 14 May 1.
All Russians should be handed over to Soviet forces at agreed point of contact established by you under local arrangement with Marshal Tolbuknin's HQ.
Steps should be taken to ensure that Allied PW held in Russian Area are transferred to us in exchange at the same time.
2.
Movement to Italy of all Germans is not acceptable because it would cause serious blockage of our L of C…we are approaching 12 Army Gp immediately with request that they accept concentration…3.
All surrendered personnel of established Yugoslav nationality who were serving in German forces should be disarmed and handed over to local Jugoslav forces."
So crucial a part was Gen Robertson's signal to play in the events which are the subject of this report that it will be considered in a separate chapter.
THE ROBERTSON ORDER — 14–15 MAY
 "CAO expressed disappointment that we did not seem to agree with him on this point, but added that he was faced with a grave administrative problem with hundreds of thousands of German PoWs on his hands and could not bother at this time about who might or who might not be handed over to the Russians or Partisans to be shot." 
[Gen Robertson, Chief Administrative Officer at AFHQ, quoted by Alexander Kirk, 14 May 1945]
The signal FX 75383 (reproduced opposite) sent by Gen Robertson from AFHQ on the evening of 14 May was central to the events which are the subject of this report, because it contained the two orders on which 5 Corps was to proceed in making preparations for the handovers of the two groups of surrendered personnel with whom we are concerned.
We must therefore give careful examination to the basis on which the order was drafted and the purposes to which it was directed.
The signal was a reply to Gen McCreery's AC/189 [KP 97]sent at 0815 hrs that morning.
Robertson's response, drafted during the day, was sent from AFHQ at 1836 hrs that evening, and was received by Eighth Army at 0045 hrs the following morning [KP 103].
A copy was sent on by Eighth Army at 0925 hrs on 15 May to 5 Corps for action [KP 113].
In his AC/189, Gen McCreery had asked for decisions on three specific issues:(i) that he should have authorization to open negotiations with Marshal Tolbukhin for the hand-over of the Cossacks;(ii) that the "remainder of surrendered personnel and refugees" in 5 Corps area should be evacuated to SHAEF/12th Army Group;(iii) that "immediate steps" should be taken to deal with the "large numbers of surrendered personnel from Army Group SE not foreseen in original plans" .
Gen Robertson's signal provided responses to each of these requests.
(i) He gave Gen McCreery the authorization he required to negotiate with Tolbukhin for the hand-over of the Cossacks (although he referred to these, somewhat imprecisely, as "all Russians" ).
This authorization made provision for the removal of one large, identifiable group of surrendered personnel from 5 Corps responsibility, although at the same time Robertson instructed that "steps should be taken to ensure that Allied PW held in Russian area are transferred to us in exchange" .
This was a reference to the principle of reciprocity embodied in the Yalta Repatriation agreements which will be discussed in Chapter Five.
(ii) In his response to McCreery's suggestion that "remainder of surrendered personnel and refugees" in 5 Corps area should be evacuated either to Italy or to the US Zone of Austria under SHAEF/12th Army Group, Robertson dealt only with surrendered personnel.
The largest such group in the Corps area were Germans.
Their removal would therefore make a major contribution to alleviating the Corps"administrative problems.
Robertson confirmed in the second paragraph of his signal that "movement to Italy of all Germans is not acceptable because it would cause serious blockage on our L of C. He therefore informed McCreery that AFHQ would be" approaching 12th Army Group immediately "to ask them to accept all German surrendered personnel from 5 Corps, with the exception of" arrestable categories", such as SS.
This request from AFHQ to SHAEF was sent off at 1917 hrs, only forty minutes after the despatch of the Robertson signal.
It ran: "Refugee and PW situation in 5 Corps area becoming unmanageable and prejudicing operational efficiency of Corps.
Essential to clear it immediately in view of political situation.
Earnestly request your assistance by accepting concentration in RADSTADT area or elsewhere more convenient to you.
Information regarding numbers is not definite but total may be about 500,000."
We may note here the estimated number mentioned as "about 500,000" .
This is considerably larger than any figure previously reported for surrendered personnel in the 5 Corps area (although Macmillan had spoken in his diary  of "400,000 Germans" , nothing approaching this figure had been formally reported).
On this evidence therefore it seems possible that, on the evening of 14 May, AFHQ was working on the assumption that Loehr's forces, including hundreds of thousands of Germans, had already surrendered to 5 Corps or were about to do so, and therefore that the German element in those forces might be included in the "500,000" Germans whom AFHQ was asking SHAEF/12th Army Group to take over.
(iii) The third paragraph of Robertson's signal directed that"all surrendered personnel of established Jugoslav nationality who were serving in German forces should be disarmed and handed over to local Jugoslav forces!
What has to be determined here is — to whom did this order refer?
The significance of this to our enquiry is that, when Robertson's order was passed on by Eighth Army to 5 Corps, it was to be taken by 5 Corps — as we shall see later — to authorise the handing over of various groups of Yugoslav surrendered personnel, including the 15,000-odd Slovene, Serb and Montenegrin troops who had surrendered two days earlier and been placed in Viktring camp.
The question we therefore have to address initially is — was Robertson's order on 14 May intended to cover the handing-over of the sort of Yugoslavs who were in Viktring?
As we know, by the time Gen Robertson came to draft his order Gen Keightley had reported to Gen McCreery that large component of Loehr's forces approaching Austria was 200,000 Croat troops.
McCreery had already signalled to Gen Clark at 15th Army Group in his AC/1 90 his request that AFHQ should"ask Tito how many enemy he wishes to retain.
Suggest Croats become Tito's show".
But these signals did not reach AFHQ until the morning of the next day, 15 May, long after Robertson had sent his response to McCreery's AC/189 which had only asked for "immediate steps" to be taken over the approach of Army Group E, and which had made no specific reference to Croats.
Did Gen Robertson therefore have the Croats specifically in mind when he drafted his order?
It is a possibility that AFHQ could have learned of the huge body of Croat troops approaching Austria on 14 May from some source other than the main signals already referred to.
McCreery had already by the afternoon of that day recognised that the question of what  should be done about the Croats posed a particular problem.
There was telephone communication between HQ Eighth Army and Caserta.
And this might help to explain why Gen Robertson devoted such a significant part of his signal to the order that "all surrendered personnel of established Jugoslav nationality who were serving in German forces should be disarmed and handed over to local Jugoslav forces" .
Certainly this definition would cover the Croat units, which were more closely integrated with German forces than any other Yugoslav formations, and it would provide McCreery and Keightley with the authorization they required.
It would enable them to take the surrender of the 200,000 Croats on their arrival in Austria and hand them back to the "local Jugoslav forces" , without having to be concerned by the general instruction that all surrendering Yugoslavs should be retained pending a political decision as to their ultimate disposal.
Support is given to the view that Robertson's order was intended to cover these Croats by a further signal sent from AFHQ on the following day, 15 May.
By this time Gen McCreery's AC/190 [KP 102]referring explicitly to the"200,000 Croats1 had arrived.
McCreery had suggested that AFHQ should approach Tito to discuss the handing over of the Croats.
In response to this, at 1611 hrs on 15 May, AFHQ sent a message [KP 118]to MACMIS, the Maclean military mission serving with Tito's HQ, asking them to inform Tito that: "Commander of Allied tps in Austria reports approx 200,000 Yugoslav nationals who were serving in German forces have surrendered to him.
We would like to turn these over immediately to Marshal Tito's forces and would be grateful if Marshal Tito would agree to instruct his commanders to accept them…"
We may note that the description of the "200,000 Croats" in McCreery's AC/190 has here been changed to "200,000 Yugoslav nationals who were serving in German forces" .
This closely corresponds to the wording of Robertson's order the previous day referring to "all surrendered personnel of established Yugoslav nationality who were serving in German forces" .
We may also note that, when this message was sent to MACMIS in the afternoon of 15 May, AFHQ was under the impression that 5 Corps had already taken surrender of the 200,000 Croats, which was why Tito was being asked to "instruct his commander to accept them" .
All these points might suggest that, when Gen Robertson sent his signal to Eighth Army on 14 May, at least part of his intention was to give the authorization required for the handing back to Tito of the 200,000 Croats.
But the fact remains that there is no formal record that AFHQ had specifically been informed of the approach of the Croats to Austria at the time when Robertson drafted his signal.
Robertson does not use the term "Croats" (any more, for that matter, than does AFHQ's signal to MACMIS the following day).
He speaks only of "surrendered personnel of Yugoslav nationality  who were serving in German forces" .
And here the question had to be asked: in his intention to authorize the removal of surrendered personnel from Austria, did he in fact mean to order the handing over of Yugoslavs other than Croats?
More specifically, did he intend to order the handing over of those categories of dissident Yugoslavs represented by the 15,000 Slovenes, Serbs and Montenegrins from Viktring?
Here we must take into account, as our only other substantial piece of evidence, a telegram sent to Washington on the evening of 14 May by Alexander Kirk, the US Political Adviser at AFHQ.
During the hours before Gen Robertson sent off his telegram to Gen McCreery on the evening of 14 May, he discussed the policy implications of its contents with Alexander Kirk.
We know this because of a telegram sent by Kirk at 2300 hrs that night to the State Department in Washington, asking "urgently" for advice [KP 107].
Robertson's Conversation with Kirk
Kirk began his telegram by summarising the main points of Gen McCreery's AC/1 89, about "unmanageable numbers of refugees and prisoners of war…materially deteriorating from operational capacity" of 5 Corps (although he did not mention McCreery's opening point about the "large numbers of surrendered personnel from Army Group SE" ).
His telegraph then went on "This afternoon General Robertson, Chief Administrative Officer AFHQ requested us to concur in a draft telegram to CG British Eighth Army authorising him to turn over 28,000 Cossacks (see our 797 of October 16, 1944 Midnight), including women and children to Marshal Tolbukhin, and further instructing him to turn over to Yugoslav Partisans a large number of dissident Yugoslav troops with exception of Chetniks." 
General Robertson stated that Macmillan, who talked with CG Eighth Army yesterday, had recommended this course of action.
We asked whether the Russians had requested that these Cossacks should be turned over to them, and Robertson replied in the negative and added "but they probably will soon" .
We also asked General Robertson what definition he proposed to give to "Chetniks" and he was very vague on this point.
We then stated that we could not concur without referring the matter to our Government.
CAO expressed disappointment that we did not seem to agree with him on this point but added that he was faced with a grave administrative problem with hundreds of thousands of German PoWs on his hands and could not bother at this time about who might or might not be turned  over to the Russians and Partisans to be shot.
He would have to send his telegram in spite of our non-concurrence.
Department's views would be appreciated urgently.
Kirk."
In general the exchanges reported by Kirk in these paragraphs confirm that Gen Robertson felt that he was having to act very fast in response to a grave administrative emergency.
He did not have time to dwell on the finer points of policy detail, and despite Kirk's Ron-concurrence"he would have to send his telegram.
In respect of the Cossacks, Robertson was simply giving authorization to Eighth Army to carry out a course of action suggested by Eighth Army and "recommended by Macmillan" .
Although Kirk does not record that he raised any specific objection to this, or that he asked for confirmation that the Cossacks were all Soviet nationals within the terms of allied policy, he nevertheless includes the exchanges about the Cossacks among the points on which he requests the State Department's views.
In respect of the Yugoslavs, however, we may note that in his draft telegram shown to Kirk, Robertson had been intending to instruct Eighth Army to "turn over to Yugoslav partisans a large number of dissident Yugoslav troops with exception of Chetniks" .
Kirk had then asked Robertson "what definition he proposed to give to Chetniks" .
This implies two things: firstly, that in his original draft Robertson had included the words "Chetniks" ; and secondly that he had specifically intended that some "dissident Yugoslavs" should be excluded from the order.
These in his original draft he had characterised at "Chetniks" , a term often loosely used at the time although its most precise meaning was to refer to the Royalist followers of Gen Mihailovitch.
There were in fact a small number of such Chetniks in Austria at the time, the 400 Montenegrins at Viktring, although there is no evidence that Gen Robertson was aware of their existence.
But also at Viktring were much larger numbers of other groups of anti-Tito Yugoslavs, the Slovene Domobranci and the Serbian Volunteers.
The term "Chetniks" could only have been used very loosely to apply to them all, although in Macmillan's diary entry on his visit to Klagenfurt he refers to the use of the word "Chetniks" to describe"guerilla forces raised by the Germans from Slovenes and…
Serbs to fight Tito "; and three days later, as we shall see, Gen Robertson himself was to use the word" Chetniks "in a telegram to the Chiefs of Staff [KP 155]in exactly this wider sense, to refer to" Slovenes"in southern Austria, ie those at Viktring.
It is perhaps not surprising therefore that, when Kirk asked Robertson "what definition he proposed to give to Chetniks" Robertson was "very vague on this point" .
Kirk then stated that he could not concur in the order and that Robertson expressed his disappointment, but stated that he could not "bother at this time who might or might not be handed over to be shot" and would send his telegram anyway.
We may then note that in the final version of the telegram, as sent, there was no mention of "Chetniks" or of any other category of "dissident Yugoslav" to be excluded from the order.
This implies that Robertson's response to Kirk's querying of the definition of "Chetniks" had been to remove the term altogether, and simply to word his instruction in general terms that "all surrendered personnel of established Yugoslav nationality who were serving in German forces should be disarmed and handed over to local Yugoslav forces." 
As finally worded, therefore, the order contained no exclusion clause, other than that implied in the phrases "serving in German forces" and "should be disarmed" .
We may therefore sum up Robertson's order in respect of Yugoslavs as follows.
We do not know precisely which dissident Yugoslav troops he had in mind.
The order was drafted in emergency conditions, to assist Eighth Army in removing surrendered personnel from the 5 Corps area.
One of the factors creating confusion in the Corps area, as Macmillan had recorded in his diary, was that "thousands of so-called Ustashi or Chetniks, mostly with wives and children, are fleeing in panic into this area in front of the advancing Yugoslavs" .
On the one hand there was no group of Yugoslavs to whom the phrasing of Robertson's order applied more completely than the Croat Ustachi, Domobranci and regular troops under German Army Group E, who at the time were approaching the Austrian border, armed and in very large numbers.
Certainly Gen McCreery wanted specific authorization from AFHQ to deal with these Croats in precisely the terms which Robertson's order gave him.
But we have no firm indication that, at the moment Robertson drafted the order, he was specifically aware of McCreery's request for such an authorization.
Nor did Gen Robertson word his order to make it refer exclusively to Croats.
If he had meant to, he surely would just have stated "Croats" .
That he did not so do indicates he had some other categories in mind as well.
On the other hand, it is also clear that Robertson originally intended to word his order in such a way that some dissident Yugoslavs should be excluded from the hand-overs, and these he categorised as "Chetniks" .
Yet in the final version of the order this exclusion was omitted.
The result of Kirk's intervention, it seems, was that Robertson left his final version worded only in general terms, without the qualification which would have made his original intention clear.
As for how Robertson's order was interpreted by those who received it, we shall come to this in due course.
But before we leave it, there is one further curious feature to be noted.
Only once subsequently was this order mentioned in any signal emanating from AFHQ.
This was in a signal sent to 15th Army Group and Eighth Army at 1234 hrs  the following day, 15 May [KP 116], correcting an error in the reference in para 2 of Robertson's signal to a directive issued in respect of arrestable categories0 Such a directive, it was pointed out, had not "yet been issued" .
Apart from this reference, and despite all the subsequent exchanges between AFHQ and subordinate commands on both Cossacks and Yugoslavs which were to follow in succeeding days, AFHQ was not to refer to Robertson's order again.
Nor, it appears, was any copy of the order as finally sent out from AFHQ passed on to the office of the US Political Adviser Alexander Kirk.
A copy was sent to the office of the British Resident Minister and the copy reproduced at the beginning of this chapter is marked "Concurred Br Resmin" (we shall go into the question of how much Harold Macmillan was personally aware of, or consulted as to its contents in Chapter 14).
But despite an exhaustive search of the Kirk archives in Washington, no copy has been found.
Kirk reported his conversation with Robertson to the State Department on the night of 14 May, asking "urgently" for the State Department's views.
The response from the State Department came in a message dated the following day, 15 May [KP 125]: "We believe that no distinction should be made between Chetniks and other dissident Yugoslav troops and that our position with respect to anti-partisan or dissident Yugoslav troops in general, in agreement with that of the British Foreign Office and in accordance with Macmillan's recommendation, is clearly set forth in PEP TEL 424, May 2.
Accordingly your refusal to concur in Robertson's telegram is approved and you are requested to inform SAC that we are strongly of the opinion that such contemplated violation of agreed Anglo-American policy cannot be justified on grounds of administrative expediency."
A further paragraph in this message in which the State Department gave its views on the proposal to hand-over the Cossacks we shall come to in Chapter Six, but in respect of the Yugoslavs the State Department was ruling that, whether they were Chetniks or not in conformity with agreed allied policy they should not be handed over and the Supreme Allied Commander was to be left in no doubt of the State Department's view.
BLEIBURG: THE END OF THE CROAT INCURSION — 15 MAY
"The crisis was past.
I went back to Brigade headquarters that evening hoping that all would go well and wondering what the next problem was going to be."
[Brig T P D Scott, Commander 38th Irish Bde at Bleiburg on 15 May 1945]
When 5 Corps had first been informed by Gen Schmidt-Richberg of the approach of 600,000 Germans and Croats to the southern edge of the Corps area on the evening of 13 May, it had been assumed that this huge mass of fugitives was on the verge of entering Austria and that it would be difficult to prevent all of them from doing so.
In fact, as it turned out, the great majority of the 300,000 German troops reported by Schmidt-Richberg as approaching Austria on 13 May were cut off from reaching the frontier by Tito's forces, or were already in the process of surrendering inside Yugoslavia.
In other words, the vast majority of the Germans never reached Austria at all.
The most serious problem remaining for 5 Corps was thus that posed by the approach of the main body of Croat troops (reported as being 200,000 in number), accompanied by huge numbers of Croat civilians, who were attempting to escape into Austria via Dravograd, towards the small town of Bleiburg just inside the Austrian frontier.
This column stretched many miles back into Yugoslavia, and no reliable figures exist as to how many people, troops and civilian refugees, were actually involved.
But Tito's forces were anxious to stop them escaping into Austria, and on 13 May Tito instructed [KP 88]his First Army: "A group of Ustashis and come Chetniks, a total of over 50,000 men, is reported by Third Army in the…area towards  Dravograd.
It includes Pavelic, Macek, the Croatian Government and a huge number of criminals.
They are attempting to cross at Dravograd and give themselves up to the British…
You must move your forces most urgently from the Celje area…in order to concentrate for an attack aimed at the annihilation of this column."
On 14 May, as the head of this column began to cross the frontier between Dravograd and Bleiburg, Tito's forces were massing in considerable strength on both sides of the frontier around them.
The British forces in the immediate area of Bleiburg were only of one brigade strength, under Brig Scott of 38th Irish Bde.
Initially it was not entirely clear how they, or other British units further west along the frontier, should be expected to respond if the Croats made a concerted advance further into Austria.
At 1530 hrs on the afternoon of 14 May, for instance, the 1st Guards Bde log recorded that "Corps have now said that we can accept the surrender of any troops of Army Group E north of the Yugoslav frontier" .
But shortly afterwards new orders arrived to the effect that"No more personnel will be accepted for surrender coming from Jugo-Slavia.
This to include Germans, Croats, Slovenes etc and refugees.
Road blocks will NOT allow any further forward movement".
At 0830 hrs the following morning, 15 May, 5 Corps signalled Eighth Army [KP 112]: "200,000 CROATS wishing to enter AUSTRIA via BLEIBURG.
YUGOSLAVS determined to oppose CROATS and will not allow their surrender to BRIT troops.
46 DIV have reinforced this area with one Battalion Infantry and one squadron tanks and are preparing to support YUGOSLAVS in event GROAT advance.
Parley still in progress and possibility CROA TS will withdraw into YUGOSLAVIA when faced by BRITISH troops."
During that morning of 15 May, as thousands of Croats halted around Bleiburg, Brig Low, the BGS of 5 Corps, held a meeting at Klagenfurt with Lt Col Hocevar, commissar of the Fourth Yugoslav Army and the senior Yugoslav commander in Austria, Major Dubajic and two other Yugoslav officers.
It was the most formal and extensive discussion to date between the British and Yugoslavs in Austria.
The lengthy minutes of the meeting [KP 115]show that it covered four main subjects.
The first, in general, was the Yugoslav claim to share control of Carinthia with the British.
The previous day the Yugoslavs had put up a proclamation in Klagenfurt claiming that Carinthia was part of Yugoslavia.
Brig Low firmly rejected these claims: I mentioned the Moscow Agreement and the plans for occupation of Austria by the Allies.
Lt Cot Hocevar stated that he knew of these plans, but that he considered that Carinthia was not part of Austria.
I said that this was the first I had heard of this claim."
More specifically, Hocevar requested that Yugoslavs should be given joint-responsibility for all camps which included surrendered Yugoslav nationals.
Low rejected this, but agreed that a Yugoslav officer would be permitted "to visit all camps in which there were CROATS, or as he called them, Yugoslav Quislings" .
He also agreed that 5 Corps would"as soon as possible, send into YUGOSLAVIA all the CROATS in our area.
I asked him to let me have his agreement to this and give me the destination."
Thirdly, "reference was made to ARMY GROUP E and to General LOEHR" .
Low stated that he had sent an order to Gen Loehr "to obey all orders given him" by the Yugoslav army.
This was presumably the reply given to the representative of HQ Army Group E whom Gen Schmidt-Richberg had been instructed on 13 May to send back to HQ 5 Corps at 1400 hrs the following day.
It was agreed that Loehr and Army Group E should be a Yugoslav responsibility, as the Yugoslavs wished.
Fourthly, Low "raised the question of the situation around Bleiburg" .
Hocevar expressed gratitude for the British action in preventing Croats entering Austria, and stated that it was Yugoslav policy that "Croats should be bottled up in the pass leading to Austria and later disarmed" .
Low stated that, if any Croats escaped into Austria, "we would guard them, disarm them, put them in a camp and later return them to Yugoslavia" .
In fact, later that day a remarkable episode at Bleiburg brought the particular emergency facing 5 Corps with the approach of the flood of fugitives from Croatia to an end.
The local British commander in the area, Brig Scott, commanding 38th (Irish) Infantry Brigade, held tripartite discussions in Bleiburg Castle with the generals commanding the Croat forces and the local Yugoslav commanders.
Tito's negotiators gave assurances that surrendered Croats would be humanely treated and that only "war criminals" among them would be tried and punished [KP 128 and also Scott's full account of the episode published in 1946 in Faugh-A-Ballagh, the journal of the Royal Irish Fusiliers).
Tito had in fact already issued orders that persons suspected of being war criminals should be tried by military courts [KPs 89 and 105].
On these assurances, and after a modest show of force with the limited resources available to him, Brig Scott managed to persuade the Groat generals commanding the entire column stretching back into Yugoslavia to surrender to Tito's forces.
Sceptics will no doubt dismiss Tito's order (even though it was issued down through the full chain of command) and the assurances given pursuant to it by the Yugoslav negotiators at Bleiburg as mere window-dressing, and they may be right.
A fortnight later Soviet spokesmen were to give similar assurances about the treatment of the Cossacks, during the course of their repatriation to the Soviet Union.
In neither case were the assurances honoured.
It can be inferred from speeches made by Yugoslav and Soviet spokesmen when the question of compulsory repatriation was subsequently debated  at the United Nations that both governments were primarily intent on getting their nationals back within their power.
They may have calculated that assurances of correct treatment might diminish British reluctance to return people against their will to countries under communist rule.
All we can say is that assurances were given, and that for a short time they were accepted as having been given in good faith; but they were not honoured.
A good deal of confusion has arisen over what happened immediately following this surrender.
According to Tolstoy in The Minister and the Massacres (pp 103–9), no sooner had the 20–30,000 Croats assembled at Bleiburg laid down their arms (they also included many civilians) than Tito's partisans opened fire from the surrounding woods causing an immense massacre ( "the slaughter was terrible…the whole field was strewn with bodies…how many people were massacred in the Bleiburg fields on 15 and 16 May is unknown" ).
Tolstoy's evidence for this massacre having taken place comes from three alleged eyewitnesses whom he quotes at length, and whom he interviewed while writing his book 40 years later.
He also describes attending a ceremony held by Croatian emigres at Bleiburg in 1985, where he"spoke with many survivors of the event.
The extent of the slaughter is indisputable".
The "Bleiburg Massacre" 
Certainly the phrases "the Bleiburg Massacre" and "the Bleiburg Tragedy" have long been in currency, and have been used by historians sympathetic to the Croats such as Prcela and Guldescu in Operation slaughterhouse: Eyewitness Accounts of Post-war Massacres in Yugoslavia (Dorrance, 1970).
This book includes a whole chapter entitled "The Bleiburg" -Maribor Massacres in the Press and Eyewitness Accounts".
But when examined closely, this book (cited by Tolstoy as one of his sources) does not actually make any mention of a massacre at Bleiburg in the immediate aftermath of the Croat surrender on 15 May 1945.
It states that the Croats were marched back into Yugoslavia, and it was only there that the mass-killings by Tito's supporters began.
Similarly there is no contemporary or British source to confirm the claim that a massacre took place at Bleiburg.
By Brig Scott's account, "as far as I could see, during the next twenty four hours, all the arrangements in connection with the surrender and evacuation were carried out by the Yugoslavs speedily and efficiently" .
Signals, sitreps and diaries of the time contain no hint that a massacre had taken place, or that Tito's Yugoslavs at Bleiburg had in any way breached their assurances to Brig Scott, and this may be regarded  as significant in assessing the extent to which 5 Corps subsequently continued to accept Yugoslav assurances that prisoners surrendered to them would not be indiscriminately killed.
In May 1990 we carried out our own investigation into the story of the alleged "Bleiburg Massacre" , with the aid of Dr Aripand Thurn-Valsassina, the owner of Bleiburg Castle and Mr Robert Plan of the American OSS who led the leading column of the Croats to Bleiburg (both of whom were present when Brig Scott received the Croat Generals), and of Yugoslav historians who have been carrying out their own researches into the massacres in Yugoslavia in 1945.
It is now clear that Tolstoy's version of events rested on a fundamental confusion between what happened at Bleiburg and events which later took place elsewhere.
There was no mass-killing at Bleiburg of the kind Tolstoy describes.
Following the surrender on IS May, Tito's men did kill some wounded at Bleiburg and some individual Croats were shot while trying to escape into the woods.
In total no more than "30 to 50" were buried locally.
Tolstoy's attempt to explain why the British did not see the massacre, by suggesting that there was a hill in the way, is therefore superfluous.
The truth of what happened after the Croat surrender at Bleiburg, although equally shocking, is rather more complex.
After the Croats, who had been halted around Bleiburg, had been disarmed (they also included many civilians), they were force-marched out of Austria into Yugoslavia.
Subsequent to the date of the surrender, according to local farmers, many Croats were machine gunned in a small valley near Poljana a few miles across the border from Bleiburg inside Yugoslavia.
It is not clear whether these were part of the advance column who had been marched back from Bleiburg or some of the vast majority of the Croats who had never entered Austria at all.
As was reported in a signal to AFHQ from Rear MACMIS on 15 May, the partisans had already managed to cut the main column in two on 14 May and the rear of the main column was surrendering piecemeal to the partisans before the Bleiburg surrender took place.
Other evidence suggests that many of these were marched towards Maribor to the east or Celje to the south and that subsequently the mass-slaughter of many thousands of Croats took place.
None of this was known to the British at the time.
What was witnessed by British troops, however, was the initial treatment by Tito's partisans of the Croats surrendered around Bleiburg, including many civilians who were marched north-east through Austria towards the Yugoslav frontier near Lavamund.
A month later, during investigations made by 5 Corps after the repatriations were over (see Chapter Eleven), statements were taken from a number of officers in the Durham Light Infantry and 46 Recce  Regiment,describing what they had seen at the time.
The first of these statements, which have only recently come to light, was by Lt-Col D M C Worrall MC and Maj J G Denny MC of the Durham Light Infantry: "On the evening of 15 May the handover of Croatian personnel to the YUGOSLAV ARMY was proceeding.
The convoy was moved through BLEIBURG to LAVAMUND from where they were to be taken by march route to MARIBOR — a distance of some 53 miles.
They party was conducted by mounted YUGOSLAV troops.
Many of the Croats were old men, women and young children.
Few carried any packages of any kind and were scantily clad.
Apparently their clothing including boots were removed by YUGOSLAV troops who left the refugees to carry out this journey on foot, in pouring rain.
The route taken by the convoy was across country, through fields of corn, over walls, banks and ditches, through fast flowing streams.
There was no apparent reason why the road should not have been used as it was free at the time.
A British officer enquired of the YUGOSLAV guards if the Croats would be fed during the journey.
The guard appeared surprised and said they would not be fed."
In another statement, Maj J Laugham DSO of 45 Recce Regiment described how: "On 15 May the main body of the Croats to be handed over to the YUGOSLAVS were encamped to the south of the main road leading from the AUSTRIAN frontier to BLEIBURG…
Once surrender had been agreed to, it was obvious that the Partisans had one object, and that was to secure, as they termed it, the "Booty of War" …within an incredibly short time, certainly less than twenty minutes, the Partisans had all emerged out of the hills and lined the main road for several thousand yards.
Meanwhile the Croats, throwing down their arms in their bivouac areas, had commenced moving down the main road in a dense mass, urged on by the Partisans at the back who were discharging arms in all directions.
Many thousands, both soldiers and civilians hopelessly intermingled, and including a large number of women and children, began to move down the road carrying with them all their personal belongings on horses, carts and cycles.
No attempt at organised march was made whatsoever, but by the time the Croats, both soldiers and civilians, had passed the road junction…leading to Bleiburg, they had been stripped of everything they possessed, including animals, carts, bicycles, food and personal belongings etc.
The civilians particularly were in a pitiful state, and everything necessary for even a meagre existence had disappeared.
The column passed through Bleiburg, stumbling along the road eight to ten deep, for over twelve hours, intermittently drenched by rain.
A large proportion of the women in the column were pregnant, and many were carrying young babies in their arms.
All had to walk, their first destination being Maribor, approximately sixty miles away.
The visible sufferings of the Croats before they had travelled five miles were terrible; their invisible sufferings, with the prospect of the long march before them, many barefoot and without hope of food before they reached Maribor at the earliest, must have been indescribable."
Another officer concluded his own harrowing account of what he had seen that day: The whole affair and its conduct was the most brutal and disgusting I have ever witnessed.
It had a profound effect on myself and all ranks who were forced to watch,"
From a military point of view, however, the most important immediate consequence of the events at Bleiburg on 15 May was that the entry of the main Croat column into the 5 Corps area had been averted.
Over the next few days considerable numbers of Croats in smaller groups did manage to cross over into Austria at various points along the frontier.
The main aim of British units then became to prevent these crossing the River Drau.
On 17 May Brig Mitchell, commanding 26 Armoured Bde, even signed a local written agreement with the commander of the Yugoslav 14th Division [KP 143a]that "all CROAT soldiers SOUTH of the RIVER DRA VA, within 26 Armd Bde area, are the prisoners of Marshal TITO's forces" , that the brigade would not allow any Croats to cross to the north bank of the river, and that British troops would not interfere with the disarming and taking prisoner of Croat soldiers in the area.
Similarly, a sitrep from 1st Guards Bde on 18 May [KP 176]reported: "I Welch Regt were obliged to withdraw their Coys to the North bank of the DRA U, leaving the Croats on the South bank to the tender mercies of Tito's troops.
This most unpleasant task was completed yesterday, and from our new positions it was possible to see the beginnings of conflict between the Croats and the Titos, which ended in the wounding of some 30 to 40 Croats after which the shooting died down."
Despite all these measures taken by the British, as sitreps on the days after 15 May record, many Croats, both military and civilians, did manage to penetrate the British lines.
Many of these were rounded up and put into camps in various parts of the Corps area.
A 5 Corps summary of personnel surrendered to date on 17 May, for instance[KP 142]reports a particularly large group of 10,000 Croats from 12th Croat Division at Sittersdorf.
The handing over of some 12,000 Croats to Tito's forces in the days after 19 May will be referred to in later sections of the report.
In a wider sense, however, the real significance of what had happened at Bleiburg on 15 May was that it was the last major surrender of the European war.
It marked the end of the Croatian Republic as a semi-autonomous nation and the final victory of Tito's Communists in the civil war which had in effect been raging in Yugoslavia since 1941.
When Croat historians have subsequently spoken of the "Bleiburg Tragedy" this is what they really mean: and the massacres which were to continue in many parts of northern Yugoslavia during the weeks and months which followed were among the consequences of that victory and that "tragedy" .
THE DECISION TO  HAND OVER THE COSSACKS
 "If we hand the Russian prisoners back to their death, it will be the military authorities who do so, on my instructions, and I am entitled to have behind me, in this very unpleasant business, the considered view of the government." 
[Sir James Grigg.
Secretary of State for War, 24 August 1944]
By the time Robertson sent his signal from AFHQ [KP 103]on the night of 14/15 May, the decision had been taken in principle that the Cossacks in 5 Corps area should be handed over to the Soviet forces.
The purpose of this chapter is to examine on what basis this decision had been taken.
Firstly, what was the precise nature of the Allied policy which served as guidance in coming to this decision?
Secondly, on the basis of what knowledge was the decision taken?
Between 8 and 12 May 5 Corps had taken the surrender of the six assorted groups of Cossacks, White Russians, Caucasians and Ukrainians referred to in Chapter One.
These comprised some 70,000 people, spread out across more than 100 miles of countryside and mountainous valleys, in an area already clogged with hundreds of thousands of other prisoners, refugees and displaced persons.
In particular, the spectacle of the tens of thousands of Cossacks in their encampments in the Upper Drau valley near Lienz, with their colourful uniforms, their mass of camp followers, their thousands of horses, covered wagons and even camels, left an indelible impression on all British soldiers who saw them.
The same was true of the mounted Cossacks of the 15 SS Cossack Cavalry Corps.
But in those early days even the moot basic information about these various formations  was scanty.
Only the vaguest estimates of numbers were available to HQ 5 Corps, when it suddenly found all these heterogeneous groups in its charge.
Figures given in various reports and signals at this time range from "20,000" to "30,000" to "40,000" (it was not until 18 May that a reasonably accurate total was available).
All that was in essence known to HQ 5 Corps was that the greater number of these people were "Cossacks" or "Russians" making up various units who had found themselves in Austria because to a greater or lesser extent they had been associated with the Germans, and had surrendered to the British in the hope that they might thus avoid falling into the hands of the Communists.
Harold Macmillan's diary entry describing his meeting at Klagenfurt on 13 May (only a day after the last group had surrendered) states that he was informed that "among the surrendered Germans are about 40,000 Cossacks and" White "Russians with their wives and children" , and he notes that"to hand them over to the Russians is condemning them to slavery, torture and probably death.
To refuse is deeply to offend the Russians, and incidentally break the Yalta agreement.
We have decided to hand them over…"
It was this which led the following day to Eighth Army's request for authorization to negotiate with the Soviets for a hand-over, "on advice Macmillan" , and which led to Robertson's order from AFHQ later that day for negotiations to begin.
The cornerstones of Allied policy towards all Soviet citizens liberated by the advancing Allied armies were the two identical repatriation agreements signed with the Soviet Government on behalf of the Commonwealth and the United States.
Yalta Repatriation Agreement
Although often referred to loosely as the "Yalta agreement" , the Commonwealth Soviet repatriation agreement signed on 11 February 1945 was quite separate from the main Yalta Agreement made between the Soviet Union and the Allies at the Crimea Conference.
The chief purpose of this repatriation agreement was to ensure that "all Soviet citizens liberated by forces under British command and all British subjects liberated by forces under Soviet command" should "without delay after their tiberation" be separated and properly maintained "until they have been handed over to Soviet or British authority, as the case may be" .
The Yalta Repatriation agreement was the culmination of months of negotiation between the governments involved, and as the documents summarised at the end of this volume indicate [see KPs 1–16], consideration of British policy on this matter had been continuing on the highest level since the summer of 1944.
The records of those discussions, which included three meetings of the War Cabinet, show that two issues predominated in the minds of those responsible for the formulation of British policy.
The first of these, initially expressed in the letter from Lord Selborne, Minister for Economic Warfare, to the Foreign Secretary, Anthony Eden, on 21 July 1944, after the Cabinet decision on 17 July 1944 to hand back  captured Russians if Soviet authorities requested [KP 1]was the fear of many Russians of the fate that would await them on their return to the Soviet Union [KP 2].
As Selborne pointed out, Russians captured in France after the Normandy invasion had expressed extreme apprehension about their return home.
Stalin had made clear that the Soviet Government acknowledged no Prisoners of War — "Russia has only soldiers in her army, dead soldiers or traitors" .
Selborne repeated this view to Churchill [KP 3], who asked the Foreign Secretary for his comments [KP 5].
In his reply on 2 August [KP 6]Eden put the second view, which was that it was essential to return Soviet prisoners to the Soviet Union, because otherwise the Soviet authorities might make difficulties over the large number of British and allied Prisoners of War in those parts of Europe which would be liberated by the Soviet Union.
Eden also argued that we should not distinguish between the Soviet government and any other allied government, but his overriding conclusion was that: "It is most important that our own prisoners in Germany and Poland be well cared for and returned as soon as possible.
For this we must rely to a great extent upon Soviet goodwill and if we make difficulty over returning their own nationals it will react adversely upon their willingness to help in restoring to us as soon as possible our own prisoners."
These two opposing views continued to dominate the discussions.
The Secretary of State for War, Sir James Grigg, summarised the arguments on both sides in a letter to Eden on 24 August [KP 9]: We are in an obvious dilemma.
If we do as the Russians want and hand over all these prisoners to them whether or not the prisoners are willing to go back to Russia, we are…sending some of them to their death; and although in war we cannot, as you point out…afford to be sentimental, I confess that I find the prospect somewhat revolting, and I should expect public opinion to reflect the same feeling…
On the other hand, if we don't do what the Russians wish there may be the danger that they will not be ready to co-operate in getting back speedily to us the British and other Allied prisoners who fall into their hands as they advance into Germany.
Obviously our public opinion would bitterly and rightly resent any delay in getting our men home, or any infliction of unnecessary hardship on them, and if the choice is between hardship to our men and death to the Russians the choice is plain."
This passage reflects the way in which the argument gradually crystallized in favour of Eden's view that ultimately the interests of our own Prisoners of War were paramount.
The Soviet Government, without giving reasons, was demanding as of right the repatriation of all its citizens displaced by the war, without exception and irrespective of their wishes.
The British War Cabinet fully recognised the implications of this, and the likelihood that many would be executed as traitors or sentenced to long terms in prison camps.
But the United Kingdom Government held that, as a matter of law, each Allied government was entitled to deal with its nationals in its own way, and that the 1929 Geneva Convention on Prisoners of War did not protect any allied national who had served the enemy against his own government.
And above all, it was vital not to do anything which might give the Soviet authorities grounds for hindering the return of our own men.
When, after long delays, the Soviet Government eventually produced the draft of a reciprocal repatriation agreement, covering civilians as well as PoWs, this was accepted as the basic working document in the negotiations which led to the signature of the Yalta repatriation agreement.
But there was one other very significant implication of the repatriation policy which Sir James Grigg, as Secretary of State for War with responsibility for the Army, had in mind from an early stage of the discussions.
This was what the carrying out of the policy might involve for those soldiers of the British Army who would be directly responsible for the repatriation operations.
Grigg therefore insisted, in his letter to Eden on 24 August 1944, that the final policy on the matter should be the result of a formal "Cabinet ruling" : "If we hand the Russian prisoners back to their death, it wilt be the military authorities who do so, on my instructions, and I am entitled to have behind me, in this very unpleasant business, the considered view of the Government." 
The War Cabinet on 4 September 1944 [KP 12]approved the proposal "that we should instruct the Middle East authorities to send back all Russians whom the Soviet Authorities wished to have back irrespective of whether or not the men wished to return; and the practice of obtaining statements from Soviet prisoners as to their willingness to return should be discontinued" .
This decision was notified on 15 September [KP 13]to C in C Middle East with a copy to AFHQ stating that Resident Minister (Macmillan) had been instructed by the Foreign Office on similar lines.
The overall policy embodied in the agreement "that it should cover all liberated Soviet and British subjects" was finally confirmed by a full Cabinet meeting on 31 January 1945, chaired by Clement Attlee, when Churchill and Eden were already on their way to the Crimea Conference at Yalta.
The Commonwealth-Soviet Repatriation Agreement, like its US-Soviet counterpart, was signed in the Livadia   At 1100 pm that evening Kirk sent his telegram to the State Department in Washington [KP 107]asking "urgently" for the Department's comments on Robertson's order.
"This afternoon Gen Robertson, Chief Administrative Officer AFHQ, requested us to concur in a draft telegram to CG British Eighth Army authorising him to turn over 28,000 Cossacks…including women and children to Marshal Tolbukhin…
Gen Robertson stated that Macmillan, who talked with CG Eighth Army yesterday, had recommended this course of action.
We asked whether the Russians had requested that these Cossacks should be turned over to him and Robertson replied in the negative and added "but they probably will soon" …
We then stated that we could not concur without referring the matter to our Government…"
The State Department's reply [KP 125]was: "The Department assumes that the 28,000 Cossacks in question are Soviet Nationals and, if so, no objection is seen to delivering them to the Russian forces in accordance with the terms of the Yalta agreement.
If any are in the category of persons provided for in Section D of Department's 279 of March 31 they should not be repatriated to the Soviet Union unless they affirmatively claim Soviet citizenship"[this referred to Balts and Poles].
The State Department thus confirmed Macmillan's recommendation that the Cossacks in 5 Corps area should be handed over to the Soviets in accordance with the Yalta agreement.
In terms of the way the issue had been considered up to this point there could have been no other answer.
THE CARINTHIA CRISIS REACHES ITS HEIGHT — 16–17 MAY
 "I must clear the decks in this area." 
[Field Marshal Alexander, 16 May 1945]
We must now return to the general situation in which 5 Corps found itself at the end of 15 May.
The crisis which had blown up over Tito's claim to Carinthia and Venezia Giulia was nearing its height.
And to understand how the complex situation was developing we must consider what was happening on three levels:
1.
at the highest Political and diplomatic level, involving Governments in London, Washington, Moscow and Belgrade;
2. at the highest military level, involving FM Alexander, General Eisenhower at SHAEF and the Chiefs of Staff in Washington and London;
3. on the ground, at Eighth Army and at 5 Corps itself.
By the evening of I5 May the immediate emergency which had seemed to be threatening 5 Corps with the approach of an estimated 600,000 Germans and Croats from the south was over.
Nevertheless AFHQ was not informed that the Croats had been turned back until the morning of 16 May, and even then it took some time for the information to be fully taken in by all branches concerned.
Quite apart from this, however, the more immediate problems faced by 5 Corps in Carinthia seemed to be worsening.
Tito's partisans and regular troops were still entering the area in even larger numbers.
5 Corps was still under orders not to provoke or resist them by force, for the reasons Macmillan had explained on his visit on 13 May, and on the evening of 14 May Gen McCreery confirmed this in a message to Gen Keightley [KP 106]: agreement confirmed that Maj Dubajic would remain at Kappel with Lt Lochhead of 6 SF (SOE) to make arrangements for the hand-over of further 10,000 Croats by 23 May making a total of 13,000 Croats to be repatriated.
So far no attention had been drawn to any conflict between this proposal, which 5 Corps believed to have been authorised by AFHQ's order of 14 May [and in harmony with the policy of wrongly surrendered formations being handed back to Tito], and the consistent policy of AFHQ in every other respect that such categories of dissident Yugoslavs should not be handed back to Tito.
On 20 May, Eighth Army received from 5 Corps a copy of the agreement with Ivanovitch.
This was the first specific indication to Eighth Army of the full range of dissident Yugoslavs 5 Corps was proposing to hand over.
Subsequent to this, as will be described in Chapter 9, questions at last began to be asked as to whether there was not a direct conflict between AFHQ's general policy, as confirmed in the Distone order, and the specific action being taken by 5 Corps at Eighth Army's direction, in response to AFHQ's order of 14 May.
WHO IS A SOVIET NATIONAL?
THE 5 CORPS CONFERENCE ON 21 MAY
 "It is not the policy of the British Government to encourage any of those persons who become a British responsibility to put forward claims that they are NOT Soviet citizens." 
[AFHQ letter to all commands, 7 March 1945]
Before examining the steps which were eventually taken to resolve the various confusions now arising over policies on both Yugoslavs and Cossacks, there was one further development in respect of the Cossacks which must be considered separately.
By 20 May it was already clear to 5 Corps, after Brig Low's meeting with Col Ivanovitch, which groups of Yugoslavs it had agreed to hand over to Tito.
But, as events had unfolded, what it turned out had not yet been settled was precisely which formations should be handed over to the Soviet authorities.
Between 8 and 12 May, as we saw in Chapter One, 5 Corps had taken the surrender of six groups originating from territories controlled by the Soviet Union.
These were: the Domanov Cossacks (Gens Domanov and Krasnov) the Cossack Training Unit (Gen Shkuro) the Caucasians (Gen Kelich Ghirei) 15 SS Cossack Cavalry Corps (Gen von Pannwitz) the White Russian Schutzkorps (Col Rogozhin) 1st Ukrainian Division (Gens Shandruk and Freytag; Col Krat) The first four of these were generally described in situation reports as "Cossacks" , the Schutzkorps were described as "White Russians" and the 1st Ukrainian Division as "Ukrainians" .
In the days immediately following the surrender of these formations, the question of any repatriation had been considered, as we saw in Chapter Five, only in the broadest terms.
The general assumption by everyone involved on the Allied side, from 5 Corps up to AFHQ, had been that, in terms of the Yalta repatriation agreement, the "Cossacks" were Soviet citizens, and on that basis the decision in Principle had been made that, however much this may have regretted by some people on humanitarian grounds, the British obligation was to hand them over.
This had been Politically confirmed both by Macmillan at Klagenfurt on 13 May, and by the State Department in its reply to Kirk on 15 May.
But as operational Planning began, and the Prospect of the hand-overs came into clearer focus, questions had begun to be asked as to whether all these formations were in fact liable to repatriation.
This led to a conference at HQ 5 Corps on the morning of 21 May, taken by the BGS Brig Low, to discuss the hand-overs of "Soviet Nationals" .
As the minutes of the conclusions of the conference stated: "Various cases have recently been referred to this HQ in which doubt has been raised as to whether certain formations and groups should be treated as Soviet Nationals in so far as their return to the Soviet Union direct from 5 Corps is concerned." 
The conclusions, headed "SUBJECT: Definition of Russian Nationals" , were summarised in the form of an order, signed by Brig Low with distribution to all units and copied to Eighth Army, and we shall refer to this as the "21 May Definition Order" .
By the time of this conference on 21 May, the immediate future of one of the six formations listed above had in fact already been determined.
This was the 1st Ukrainian Division, many of whose members came from those parts of Poland incorporated into the Soviet Union in 1939 and which had been such a special concern of the AFHQ letter of 6 March defining "Soviet nationals" .
Before we examine the 21 May Definition Order in detail, we must therefore summarise what can be discovered as to what made 1st Ukrainian Division, of all the formations originally surrendered to 5 Corps, a special case.
What we know about the Ukrainian Division is that it was not retained by 5 Corps in Austria, and that by the end of May it had turned up in Italy.
It has been something of a mystery how this move came about.
On the face of it, there would seem to have been quite a strong case for handing over the division to the Soviet authorities along with the other formations originating form territories controlled by the Soviet Union.
The Ukrainian Division undoubtedly contained a substantial number of Soviet citizens.
It had been engaged in regular combat with the Red Army, as part of German forces.
Yet at some time in the days after its surrender to 5 Corps, the decision had been taken that the division should not be repatriated, although no formal record of how or why this happened seems to have survived.
We know from Gen Shandruk's memoirs that on 10 May, the day after the  division had been recorded by 6 Armoured Division as having surrendered near Volkermarkt, the two generals, Shandruk and Freytag, set off with a small group to reach the US Zone, leaving behind some 10,000 men under Col Krat.
Shandruk also indicates that, following contact with Gen Anders, the Polish commander in Italy, the division was given Permission to march through the British lines towards Italy.
Certainly, after the initial report of their surrender, the Ukrainian Division seems virtually to vanish from 5 Corps records.
In a "Summary of Surrendered Personnel" sent by 5 Corps to Eighth Army and AFHQ on 17 May, under the general heading "Russians" , "about 4000 from 14 Ukrainian Div" are mentioned as still being in the Corps area, along with the main groups of Cossacks, the Caucasians and the Schutzkorps [KP 142].
But there had been no reference to them in the detailed report of Surrendered Ex-Enemy Personnel sent up by 5 Corps to Eighth Army two days earlier, on 15 May [KP 112].
There is no mention of them in any movement order.
We have found no documentary evidence at all to explain how such a large body of men came to leave the 5 Corps area, eventually to turn up in northern Italy.
Our researches have confirmed Shandruk's indication that the reason for this was that the Ukrainian Division was simply permitted to make its own way to Italy.
Lt Col Campbell-Preston has provided an account of how on 28 May his regiment, the 80th Scottish Horse Medium Regt RA, was near Riccione, south of Rimini.
On that day the Ukrainian Division arrived under Col Krat "in an ancient staff car" .
Krat stated that the men with him comprised "the remnant of the Ukrainian Division, but still about 10,000 strong," reporting "(no word of surrender)" .
It was explained that "they had crossed the Alps in small groups" (hence the lack of any movement order or need for British transport or supervision) and "would now join the victorious Allied armies and drive the wicked Russians out of Europe" .
In the light of this new evidence, it seems that Shandruk's account of why the Ukrainian Division was permitted to leave Austria is broadly correct, and that the inclusion in the division of considerable numbers from "Eastern Poland" was regarded by local commanders as sufficient reason to allow the Ukrainians through to Italy, bearing in mind the emphasis in all allied instructions on the importance of not handing over to the Russians "persons coming from those territories" .
[See note at end of chapter.]
This left five of the six formations to be considered when the conference met at HQ 5 Corps on 21 May.
As we have seen, the order which summarised the rulings of this conference began by stating that "various cases have recently been referred to this HQ in which doubt has been raised as to whether certain formations and groups  should be treated as Soviet Nationals" .
One of these may have been the Ukrainian Division though it was not mentioned in the definition order.
Another was obviously the Schutzkorps, because the Definition Order [reproduced opposite]immediately goes on to rule that: "Russian Schutzkorps (incl Rumanians in this fmn) will not be treated as Soviet Nationals until further orders." 
THE 21 MAY DEFINITION ORDER
The reason for excluding the Schutzkorps from repatriation must have been that, although it included a number of Soviet citizens who had joined during the war, a large majority of its members had lived outside Russia since the Civil War and had become passport holders of other countries, mainly Yugoslavia.
[See note at end of chapter.]
On 18 May the Schutzkorps had been moved from Viktring to a new camp near 5 Veit.
This meant that two of the original six formations had now been exempted from repatriation, the Ukrainians and the Schutzkorps, and these were the only two in which "non-Soviet nationals" by any definition, constituted a majority.
The Definition Order then goes on to state that: "Following will be treated as Soviet Nationals: Ataman Group 15 Cossack Cav Corps (incl Cossacks and Calmucks) Resferve" Units of Lt-Gen Shkuro Caucasians (incl  Mussulmen ).
These therefore were the formations which it had been ruled were eligible for repatriation, and these correspond directly to the four remaining groups of the original six the "Ataman Group" referring to Domanov's Cossacks, which included two Atamans, Domanov and Krasnov; von Pannwitz's 15 SS Cossack Cavalry Corps; the "Res Units of Lt Gen Shkuro" , meaning Shkuro's Cossack Training Unit; and the "Caucasians, incl  Mussulmen " , including Georgian and other Christians and Moslems from Azerbaidjan.
We know that each of these groups contained a small minority of emigres, and that the Cossack Cavalry Corps in addition contained nearly 1000 Germans who, under the 1929 Geneva Convention on PoWs, should have been repatriated to Germany.
But all these, under the Definition Order, were to be "treated as Soviet Nationals" This clearly indicates that the primary and overriding purpose of the Definition Order was simply to distinguish between the various groups on a formation level.
However much controversy may have arisen subsequently over the presence in each of these formations of emigres, by far the most obvious group of non-Soviet nationals involved were these Germans.
Yet, on a formation basis, all these groups, including the Germans, were to be "treated as Soviet Nationals" and handed over to the Soviet authorities.
Section 2 of the Definition Order, we may then note, proceeds to mention "individual cases" but immediately states that these "will NOT be considered unless particularly pressed" .
If individual cases are pressed, and also in the case of appeals by "further units or formation," three guidelines are offered.
And here we may note that the definitions of what constituted a Soviet national appear to be unique and to derive from no other known document or authority.
Under (a), for instance, it states that — "any individual…who at the time of joining the German forces or joining a formation fighting with the German forces, was living within the 1938 boundary of the USSR, will be treated as a Soviet National for the purposes of transfer." 
The 6 March letter attached great importance to the boundaries of the USSR on 1 September 1939, but here it appears that the date 1938 has been selected by 5 Corps on a rough-and-ready basis, simply to indicate "pre-war" and without reference to any known precedent.
Most of the emigres who had joined the Domanov Cossacks during their time in Byelorussia in 1943–4 might strictly speaking have been included as Soviet Nationals under this definition, since at the time of "joining a formation fighting with the German forces" they would have been "living within the 1938 boundary of the USSR" , regardless of where they had lived before.
The only paragraphs in Section 2 which does allow any exemption for individuals is that concerning emigres who "although of Russian blood" had "not been in USSR since 1930" prior to their "joining the German forces" .
Again the date 1930 appears to be deprived from no known authority and to be quite arbitrary.
In general, the overwhelming impression given by the 21 May Definition Order is that was intended, for operational purposes, to lay down certain very general but firm guidelines, to ensure that a difficult operation should proceed with as little complication as possible.
In contrast with earlier discussions and orders, which treated all "Cossacks" and "Russians" as an entity, it certainly allows for some distinction to be drawn between those who were liable for repatriation and those who were not — hence, for instance, the ruling that the White Russian Schutzkorps was to be excluded.
But these distinctions are still made in a very broad-brush fashion.
The primary intention is only to consider the Cossacks on a formation basis, and certainly all the evidence indicates that it never entered the mind of anyone at HQ 5 corps that a comprehensive detailed screening process should take place, to sort out liability to repatriation on an individual basis.
All that might be allowed for in this context was that individual cases might be considered if I particularly pressed ", and it has to be added that this was in full accordance with the AFHQ instruction of 7 March which stated that" it is not the policy of she British Government to encourage any of those persons who become a British responsibility to put forward claims that they are NOT Soviet Citizens".
In fact we may take it from the wording of Section 2 of the Definition Order that, during the conference questions were asked about the liability of individuals to repatriation, or Section 2 might not have been included at all.
The only evidence we have to shed further light  on this question comes from a letter written on the same day by Mr J Nicholls [see note at end of chapter], a Foreign Office political advisor, who had recently joined HQ 5 Corps staff at Klagenfurt.
Writing to a colleague at Caserta, he mentioned that he had been presented with some tricky problems concerning the status of individual British subjects in Austria, and he then went on to mention, among "similar problems" he had been confronted with: "if captured Cossacks fighting with the Germans are to be handed over to the Russians, what should be done with White Russians with French nationality?
And so on, and so on "
From the fairly casual manner of Nicholls' wording and his failure to mention what he had recommended, we may take it that, at least so far as he was concerned, the problem of the status of emigres holding non-Soviet passports had not at this stage been presented as of overwhelming importance or urgency.
Finally it must be remembered that, at this stage, the majority of the Cossacks still had no inkling of the preparations that were being made by the British to hand them back.
For this reason alone, there was no reason why individuals should have been pressing their case to be personally excluded from repatriation.
It must be further borne in mind that, right to the end, the vast majority of the Cossacks were to continue to see themselves, regardless of their own individual status or background, as a collective entity.
As Tolstoy himself concedes, in The Minister and the Massacres (p 44): Neither Gen Krasnov nor any other old emigre was seeking to extricate himself from sharing whatever fate attended those of their comrades who were in the equivocal position of being Soviet citizens.
At least no trace of an attempt to do so has survived among the voluminous Cossack and British sources.
The same was true even for Gen von Pannwitz and some of his senior German officers in the 15 SS Cossack Cavalry Corps who, as we can see from the diaries of Count Erwein-Carl zu Eltz [See KP 62], regarded their fate as inextricably bound up with that of their men, even though they might, like zu Eltz, have found the opportunity to escape.
So far as the Cossacks were concerned, just as much as for the British, the overriding question was not whether certain individuals should be excluded from repatriation because they held non-Soviet passports, but whether the various formations of "Cossacks" as a whole should or should not be repatriated.
And by the conference and the Definition Order on 21 May that question had as far as 5 Corps was concerned, finally been settled.
 "WITHOUT USE OF FORCE" — THE EFFORTS MADE TO HARMONISE
POLICY ON COSSACKS AND YUGOSLAVS — 21–27 MAY
There was considerable discussion upon the interpretation of the term "use of force" It was finally agreed that local commanders appeared to be using their discretion in a satisfactory manner…and that it was unwise to makes any further interpretation."
[Conclusions of AFHQ/Eighth Army discussions 27 May 1945]
By the afternoon of 21 May, as we have now seen, 5 Corps had determined precisely which groups of Cossacks and anti-Tito Yugoslavs in the Corps area it was planning to  hand over , in accordance with their interpretation of the Robertson order of 14 May.
AFHQ itself, however, had by this time issued a number of order and signals in respect of both groups which were potentially in conflict.
The moment had now arrived when, at the various levels of military command, that state of conflict began to become apparent.
In this chapter, using significant material not previously published, we shall, for the first time, give a comprehensive picture of the complex efforts which were made between 21–27 May to achieve a state of harmony between (a) the various conflicting policies and orders of AFHQ and (b) the policies and orders being carried out by Eighth Army IS Corps, in respect of both Cossacks and Yugoslavs.
The general situation in respect of each of these groups on 21 May was as follows  1.
AFHQ had given instructions to Eighth Army (by the "Robertson order" of 14 May) that "all Russians" were to be handed over to Soviet forces.
On the ground, in accordance with the order, 5 Corps had already entered negotiations with the Soviet authorities to take them over, and had come to a final decision (reported to Eighth Army) on which groups were to go.
Cossacks
2.
The future of the Cossacks had also been referred to the Chiefs of Staff by AFHQ on 17 May, and on the same day AFHQ had appealed to SHAEF to take them over.
1.
15 Army Group had given instructions [KP 153]to Eighth Army on 7 May that surrender can only be accepted of those forces in contact with Eighth Army.
 "Those facing Tito forces must surrender to Tito" .
5 Corps had made a consequential agreement with Yugoslav Fourth Army that "any formation wrongly surrendered will be returned to Tito" .
2.
AFHQ had given instructions to Eighth Army (by the "Robertson order" of 14 May) that all surrendered Yugoslav nationals "serving in German forces" should be handed over to Tito's forces.
On the ground, in accordance with this order, 5 Corps had already entered into arrangements with the Yugoslavs to take them over, and the first batches of Croats had already been repatriated, with the remaining categories to follow.
This had all been properly reported to Eighth Army.
3.
The future of "Chetniks" and "Croats" had been referred to the Chiefs of Staff by AFHQ on 17 May, and on the same day AFHQ had issued the "Distone order" to Eighth Army.
Our first task is to examine the steps which were taken to reconcile these various AFHQ signals and instructions.
Yugoslavs
Late in the evening of 21 May Eighth Army sent an urgent signal to AFHQ concerning Cossacks.
Eighth Army HQ had been informed that, on the evening of 19 May two days earlier, AFHQ had received an answer [KP 184]from Gen Eisenhower to FM Alexander's request that the Cossacks should be evacuated to SHAEF.
This was that he was: "willing to accept 150,000 enemy personnel into 12 Army Group including 45,000 Cossacks.
Accompanying the Cossacks are an estimated additional 11,000 camp followers (women, children and old men).
Until these persons can be segregated and properly disposed of as displaced persons they should be accorded the same treatment as the forces they accompany."
Cossacks
Now on 21 May, Eighth Army received from HQ 5 Corps a copy of the "Definition Order" resulting from that day's conference on "transfer SOVIET NATIONALS" showing that preparations were well advanced for the handing over of the Cossacks to the Soviets.
Obviously there was a complete contradiction between the two policies, and at 2135 hrs that evening Eighth Army signalled AFHQ IKP 213]for an urgent ruling on which policy was to be followed: "Reference your FX-75383 dated 14 [the" Robertson order"of 14 May]stating all Russians to be handed over to Soviet forces and SHAEF 399 FWD stating Cossacks accepted by 12 Army Group.
Request earliest information whether approved policy is to despatch to SHAEF or to endeavour to secure direct return to Russians by Eighth Army negotiations.
The following day, 22 May, at 1259 hrs AFHQ replied IHP 218]with copy to 5 Corps: "All who are Soviet citizens and who can be handed over to Russians without use of force should be returned direct by Eighth Army.
Any other should be evacuated to 12 Army Group.
Definition of Soviet citizen is given in AFHQ letter CR/3491/G1 Br of 6 March."
Later that day, 22 May, at 190 hrs, a further signal was sent from AFHQ to Eighth Army (with a copy to 5 Corps)[KP 224]marked "Personal for Gen McCreery from Gen Morgan" .
This underlined that "You have authority to pass Cossacks to Russians provided force has not, repeat not, to be used." 
This is based on the original AFHQ text in Kirk Archives, Washington.
In the recipient copy in Eighth Army files the final date 6 March has been corrupted into "6 May" .
This led Tolstoy (in the minister and the massacres) to the misconception that a subsequent instruction concerning the definition of a Soviet citizen had been issued on 6 May.
Although Tolstoy attached considerable importance to this "6 May" instruction, it never existed.
We discuss the implications of his misconception in Chapter Fourteen.
Yet at 1130 hrs that morning a Corps Commander's Conference had been held at 5 Corps HQ [Kp 217]at which one of the main topics discussed had been "the Evacuation of the Cossacks to the Russians" and under this heading the decision had been taken that: "Divs will be prepared to shoot at Cossacks to enforce the evacuation plan." 
On the morning of 22 May,"therefore, 5 Corps divisional commanders had been authorised to use force to enforce the hand-overs of the Cossacks (and that arrangements with the Russians would be confirmed at a meeting at Wolfsburg on 23 May).
But by the evening HQ 5 Corps and the Army commander personally had been instructed that force was not to be used.
A remarkably similar dilemma was now presenting itself over the hand-overs of the Yugoslavs.
On 19 May a copy of AFHQ's "Distone Order" of 17 May that all "dissident Yugoslavs" should be evacuated to Italy was submitted to Gen McCreery who saw it but did not date his initials or order any action.
No evidence was found that any action was taken.
On 20 May 5 Corps had reported to Eighth Army on the meeting which had taken place the previous evening between Brig Low and Col Ivanovitch.
This had included Ivanovitch's demand from the return of both military and civilian Yugoslavs not in Austria (ie in Italy) with the note that "reference would be made to Eighth Army and an answer sent to HQ 3 Yugoslav Army by 800 hrs 22 May." 
Yugoslavs
At 157 hrs on 21 May Eighth Army signalled to AFHQ [KP 2081: "U.128.
CONFIDENTIAL.
Many urgent questions constantly arising concerning treatment of various nationals both members of armed forces and others…
Consider it essential proper principles are consolidated and that action can be taken in each case without reference to you.
Will you fly to us tomorrow a representative who can lay down principles and answer specific questions.
Will then organise conference at which present problems can be cleared and principles laid down The next day, 22 May, AFHQ replied to Eighth Army [KP 22]]: "Policy discussions on questions indicated your U 128 now being considered this HQ.
You will be informed immediately…"
Those discussions took place the same day in G-5 Section at AFHQ, reporting to the Chief Administrative Officer Gen Robertson, on the subject of "Disposal of Displaced Persons etc in N Italy and Austria" [KP 222].
The discussion began by noting that on 15 May "this IIQ" had sent a signal to Marshal Tito suggesting the hand-over to him of "approximately 200,000 Jugoslav nationals who were serving in German Armed Forces and who had surrendered in Austria" .
Although "this offer has been accepted by Marshal Tito" , it had "subsequently been discovered that these troops had not in fact entered Austria…it was possible to turn them over to Marshal Tito in complete formation, and prevention of infiltration into Austria was essential for operational reasons" .
On the other hand, the discussion went on, "this HQ" had on 17 May sent a signal "to the effect that Chetniks and dissident Jugoslavs" should be evacuated to Italy [the "Distone order" ].
Yet again, it appears that no reference was made to the Robertson order of 14 May, nor therefore to any possible conflict between this and the "Distone order" .
Instead the conference went on to discuss further queries which had arisen, centring on the distinctions between genuine anti-Tito "dissidents" and former "collaborators" .
But the meeting understood that "It has hitherto been the policy of this HQ and remains (it is understood) the advice of the British Resident Minister and the US Political Adviser that all classes and types of dissident and anti-Tito Jugoslavs who fall into the hands of Allied Forces either in Italy or in Austria should not be forced to return to Jugoslavia…" 
It was suggested that this policy "be continued and issued to all concerned as AFHQ policy in the following form" :(a) No Jugoslavs, who are (1) Supporters of Mihailovitch (Chetniks)(2) Supporters of Nedic…(3) Croats (4) Slovenes (5) Miscellaneous refugees and dissident civilians, including women and children who have come into the hands of Allied troops will be returned to Jugoslavia.
This was how the typed recommendations of the meeting ran.
As a later handwritten amendment after "Jugoslavia" the words "against their will" were added in ink.
In other words, according to the original, typed version, the meeting concluded that "No Jugoslavs" were to be "returned to Jugoslavia" , in accordance with "the policy of this HQ" and the advice of Macmillan and Kirk.
Only later was this amended to allow the return of Yugoslavs home so long as they went willingly.
At this stage, the G-5 (personnel) branch of AFHQ was still firmly upholding established policy, with the minor proviso that Yugoslavs who wished to return should be able to do so.
Finally, it was recorded that "representatives of G-1 and G-5 should go to Main Eighth Army for discussion" .
On the morning of the following day, 23 May, before Eighth Army could be informed of the conclusions of this meeting, a further signal arrived at AFHQ for Gen MacLeod DAG from the Assistant AG Eighth Army, Lt-Co1 Ti1ley [KP 226].
This for the first time drew explicit attention to the contradiction between the order EX 77268 of 17 May, the "Distone order" , that "Chetniks and dissident Jugoslavs" should be evacuated to Italy, and the agreement reached by 5 Corps that they should be handed over: "Ref F 77268 of 17 [the Distone order].
Negotiations by 5 Corps with 3 and 4 Jugoslav armies provide for all military personnel to be handed over to Jugoslavs and considerable numbers have already been handed back…
This considered in accordance with AFHQ FX 75383 dated 14 [Robertson's order of 14 May -this confirms that Low's order of 17 May was issued in response to the Robertson order].
Consider essential this arrangement continues and that all Jugoslav military personnel handed over to Jugoslavs.
Dep Cmd 3 Jugoslav Army has now raised question of return all Jugoslav nationals incl ex-PW internees slave workers and other displaced persons including Chetniks.
Request immediate authority for all these categories to be returned as decision required this evening.
Consider policy should be for all nationals, ie persons born within pre-1939 frontier of an Allied country, to be handed over to Ally concerned This final sentence underlined how keen Eighth Army was by this time to "clear the decks" in its area.
Here was McCreery's HQ giving the widest possible interpretation to the term "allied national" to include anyone "born within pre-1939, frontier of an" Allied country", which of course would also have covered all Russian emigres regardless of when they had left Russia.
As far as Yugoslavs were concerned, not only was Eighth Army fully in support of 5 Corps "agreement with Ivanovitch, and asking for the terms of the" Distone order", FX 77268 to be set aside.
It was going even further, in asking for authority to accede to Ivanovitch's demand that Yugoslavs "NOT in Austria" (ie in Italy), "including Chetniks" (such as the 11,000 under Damjanovitch who had surrendered on 3 May) should also be handed over.
AFHQ's response came at 1857 hrs that afternoon [KP 228]: "Agree all Yugoslav nationals in Eighth Army Area to be returned unless involves use of force, otherwise evacuation to Distone (Italy) in accordance with FX 77268 of 17 May." 
This marked a significant change from the conclusions of the previous day.
Now AFHQ was supporting Eighth Army's request in very wide terms.
All Yugoslav nationals in Eighth Army area were to be returned so long as this did not involve the "use of force" .
This marked a striking change from the initial view recorded by G -5 the previous day that "No Jugoslavs…should be returned to Jugoslavia" later amended to allow volunteers to return.
But at 2002 hrs that evening  AFHQ replied to Eighth Army's signal U 128 two days earlier, requesting guidance on questions concerning "Various nationals" :
"Re U 128 — representatives this Headquarters will arrive yours 25 May for discussion policy on lines suggested as follows:
1.
No Yugoslavs who have come into the hands of Allied Troops will be returned direct to Yugoslavia or handed over to Yugoslav Tps against their will.
2.
Para 1 includes Chetniks, Ustachi, Croats, Slovenes and miscellaneous refugees and dissident civilians incl women and children
3.
All above will be moved to suitable concentration areas and screened…"
This again reflected the earlier position, in that "No Yugoslavs" were to be returned "against their will" .
Once again AFHQ was issuing signals which appeared to contradict one another.
But representatives from AFHQ were to visit Eighth Army on 25 May, which would give an opportunity for these conflicts finally to be resolved.
By the evening of 23 May the situation in respect of the Yugoslavs was thus almost identical to that in respect of the Cossacks.
In each case it had in effect been ruled that Gen Robertson's order of 14 May would apply, and that 5 Corps could continue with arrangements already entered into hand over both Cossacks and Yugoslavs but only in each case, so lob as force did not have to be used.
In such a case, the alternative orders would apply: Cossacks should be evacuated to 12 Army Group, Yugoslavs should be evacuated to Italy.
At 2250 hrs that evening Eighth Army confirmed in a signal to 5 Corps that they were to act in accordance with AFHQ's ruling that they could hand over all the anti-Tito Yugoslavs so long as this did not involve use of force.
So far as the Cossacks were concerned, 5 Corps had already considered it necessary to order that force should be permitted.
At 1915 hrs that night, 5 Corps therefore sent off a further plea to Eighth Army [KP 229]to get the authorization they required (despite Gen Morgan's personal message to Gen McCreery the previous day that force was not, repeat not, to be used"):
"Personal for Gen McCreery.
As a result of verbal directive from Macmillan to Corps Comd at recent meeting we have undertaken to return all Soviet Nationals in proviso about use of force and we have issued instructions that force may be  used if absolutely necessary.
Consider quite impossible to return Cossacks and so honour our verbal agreement with Soviet forces unless we are allowed free hand in this matter.
Cossacks will view any move with suspicion as to destination.
Consider therefore may be necessary to use force to move Cossacks at all from present area.
Longer they remain present area more likely force have to be used.
Request you confirm our freedom of action in this".
[See note at end of chapter.]
No record exists in the archives of a reply from Gen McCreery to this signal.
What we do know, however, is that in the light of the conflicts of policy surrounding both repatriations that Eighth Army was now fully aware of, the Army Commander Gen McCreery had already decided to fly up to Austria to take a look at what was going on for himself.
He was to visit units of all the three divisions in the Corps area, each of which was to be concerned with the repatriations.
In particular he asked in advance of his visit to see Brig Verney of 1st Guards Brigade and two of his battalion commanders, including Col Rose-Price of 3rd Welsh Guards.
At 1200 hrs on 23 May, 1st Guards Brigade put out a warning order that the Army commander was expected to arrive at the battalion HQ of 3rd Grenadier Guards at 1130 hrs the following morning, where he "wishes to see the Brigade commander and COs" .
In fact his schedule was then changed, and on 24 May Gen McCreery began his tour of 5 Corps area by visiting units of 46 Division who were to be concerned with the repatriation of the Cossacks.
That evening at 2030 hrs 1st Guards Brigade advised [KP 247]that the next day, 25 May, the Army commander would visit Viktring cage at 1100 hrs, and would then "proceed to HQ 3 Grenadier Gds where COs 3 Grenadier Gds and 3 Welsh Gds will meet" .
In other words, McCreery would be seeing the commanding officers in 6 Armoured Division who on 19 May had expressed disquiet over the Yugoslav repatriations, as had been reported by Maj Mennell on his return to Division HQ.
Gen McCreery's Visit to 5 Corps on 24–25 May Following his visit to 46 Division on 24 May, the War Diary of 6 Armoured Division records that Gen McCreery spent the morning of 25 May touring the divisional area with the Corps Commander Gen Keightley.
This included his visit to Viktring camp, and his meetings with Verney and Rose-Price.
The repatriation of Yugoslavs had now been proceeding for a week.
Between 19 and 24 May, 12,196 Croats had already been handed over through 6 Armoured Division area, although many had been held in camps under 78 Division and 46 Division.
On 24 May the first batch of 1,000 Serbs had been moved from Viktring, and further lorry loads were leaving the camp during McCreery's visit.
Although the Yugoslavs had so far had no indication that they were being taken to anywhere but another camp, probably in Italy, and therefore McCreery would have observed an operation apparently going smoothly, we think it unlikely that Verney, Rose-Price and others who disliked the fact that Yugoslavs were being repatriated under a misapprehension as to their destination  would have failed to ensure that the Army Commander was given a true picture.
In the afternoon, according to 78 Div War Diary [KP 248]McCreery toured camps where DPs and surrendered personnel were being held west of Hlagenfurt.
He did not get as far as the main Cossack encampments at Peggetz and Oberdrauberg near Lienz, a considerable distance further west.
But in visiting units who would shortly be involved in the repatriation of the Cossacks, and in discussions with Gen Keightley and his staff, we believe that McCreery would have been fully briefed on the plans for the Cossack repatriation operation which had been issued by 5 Corps to all divisional commands the previous day, 24 May [KP 245].
This "Provisional Plan" for the "Return of Cossacks to Soviet Forces" had been agreed between the GSO .1 5 Corps and the Chief of Staff of 57 Soviet Army earlier that day.
The plan outlined the procedures whereby all the Cossacks defined by the Definition Order of 21 May, including Germans, should be handed over to Soviet forces.
It included the need to separate officers from other ranks, and to place them in separate confinement (the intention of this was to prevent the officers from leading their followers in opposition to the repatriations).
The plan also stated: "It is of the utmost importance that all the offrs and particularly senior commanders are rounded up and that none are allowed to escape.
The Soviet forces regard this as being of the highest importance and will probably regard the safe delivery of the offrs as a test of British good faith."
By the time Gen McCreery returned to Eighth Army HQ at the end of the afternoon, he had ample opportunity to be fully briefed as to what was going on.
McCreery knew that on the following day his HQ would have difficult talks with AFHQ representatives, who would arrive with a brief which, for operational reasons, would present 5 Corps with great difficulties.
It was to the interest of HQ 5 Corps to ensure that the Army Commander was fully conversant with their concerns.
And we think that Gen McCreery would have given short shrift to anyone who tried to pull the wool over his eyes.
These conclusions are confirmed by what happened at Eighth Army HQ over the following two days, as we shall come to shortly.
This is of particular importance because of the impression which Tolstoy sought to convey in The Minter and the Massacres that attempts were made to withhold from McCreery on his visit to 5 Corps a true picture of what was happening.
Also at 5 Corps HQ on the day of McCreery's visit, 25 May, was Lt-Col Gerrett of 15 Army Group, to supervise the evacuation from Austria  Austria of German PoWs to 12 Army Group under SHAEF.
This was the transfer which, under the arrangements discussed between Eisenhower and Alexander, might also have included the Cossacks.
Gerrett reported to 15 Army Group: "5 Corps confirm that approx 42,000 Cossacks to be handed over to Russians are Soviet citizens within the definition of cited AFHQ letter.
Any NOT eligible for transfer to Russians will be included in surrendered personnel at first(b) above (ie will be included among German PoWs to be transferred to 12 Army Group).
At 2130 hrs that evening, 25 May, Eighth Army signalled [KP 251]to AFHQ, with copies to 15 Army Group and 5 Corps"Ruling now received 15 Army Gp all Soviet citizens…will be treated as surrendered personnel and will therefore be handed over to Russians.
For 5 Corps please take action accordingly…"
Until recently it was assumed that this was the final signal concerning the Cossacks before the repatriations actually began, giving Eighth Army's authorization for those Cossacks who were Soviet citizens to be handed over, even though it did not explicitly set aside AFHQ's previous ruling that "force has not, repeat not, to be used" .
What has now come to light, however, from the archives in Washington of Alexander Kirk's office at AFHQ, are the notes of the conclusions of a "series of conferences" which were held at Eighth Army main HQ on 26–27 May [KP 269].
The main subject heading of these discussions was "Disposal of Jugoslavs in Austria" , although a further note is headed "COSSACKS" .
These notes are addressed to "G-1(B)" at AFHQ from "G-5" , with copies to "G-Z, British Resident Minister, US Political Adviser" .
What was the purpose of this "series of conferences" and why had they been called?
Five days earlier, on 22 May, it will be recalled, a discussion had taken place in G-5 at AFHQ on the "Disposition of Displaced Persons etc in N Italy and Austria" which had concluded that "no Jugoslavs…who have come into the hands of Allied troops will be returned to Jugoslavia against their will" .
Finally it was recorded that "representatives of G-1 and G-5 should go to Main Eighth Army for discussion" and Eighth Army had been notified to this effect on 23 May, as a reply to its signal U 128 of 21 May requesting guidance on questions concerning "various nationals" .
These conferences at Main Eighth Army on 26–27 May, involving representatives of G-l and G-5 branches of AFHQ were the result.
The significance of the presence of both branches was that G-5 were concerned with policy on displaced persons, while G-1 was concerned  with military personnel.
By the time the discussions took place, the various dilemmas which had been reflected in the series of signals between 5 Corps, Eighth Army and AFHQ between 22–23 May, particularly those concerning the "use of force" , could be taken fully into account.
So also were the impressions formed by the Army Commander, Gen McCreery, on his visit to 5 Corps during the preceding two days.
The Eighth Army/AFHQ Conferences on 26–27 May
The notes by Col Jackling of AFHQ G-5 began: "As a result of a series of conferences at Eighth Army Main on 26/7 May the following arrangements were made.
(A) JUGOSLAVS (i) All Jugoslavs, civil and military, in the hands of Allied troops in AUSTRIA will be returned to JUGOSLAVIA provided that it is not necessary to use force to do so."
The emphasis here is again clearly different to that of the AFHQ conclusion on 22 May that "no Jugoslavs…who have come into the hands of Allied troops will be returned to Jugoslavia against their will" .
Now it was again being ruled that the Yugoslavs should be handed over, so long as it was not necessary to use force — but to this a subsequent note now added a very important qualification.
After several more paragraphs stating that any Yugoslavs "who cannot be disposed of" on these conditions should be retained until arrangements can be made for their evacuation to Italy, an additional "NOTE" refers back to para (i): "There was considerable discussion upon the interpretation of the term" use of force".
It was finally agreed that local commanders appeared to be using their discretion in a satisfactory manner as to the means used to persuade Jugoslavs that they should return to Jugoslavia, and that it was unwise to make any further interpretation."
The significance of this strikingly worded note is that it was written in full knowledge of the methods already being used by "local commanders" to "persuade Jugoslavs that they should return to Jugoslavia" — ie the "deception" whereby they were allowed to believe that they were being taken to Italy.
Although the wording indicates   that this had given rise to "considerable discussion" , implying that these methods had been questioned by some present, and the phrase "it was unwise to make any further interpretation" implies that those methods should not be spelled out too explicitly, the clear conclusion of the conference was that the policy being followed by 5 Corps should be given full backing.
In other words, the repatriations of the Yugoslavs should continue; the methods being used to carry them out were found to be "satisfactory" as an alternative to the "use of force" , and this was now a matter of full agreement between Eighth Army and AFHQ.
The record goes on to show that it was not only the handing over of the Yugoslavs that was discussed at these conferences.
The next, much shorter section runs"(B) COSSACKS (i) Cossacks will be treated as Soviet Nationals and will be returned to Russian hands.
(ii) Other Soviet Nationals including 55 troops and other arrestable categories will be treated in the same way."
Firstly, this order that all Cossacks were to "be treated as Soviet Nationals" appeared to sanction the sending over of any Germans or emigres among them.
Secondly, there are no qualifications at all here about "the use of force" .
The Cossacks are to be handed over, by whatever means are deemed appropriate.
According to all the archival evidence available until very recently, there had apparently been no answer to 5 Corps' almost desperate insistence on 23 May that the hand-over of the Cossacks could not be achieved without use of force.
It seemed (see, for instance, our Interim Report, 1988) that, right up to the moment when the repatriation of the Cossacks began, there remained a complete and unresolved contradiction between this insistence by 5 Corps and the reiterated insistence by AFHQ that force was in no circumstances to be used.
Now it is clear that an answer was implicitly given to 5 Corps"request, by a conference which included representatives both of Eighth Army and of AFHQ itself.
In the full light of 5 Corps"insistence that the Cossacks could not be handed back without the use of force, the conference ruled that nevertheless the Cossacks should be handed back, without qualification.
If force was to be"used, it would be with the authorization of the full chain of command to Allied Forces Headquarters.
The importance of the recent discovery of this document recording the conclusions of the conferences of 26–27 May is that it fills in what have hitherto been two of the most significant gaps in the whole story.
It makes clear, firstly, that Eighth Army and AF HQ were brought fully into the picture as to the methods being used by 5 Corps to effect the repatriation of the anti-Tito Yugoslavs and, after all  the discussions which had gone on in previous days, gave those methods their complete support.
It provides, secondly, that long elusive missing link, decision taken on 5 Corps' signal on 23 May reiterating that it could only carry out its orders to hand over the Cossacks if it was given authorization to use force.
This provided the basis for giving 5 Corps the operational authorization it required, with the full support of Eighth Army and AFHQ.
Even though we have no record of how this was communicated to 5 Corps, we assume that in view of the urgency of the situation, the decision was passed on from HQ Eighth Army by telephone.
All the earlier confusions and contradictions had apparently been resolved.
We can now move on to the next stage of the story — the repatriation operations themselves.
This signal, which was headed "Personal BGS for C of S" , has played a significant part in the controversy over the events in Austria in 1945, not least because of the phrase "verbal directive from Macmillan" .
Tolstoy has assumed, in The Minister and the Massacres and elsewhere, that the BGS who originate the signal was Brig Low (now Lord Aldington), and ha used the phrase "verbal directive from Macmillan to Corps Command as important evidence to support his theory that at the 13 May meeting Macmillan had" initiated "moves to hand back the Cossacks, and had in effect used his political authority to" direct"5 Corps to this end.
Tolstoy misread the evidence of this signal in both respects.
In the course of his libel proceedings against Tolstoy, Lord Aldington stated that he had been succeeded as BGS by Brig de Fonblanque on 21 May, in order to return to England the following day (the last document bearing his personal initials was the "definition Order" of 21 May).
This was confirmed by a handwritten journal kept in 1945 by de Fonblanque, which came to light during the trial of the libel action in 1989, in which the entry for 21 May reads "Toby Low departed on leave, not to return, and I became BGS" .
In fact the use of the phrase "verbal directive" is a further indication that this signal was not drafted by someone who had been intimately involved In the events of the previous ten days, as Brig Low had been.
As Low would have known, in military matters Macmillan was in no position to "direct" .
He could only offer advice.
This is quite properly reflected in the first signal from $ Corps after Macmillan's visit, referring to his "advice" that Tolbukhin should be approached about the handing over of the Cossacks.
Tolstoy attaches great importance to the change of wording in the signal of 23 May, referring to a "verbal directive" , as if this implied that on 13 May Macmillan had not just "advised" but had in effect given an order, which he was in no position to do.
What matters is the record of action which actually followed his visit to Klagenfurt.
Within hours of his departure HQ 5 Corps had acted on his "advice" and had approached Tolbukhin's HQ about the handing over of the Cossacks, but they did so in a manner which reserved to higher authority the final decision whether or not to hand them over [KP 93].
Macmillan's "advice" was supported by HQ Eighth Army [KP 97].
At AFHQ it was approved by Robertson [KPs 103 and 113].
Robertson's authorization passed on by Eighth Army was acted on by HQ 5 Corps [KP 145].
In the chain of authorization through military channels there are no missing links.