

A Land of Waking Dreams
This is the story of a unique ten-year voyage of exploration amongst the steamy islands of the volcanic Indonesian archipelago.
It begins, inappropriately enough, in the freezing winter of 1972…
I was struggling to complete my doctoral thesis in an icy northern England when my brother Lorne called me from London with the news that Ringo Starr had agreed to put up £2,000 and the post-production costs of our first adventure film.
I had spent three years researching contemporary mysticism, and it was through John Michel, a colleague of mine who was an authority on Druid mythology and the ancient sites of Britain, that I first met Ringo.
Shortly after the formation of Apple Films (a subsidiary of the Beatles' Apple Corps Ltd), Ringo and his associate Hilary Gerard had approached us to help them make a film about Arthurian legends and "Magical Britain" .
Although this project failed to come to fruition even with Apple behind it — it was to lead us indirectly into more than a decade of adventuring in some of the most remote regions of Indonesia.
Within three weeks I had handed in my dissertation, Lorne had assembled the rudimentary equipment, and with more bravado than common sense we found ourselves on the island of Celebes in the South China Sea.
From there we set sail with sixteen fierce Bugis tribesmen on a 2,500-mile voyage through the Spice Islands in search of the Greater Bird of Paradise.
For nine months of storms and doldrums we drifted amongst forgotten kingdoms of silk and gold, fire-walkers, grave-robbers, pearl-divers and pirates.
Eventually we reached the Aru Islands, close to the shores of west New Guinea, where we managed to record the first ever colour footage of the golden-tailed bird in its natural habitat.
Of all the Birds of Paradise, the Greater is as rare and remarkable as it is difficult to reach.
For centuries before the arrival of Westerners it  had been the symbol of the soul and of eternal life; and for the Chinese, who traded with the southern islands long before the time of Christ, the bird became associated with the phoenix myth — which crept across the continents into the mind of medieval Europe, even before it was known that the world was round.
On finally seeing these creatures, mating in the high forest canopy like cataracts of spun glass, we found them to be transparent with a deeper meaning, something which lay beyond them, in the undiscovered wisdom of the islanders themselves.
The birds proved to be merely the lure which was to draw us into ten years of adventure through a land of waking dreams.
Just how we got involved in this way of life is still beyond me.
I'm not sure how we got here at all.
Lorne, three years my junior, didn't even want to arrive.
According to our mother, he was so late that she began to suspect she had the hysterical pregnancy of all time.
He received his first report card when he was only four years old from a boarding school in the South of France which domestic insecurities had required our attending rather early in life.
It consisted of just two words: "folle indépendance" which can fairly be translated as: "independence to the point of lunacy" .
Shortly afterwards we returned to English prep schools, where I quickly had my French beaten out of me in French grammar classes, and where Lorne responded by continuing to be unable to talk or, rather, to speak in any known language, for he would hold forth volubly in a tongue uniquely his own.
I was frequently called out of my classes to interpret for him, and it began to be assumed that he would never talk at all.
But when we emigrated to Mexico as teenagers with our mother and stepfather in the mid-fifties, he suddenly burst into articulate Spanish and English — to which he later added French and Indonesian — all of which he used to protect and further his folle indépendance.
It was in Mexico, during those flowering years, that we climbed the snow-capped volcanoes, dived in the Mayan wells, collected creatures and orchids and, abetted by the enlightened curiosity of our parents, delved deep into ways of being and mind unimaginably different from our own.
Caught by the currents of our time, the family also became involved in Subud, a meditational method which was based in Java.
Shortly after our stepfather died, our mother, Lydia, made her first leap across the Pacific to live with a Javanese guru in Jakarta, and brought back tales which inspired our first visits to Indonesia, as delegates to a Subud conference.
I was to spend a month there during the toppling of President Sukarno, while bloody revolution raged beyond the ashram walls, hoardings displayed anti-Western hate propaganda, and the British embassy was fire-bombed.
Our mentors and brothers at the Subud enclave encouraged us to focus only on the inner world, and to avoid exploring the dangerous but tempting "illusory" world of "Maya" outside.
Lydia had barely set foot beyond the ashram in three years when Lorne turned up to kidnap her  for a reconnaissance mission with him to Celebes island, eight hundred miles away to the north-east.
It was to prove a magical turning point for them both.
In Makassar harbour they saw the great black-sailed trading schooners of the piratical Bugis tribe, with whom, just 120 years previously, the remarkable naturalist-explorer Alfred Russel Wallace had sailed on his historic odyssey through the Spice Islands to become the first Westerner ever to see alive the Greater Bird of Paradise.
They also visited the Toraja tribe of the Celebes highlands, who believe their ancestors once descended from the Pleiades in starships.
Here they discovered that their last great king had died several years previously, and still lay rotting in his widowed queen's home.
He would lie here, no one knew for how long, until the tribe had painstakingly amassed the financial and ritual wherewithal necessary to launch a dead king's soul back to the stars.
By going beyond the scented ashram walls of Subud, Lorne and Lydia had touched on an unsuspected world on the brink of disappearing.
Even after our Mexican upbringing, it was a revelation to find such things still going on, unknown to the outside world — and there were still another thirteen thousand Indonesian islands to explore, if we could only reach and film them while there was still time.
We were always a family uprooted.
Lydia, herself an inveterate explorer, was now aware that her three years in Java had been quite enough of an inner workout, and she returned to Europe to comb the Mediterranean for a solitary place to centre herself.
She had just enough money left after selling up in Mexico to buy a small finca in Ibiza, where she settled in to survive on a war widow's pension and the proceeds from her annual harvest of almonds.
By our mid-twenties, Lorne and I had returned to England penniless but hopeful, with our BA degrees from Mexico in Business and Philosophy.
Well — Lorne had almost got his Business degree, for just a week before graduating he accepted instead the position of assistant to Bob Cundy, an independent ethnographer who virtually single-handedly cranked out hair-raising adventure films, shot in all parts of the world, at a time when it was still feasible to make a living out of them.
This hands-on experience helped Lorne talk his way into a production assistant's job at the BBC in London, where he was exposed to the broader spectrum of skills required to get a film on the air.
But he chafed for his independence, and his brief visits to Indonesia only increased his determination to make the big jump.
His nights were filled with reading abstruse research material, hatching film-plots and writing investment proposals.
I, too, was living a double life.
My exposure to the energy and subtle abilities of my Subud brothers in Java had so ignited my optimism and sense of wonder concerning our hidden natures that I had wangled my way into Lancaster University's Department of Comparative Religion to write a doctorate on transformational consciousness, in a field which was later to be referred to as psycho-anthropology.
My subsequent book was an early attempt to define the range and focus of  this discipline.
I was alternating between the academic asceticism of northern England and an enormous flat I shared with Lorne and two highly entertaining identical twin brothers in Bayswater, London.
It was a vibrant time: the flowering of the sixties had lost some of its bloom, but the fruit was ripe and all around us in the protagonists of the new arts.
We watched from our window as Mick Jagger gave his free concert in Hyde Park, stood on our seats at the Albert Hall for Janis Joplin's last performance, and traipsed to Avebury and Stonehenge for equinoctial celebrations.
Through our tangled London flat flooded musicians and philosophers, ravers and astrologers, actors and explorers.
Periodically I went back to the northern wastes again, a sort of alchemical prep school where, like Lorne, I sustained myself through the dark times with dreams of the southern islands.
It was during one of the darkest that I received Lorne's excited phone call.
 "We've got it!" he shouted.
"Ringo's accepted our proposal for repeating Wallace's search with the Bugis pirates for the Greater Bird of Paradise.
He'd have gone for the Toraja "star funeral" , too, if we only knew when it was happening.
It was talk of "pirates" and "spaceships" that did it!
Can you be ready to leave in three weeks?"
Of course I could.
Someone had to keep an eye on him.
I would be responsible for sound, second-unit camera, and most of the stills — although I'd never operated a movie-camera or tape-recorder in my life.
We departed from Heathrow with two still-cameras, two 16mm cameras with an underwater housing, a tape-recorder, a small Honda generator, a "five-minute" Sun Gun for night filming and a pocket-sized slide-projector.
At the airport we bought a sheet of tourist slides (the Changing of the Guard at Buckingham Palace, the Forth Bridge, the pearly kings and queens of London, the Apollo moon landing, etc.) to show the Indonesians something of our bizarre world.
We took a tripod, but it fell into the sea shortly after our arrival, and thereafter twisted on its axis with the serenity of a chain saw.
We took a first-aid box stuffed with Lomatils, plasters, anti-malarial tablets and insect repellents — all of which proved useless to ourselves, but helpful to our reputations as "white medicine-men" .
We took a Boy Scout's compass, an aviator's map and a primitive Polaroid camera, which was to prove more valuable than our passports.
We indulged ourselves with some jars of Marmite and bitter marmalade (which proved not to go well with rice) and an emergency medicinal bottle of Grand Marnier.
In addition to the latest tapes by the Beatles, Joni Mitchell, Bob Dylan, Van Morrison and Neil Young, we took some reference books on shells, fishes and birds — and an 1890 edition of Wallace's classic The Malay Archipelago.
With these, but with no filming permits, since they were impossible to obtain at the time, we winged it to the steaming metropolis of Jakarta.
Whether by some trick of the Mercator Projection, or due simply to the natural chauvinism of cartographers, Indonesia seldom reveals her true proportions, or even her whereabouts.
Sprawling across the equatorial seas between mainland Asia and Australia, her nearly 14,000 islands  include the lion's share of the world's largest and least explored.
Amongst them are the last great wild gardens of the earth still harbouring uncatalogued varieties of creatures and man.
In 2 million square miles of ocean, and stretching wider than the continental United States of America, Indonesia's geographical, legal and linguistic complexities have kept most of her, even today, effectively off limits to all but the most stubborn foreign travellers.
Even the Dutch, who colonized the nation longer than any other Western power, were more interested in trading posts than in exploration, and vested their authority in the local chieftains who in turn vested theirs on down the line so that a great many Indonesians have still never seen a European.
Since winning their independence in 1949 the government, based in Java, has sought to control its vast domain partly by making it difficult even for Indonesians to travel freely throughout their own country.
The nation thus still remains largely unknown to the world, and to herself.
It was here that we sought to capture a record of the least-contacted tribal peoples while there was still time.
This was both for the hell of it, as well as for the annals of the newly developing discipline of psycho-anthropology, whose aims are in part to define the global range of human ability.
It was a pursuit which we could only continue, of course, so long as we managed to sell our films to commercial television simply on the strength of their entertainment value.
 "Psycho-anthropology" , a stepchild of anthropology and psychology, emerged as a sub-discipline at just about the same time that its purest source data — the least-contacted tribal peoples — were vanishing into extinction.
Now dwelling only amongst the remotest regions of Third World nations, they represent the final fraying link in a hitherto unbroken chain of memory which stretches to the roots of the whole human tribe.
Amongst them are found the last adepts of controlled altered states, out-of-the-body experience, psycho-navigation, environmental wisdom and time-honoured alternative methods of giving birth, healing, living and dying.
Reaching these peoples, of course, first required running the gauntlet of a bureaucracy which treats ethnographic film-makers with the same distrust as it does their subjects.
For, having barely embarked on their first Industrial Revolution, many Third World nations tend to regard their tribal peoples with the same antagonism which caused the "maturer" nations to extinguish theirs just a century earlier.
Further difficulties lay in raising funds in the first place.
However enlightened our investors might be, they were not always convinced we would return from improbable places with improbable footage of expeditions for which no insurance company would dream of covering us.
But for us the effort still far outweighed the really terrifying prospect of trying to make a living working forty-hour weeks, as our father would have said, "like proper, responsible adults" .
Totally isolated from our own culture for long periods, we became vulnerable to forgotten times and tribes re-awakening within us.
Our journeys, we found, were to take us simultaneously to some of the least-charted regions of the planet and to the least-charted regions of our own  minds.
What began for us as the effort to capture a purely objective record of what we saw gradually dissolved into a quest, an odyssey of self-discovery which actually took place amongst the last of the lands of real living kings and queens, dragons and pirates, cannibals and headhunters, mystics and magicians.
Much of our material now contains footage of peoples and events which, in the space of just ten years, have forever vanished or at least changed beyond recognition.
It is odd to reflect that the firmest objective record of what we experienced now lies in the films — themselves mere illusory genii of chemicals and light, bound to 400-foot reels of processed trees and silver.
Like genii, too, they must be uncorked in a dark room to dance briefly in their own time, before receding into the invisible world of memory again.
The job required the smallest possible team, for maximum mobility and minimum social impact, capable of staying for indefinite periods in unexplored territory amongst barely known peoples, while eating their food, speaking their language and sharing their lives as intimately as possible.
This form of "guerrilla ethnography" has obvious advantages over larger, better-equipped crews with more limited time in the field, but it does not include the consolations of insurance, institutional funding or any guarantees of selling the films afterwards.
Working sometimes independently of one another on separate teams, but for the most part together, we managed to capture some eighty hours of usable film spanning nine separate expeditions.
This required juggling between us the hats of sleuths, writers, researchers, logisticians, cameramen, diplomats, doctors, navigators, tooth-pullers and leech-pluckers, to name but a few.
Our film stock and equipment, which comprised some nine-tenths of our travelling weight, had to be husbanded first past the Pac-Man thicket of Customs and Immigration, thence through unpredictable months in the jungles, and finally out of the country again intact and undetained.
Apart from improbable luck, much of our success as a two-man team — and siblings at that — comes less from our similarities than from our differences of character.
Lorne is diurnal; I am nocturnal.
He can go for long periods without food; I can go for long periods without sleep.
Whereas I cease to function if I can't put at least something in my mouth every day or so he, beyond a certain threshold of exhaustion, falls unavoidably asleep, bolt upright, with his eyes wide open.
One of them admittedly retains a glazed, half-shut look, but the other, propped open behind his monocle, continues to observe the world with bulbous attention.
This can be useful during the occasional compulsory attendance at official Indonesian functions, or when waiting in government offices for filming permits to be granted; but there have been dinner parties, at which he was the guest of honour, when he was actually thought to have died at table.
Lorne doesn't much mind what he looks like.
He is not even disturbed by the fact that his beard, monocle and considerable size are not always the ideal ambassadorial countenance for delicate first encounters between East and West.
Many of Indonesia's peoples, for instance, who have never previously seen Europeans, grow very little body hair, and all of it straight.
To come upon someone with it curling all over his face is astonishing enough to overlook at first a certain glassiness to his left eye — until, that is, he absent-mindedly lets it fall to dangle from its string.
It is then that all hell has broken loose and we have found ourselves standing alone in the jungle again.
Lorne excuses his monocle on the grounds that, being astigmatic in one eye and myopic in the other, he needs but one lens to neutralize the problem and that one lens is harder to break than glasses and it is easier to carry spares.
Since he does 90 per cent of the filming, and is astonishingly blind, the loss or breakage of his optical eccentricities is a cause for concern.
On extended expeditions there were occasions when he would break or lose even his spares, and I would find myself combing deserted beaches and jungle tracks looking for a small circle of glass on which, I was acutely aware, rested the success or failure of an entire project.
Lorne sees best when looking through his camera viewfinder — the contents of which become his whole world.
It is easy now to understand why so many cameramen have filmed their own deaths.
On numerous occasions I have held him by belt and legs in the rattling back of an open truck, from the edge of a storm-tossed boat, in the path of galloping Sumbanese warriors.
Deaf to my shouts, he remains hypnotized by the contents of his viewfinder, which unfold before him as if on a giant cinema-screen on Oscar night, where he is an enraptured member of the audience, completely disembodied from this temporal peril.
Lorne is slow-moving, solitary, watery and, like a true Cancerian, carries his home within him wherever he goes.
I am gregarious, cerebral, Geminian, and have sought, somewhat to my cost, to make the world my home.
Our metabolic differences were once explained to us by a Dyak companion in Borneo as due to the fact that I belong to the tribe of gibbons, whereas Lorne belongs more to that of the orangutan.
But we are both primates, and though we have often functioned as one organism we have nevertheless brachiated through the forests of adventure at rather different levels, and have seen through different eyes.
Our fears, too, are rather different.
Under dangerous conditions, his chief  concern is for the welfare of the film stock and equipment, whereas mine is more for keeping us both alive…
National frontiers are the "red zone" for guerrilla ethnographers.
There were alarming stories from a French colleague who had first been made to pay an exorbitant "import duty" for bringing his film stock into the country — and then, on his eventual departure, three times as much again for "export duty" because, it was argued, exposed film was clearly much more valuable than virgin film.
An even grimmer tale came from an Australian team which, on leaving the country after hazardous months of filming the interior, helplessly watched officials open every can of their exposed film to establish that they were not smuggling.
In those days the Customs officers were still sufficiently unfamiliar with tourists and their toys to have difficulty distinguishing between amateur and professional equipment.
Everything that could be dismantled, we carried in pieces on our person.
In Singapore, Lorne had begun climbing the step-ladder to the plane with the generator in his backpack, when he lost his balance and fell over backwards on to the tarmac waving his arms and legs in the air like a beetle.
In Jakarta they quickly found the generator and looked stern.
We explained later it was to power a lightbulb so that we could read at night where there was no electricity.
I remember Lorne saying something to the effect that it might look a bit bulky but, with their excellent petrol, in the long run it was neater than bringing hundreds of spare flashlight batteries along.
The officials exchanged some old-fashioned looks, and then discovered our most incriminating object — the 16mm underwater camera housing.
They already considered the ways in which foreign visitors spent their money was pretty odd.
The obsession, for instance, with snapping endless portraits of complete strangers to take back home as mementoes struck them as particularly humorous.
When we explained that the underwater housing was to enable us to take portraits of the fishes underwater, they dissolved into disbelieving laughter and ushered us into the country.
It was to be nine months before we finally emerged again at the other end of the archipelago — shocked, emaciated, but exalted.
It was a sobering introduction to the adventurous years ahead, and the start of a most fruitful — if at times near-fratricidal — partnership which, in all conscience, one could hardly advise other would-be young explorers to emulate, unless exhaustively financed and gluttons for punishment.
For me the most dangerous aspect of the job has been not so much the very real dangers in the field as the psychological vertigo of alternating for months at a time between the utter extremes of the planet; from the film markets of California's Hollywood Hills, where I rented an A-frame, to the remotest jungles of the East.
The violence of this transition became more cushioned for me in the mid-seventies, when we built our bamboo and coconut-wood home in the highlands of Bali, which for seven years now has served us as a sort of decompression chamber between the two worlds.
In Los Angeles, where I lectured for a living, I pursued my fascination for the harmonic patterns and golden-mean ratios which  run so consistently through the sacred art, music and architecture of both Western and oriental mystical traditions.
With the advent of the new technology of lasers and holography it was possible for the first time in history to build the ancient consciousness-raising symbols out of pure light.
With the devoted assistance of several technical wizards we converted my A-frame into an alchemist's chamber of optical and electronic apparatus with which to visualize the unseen dimensions of sound and form so often described by metaphysicians.
We built holographic Kabbalistic Trees of Life, and revolving human-sized mandalas.
We assembled laser sculptures of "the subtle anatomy of man" , with the acupuncture points hanging in space and the lines of "qi" energy flowing between them in a shimmering web.
There were geodesic spheres of optical plastics which appeared to explode like novas when struck with light.
We also experimented with "cymatics" , the relationship between sound and form, and built meditational drums (or "cymaflowers" ) whose surfaces, scattered with powders and liquids, formed perfect harmonic patterns in response to correctly chanted tones and mantras.
It was an experience which revealed a whole new meaning to the mind and body altering sounds ritually used by the tribal peoples of the East.
From this rarefied environment of pure light and pattern, I would suddenly find myself winging across to Indonesia again, to join my brother for months of immersion in a different dimension of discovery.
For years we had studiously avoided visiting the island of Bali on the quite false assumption that its international airport and beach hotels placed it beyond our professional interest.
But when curiosity got the better of us we found ourselves almost immediately drawn to a highland community where, like a long-awaiting gift, we were invited to build a house for about a thousand pounds on a verdant piece of property.
Far from the tourist beaches, this idyllically simple three-storey home would serve as a sort of Base Camp One for our more ambitious sorties into the extremities of the nation.
The differences between living in my Hollywood A-frame and in our Balinese house required an organism-crunching transition, which in many ways parallels the fundamental complementary opposites between East and West.
Successful living in Los Angeles requires controlling the environment, whereas in Bali it requires a total surrender.
My Hollywood A-frame was hermetically sealed and thermostatically controlled.
Our Balinese house has no doors, walls or windows and is protected from the occasional horizontal rain by dense surrounding vegetation, and by reed blinds which can be lowered to the floors.
In Hollywood I could interact with the outside via telephones, answering machines and television.
My television harangued me to buy endless varieties of insecticide and creature-killer, whereas in Bali it is taboo to move into a new home before the geckos and house-spiders have taken up residence first.
These creatures are part of the Balinese pantheon of animal deities, for it is they who are the mediators in a rich and harmonious ecology of wildlife with which, to be comfortable, one must become intimate.
At night, on a dark moon, lying on my raised sleeping-platform at  coconut level, the stars are reflected in the paddies as strongly as if down was up, and half this universe dances round me as the mating fireflies move through the trees and the house.
Some of them become trapped beneath the thatch, and whirl above me as diminutive galaxies of light.
Whereas in Los Angeles I manipulated costly hot and cold water in appropriate vessels throughout the house, Bali is a network of streams and rivers which, like veins and arteries, must be distinguished one from the other for their various uses.
To wash our dishes, for instance, requires placing them for a few hours in a rattan basket in the swift-flowing stream deflected through the kitchen to the left of our house.
The stream to our right is encouraged to pour through our bathroom, roofed with flowering creepers, in a perpetual shower.
We live near-naked day and night, in close and harmless proximity with insects and snakes, in an average year-round temperature of 75°-85° Fahrenheit.
Here we submit to a deep sea-change of hormonal rhythms and intestinal flora — and prepare ourselves for unknown months of deep immersion amongst the wilder regions of the archipelago.
We are also exposed to the rhythms of our village of Pengosekan, and its remarkable community of healers, farmers, mystics and artists.
Nyoman Batuan, our landlord and village headman, became our friend, mentor, and in many ways our gateway to understanding the psychology of the nation.
It was Batuan who explained that, although only the Gods can own land, they can lend it to man for his temporary use.
Through his assistance our house was built in the traditional manner, and we learned that what had first seemed simply a glorified jungle treehouse actually contained remarkable hidden know-how.
The craftsmen knew, for instance, the precise critical angle beyond which an elephant-grass roof will begin absorbing rather than rejecting rainwater.
The thatch is kept dry through a subtler technique.
The cellular structure of a coconut tree is such that it convects moisture from its roots to its branches.
Our home's eight coconut support-trunks were  planted upside down so that they continue, even in death, to draw moisture from the roof thatch down into the ground, where it belongs.
It is customary to assemble the final roof in a single day.
The owners provide a feast, with plenty of palm wine, to which the whole community is invited.
The roof goes on in a few tumultuous hours.
In this way, they tell us, there is a piece of each person in every home in the village — which helps bind the community together.
The Balinese are remarkable in that they give but half their time to the chores of food and shelter; the rest is devoted simply to the celebration of life.
The festival days, the sacred plays and dance, the processions which move jangling through the villages at night quicken us to the hidden rhythms by which the island lives.
Time belongs to the gods, not to the clocks of the linear West.
The Hindu-Balinese calendar is annually calibrated by the astronomer-priests according to lunar and stellar relationships, so that the rites of fasting and planting, rejoicing and reaping, weeping and cremating are synchronized with the actual bio-rhythmic pulse of the island.
With Batuan and the community we have shared the all-night pilgrimages to the Mother Temple shrines on the slopes of the Gunung Agung volcano.
We have felt the earth quake with them, helped when the paddies were swept away by floods.
We have surrendered our fears and our dreams to them — and they have shared everything with us.
In the early days, when we had some money to spare, we would contribute to the village festivals and later, when we fell on harder times, and they had become richer and more famous for their art amongst international collectors, they would support us.
Here, when I came closest to watching my own slow death from septicaemia after a motorbike accident, and Western medicines had ceased to work, I was nursed back to health by their healers.
It was they who made very clear how the body is but a reflection of the life force within it.
The illusory world of "Maya" revealed its meaning — not only through the constantly shifting physical environment, but also through the all-night Wayang shadow-puppet dramas, where the shadow parade of gods and demons, creatures and people reflects the eternal dynamics between order and chaos.
They recount the trials of mythological heroes on their quest for enlightenment, through the tempestuous waters of illusion.
Their shadow images, like our own lives, are seen as merely the surface reflection of an unseen fabric of energy which majestically moves beyond time.
Living amongst the Indonesians, where the pursuit of wisdom virtually amounts to a national pastime, the elements of Earth, Air, Fire, Water and Ether became real for me in a way they had never been in the writings of the Gnostics or the Pythagoreans.
Expressed in their paintings and sculpture and stories, these elements are seen as the successive thresholds, or levels of initiation, which the warrior of consciousness must broach on his path to enlightenment.
In our ten years of wandering, we had tasted something of these trials in near-drownings, starvations, falls and fevers.
We faced trials by Earth, hunting for pythons deep in caverns of human skulls; Water, too, and Air, driven by storm through mountainous seas in tattered pirate-ships, or dropping vertiginously into jungle clearings in light aircraft.
We ran Borneo's uncharted rapids in Dyak canoes, dived with sharks in the rip-currents of Komodo, and were sluiced off Javanese roads in monsoon flash-floods.
I thought we had also faced our trial by Fire, when in 1983 we had ignored government safety warnings and climbed the newly erupting "Child of Krakatoa" volcano in the Sunda Straits.
This was on the last day of an exhausting eleven-month shoot tracking down the healers, mystics and wise men of the islands.
It was to be the opening sequence to our whole ten years of Indonesian adventure filming.
Scorched and chastened, with the entire footage for our series finally in the can, Lorne returned to London to process and store the film, and I to my Hollywood A-frame to collate the slides and assemble this book.
Here, over the years, I had gradually collected an Indonesian treasury of rare and beautiful things — as well as an uninsurably valuable archive of some 14,000 slides.
My laser and holographic equipment lay fallow and cobwebbed.
My girlfriend, after my eleven-month absence, had understandably left me, and it was in the company of my two still-faithful black cats that I threw myself into writing.
They would sit patiently either side of my word processor as I wrote into the small hours, purring appreciatively when I was pleased with myself, and opening their eyes enquiringly when I was not.
At ten o'clock one morning one of my cats leapt on my face.
Until very late the previous night I had been writing about Krakatoa and trials by Fire, and was deeply asleep when the cat woke me.
Suddenly I heard the guttural roar of fire from my studio above.
I bounded naked upstairs to find the place merrily ablaze.
I tried grabbing my slide-albums, but they were melting like a cauldron of boiling oil.
I lunged for the computer which contained my first four hard-laboured chapters, and it literally burst into flames at my touch.
My next thought, since saving my life's work was out of the question, was for a pair of underpants in the probable event that I would shortly find myself in public.
Evidently deciding that prudery was the better part of valour, I hotfooted it down to the bedroom again in time to witness half the ceiling crashing in flames on to the bed I had been sleeping in moments before.
Quickly beknickered, I attempted the stairs to my treasures again, but they, too, were now burning.
Geodesic sculptures were dropping from the ceiling and exploding around me, and my giant perspex magnifying mirrors, like contorting windows on to hell, were melting down the walls.
My tapestries and books were turning into pitch-thick smoke, and the heat, from which I had hitherto been protected, it seems, by the initial surge of adrenalin through my body, now made it plain that this was the last window of opportunity for effecting a dignified, if empty-handed, exit.
I just made it out of the front door and to the end of my path, when the picture windows imploded inwards and the house erupted behind me through its triangular roof like Krakatoa herself.
I stood there wretchedly in the street, watching the unbelievable actually happening in front of me, while my neighbours nervously hosed their  roofs against flying sparks.
I had no insurance, and nothing in the bank.
When the firemen finally arrived I pointed at the sacrificial pyre still burning and burbled something about my priceless slide-collection.
They responded by giving the general area a few desultory squirts with their foam, but informed me the place was a total loss, and that I should be fully content with having got out of it alive.
The City Fire Inspectors later concluded that the fire was caused by a "freak focus" , due to the rising sun catching and reflecting off one of my holographic magnifying mirrors.
Being struck by light, the Inspectors informed me, was statistically even less probable than being struck by a bolt of lightning.
My notes and books and shells and treasures, the tools of my precarious trade, had utterly gone.
The vinyl binders which had contained my slides were discovered amongst the ashes as a single, solidly welded lump.
Hard and sharp as a meteorite, this carbonized giant clam finally yielded to saws and machetes, razor blades and tweezers.
At its centre were several hundred perfectly preserved slides.
Radiating outwards were different stages of transformation, giving an eerily beautiful look to the already exotic subject-matter.
The firemen's water had contained an extinguishing agent which at specific temperatures has an exalting effect on colour emulsion.
Thus my trial by Fire had shriven me of all but the Dyak tattoo I stood up in, and enough imagery to illustrate something of both the linear and the dream dimensions of an odyssey into the oceanic hemisphere of our beginnings.
2 Into the Ring of Fire
In the summer of 1883, from the Sunda Straits between Java and Sumatra, the volcano of Krakatoa suddenly blew eleven cubic miles of ash and rock into the stratosphere, sending a shockwave seven times around the globe.
The dying ripples of its massive tidal wave lapped up the English Channel, and the volcanic debris, wreathing the planet, altered weather and harvest patterns around the world for years afterwards.
Despite Kipling's dictum that "Never the twain shall meet" , the East had reached out and touched the West with a premonition, perhaps, of the planetary holism which was to grip our minds less than a century later when we walked on the moon, looked back, and for the first time saw the whole earth rising as a single bubble of life.
It was also a foretaste of the explosive energy which, within a life-span, would be ours to control or abuse.
Within a few decades, forests and animals had returned to the shattered islands which were all that remained of Krakatoa's outer rim; and from the waters between them emerged an ominous smoking mound, sometimes growing at a rate of more than three feet a month.
The locals call it "Anak Krakatao" — "Child of Krakatoa" .
It has actually raised and submerged its sulphurous head five times since its first appearance in 1925, and when Lorne and I reached it in September of 1983 it was nearly 300 feet high and so active that the government had denied us landing permits.
Under these circumstances we were obliged to reach it at night, in a small open boat crewed by two very anxious and expensive local fishermen.
We approached the crackling silhouette through floating fields of pumice which rattled against our wooden hull, and when we stepped into the surf to haul our boat on to the beach, as black as the night around us, our bare feet sank into sand too hot for comfort.
Moving like ants in a sand-trap we gasped slowly up the near-vertical rim of the secondary crater, into a storm of ash which masked the gathering dawn.
It was nearly daylight by the time we reached the summit.
A few miles away, in three directions, lay the crescent islands of Verlaten, Lang Eiland and Rakata, which were all that remained of the original mother volcano's metamorphosis.
Beyond them, against a curiously speckled sea, we could survey the distant coastline of Java on one side and Sumatra on the other.
We could just see the hazy point where, in that August of 1883, the Dutch administrator of south Sumatra and his family had observed the tidal wave rise inexorably 150 feet right up to the veranda of his residence, pause, and withdraw again, taking some of his flowerpots, half the hillside, and the entire town with its population of some 800 people.
To the south, off Java, we could detect where the mouth of the Lampong river lay, where another survivor, a fisherman, had found himself floundering in a furious inrushing sea, and had seized and ridden for miles inland what he had thought was a log, but discovered to be an equally terrified crocodile.
The grey ash cone on which we crouched pared away beneath us to blend with the leaden sea like an optical illusion.
The only reference point to give us a sense of our height was the tiny boat on the beach beneath us, with the two fishermen, who had not only declined to follow us up the crater, but also expressed an urgent desire to avoid even setting foot on shore.
Around and beneath us coiled an oily, uneasy water, flecked with floating stones.
We had read in our Admiralty Pilot that the temperature of the sea round here could vary very suddenly by 35 hundreds of degrees.
Ships are advised to give the islands a wide berth, as the seabed is constantly shifting and massive magnetic anomalies cause compasses to swing wildly round the rose.
It was these haunted waters which had swallowed up nearly all the 36,000 victims who had perished in the first blast.
A crewman in Samoa, which passed through the Sunda Straits shortly after the eruption, described seeing bodies and pumice stretching all the way to the horizon.
Floating pumice fields were so thick that sailors could walk on them — and some bore bleaching human remains 4,500 miles across the Indian Ocean to deposit them along the beaches of Zanzibar.
By the time we reached the volcano's outer lip it was deafeningly noisy.
It was erupting rhythmically at about eight-minute intervals, which were preceded by two separate and terrifying sounds.
First, as the whole island trembled like jelly, from way beneath us came what sounded like a giant rustling great sheets of brown wrapping-paper.
This was followed by the bowling-alley racket of stones and boulders ricocheting off the walls of the crater as they ascended from a great depth to gush out over our heads in billowing clouds of debris and Our equipment, clothes and bodies were penetrated by the finest, hardest black dust.
Every so often a football-sized boulder would thud into the ash nearby.
I was reminded of the Javanese guru we had recently interviewed who claimed to teach his students how to walk through rain without getting wet!
As the sun rose, the sky became perfectly clear and blue all around us, except for directly overhead where the island was creating its own weather.
It wore a personal mushroom cloud which fired sheet-lightning directly down into its crater, with thunder so head-shattering that it was hard to convince the body it had nothing to worry about.
With each blast came a drizzle of hot stinging ash, which settled on our eyelashes and blistered their roots.
We had difficulty in breathing, our hair stood on end, and the tape-recorder and camera electronics began initiating a synch-pulse all their own, transforming our voices into a sort of demonic rasping.
Our shooting permits, after what had been eleven months of filming, were due to expire that evening and, though shot at the very end, the sequence on Anak Krakatoa was intended to introduce the very beginning of our whole ten years of adventure films.
This was indeed a place of power, shunned as studiously by modern shipping as by local fishermen, and yet it was also a chance to pay homage to the mysteries moving beneath the surface of this strange island region.
Here, at the site of the most devastating explosion in human memory, we wished to demonstrate both the unity and the fragility of the earth by blowing soap bubbles across the crater.
One might hardly suspect that so simple a task for so few seconds of film could prove so practically trying and, on reflection, so symbolic of our whole chain of adventures, attempting to keep aloft and alive a consecutive string of luminous mirrors against rather ridiculous odds.
Considerable effort was spent first on locating the appropriate soap powder and the pharmaceutical glycerine, and then on experimenting with proportionate mixtures and blowing techniques for producing the strongest bubbles.
But these glistening globes, though blown by the panting thousands, lived in that rain of ash only for frustrating fractions of a second.
Standing on Anak Krakatoa we could see and feel the fragility of the world, for we also stood at the gateway to its oceanic hemisphere.
Krakatoa is merely the first of a whole chain of active volcanoes which arc down through the Indonesian islands and round the Pacific to form what geologists call the Ring of Fire.
To pass beyond it is to cross the threshold into another dimension which, for all its pragmatic gifts to the West over the centuries, remains as mysteriously little-known to us now as it was for the first explorers.
It was really a scent, the aroma of spice, which first drew the West's attention to the Eastern islands.
Exotic substances began arriving in medieval Venice, brought through overland trading routes and via Arab mariners across the Indian Ocean.
Spices, together with tales of phoenixes and ape-people, filtered into the bloodstream of the sleeping Europeans.
Nutmeg, cloves, cinnamon, and curry-powders enabled us, for the first time in history, to preserve and stockpile food across the seasons.
With insurance against hunger came the ability to plan ahead, and a different structuring of time emerged.
The ability to store more food than we could eat at once also meant being able to buy and sell it in real quantity and the merchant cities arose.
The resultant economics  was to lead directly to the Renaissance, and thence to the Industrial Revolution.
No sooner had we caught the first heady whiff of the East and altered the chemistry of our food with it than we made a quantum leap in our cultural and artistic range as well.
The Age of Discovery was launched by our greedy desire to bypass the traditional trading routes and find the source of spices for ourselves.
Christopher Columbus was actually looking for a quicker route to the heart of Indonesia when he stumbled on America.
Spice drew us round the world, showed us it was round, and led us to confront ourselves again.
Whereas Indian, Malay, Arab and Chinese merchants had by and large traded peacefully for the exotic treasures of the islands since before the time of Christ, the marauding European buccaneers sought to own and control the real estate itself, and began four centuries of infighting.
Regional spice monopolies were bitterly fought for, claimed and lost again by Portuguese, Spanish, Dutch, French and English adventurers, who spilled as much of the locals' blood as each other 's in the process.
The voyage from Europe was a hazardous undertaking, with fairly poor odds on returning at all, let alone with a holdful of spice.
The island aromas also came tinged with scents of the dark unconscious.
To run amok, for instance, comes from amok, the island term for the "killing madness" , or a frenzied thirst for blood.
The early spice traders also encountered the daunting "home" team of defending mariners, the Bugis tribe, who so terrified them with their skill and ferocity that the word "Boogie man" entered our language, and still haunts our dreams.
Marco Polo seems to have been the first European actually to have made it there and back.
He was laughed to scorn for returning with tales of people who actually ate the nests of birds, which they boiled over fires of burning black stones — seven centuries before the same black stones were discovered and harnessed in Europe to fuel the Industrial Revolution.
Many of the subsequent early navigators recorded a brush with the southern archipelago, long before its general shape was known.
Magellan's tattered fleet, on its historic circumnavigation, lost a further ship in Indonesian waters while limping home after Magellan himself had been killed in a skirmish in the Philippines.
Captain Cook  broached the forbidding shores of west New Guinea, and lost several men there in a fight with the Asmat cannibals, under circumstances similar to those in which he would later lose his own life in the Hawaiian Islands.
More fortunate early encounters are recorded by such master mariners as Sir Francis Drake and the notorious Captain Bligh.
It was after being cast adrift in a longboat by the mutinous crew of Bounty that Bligh managed to make his monumental open-boat voyage with a handful of faithfuls to safety, and ultimately revenge, on the Indonesian island of Timor.
Drake, on the other hand, the piratical darling of Good Queen Bess, returned from a transglobal raiding adventure with a holdful of Indonesian spices, and paraded through the streets with his crew bedecked in the captured finery of the most astounding oriental silks and damasks ever to have been seen in England.
Drake's most treasured Indonesian memento was a mummified "mermaid" from Sumatra, which aroused much excitement as the proof that mythological beings were alive and well in the Eastern seas, even if their mortal remains oddly resembled the resinous union of a fish and a monkey.
But we believed a lot in those days; protected by our innocence and by our conviction in our one God, under whose banner we could righteously pillage the world.
Less practical perhaps than spices, but also commanding the highest prices in the auction houses of Europe, were the precious shells which came from the Moluccas — named after "molluscs" .
Wonderfully bizarre, compared to the local species, they seemed to symbolize a sudden awakening from the drab monotones of medieval Christianity to a much richer world than had previously been imagined.
Wherever we travelled amongst the islands we would collect rare and exotic shells which became for us like fragile clues in a paper-chase of changing life-forms as we moved across historical as well as zoographical boundaries.
The birth of science, and its bitterest pill, the Darwinian Theory of Evolution, was to be oddly influenced by Indonesia, and can be partly traced through the subtle relationship between Charles Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace, which recent evidence strongly suggests produced not only one of the most revolutionary achievements in the history of science but also one of its most intriguing deceptions.
For it is now quite certain that Darwin, who gives no credit to Wallace in his Origin of Species, would have been quite unable to write it without his essential contribution.
Far more than a further unsavoury tale of professional infighting for accreditation amongst the greats, the out-come — on the principle that the discoverer leaves his imprint on his discovery — has profoundly affected the subsequent tenor of both science and the humanities.
Darwin was a member of the landed aristocracy who had flirted with theology at Cambridge before becoming a highly respected naturalist.
He undertook only one expedition, travelling for five years aboard Beagle with all the modern conveniences of the day, and spent the next forty-five years as a hypochondriacal recluse in his English country mansion, churning out voluminous erudite papers for the scientific establishment, while privately pursuing his haunting suspicion  that species diverged to become other species.
He was fully aware of the blasphemy implicit in suggesting that human beings were not created by God as separate and distinct from nature, and of the turmoil that such a theory would release on the Victorian world.
It is plain from his private correspondence that, even if he had discovered by himself the mechanism by which species diverge, he had no intention of publishing until after his death.
But it was the arrival of the brilliant paper from the much younger, socially insignificant Alfred Russel Wallace which forced his hand — affording Darwin the full posthumous credit for Wallace's discovery, and the bequeathing to subsequent generations of a "Darwinian bias" which is considerably less enlightened than Wallace's own interpretation.
 "Survival of the strongest" , for instance, and its tooth-and-claw ethic which became associated with Social Darwinism, is not at all what Wallace had meant by "survival of the fittest" , where fitness was defined by him as a far subtler and more complex weave of forces than mere pugnacious self-interest.
A further major difference was in the two men's attitudes towards tribal peoples — whom Wallace recognized as fascinating equals, rather than as "a lower order of the human race" , which was Darwin's perhaps unwitting contribution to twentieth-century racism.
Wallace was a different animal, who, through a combination of circumstances and personal courage, was thrust into broader horizons.
Against Darwin's five years in Beagle, Wallace had spent four years exploring the Amazon basin, followed by eight years, largely alone, travelling throughout the Indonesian islands expressly seeking a solution to the evolutionary divergence of species.
He collected what was to amount to over 125,000 species of flora and fauna, many of which were entirely new to science.
He lived cheek-by-jowl with the peoples of the region, absorbing their environment and languages.
He sailed with the Bugis tribe to the haunts of the Greater Bird of Paradise, and one night, delirious with fever beneath the volcanoes of Ternate, he had a sudden vision of the entire dynamic of natural selection.
Many of the explorers of the time were afflicted and often killed by malaria, or the "ague" as it was called.
 "Those who have had the advantage of experience in such matters" , wrote Austen Layard, a contemporary of Wallace who had discovered the ancient city of Nineveh, "know that one of the results of fever is a considerable excitement of the brain, consequent audacity and no small additional loquacity only limited by physical debility." 
It was in such a state of mind, suffering from malaria in the Moluccas, that Wallace had his vision.
 "During one of these fits," he later recalled, "while again considering the problem of the origin of species there suddenly flashed upon me the idea of the survival of the fittest." 
In this ague-altered state Wallace perceived the whole symphony of evolutionary change with such immediacy that he feared it would escape him like a dream before he could write it down.
Over the following days between attacks he managed to pen his brilliant fifteen-page paper called "On the Tendency of Varieties to Depart Indefinitely from the Original Type" , and mailed it to Darwin, whom he had never met, with shy requests for his comments.
The "Ternate" paper threw Darwin into a panic.
He suddenly risked losing the crowning glory of a lifetime's secret endeavour to an unknown malarial "fly-catcher" as the humble naturalist-explorers were known.
After weeks of private anguish followed by questionable closed-door lobbying of the leading minds of the Royal College of Science, Darwin found himself forced to go public on the issue of evolution for the first time, when both their papers were read at the Linnean Society of London on that momentous July evening of 1858.
What is seldom revealed in the history books, though perfectly easy to verify, is that Darwin's contribution was less a paper than a rambling series of notes which contained nothing novel, whereas Wallace's "Ternate" paper was the first complete exposition in writing of "Descent and Divergence with modification through variation and Natural Selection" — which is the very kernel of what has become known as the "Darwinian" theory of evolution.
Although some kink in the confluence of timing and temperament may have robbed Wallace of his posthumous fame, it may also have robbed the rest of us, through this century of science, of a broader view of the hidden forces of life.
Wallace, strongly influenced by the multi-dimensional environment and circumstances under which he had perceived the Theory, had also anticipated its very limitations, which are only now being explored by Neo-Darwinists and modern theorists of evolution.
To him, the "checks and balances" of Natural Selection were only some of the forces operating in what he saw as the evolution of spirit or mind through matter.
Recognizing amongst the life-filled Indonesian islands a way of  being and mind as alien as it was complementary to Western thought, Wallace's writings were also amongst the first to gleam with an enlightened futurism.
He was amongst the earliest modern scientists to confront seriously the supernatural dimensions of nature and mind, and was a pioneering author who supported, amongst other novel ideas, equal rights for women, social justice, nature conservation and land distribution.
Whereas Darwin had laboured with left-brain precision in solitary confinement with fossils and formaldehyde, Wallace had wandered, alone and open-minded, through the cauldron of the world, amongst a diversity of life unimagined by Western minds.
His dream was to transform the world, as the key to the Theory of Evolution for which Darwin had striven so long.
However, although his bust shares a place of honour in the apse of Westminster Abbey with that of Darwin, commemorating him as a great co-pioneer of rational science, elsewhere his memory is largely eclipsed perhaps because of the premature breadth of that dream.
Only in the Ring of Fire, in the Eastern islands he loved, is his name writ large — on any globe worth its salt — in The Wallace Line.
The Wallace Line commemorates his observation that a zoographical division slices the Indonesian archipelago in half, running down between Celebes and Borneo, Bali and Lombok, and thinly separates very old and very new life-forms.
Nowhere to the west of the Wallace Line can be found the giant Cassowary, Birds of Paradise or marsupials of Australasia, and nowhere to the east of it are found the tigers, elephants, primates and early man which crossed the land-bridge once connecting Java, Sumatra and Borneo to mainland Asia.
In the early days of "Darwinism" , when the race was on to find tangible evidence of the "missing link" between apes and men, it was again from Indonesia that, from a few molars and shreds of skull, Java Man and Gigantopithecus would briefly rise to claim the title.
Distressing as it was for the Victorian establishment to contemplate having descended from monkeys, it would not be long before new advances in physiology and biochemistry revealed that we virtually are monkeys — differing from the chimpanzee, for instance, by a single chromosome in our genetic code.
And, again, the monkeys, like ourselves, are still more lizards than anything else; for, as Carl Sagan points out, by far the longest period of our air-breathing history was spent evolving through the Age of Reptiles.
He suggests the millions of years we spent as reptiles are what have kept the myth of the dragon alive in the art and literature of the world, and this theory also has a physiological basis.
Sagan and other experts refer to our three separate brains (quite apart from our right and left lobes) each with its own biochemistry.
The top, thinnest, most recently evolved neocortex is the rational "thinking cap" , found only in such higher animals as whales, primates and humans.
Beneath it lies the limbic system, seat of the strong emotions and intuitive responses which we share with birds and lower mammals.
Beneath that again is a bulb at the top of the spine, the Reptilian (or R-) complex, governing our deepest autonomic functions.
Our biochemistry  is part dragon: the "R-complex" , which awakens when our thinking and feeling brains are off guard, in trance, afraid or asleep, is a dragon brain.
It is the root of our sense of smell and taste, fear and desire, and it still remembers the dragons we ate and were eaten by.
It dreams dark dreams, but keeps the engine-room running, the peristaltic movements, the flight and fight hormones.
No one quite knows what lives in that dark sea of the deep genetic unconscious.
In the early days of discovery medieval cartographers used to mark the empty, unexplored spaces on their maps as Where Dragons Be".
But it wasn't until 1912, from the volcanic outcrop of Komodo in Indonesia's Lesser Sundas, that the myth of the dragon became reality with the discovery of Varanus komodoensis — a running, swimming, tree-climbing lizard, over twelve feet long and very carnivorous.
The Komodo Dragon lives off pigs, goats, deer — and man, if he can get him.
He is an evolved and voracious hunter, scenting his prey with a long, pink, forked tongue which flickers over the ground like a flame.
High on the Borassus Palm escarpments of Komodo stands a cross to Baron Von Reding Biberegg who died here in 1974.
Although there have been several since, he is the first known Westerner to have been eaten by a Komodo Dragon.
The fertile biochemistry of forests constantly racked and renewed by volcanic eruption — which once prevailed throughout the cooling surface of the globe — still continues in Indonesia, and amongst her trembling islands we find time-capsules of our earliest beginnings, when dragons stalked the earth.
Throughout Indonesia we found that the fears of myth are still alive today.
Newspapers frequently publish macabre photographs of people who have been cut, too late, from the innards of enormous snakes, some of which reach thirty feet long.
We were to meet them ourselves, when we followed the professional python-hunters into the burial caverns of Celebes island.
In the Age of Reptiles, some species sought to escape their cousins by growing smaller and climbing higher.
A few sprouted wings and took to the air, without bothering to become birds first.
Flying reptiles still disconcertingly glide and slither through the Indonesian sky.
The eight-inch-long Draco volans, or "flying dracula" lizards, swoop amongst the eaves of our Balinese house.
In Borneo there are flying frogs, which parachute laterally on voluminous feet.
There's even a flying snake, which flattens itself into an aerofoil and swims through the air like flying tagliatelle.
Lizards of course became birds — some as unearthly as the Greater Bird of Paradise, and others, like the Cassowary, which reversed tactics somewhere in the past and returned to the earth again.
This flightless, quarter-ton relative of the Australian emu has a head like a monstrous purple turkey, runs through the undergrowth in small bands, and has been known to kick a man to death with its six enormous taloned toes.
Just as the early European explorers of the North Atlantic would bring back the tusks of narwhals and pass them off as the horns of unicorns, so would the early Arabian and Indian sailors bring back the massive bones of the Cassowary as evidence of the giant "roc" of the Sinbad  sagas, or the Garuda bird of Hindu mythology, which is today the symbol of Indonesia's national airline.
Some lizards climbed higher still in that primordial forest, their claws changing into fingers with opposing thumbs.
Their eyes migrated from the sides of their heads (where their cousins still keep them), to look forward with acute stereoscopic vision, and their brains began to mushroom in proportion to their body-weight.
Almost identical in size and looks to this prosimian ancestor of ours is the extraordinary tarsier, a primate just six inches tall, found only in the high jungle canopy of Indonesia and the Philippines.
With human-like mouth and hands, and enormous eyes in a head which can swivel 180 degrees, the Dyaks of Borneo refer to him as hantu — meaning "ancestral spirit" .
Like an apparition of our goblin beginnings, the tarsier still stalks the treetops at night.
Some of this goblin's progeny were later to descend to the ground again, increase in size, and stagger towards humanness.
It was from the same haunts as the tarsier that the original "Wild Man of Borneo" — the orangutan, or "man of the forest" — was to reveal himself: a creature so vulnerable, so resonant with human emotion, that we could not fail to see ourselves in him.
The islanders of course do not share our Western compulsion to distinguish ourselves, the rational "observers" , from the rest of nature.
Their unhesitating assumption that they contain all life as much as they are contained by it has helped them forge what to our eyes is an almost supernatural intimacy with their forests and creatures.
They acknowledge that elephants and man, for instance, have a very close relationship, having climbed the evolutionary ladder side by side, losing hair together, returning to and re-emerging from the sea again, growing warm blood, emotion and long memories.
They even went to war together.
Like the moguls of India and Siam before them, the ninth-century island kings commanded great armies mounted on trained fighting elephants.
Their wild descendants are still very much at large today, and with the gradual encroachment on their habitat there are increasing reports in the local newspapers of troupes of elephants rampaging through Sumatran villages in grand old-fashioned style.
A few years ago the cousin of a Sumatran friend of ours was killed by a singularly persistent elephant.
He came across it raiding his fruit garden, unwisely wounded it with buckshot, and was chased up a tree for his trouble.
He remained there for what must have been an anxious day and a night while the elephant returned to and from a nearby stream with trunkfuls of water with which it was finally able to loosen the roots of the tree, push it over, then trample its victim just as his belated rescue-party arrived on the scene.
In the jungles of north Sumatra lie the long-abandoned temple ruins of Moera Takoes.
Built in the eighth century by an unknown Shivite sect, they honour the elephant god Ganeesh — the Hindu patron of, amongst other things, partying, wisdom and jovial abundance.
Although the people who built this temple have long since vanished, legend has it that during certain summer full moons the wild elephants arrive to roister amongst the ruins.
We discovered that the temple is  surrounded by durian trees, the fruit of which ripens and ferments through June and July.
These highly alcoholic, elephant-sized olives are occasion for a drunken orgy of pachydermic proportions.
With a prickly, reptilian skin, the durian can weigh forty pounds and measure a yard across.
Every year several people are killed by these preposterous objects, ripe and fermenting, plummeting on to their heads from a great height.
You cannot harvest a durian, but the first person to reach a fallen fruit, even on another's land, may claim it.
It smells and tastes so richly revolting that it is claimed to be the only fruit expressly forbidden in the plush Mandarin Hilton hotel in Singapore.
Even in Jakarta's sixteen-storey Kartika Plaza hotel the fruit may only be consumed on three floors specially set aside for it.
A durian dilettante is a breed apart: there are even special clubs which devote themselves to following the durian season round the entire archipelago — feasting and waxing lyrical on the fruit's narcotic delights.
Tigers are also particularly addicted to ripe durian.
Sumatra is the only place left where tigers are on the increase, and with the human population expanding in inverse proportion to that of deer and wild pig the tigers have begun making the logical dietary transition.
Shooting a known man-eater used always to be done by attracting it to fresh meat, until it was discovered that a ripe durian is a much stronger lure.
There's even a joke about the "reverse run" , which can happen when several people converge at speed towards the sound of a fallen durian, to find they have been beaten to it by a possessive and alcoholic tiger.
The Sumatran tiger is more closely and deceptively striped than his larger Indian cousin, and quite a bit more intelligent.
In 1956 a Dutch ship was bound for home up the Malacca Straits with a cargo of animals for the Amsterdam Zoo, when a large Sumatran tiger burst out of the forward hatch, scattering deck-hands.
It sniffed the air once, went to the starboard railing, where the coastline of Malaysia was clearly visible only four miles away, and returned to bound over the port railing sixty feet into the sea, to begin swimming directly for the shores of Sumatra, a further eighty miles away and still beneath the horizon.
But more than elephants, big cats and early man moved down from continental Asia across that early land-bridge to the islands.
In later years wave after wave of Confucian, Hindu, Buddhist, Christian and Islamic influences swept from the flowering civilizations of Asia and entwined with the pre-existing "oceanic" animism of the islanders.
The Wallace Line also appears to mark the division between two very different kinds of mind — the "continental" and the "oceanic" .
There is increasing evidence that the original island peoples did not migrate eastwards from continental Asia, but evolved independently for millennia amongst the isolated atolls of the south Pacific — resulting in a different turn of mind.
Little is known about early Micronesian Melanesian culture mainly because they developed no writing, passing down their knowledge through words and music instead.
But we do know that they reached a high, technology-free civilization, practised a sophisticated form of navigation, and ranged over the entire Pacific in ocean-going outriggers.
Severed from the rest of the world by sea and sky, an atoll-dweller, unlike a continental people, cannot easily resolve his differences with neighbours by simply fighting or moving on if he loses.
He must adapt, turn inwards, integrate with his community.
Food and possessions become shared, rather than bought and sold.
Decisions, too, tend to be collective, rather than autocratic.
So limited are the staples, materials and real estate of an atoll-dweller that every food, object and square yard of his diminutive space becomes invested with mana, an invisible, inter-connecting kind of holy force, making everything individually "alive" .
Rein is given to the intuitive, or "right brain" , faculties — which perceive wholes, rather than their parts.
Whereas the "continental" mind is logical, monotheistic and autocratic, the "oceanic" mind tends to be holistic, polytheistic and democratic.
The "earth" mind is more practical, the "water" mind more mystical.
The difference between them is further revealed by the barriers which each had to overcome in its discovery of the other.
In the early days it was water, in the form of the "endless ocean to the west" , which was the first major obstacle for continental European explorers.
For the oceanic explorers their obstacle was land.
This is well illustrated by the oral history of the Gilbert Islanders' discovery of South America in the distant past.
On sighting the desolate Andes after a voyage of four months, they were far from delighted, and apparently turned round and sailed back towards their atolls.
They described it as Maiwa, "the wall at the side of the world, four moons" sail to the eastward…a land which stretches to the north and to the south without end…beyond the furthest eastward island it lies — a wall of mountains up against the sun".
Indonesia is aware of being strung between the two worlds of eruptive land and tempestuous water.
The nation refers to itself not as "this sovereign land of ours" , as do other countries, but to "this, our land-and-water" — and considerable ritual effort is devoted to maintaining a balance between the two.
The hereditary sultans (of which there are  only two officially left) are still called "Susunan" — the "Life-Giving Mountain" , or "Volcano" .
The Sultan of Jogjakarta annually gives the royal substances of his hair and fingernail cuttings to be deposited as placatory offerings in the crater of the great Merapi volcano.
Only a few years ago, during the "Hundred-Year Ceremony" propitiating the Gungung Agung volcano on Bali, Indonesia's President Suharto attended the sacrifice of over eighty animals, including leopards and eagles, which were cast into the smoking crater.
At the other end of the spectrum is the powerful Loro Kidul, "Goddess of the South Seas" .
We met her under various guises throughout the islands: with the Bugis pirates in the Moluccas, where we cast offerings into her whirlpool; and amongst the tribesfolk of Sumba who rely on her signal in the form of the one night each year when Sumba's beaches briefly swarm with red sea-worm — to initiate their deadly war-sport between lance-throwing armies of mounted warriors.
We met her, too, as the patron goddess of the birds' nest gatherers of southern Java, who pursue what must be one of the world's most hair-raising professions.
Much of Java's bleak southern coast consists of 300-foot cliffs which are assaulted by breakers which have swept, uninterrupted, from Antarctica.
The swiftlets which produce what the Chinese consider the most desirable edible birds' nests roost in caves beneath these cliffs.
The gatherers descend the sheer cliff-face on coconut-fibre ropes to an overhang some thirty feet above the water where a rickety bamboo platform has been built.
From here they must await their wave, drop into it, and be swept beneath the overhang into the cave where they grope around in total darkness filling their bags with birds' nests.
They must then choose their wave again to carry them out and up with the swell so they can seize the ropes dangling from the platform.
The timing must be very precise.
We talked to a gatherer who had misjudged the tides and found himself unable to leave the cave for thirty-two days.
In utter darkness, breathing rank air and deafened by the breakers outside, he kept himself alive by groping around for newly hatched swiftlet nestlings and the grubs which thrive in the dung on the cave floor.
It is perhaps understandable why these men, who earn their livelihood in the very embrace of the Goddess of the South Seas, should take her so seriously, but it came as more of a surprise that the Sultan of Surakarta should do the same.
Sultan Pakubuono XI of Surakarta comes from a lineage reaching back to the ninth century and, despite Indonesia's official birth into the modern age with her independence in 1949, the Sultan, like his ancestors before him, remains the uncrowned "Pope" of pre-Islamic Javanese mysticism.
For many years we sought access to him and the inner sanctum of his medieval palace, until in 1981 he finally gave us the first filmed interview ever granted by one of his line.
It was then that we made the surprising discovery that the Sultan, "the Great Mountain" , is officially married to Loro Kidul.
Rising from the palace courtyard is a ninety-foot phallus-shaped tower.
Once a year his "Superlativeness" is ritually cloistered in its upper chambers for a night of passionate  consummation with the Goddess of the South Seas.
The outer walls of the palace are thronged throughout the night by crowds eagerly awaiting news of the outcome.
For it is on her satisfaction with this supernatural tryst that the stability of the following year depends, and the equilibrium between Indonesia's volcanoes and oceans — her earth and water natures — can prevail.
It is hardly surprising that the Indonesians have been so profoundly affected by their kinetic environment, for theirs is the most tectonic nation on earth, boasting some 34 per cent of all the world's active volcanoes, and registering an average of three earthquakes a day measuring over 5 on the Richter scale.
Of a total population of some 160 million Indonesians, about 151 million of them dwell on or near volcanoes, thriving on the rich nutrients which make their islands so fertile.
Here in Indonesia, at the most fragile geographical division between the earth's outer, congealed crust and its inner, molten magma, we also found amongst the peoples themselves the thinnest division between our more recently evolved left-brain, rational faculties, and the millennia-old storehouse of right-brain intuitive wisdom.
The supernatural is constantly present, and what the West considers in the realm of the paranormal the Indonesians have raised to a fine art; the islands seethe with sorcerers, healers, sages and mystics.
Whereas the continental mind prefers a firm division between the "observer" and the "observed" , the oceanics see no such clear distinction.
The Dyaks of Borneo, for instance, have always referred to the orangutan as the "man of the forest" , treating him at least with the dignity accorded to neighbouring tribes, whereas the Europeans, on examining the first Tierra del Fuegans brought back to the West, could not decide whether to classify them as humans or animals.
This approach characterizes much of the brief and rather shameful history of anthropology, where the study of Man has not been of you and me so much as of those other strange folk whose bodies, habits and beliefs were alien, but whose lands, raw materials and pagan souls were so promising.
Only now, when the tribal peoples have almost gone, has the West awakened to the fact that, rather than their lands and possessions, it is their subtle abilities and specialized environmental wisdom, forged since the beginning of time, which are of paramount importance to us all.
The new psychologies of hypnotic suggestion and "creative visualization" are increasingly aware that we are capable of infinitely more than the assumed constraints of "physical laws" on our bodies and minds would have us believe.
The Indonesians have no such constraints to overcome.
From earliest childhood, through trance and possession, they practise surrendering to other than themselves.
In High Javanese the word for a man means "half a woman" and that for a woman means "half a man" ; when a couple are separated, the individuals can be possessed by the energies of their mate.
Entire communities may become possessed.
In the Moluccas we watched people piercing their cheeks and arms with swords, submitting to having their backs and chest beaten with boulders, eating glass, rolling in fire — and suffering no ill effects.
In Ceram and Borneo, when a villager is taken by a crocodile, there are shamans who specialize in possession by the apologetic spirit of a crocodile god, who leads the community to the guilty beast.
Whereas "animal familiarization" is now only a fading memory in European folklore, it is still common in the islands, and there are shamans who claim regularly to enter the bodies of creatures to stalk the woods and fly the air at night.
Like the sages of India, there are individuals with "animal power" who can sit alone in the forest attracting wild animals to them.
Conversely, people can become possessed by animal souls.
In Cilicap in southern Java we have watched old men being most convincingly possessed by what they call the spirits of horses, monkeys and pigs.
They began eating hay, nuts, and even raw offal in enormous quantities, until slapped out of trance by the overseers.
There is also a form of transferred possession in northern Celebes in the rite of the "dancing bamboos" .
It begins with two entranced dancers fencing with short bamboos, and ends with the dancers unconscious in the arms of the community, while the bamboos continue dancing on their own as if they were slivers of paper on an electrostatically charged diaphragm.
The dramatic arts of masked dance and puppetry are also but thin excuses for shamanic possession.
One of the more sinister involves the Segale-Gale puppet, which is occasionally still seen during the funeral rites of Batak chieftains in north Sumatra.
Human-sized, and resting on a wheeled platform, the puppet is operated by a shaman through wires and levers extending some six feet behind it.
With articulated limbs and facial expressions which even allow the effigy to weep tears and gnash its teeth, it springs fully to life before the hypnotized community, dragging the priest behind it, speaking recognizably in the voices of the recently as well as more distantly departed.
It was a form of meditational surrender and possession by a higher form of energy which first drew us to Indonesia, and the Subud ashram in Java.
But this only gave us a taste of the variety of altered states we  would encounter ahead.
Isolated for long periods amongst little-known peoples, our sole defence lay in a sort of encounter therapy, a complete vulnerability to our hosts' ways of being and seeing.
There were places where we were the first Westerners ever to have been seen, though we pre-existed in their racial memory as ugly, dominating invaders.
To be a highly visible minority of two in communities which were often as expressive as they were antagonistic was an abrupt reversal of the roles we had so unthinkingly come to accept in our British prep schools.
To be greeted by complete strangers with instant derision was a sobering experience, and it vividly reminded me of what it must have been like for those first black people, in the eighteenth century, walking the streets of England freely.
There were coastal villages in Celebes and Borneo where the men would scowl and stride away, the women would slam their doors and window shutters in our faces, and the children would follow us down the street in howling, baiting hordes, challenging us to lose our poise.
This was more a psychological war of attrition than a physical threat, but it was on just such an occasion that we used what might be called our only "weapons" — a couple of pairs of plastic, luminous, blood-shot eyes which I had picked up in an American novelty store over Halloween.
An aggressive mob of youngsters had been closely dogging us for some time and, emboldened by our apparent failure to notice them or to quicken our pace, had begun throwing stones.
When we stopped and slowly turned, with our bulging eyes in place, the gang scattered with such blood-curdling screams that we wondered if we hadn't overdone it, and felt sufficiently ashamed of ourselves never to use the eyes again.
In Bali, amongst the community of wise and loving farmer artists where we have our home, such a stunt would be as unbelievable as it would be unnecessary, for when it comes to the supernatural — or human trickery, for that matter — the Balinese are old hands.
The full power of trance possession first came through to me in Bali while watching the all-night shadow plays by the great dalangs, or puppet-masters, such as Madra.
Though tragically killed in a recent motorbike accident, Madra was an undisputed maestro of the art, as well as an easy and informative friend whom I had known for some time, so it was a shock to witness the epic genius which came through him, and the transformation which both he and his audience underwent in that open village square the first time I saw him perform.
I had to leave my place in front of the screen frequently and go behind to convince myself that each new voice was indeed coming from the same man.
The dalang is the supreme shaman of the community, and requires rigorous yogic training in breathing, fasting and energy-conservation techniques, as well as in languages and mythology.
Above all he becomes a technician of controlled trance, to which he then surrenders totally — perhaps rather unknowingly as do our greatest actors and musicians.
The dalang may perform for up to ten hours without a break, while singing and speaking in different voices for each of as many as 125 different shadow-puppet characters.
Alternating between four different languages, ranging from the archaic Pali of medieval India, through Javanese and Balinese, to the coarsest of contemporary "market" Indonesian, he will simultaneously conduct a full gamelan orchestra with his feet.
Through his voice and hands will pour all the archetypes of the great Hindu epics of existence, their battles and heroes, gods and demons.
The national news, local gossip, your neighbour, too, all come alive and take their place to strut briefly with the immortals on the shadow screen.
The dalang is the apotheosis of the wizard priest, the shamanic bard who conducts the Eternal into the presence of the community, confronting them with their deepest values and beliefs.
The Balinese talk of the great dalangs who, when "possessed by light" beyond the shadow screen, are occasionally seen to glow with a flickering nimbus, as they speak in voices not their own.
The shadow-screen becomes the battle-ground for the eternal conflict — at least in this illusory world of Maya — between the primordial opposites of Light and Darkness, Chaos and Order.
Neither the demonic nor the angelic is suppressed.
In the dramatic arts, which children are taught as soon as they can walk, each participant has a chance to become personally possessed by the soul of the character he is playing.
One of the most fascinating of these rituals is the rarely seen "Sangyang Dedari" , in which exquisite eleven-year-old girls, dressed in the silk and gold of the Star Maidens, stand unsupported, with eyes closed, perfectly upright on the whirling shoulders of adult dancers.
I recently returned to Bali for the first time since my Los Angeles house burned down.
I feared to find that it had changed, as many had told me, beyond recognition.
But this was not so.
There are more roads, there's even a Kentucky Fried Chicken and a small supermarket by the beach.
Our house in the hills is now closer to the beaten track: Batuan's painting community has grown much larger, and more sophisticated, but its exuberant creativity is if anything richer still.
The Balinese are aware that their deities are only symbols for forces, and not the real forces themselves.
They pick and choose the best of the West and incorporate it into their living mysticism.
The carved demons on temple walls have begun to acquire helmets and machine guns.
During the special day of Saraswati — goddess of wisdom and the arts — offerings are now made to her not only on our neighbour's canvases and paint brushes, but also on our typewriters, cameras, and tape-recorders.
In the rice paddy opposite our house is a temple shrine whose highest points sport electric lightbulbs.
They are not wired, but they serve as symbols for the Light of the Upper World.
Of all the islanders, the Balinese have traditionally had the most uneasy relationship with the sea.
Indeed, the waters there seethe with rip currents and are turbid with virulently healthy micro-organisms.
It is the only seawater I have ever swum in which infects rather than heals an open wound.
We used to treat our coral cuts with iodine, unaware that the coral polyps which had entered the wounds normally thrived on iodine which they extracted from seawater — and were now extracting from our blood.
Treatment with pure iodine promoted, in effect, the burgeoning growth of a coral reef in the festering wounds, and its crackling could be clearly heard if they were pressed.
For the Balinese  the ocean has always been the underworld, and source of their demons; except for a few intrepid fishermen, they used to approach it only to scatter the cremated ashes of their dead.
But recent years have witnessed a remarkable example of their ability to adapt to change.
With the arrival of Australian surfers in the late 1960s, the Balinese took to the water like the true temple dancers they are.
Disciplined in ritual dance from an early age, there are now several young Balinese who rank amongst the world's top competitive surfers.
Our close friend Bobby Radiasa, whom we trained as a soundman and took around the islands on our last expedition, was amongst the first intrepid handful of Bali's surfers.
 "It's just a matter of remaining possessed by Arjuna, who belongs to the Upper World," he told us.
 "That gets me past the fear of what lies beneath." 
Arjuna is the noble shadow-puppet hero who appears to walk on air.
Another young champion, Ketut Widjaya, who had been famous as a child dancer, remarked that he applies what his instructor had taught him.
A Balinese, like a tree, he told us, must remember that he is strung between two worlds, balanced between the pull of gravity and the pull of heaven.
Both the very young and the very old are seen as being particularly close to the Upper World.
A Balinese child does not touch the ground for the first three months of life.
He is cradled and cosseted above the earth and introduced to gravity very gently.
When he is 105 days old a "foot-touching-the-ground" ceremony is held, when the child is ritually "planted" in matter, and first sets foot on the earth.
Until then he has merely been an angel, hovering at the frontiers of the heavenly world.
He is even weighed down with bracelets and anklets, to discourage him from floating up again too soon.
Everywhere in Bali the atmosphere is leavened by the experience of being only half of this world.
It is expressed in their myth of the first human child, or "adam" .
They say that before the first human was born the seven celestial sisters — the Nymphs of the Pleiades — using their sarongs as wings, used to descend to a sacred pool in Bali to bathe naked in the waters of the world.
The prince, Raja Pala, lost on a hunting expedition, came across the pool and spied on the star nymphs.
Obsessed with Siti, the youngest, he stole her sarong from the bank so that she couldn't fly back to the stars with her startled sisters.
Despite her pleas Raja Pala insisted he would only return her wings if she first bore him a child, whose eyes might always remind him of the world she came from.
This child was the first human, strung between two worlds — born of a prince and a sky goddess.
But before Siti returned to the stars she told Raja Pala.
 "You may have this child for his brief life on earth, but after that, remember, he returns to me." 
Even today, when a child cries at night, he is taken outside and shown the stars.
 "There is your mother," they say, "the place we all come from and where we all return, and there is no need to weep." 
But to start our adventure story at the beginning…long before we visited Bali, we escaped the ashram walls of Subud in Java, raised some money to make our first film, and found ourselves amongst a tribe who literally believe their ancestors descended from the stars in skyships.
3 The Last of the Star Children
Midway between Borneo and New Guinea sprawls the great four-limbed landmass of Celebes, which has variously been compared to an orchid, or a spider, depending on your perspective.
Her long shore-lines are lapped by the Java, the Flores, the Banda, the Moluccas and the Celebes Seas.
The island presented such a complex profile to the early European navigators that they assumed her to be separate islands — and her pluralized name remained all the way up to Indonesia's independence when an orgy of name-changing occurred and Celebes was renamed Sulawesi, and her capital, Makassar, became Ujung Pandang.
The sapphire waters of the coast have long been the domain of fierce sea-going tribes who were such a formidable barrier to the early European spice traders that the mountainous backbone of the island remained unexplored until the turn of this century.
It wasn't until then that the Toraja tribe — meaning "the people from above" — revealed themselves.
Being ethnically dissimilar to any of their neighbours, their origin gives rise to conflicting anthropological theories, but when the Toraja themselves are asked where they came from they reply: "Before the dawn of human memory our ancestors descended from the Pleiades in skyships." 
They still build their houses in the arc-like forms, they say, of the ships which once brought them, and their funeral rites, which for their nobility are unequalled for extravagance, are intended to launch the souls of the dead back to the stars of their origins.
When Lorne and our mother, Lydia, visited the Toraja in 1971 they found that the last great king, Lasso Rinding Puang Sangalla, had been dead for three years, and was still lying in state awaiting his final star-launch.
Although this event would signify the end not merely of another king in the nation, but of a dynasty which had so far extended unbroken into prehistory, no one had any idea just when it would take place.
A year later, when Lorne and I reached Celebes to make our first film, the star-gazing Toraja priests were no more certain as to when, or even if, this climactic coup-de-grace to their culture would occur.
We had arrived in Indonesia speaking very little of the language, with 20,000 feet of film stock and what was left of Ringo's £2,000, intending to film our search for the Bird of Paradise with the Bugis pirates aboard the schooners which Alfred Wallace himself had sailed in 125 years before us.
We had talked our way past the immigration officials in Jakarta, flown to Makassar, and checked into the rotting, former colonial splendour of the only hotel on the waterfront.
We were not much concerned at discovering that we shared our beds with  lice, or that the hotel also doubled as a brothel for the town's leading gentry, because for us it had the finest view in the world.
From our balcony we could see the great Bugis sailing prahus scything past us into the harbour.
To watch them, the largest working sailing ships left in the world, shaped like the galleons of dreams, straining softly into port under thousands of feet of black canvas, made us long to put to sea in them.
At night we were visited by entrepreneurs in sarongs and Muslim black felt "peci" hats, who knocked so quietly that for a long time we thought they were merely underpowered geckos.
When we opened the door, they looked furtively around them and hurried inside with grimy bundles of sacking and newspaper from which they proceeded to unpack superb Chinese porcelain.
These fellows fenced, it turned out, for a small syndicate of grave-robbers.
We later managed to track down their elusive boss, Halim, a fragile, sharp-eyed father of twelve, in the back of his porcelain shop on the waterfront.
It took weeks of winning his trust before he finally let us film his operation.
We took a rickety public bus with him twenty miles out of town and then struck out on foot for several hours into the wilderness.
We saw not another soul, even when we finally reached the clearing where a number of circular dustbin-sized holes had been neatly excavated in the red mud.
Only when Halim whistled astonishingly loudly through his blackened front teeth, did a small platoon of grubby, half-naked men sheepishly emerge from their hiding places in the bush and recommence excavating the holes with trowels made from flattened tin cans, and thin probes of concrete-reinforcement steel.
 "This my army," Halim announced proudly and, with a sweeping gesture,"this our private Ming mine!
We have many more, further off, but this is a new one."
We were keenly aware that the local and national authorities, to say nothing of the international archaeological community, would have been horrified by such a spectacle.
And this was just one of a number of sites, known only to Halim and his team, where the early Chinese mariners had buried their dead together, as was their custom, with porcelain some of which had been fired in the imperial kilns of the Sung and Ming dynasties and dated back as far as the eleventh century.
We watched one fellow as he probed the soft mud with a steel rod and then shouted excitedly.
He pulled out a blue Ming vase which, after a preliminary dousing with water, appeared as good as new after its four centuries of burial.
"Fine!
Fine!"
Halim encouraged them.
"Many more must be here; that common bowl always means more.
He turned to us.
 "See!" he said proudly.
"Why government try to stop us?
This bowl mean these men and me already make more money today than three months of growing rice.
My children eat that very quickly."
He grinned.
As the money man of the team, Lorne is also strongly drawn to both bargaining and gambling.
I was appalled to find him investing a portion of our diminutive budget in some sixty bowls.
Less than twenty of them finally made it back to England, alas — but their sale at Sotheby's  made this one of the most profitable ventures we've ever engaged in, and did much to offset our subsequent post-production costs!
Makassar, still barely visited at that time by foreigners, was an eye-opener.
Her chief contribution to the English language appeared to be in the areas of grease and poison.
Makassar Poison, which was smeared on dagger blades to make them instantly fatal, exerted a certain fascination over Europeans.
The seventeenth-century diarist Samuel Pepys, in one of his less endearing passages, describes witnessing the chilling effects of this toxin being given experimentally to a hapless dog in a London gentleman's club.
Makassar Oil (a particularly noxious distillation from coconuts) was a popular hair cosmetic for Victorian men, and perhaps the greasiest of "greasy kids' stuff" ever to have caught on.
It gave rise to its defence, the "Anti-Makassar" — the strip of linen still occasionally found protecting the headrests of seats in the older first-class carriages of British Rail.
Our only other cultural memories of Makassar came from Wallace and the tales of Joseph Conrad, his contemporary, who had written:
At that time Makassar was teeming with life and commerce.
It was the point in the island where tended all those bold spirits who, fitting out schooners on the Australian coast, invaded the Malay Archipelago in search of money and adventure.
Bold, reckless, keen in business, not disinclined for a brush with the pirates that were to be found on many a coast as yet, making money fast, they used to have a general "rendezvous" in the bay for the purposes of trade and dissipation.
We found the Makassarese remembered us, the Europeans, mainly as pillagers and colonial invaders.
As recently as 1949 a Dutch officer had committed some appalling massacres here in a misguided attempt to regain control of the colonies for Holland.
 "Belanda" , the derisory equivalent of "gringo" , was screamed at us wherever we went.
Hordes of hostile bicycle-rickshaw drivers would jeer at us — and it became quite hard just to walk through the streets.
The town appeared very much as Wallace himself must have witnessed it.
The markets were humming with things we had never seen and would require considerable practice to begin eating.
There were two types of cicada: one of them fried, for consumption; and the other alive, for fighting.
For this was the season when at every doorway and table the locals were noisily betting on the lilliputian battles of fighting cicadas.
They were sold in tiny cages by little boys who poked them so that they chirruped for potential customers, for the feistiness of a cicada is judged by the pitch and quality of its song.
The harbour was crammed with the great prahus which we had come so far for, but our attempts to communicate with the captains and crewmen were discouraging.
Their initial abuse would give way to laughter when they understood we were looking for a prahu which would carry us eastwards.
More distressingly, we discovered that the Aru islands and the Greater Bird of Paradise were no longer on their  trading routes and that for the last twenty years they had been pursuing the shorter and more profitable triangular passage between Celebes, Java and Borneo.
We might well have to wait for six months before we found a prahu which was heading in the right direction.
We anxiously resigned ourselves to a long wait, and as the weeks passed we gradually got to know the handful of long-term foreign residents in the town, all of them eccentric survivors from days of former glory.
Hans Weber, a frail, piercingly blue-eyed Swiss, had been a sea-captain here in the early 1900s specializing in smuggling Bird of Paradise feathers back to Europe when they were all the rage for ladies' hats.
There was the redoubtable Mary O'Keefe — daughter of the famous sea-captain who became known as King O'Keefe of the South Seas.
We also found Karl Bundt, born of an incestuous union of titled aristocrats who had fled the opprobrium of European society for the Moluccas before the First World War.
This bespectacled bear of a man had been born and lived here all his life, and was now Makassar's sole expert and international exporter of the rare shells and orchids for which the archipelago had once been so famous.
We were to spend many long hours exploring his meticulously catalogued treasury, practising the identification of species from our slim reference books on flora and malacology.
But it was the German Dr Werner Meyer who was to become our closest confidant and endlessly generous source of both nonsense and invaluable information.
We first found him sitting bolt upright, dressed immaculately in a white safari-suit, eating gado-gado — a delicious local vegetable dish with a spicy peanut sauce — at one of the tiny mobile eateries near the market.
He had a flowing white mane, and an expression of vaguely inscrutable self-possession, giving him somewhat the air of a Nordic Chinese Mandarin.
 "Is this the place to eat, then?" 
I asked.
 "Where I eat," he replied.
"Good.
But, for me, also free."
He nodded towards the couple who were solicitously cooking his food for him, mouthful by mouthful.
"Five years ago now, Hasim here came sick to my hospital, with no money.
I make him better.
Still he want to feed me for ever.
So I come here sometimes, "he chuckled," so he stay healthy."
When Werner heard of our filming plans he took us back to his bungalow, where he proved to have a superb cook of his own, a staggering collection of ethnographic art, and an intimate knowledge of the islands.
He seldom spoke above a whisper, as if to disguise his theatrically thick German accent, and punctuated his sometimes outrageous stories with deep gurgling chuckles.
It transpired that during the war he had been a medical officer in the German Wehrmacht fighting on the Eastern Front.
He was captured by the Russians, and spent two years doing hard labour in a Siberian coal mine.
After his release and recovery he joined a United Nations medical programme for Third World nations, and reached Celebes in the early 1950s as part of a team of sixteen other doctors and nurses.
This was shortly after Indonesia's independence, when chaos racked the nation and Celebes was terrorized by the "Darul Islam" rebels, an Islamic fundamentalist group who succeeded in capturing the entire medical team and holding them hostage for eighteen months.
Conditions were so harrowing that only two of them survived.
One of them immediately returned home, never to set foot in the tropics again — while the other, Werner Meyer, the only white doctor left on the island, stayed on to become the director of Makassar's hospital.
It was a position which helped him survive many subsequent close calls, particularly during the wave of anti-foreign sentiment engendered under the later years of President Sukarno's regime.
 "The Bugis you cannot trust a lot," he whispered to us.
"They like easy trading routes now and they have forgotten old navigation ways.
Often they do not go where they're saying.
And many sink now every year.
The government is very angry with them."
He told us unsettling stories of Chinese merchants who had insisted on travelling aboard the prahus to keep an eye on their cargo, and had somehow been lost overboard while their merchandise appeared for sale in harbours far from their intended destination.
There had also been recent newspaper reports of Bugis prahus putting into the atolls east of Celebes, burning the villages to the ground, and making off with the whole year's harvest of copra the oil-bearing coconut husks — which was the inhabitants' sole source of income.
 "This Bugis journey, on sailing prahu, may be very difficult, very dangerous, now," he warned us.
"Two people you must know.
First, the General, so he can protect you, if he likes you filming; and, second, Chinese trader friend, Tan Hans Yong, who has family in the Aru islands where Bugis used to go.
But much better you try film funeral of Puang Sangalla of Toraja people.
I just hear it begins, maybe one month now."
If anyone knew when this unique event might actually happen, it was Werner, for it was he who had dramatically cured the late king of  tuberculosis in the 1950s, thereby becoming a much loved honorary member of the tribe, and the recipient of all the latest news and gossip from Torajans visiting the lowlands.
This was tremendously exciting news for us, but it also confronted us with the dilemma of attempting to make two films with a budget and film stock barely sufficient for one.
This would mean spending very little on food, saying goodbye to our "emergency contingency fund" , and shooting a usable-film ratio of six to one, as opposed to the more realistically recommended twelve or even fifteen to one.
Werner's "General" turned out to be the commander of the armed forces in southern Celebes — a figure whom we would normally have done our utmost to avoid, given his political power and our absence of filming permits, but he turned out to be an exuberantly friendly man who never asked for them.
He spoke numerous languages, had travelled widely abroad, and was delighted by the prospect of our filming either the Toraja or the Bugis, though he expressed some misgivings about sailing any distance with the latter.
He then astonished us by lending us a jeep, with its driver, Abu, for as long as we needed it.
 "First go and find out what's happening with those crazy priests up in Torajaland," he told us.
"Then you had better start exploring the coast for the villages which still build, own and crew these prahus.
Be careful of them, though; they're not used to foreigners,"he finished ominously, as Abu, a villainous-looking Makassarese Ali Baba, was ushered in to meet us.
He entered the room with the pop-eyed, lock-jawed expression of one who was expecting to hear a death-sentence from his commanding officer, but he cracked into smiles of various kinds when he heard we were to be his proteges.
The General rose from behind his enormous mahogany desk, without visibly gaining in stature, and came out on to the veranda to see us off.
 "Just remember," he shouted at us, "let me know what's happening in Torajaland; don't let Abu too close to those Toraja ladies; and bring back my jeep!" 
 "Tanah Toraja" , or "Torajaland" , could only be reached via a hazardous fourteen-hour jeep-ride, a journey which was not enhanced by the sensibilities of our zealous Abu.
Never before had we experienced a road code which considered any living things trespassing on the tarmac to be absolutely fair game.
Even before we had left the outskirts of Makassar, Abu grinned into my face and asked, "In your country, chickens fly?" 
 "No, they don't," I replied, puzzled by the question.
 "Well, Indonesia chickens fly — look!" he said, accelerating towards a group of hens pecking at some minor accident on the road ahead.
Those that weren't instantly flattened proved to be the first genuinely air-worthy chickens I had ever seen.
One of them even took off to perch indignantly on a rooftop a good sixty yards away.
Despite our strong protestations, this was to be the pattern of "flight or slaughter" for the whole journey.
Human pedestrians faced the same treatment, but knowing the rules they were quicker off the mark.
It was even more frightening when we reached the cooler highlands, where at night people would huddle on the road for warmth, barely visible and apparently asleep, yet able to leap dexterously out of our path at the last moment.
Narrow and deeply potholed, the road coiled without any protective barriers next to vertiginous drops to the valleys below.
Happily there was little other traffic — and most of that appeared to be oxidizing in heaps at the bottom of the chasms either side of us.
Occasionally we encountered a bus or truck hurtling down towards us, slamming on the brakes at the last minute to edge past us with inches to spare.
We were never passed from behind.
Abu was an army man in an army jeep, to which he was wedded as intimately as an Indian mahout is wedded to his elephant.
As a Makassarese, Abu, along with the other lowland seafaring tribes such as the Bajos and the Bugis, was one of the first drivers on the island.
In less than a generation the pirate peoples who were notorious for forging themselves and their sailing craft through impossible conditions had acquired the ability to command undreamed-of tonnage and horsepower with their big toes.
They also brought to the road some eccentric sealore of their own.
It is their custom, even on their largest ships, to show no lights at night — on the principle that it is better to see than to be seen, and that it is easier to see in the dark without the distraction of lights.
When night fell we were appalled to find that the same principle had been carried over to the highway.
During a bright moon, headlights were kept off — otherwise they remained on only when driving on the road alone.
When another vehicle approached to within fifty yards, both would turn their lights off, and pass each other in total darkness.
Six hours into the journey, and several thousand feet higher, we stopped at a small village to quench our thirst and refuel the jeep from rusty milk-cans.
I was afflicted with diarrhoea — and directed to the communal latrine, which consisted of eight holes in the ground surrounded by a large enclosure of bamboo walls.
About eighty villagers followed me inside, and waited expectantly…so I struck out for the hinterlands.
About a quarter of a mile later they were still with me, and it became clear that choosing between dignity and entertaining the village was no longer an option.
They made no effort to withdraw, or temper their gaze or remarks, and I struggled to maintain the sort of meditational dispassion which I'd observed in my cat on its box.
When we took off again we found ourselves climbing ever more steeply through jungled mountains.
The road became narrower, the drops either side more precipitous — and we sought to engage Abu in conversation, more to dilute his fanatical sense of destination than to practise our halting Indonesian.
He responded with exuberant gestures — which in no way reduced our speed and which left is hands free of the wheel for long intervals.
His pantomime became most articulate when we at last reached the two vast geological features which mark the gateway to Torajaland.
They are known in the Toraja language as "Most Holy Penis" and "Most Sacred Vagina" — though they would more accurately translate into a lighter vernacular.
Half a mile away on our  left towered a rounded granite outcrop, about 1,000 feet high; against the opposite mountain, to our right, lay an exfoliating fissure, fringed with forest, about three football fields long.
Both features resembled their names to a baffling degree but, despite this, Abu was moved to expound upon them with such fervent body language that we nearly plunged into the ravine and terminated our lives at the very lip of the sacred symbol of where we had begun it.
It was here that the Toraja believed their first ancestors had descended from the Pleiades in starships to populate the verdant valleys into which we now descended.
This was indeed another world from the coast.
Misty green valleys, shot through with rushing vodka-clear rivers; emerald rice-paddies fringed with golden stands of bamboo, and primary forest towered over by soaring escarpments of granite.
Through the greens and gold rose the curved and painted outlines of Toraja architecture.
Houses and rice-barns, on elephant-leg pilings, rose with vivid panelled eaves to a high taper either end.
They were built with neither nails nor pegs, but merely slotted and lashed together with great precision.
With their narrow base, and expanding gables and roofs, they combined apparently ludicrous instability with extreme tensile strength.
The people looked different, too more akin to the Cambodians or Siamese than to the Malays of the coast.
Some anthropologists argue that they came from China, or in boats from Burma, or even from the Himalayas.
None of them seemed to set much store by where the Toraja themselves say they came from.
Certainly no one set any store by when they said they would conduct their final funeral rites.
For these had to coincide, we discovered, not only with the metaphysical and astronomical indices, as interpreted by the Toraja priests, but also with the more secular calendar of the government, which had demanded the presence of several high-ranking Javanese officials for the final events.
We bore a letter of introduction from Werner Meyer to Puang Ranteallo, son of the late king — whom we at last tracked down in an  astonishing arena.
The road, such as it was, had come to an end and the last twelve miles to our destination were strictly four-wheel drive through yard-deep mud, and over streams alarmingly bridged with thick bamboo trunks simply laid next to each other, so that they separated between our wheels if we took them at anything less than a rush.
Abu piloted us with all the aplomb of a sailor surging through dangerous surf, and finally brought us to an entire circular village of some sixty three-storey houses, all shaped like space-arcs.
This village had been built solely for the duration of the festival, for the thousands of funeral guests who were expected to arrive on foot from the far corners of the kingdom.
The festival village encircled the Rante, or "sacred place" — which was a smaller circle of some forty ancient stone megaliths, many of them still upright and very much resembling a Druidical circle of Celtic Europe.
We tracked down Ranteallo in the most elegant of these structures, which he was sharing with some thirty family members, guests, and slaves.
We were warmly invited to stay with them for the duration of the festival, and were conducted to the top floor for a rather formal preliminary audience with Ranteallo and his elders.
We had been  warned by Meyer that he was a man under pressure.
Recently converted to Christianity, bearer of the burden of funeral arrangements, father of nine, Ranteallo was the recipient of the rawest deal of his perhaps 800 year lineage.
It had fallen to him to inherit not a heaven-born dynasty in an earthly paradise, but the staggering debt of correctly bringing it to an end.
We found him sitting regally cross-legged on the floor, surrounded by elders chewing tobacco, their mouths rouged and swollen with betelnut juice.
We were still fairly new to the local etiquette, so we sat in silence for a long while.
For the first time I really felt myself become part of a tribal circle, accepted as an elder simply by being a foreigner.
Yet as time wore on and still no one spoke I itched to ask questions.
At last I ventured, "Can you please tell us what's going on?" 
The hush grew deeper.
Perhaps they hadn't understood.
Lorne asked again.
The prince at last leaned forward on the verge, we assumed, of uttering some revelation — but instead blocked his right nostril with his index finger and noisily expelled from his left an impressive length of mucus which plummeted precisely through a small hole in the floor.
It was but the first of a host of cultural discoveries.
To the Indonesians, we found out later, one of the quainter of our many vulgarities is our predilection for depositing the contents of our noses in embroidered cloth and carrying it around in our pockets with us.
These water-based peoples find our use of lavatory paper pretty funny, too.
"Cutting down forests to wipe your behinds with? they call it.
 "Our forests, too!" the more politically minded would point out.
We were billeted on the top floor, together with the royal family and about twenty retainers.
An open balcony and a low sago-thatch balus-trade ran right the way round the single room and at night, when the resilient bamboo-strip flooring became everybody's mattress, the family groups, in a transparent gesture towards privacy, divided themselves from one another with colourful cotton sarongs suspended on a fragile network of strings.
People would roll over in their sleep and finish up "next door" , and our own diminutive cubicle was the nightly thrashing-ground of disembodied limbs belonging to our snoring neighbours.
The whole arrangement was on too small a scale for our size, and on one occasion, while making a nocturnal visit to the bushes, Lorne stumbled through the main string, snapped it and brought the curtain up (or rather down) on the whole assembled company.
But in the daytime our top balcony gave us a grandstand view of the arena in which the final events would take place.
Everything below, we were sure, was exactly as it would have appeared in centuries past-apart from one major anachronism, a bright yellow construction crane, which was attempting to plant the last monolith in the stone circle.
Ranteallo explained that a stone had been raised at the death of every Toraja king, and indeed queen — though no one remembered their names beyond a few generations.
His grandfather had been sent to the stars in 1912, when they still knew how to raise megaliths "the old-fashioned way" , which Ranteallo ruefully confessed to us was damn well more than he could do for his father now.
For months they had been trying with divets and tackle to hoist the appropriate two-ton stone upright and into its hole.
 "Never mind," Ranteallo said, brightening.
"What's the point of living in a new, Christian age, if we don't use its technology?
We borrowed the crane from the local department of road construction."
It certainly looked more suited to planting telephone poles than megaliths — despite the fact that the closest phone was in Makassar — and throughout the ensuing month its groans and screams would punctuate the festivities.
Slightly inset from the circle of houses was the "death-house" itself where the king's body, with the queen and her two attendants would"be brought to observe the rites from their residence half a mile away.
We had read that the Toraja hunted heads until as recently as the 1920s, but they were feared by their neighbours less for their ferocity than for their magic, part of which was their unnerving reputation for being able to cause the dead to walk.
Toraja warriors had to die in their own "Rante" , or village circle, if their souls were successfully to return to the stars.
Should they die beyond the Rante, then their shamans, the  stories went, could quicken their corpses long enough for them to walk home under their own steam, even without their heads.
Various anthropologists had remarked on this zombie tradition — but in Makassar Werner had given us a supplementary twist to the story.
The occupying Japanese forces had apparently been so terrified by the Toraja that after a few peremptory massacres they had left them to themselves.
On several occasions, according to Werner's informants, groups of Toraja resistance fighters had been taken into the forest by the Japanese, machine-gunned, and left there as a warning to others.
Later in the evening their horrified executioners had reported encountering them again, in serious disrepair, shambling in single file back through the forest towards their Rante.
Werner had delivered this anecdote with the same wry chuckles that accompanied his more orthodox information.
He had gone on to remark that the Toraja combined various features which were rarely found together: they had hunted heads, believed in a celestial origin, practised a primeval megalithism, built sophisticated architecture and produced a unique written (or, rather, carved-and-painted) language, which very few scholars can read.
The houses all displayed these picture-glyphs, resembling the whorls and yantras of Tantrism, which, reading from the ground up, told the entire history of the tribe, the clan and the individual household.
Some of the finest of these were on the walls of Puang Sangalla's house, where Ranteallo took us the following morning to meet his dead father, and barely alive eighty-seven-year-old mother.
It was a formal introduction.
We had been warned first to make our obeisances to the dead king before we even acknowledged his long-suffering queen.
The interior measured about eight feet by twelve, and was occupied by two "lesser widows" , a fat and contented black cat, the corpse and the queen.
Five feet from her sleeping mat the dead king lay on a low trestle, swaddled in red velvet decorated with very old beaded embroidery.
Beneath him a bamboo pipe extended towards a bowl of Ming porcelain into which his body fluids drained.
Though by now he had largely desiccated, the odour of death was still unmistakable.
Next to the bowl were his bottle and plate which visitors refreshed with palm wine, betel nut or chewing tobacco to keep his soul from feeling neglected.
For the last four years the widow had been forbidden to leave her husband's side, and her legs had so deteriorated that (it being considered lèse-majesté; to crawl) she had herself carried about her diminutive space by her "slaves" , the "lesser widows" .
Tradition required not only that she rot in constricted shade with the disintegrating corpse of her husband, but that she also eat a special diet for the entire period, which excluded any rice at all.
She accepted our brief presence with disinterested dignity — as if she herself were now as symbolically dead as her husband was still symbolically alive.
The "lesser widows" had an easier time of it.
Slavery still existed here, but not at all in the form we were accustomed to in our Western history books.
Theirs is not an unhappy lot — even though they must contend with the customary appellation of "chicken dropping" .
The  Toraja acquire them through inheritance, but they are still "free souls" , and often become richer than their masters — since they are not so rigorously required to re-distribute their wealth.
A nobleman's son will have a "slave" of his own age assigned to him from birth, who will later attend school with him in Makassar, and sometimes even university in distant Jakarta.
In the 1960s the government sought to reduce the animist religious confusion in the nation — and centralize its own authority by abolishing the practice of all but five officially sanctioned religions.
These were Islam, Hinduism, Buddhism, Christianity and, since Bali was already so internationally attractive precisely for its rich blend of animism, the quickly invented category of "Hindu-Balinese" religion.
This would have effectively made Toraja religion illegal had it not been for a young Toraja "slave" who had studied law while attending to the needs of his lord at university.
He had brilliantly and successfully argued that the Toraja religion was one and the same with whatever "Hindu-Balinese animism" might be — and thus Toraja religion was permitted to survive.
In many respects Toraja women are the equal of men.
Sex is encouraged from an early age, and holds no shame for them.
Much experimentation has usually taken place before marriage — which then tends to be very long-lived, though it, too, may be dissolved when either party wishes it.
The Toraja children refer to all men as "Father" and all women as "Mother" — and their blood parents are not necessarily their favourites.
All children appeared to be treated by all the adults with equal and, by our standards, highly indulgent affection.
Thus to be a "bastard" , or the child of what we would call a "broken home" , means simply to have many parents and to be part of a larger, stronger family.
Girls are given names like "Slippery Eel" or "Downy Bird's Nest" , and boys get names such as "Tall Bamboo" or "Twelve Times" .
We were taken aback to learn that the late king's additional name of Lasso Rinding means "Granite Penis" — a title he apparently did nothing to dishonour.
When we asked Ranteallo how many times his father had been married, he replied rather confusingly: "Marriages, only five.
But wives!
Ah!
Very many!"
Apparently he was a man of both great passion and civility, but he was also famed for his ability to project energy.
His anger, when fully aroused, was voiced very quietly, but could forcefully throw people in his presence to the ground.
When the king had died peacefully in bed in 1968 he had been left exactly as he was for the first six months to make sure he wasn't simply astral-travelling.
This was also the period beyond which the Tominah priests could allegedly no longer cause the dead to walk.
Only then was his black cat (a participant in many of the rites) ceremonially informed of his death, and his body reorientated towards the south-west — the "land of souls" — initiating a whole symphony of rituals which only now were coming to a head.
 "All being well," Ranteallo informed us, "within a week now we can transport the household and the king's Tau-Tau to their death-house in the Rante for the culminating rites." 
Tau-Taus, together with textiles and carved panels, are amongst the Toraja's artistic products most coveted by ethnographic collectors.
At the death of a noble, a Tau-Tau is carved in his likeness by a specialized shaman and dressed in his clothes.
It will become home for his earthly shade, and will join those of his predecessors which line the balconies hewn in the death-cliffs.
The Toraja believe we have many layers of spirits, or astral bodies, which at death must detach themselves like the skins of an onion so each may find its proper place.
Some of these will remain to watch over the living; others enter the bodies of white birds, such as the sulphur-crested cockatoos or white egrets which hover over the Toraja rice-paddies.
Another will inhabit his Tau-Tau, while the essential soul is freed to make its journey across space to its source.
Ranteallo was a distracted host.
His recent conversion to Christianity, his gruelling exposure to the banking system in his attempt to raise money for the rites, and his position as arbitrator between the old Tominah priests and representatives of the Jakarta government were getting him down.
He could no longer explain to us what was going to happen next, but he gave us complete carte blanche to explore and question as we pleased, and suggested that we begin by taking a look at the burial-cliffs, about a mile away from the Rante, where the king's body would be interred.
Even with Ranteallo's permission to explore the death-cliffs unaccompanied we felt, on reaching them, that we were trespassing on very haunted ground.
The carved balconies, some over a hundred feet high, were lined with disintegrating Tau-Taus which gave the very sinister impression of watchful armies of waking dead.
The cliffs all around were honeycombed with caverns, which Lorne and I cautiously entered, brushing aside curtains of cobwebs and creepers with our torches.
We gasped to find chambers of dripping stalactites piled to the ceiling with skulls and bones, ancient Tau-Tau heads and crumbling sarcophagi superbly carved with the rippled waves of the "waters of space" which the dead must navigate on their way home.
"OK, that's it.
Enough.
Time to leave!"
I was feeling extremely jittery.
 "Hold on, just a minute!" 
Lorne replied.
"It's exactly like those fairy-tale books they terrified us with.
Remember the Ogre's cave and the mountain of his victims' skulls?"
 "Yes, quite…you've got the picture — time to go!" 
 "Look at this carving," he rhapsodized.
 "Do you realize how priceless this stuff is, and just lying around?" 
Now he was fiddling with a heap of human jawbones.
 "Gold teeth!" he announced eagerly.
"Plenty of them.
They must have been at that game for ages — and no anaesthetics, either.
I wonder why Ranteallo didn't think of financing the funeral with them!"
We finally emerged into the sunshine again to find we were no longer alone in this forbidding place.
A few Toraja children had arrived to tend to those remains of their forebears which were not in darkness.
They neatly stacked the skulls and re-arranged the femurs with a pottering reverence.
We had heard from Werner Meyer that the Toraja custom of burying their dead in high vaults began only a few hundred years ago when Bugis raiding parties from the lowlands began pillaging their burial sites for the booty interred with the corpses, and as recently as 1964 an army general stationed on the island had led his army on similar raids.
We found and filmed superbly carved treasures lying about unprotected which, within a decade, were to be stolen, and subsequently appear in private and museum collections abroad.
We had now been in the village for nearly five weeks, and the atmosphere was heating up considerably.
In every house in the Rante, as well as at every animist site throughout the valley, numerous puzzling little rituals were taking place — all of which had to be successfully completed, apparently, before the final "star-launching" could proceed.
Tominahs and small family groups could be seen squatting beneath trees or next to streams, intoning over sacrificial chickens and burning incense and symbolic offerings woven from jungle fibres.
One of the strangest of these rituals we were to witness only by chance.
Werner Meyer had told us of a pool about five miles from the Rante, known only to the Toraja, where "sacred eels" were occasionally "called forth" by the Tominahs to accept blessed offerings of rice.
One morning, suffering from the cumulative effects of the noise and confusion, we left our cameras behind and took only our  snorkelling equipment in search of this waterhole.
We found it nestling in a golden-green stand of giant bamboos, beneath a soaring cliff.
Its opalescent waters seemed to be everything a Star Maiden from the Pleiades could wish to bathe in.
Several of them, by the looks of it, in the form of three almond-eyed, half-naked Toraja girls, together with their young brothers, were already doing so.
Far from being taken back, they were delighted by our sudden arrival, and unhesitatingly encouraged us to join them in the water.
We splashed and laughed and played together for a long time, sharing their delight at looking underwater through a diving mask for the first time.
They spoke no Indonesian, even less than ourselves, but talked warmly and directly to us in their tribal language as we did to them in gentle English.
It was perfectly understood that no outer differences between us, however great, had the slightest bearing on this shared moment of enchantment together, at play in the sunlit waters.
Things abruptly changed with the solemn arrival of about a dozen ceremonially dressed adults, led by a tall, bony Tominah jangling with necklaces of crocodile teeth.
Our playmates swam quietly to the edge of the pool, while Lorne and I began to climb out until signalled that we could remain in the water if we wished.
Sure enough, against all the odds, and with our cameras back at the Rante, we were about to watch the "calling of the eels" , a rite barely referred to in the literature on the Toraja, and which even Werner had never seen.
While his retainers squatted noiselessly behind him, the Tominah advanced to the edge of a rock overlooking the pool by about six feet, closed his eyes and opened his betel-nut-rouged mouth.
Even the surrounding sounds of birds and cicadas were hushed as his throbbing ululations resounded off the cliffs above us and through the bamboo forest.
After what seemed like a good twenty minutes of this he took a handful of rice from a gourd at his belt and scattered it over the waters.
We floated there, hardly breathing through our snorkels, watching small schools of transparent, leaf-like fish — which we assumed no ichthyologist had previously seen or named — but there was no sign of an eel.
I wondered whether they really meant "water snakes" — a word identical to "eels" in their language — and I focused more closely on the lengths of bamboo which littered the bottom.
The chanting continued slightly changing in pitch, then from separate deep corners of the pool undulated six velvet-black eels, each slightly longer than ourselves, and as thick as our thighs.
They converged beneath the priests barely ten feet from us and settled on the bottom in a relaxed Stygian knot.
When the first handful of rice hit the water they didn't dart to the surface, but calmly waited for it to sink down to them.
They ate a few grains, ignored the rest, and cruised back into their hiding places again.
The offerings had been received, the funeral could proceed.
We were shocked to discover how important this secretive and ill-attended rite was, and realized that our aquatic curiosity might well have offended these creatures on whose appearance, or otherwise, rested the continuation of the entire festival.
On several later occasions we returned to the pool, and tried ourselves to attract the eels with rice from both above and beneath the water.
We were observed only by an old man and two buffalo boys, who eventually informed us that the eels don't eat rice, only live food.
 "They only come to the Tominah's singing," they said.
Lorne tried chanting a few limericks over and over, but we never saw the eels again, though we dived there often.
By now, the nights at the Rante were getting noisier.
Hundreds of funeral guests were beginning to filter in on foot from the outlying corners of the kingdom, bringing sacrificial fighting cocks, pigs and magnificently decked-out water-buffalo.
Amongst them were the rare white, or pink, variety unique to the Toraja, with china-blue eyes like a Siamese cat, and each worth twenty times more than an ordinary buffalo.
The pigs were never pink but prickly, black, red-eyed close cousins of the wild hog.
Some were so bulky that they were borne into the Rante sitting upright like pugnacious lords in specially constructed litters, carried by as many as eight straining porters.
They were much less gentle than the water-buffalo, which spend most of their lives doing nothing, wallowing up to their ears in mudpools, while pampered and scrubbed by the little boys who are assigned to look after them from birth.
Occasionally they are led through the freshly flooded rice-paddies to turn and fertilize the soil; otherwise their duties extend only to being sacrificed at noble funerals such as these, and leaving their magnificent horns attached in layers to the Toraja houses whose residents had so generously supplied them.
We lived on chunks of fighting cock, pork and water-buffalo boiled in bamboo tubes until I thought I never wanted to eat meat again.
Our grandstand view proved to have its drawbacks as day and night literally hundreds of animals were ritually slaughtered in front of us, and the Rante reeked with blood.
The fighting cocks lived in the house with us, sleeping under their owners sarongs, and periodically exploded, at all hours, with stentorian "cock-a-doodle-doos" — or, rather, their Indonesian equivalent, for here, of course, the animals speak differently.
A cock shouts "ruka-ruka-row" , a dog barks "duff-duff" and a cat simply says "meng" !
During our stay we were awakened not only by the cocks, but on several occasions by piercing screams coming from the rice-paddies behind us, which would continue for some time before abruptly stopping.
They were ignored by our host and fellow guests alike.
Ranteallo simply looked sheepish when we first asked for an explanation the following morning, and it was left to Werner Meyer to give us an explanation, when he finally arrived to join us.
He had often experienced it, he assured us, but had thought it had died out with the Christian missionary influence of recent years.
It is customary for a Toraja girl who feels amorous to walk alone into the rice-paddies shortly before dawn or after sunset and begin  screaming.
Any swain within earshot who approves of her scream, and feels similarly inclined, is at liberty to rush to her aid and stop her, which is the sign for other suitors to halt their pursuit and file back to bed again.
Some girls apparently continue screaming despite the fact that a number of fellows have already reached her and are trying to wrestle her to the ground.
She, it appears, is awaiting a particular suitor who is just not as fast on his feet as the others.
The girls were very beautiful, and flirtatious, but as royal guests there was no question of us, much as we entertained the thought, lumbering off with our torches in the direction of pitiful screams.
Now that we had been here for nearly seven weeks, we were beginning to wonder if the final climax would ever take place at all.
However, one evening an imposing delegation of Tominahs arrived unannounced in our royal upstairs boudoir to inform Ranteallo that the spiritual path was finally clear to transfer Puang Sangalla's remains from its abode of four years, a quarter of a mile away, to the death-house in the Rante for the culminating month of final rites.
The king's body was borne on a litter in a sarcophagus resembling a brightly decorated, miniaturized starship.
A smaller litter carried his freshly painted Tau-Tau, and a third, draped in black, transported his widows.
It was a far less sedate procession than we had imagined.
Foaming bamboos of rice wine were being copiously consumed by every level of society, and the two litters were furiously bounced up and down along their journey.
This was to assist the layers of the king's soul to break free and find their proper places, so as not to encumber his final space-flight.
Some of these layers are believed occasionally to attach themselves to the living, which can cause madness and even death.
Thus the "widowed queens" on one side and the "dead kings" on the other raced each other violently through the rice-paddies, bouncing their burdens for all they were worth, while screaming obscene abuse and exhortations to each other.
The unfortunate queen, unable to take sunlight after her lengthy seclusion, was entirely swaddled in black cloth — in which she was undergoing an exercise so rigorous that we wondered if she would emerge from it alive.
But she ultimately reached the Rante and was lifted up the death-house steps looking little the worse for wear and, if anything, pinker with health.
The days and nights that followed this procession became filled with the ghostly rhythms of the Ma'badong dance a cumulative mantric tone intended to induce altered states, which most successfully we found, interfered with our capacity to keep a grip on the job of filming.
It begins with a human circle, linked by the little fingers, swaying and chanting themselves into deep trance with the eyes closed.
The circle expands, ruptures and spawns new circles — which eventually fill the entire Rante with wheeling vortexes of hypnotic sound.
In the Ma'badong, we were told, they could feel all the past and future generations of their tribe resonating through them as one — they could touch their Whole People, outside time, in the here and now.
There was no doubt that this unceasing hypnotizing rhythm was, as it was doubtless designed to do, dulling our left-brain "edge" , and weakening  our concentration and our will.
Rushing about the Rante, attached like Siamese twins by a synch-pulse cable, tripping over and swearing at each other, burying our heads for mysterious minutes in black film-changing bags, endlessly sticking our noses into other people's business was a cause for considerable levity amongst the participants.
Added to the Ma'badong there were now also spontaneous explosions of Pa'gellu dancers, young girls dressed in green and gold and the most fashionable jewellery of the time — hollow Taiwanese watches, without their works, which some enterprising pirate had no doubt made a killing on.
They, too, chanted a trance-inducing song — and their swaying arm movements sought to still the "invisible waters of space" which a dead king must cross.
The finest of the remaining buffalo, one by one, were brought into the circle, and dispatched with a single blow to the jugular from a machete.
From a high bamboo platform the priests, some with battery-powered megaphones, supervised the distribution of every morsel of the sacrificial victims.
The  buffaloes' souls, we were assured, would join the king's Celestial Herd in the afterlife.
Funeral giving is a vital ingredient in the Toraja economy, which is primarily concerned with the redistribution of wealth; gifts are determined by the previous history of generosity between clans and families at their funerals.
Then the rains arrived, in a stifling, continuous downpour, accompanied by shattering thunder, and the Rante was transformed into a red quagmire.
Rather than dampen the festivities, the storm initiated a whole new cycle of tumult with ensuing days and nights of ritual cockfighting which took place beneath a hastily assembled palm-thatched enclosure in the centre of the Rante, observable by the throng from the protection of the slanting gables of the surrounding houses.
They were bold gamblers, and noisily made bets which left some people in debt literally for years to come.
The cocks symbolize the upper world of fiery courage.
They are pampered and hand-fed from hatchlings and their hidden ferocity is nurtured with affection.
A Toraja boy desires his own fighting cock just as longingly as a youngster might desire his first motorbike in the West.
They are armed for battle, with a single five-inch steel spur bound to their right heel with magic knots and whispered incantations.
In Bali, where cockfighting is also a controlled ritual, the cocks have two spurs with honed edges, rather than a single spur with a sharpened point, so the battles differ in style and technique, according to the aficionados, rather as swordsmanship differs depending on whether a cutlass or a rapier is used.
Experience is the name of the game, and surviving the first fight is the hard part.
It is more a battle of style and speed than of brawn or luck.
They are quick learners, and some cocks go on to vanquish more than a hundred opponents before they themselves miscalculate and die.
Losers instantly have their spur leg amputated with a machete, and we were shocked to find that a cock which even for a moment turns and runs has instantly lost.
Losers are also eaten.
Victors, on the other hand, are wined and dined around the community, given the place of honour at the eating circles, and generally behave themselves insufferably.
Occasionally, a cock is such a winner that despite being a potential goldmine for its owner it is reprieved from further battle and enters the mythology of the tribe as a sort of Spartacus Chicken.
With the continual stench of blood, the din of animals, Ma'badong chants, the roaring crowds and general confusion, the days and nights began to melt into a sort of homogenous limbo, but as the ceremonies moved towards their height we noticed that Ranteallo's twenty-four-year-old niece, Rala, had begun behaving oddly.
She would periodically become possessed with rage, strip off much of her ceremonial clothing, and tear about the Rante beating anyone who would stand still long enough with a knobbly bamboo cane.
The children baited her into further wrath until, just as suddenly, she would snap out of it again and return to her former, demure self.
The Tominahs and even her uncle seemed to think this behaviour was quite to be expected on an occasion such as this, with so much soul energy flying around.
Ranteallo himself was looking increasingly unhinged; and, now I come to think of it, so was my brother.
We were all being swept into a maelstrom of energy which was beyond anyone's ability to control or even explain.
With so much happening, and no central authority, Lorne and I were constantly harried by the attempt to film only the crucial  events, which appeared to erupt spontaneously at any time of the day or night, while conserving the precious little film stock we had put aside for the intended Bugis film.
This sense of responsibility was now being seriously eroded by the continuous Ma'badong chants, and by our increasing desire to surrender to, rather than to observe objectively, the wave of history into which we now felt ourselves being helplessly, anxiously, gathered.
On the final tumultuous day, foreign visitors began arriving: two English girls, daughters of country parsons, who had hitch-hiked round the world and about ten Japanese tourists who moved cautiously in a close-packed pod bristling with lenses.
There were also two French anthropologists, a raggedly effete group of Dutch and American missionaries, from opposing Christian denominations politely vying for the Toraja's attentions, and the splendid Werner Meyer, looking like the Cheshire Cat in safari costume.
There was also the party of representatives from the Indonesian President Suharto in Java.
The delirious atmosphere hushed slightly as their column of official jeeps snaked its way down into the Rante.
The dignitaries were led to a VIP balcony from where they inscrutably observed the goings-on from behind their mirrored sunglasses.
It was they who would decide whether such rites should be prohibited as too economically wasteful, or else encouraged as a possible attraction to the future tourist industry.
Ranteallo had already confessed to us that much of the problem of fixing a date for the rites had also been the laborious process of raising money from the banks in Makassar.
 "Forty times I made that ride there and back — in the bus, not the jeep like you two," he told us.
 "But I finally borrowed the money against four future years" harvests of rice!
 "Maybe it has been wasteful," he continued.
 "Maybe it's now time to be wise virgins, and save." 
 "How wasteful?" 
I asked.
"Well, when my grandfather went, more than a thousand buffalo were sacrificed, and the death-village, which was twice as big as this, was completely burned down.
But the Dutch stopped us from doing that at later funerals.
They said it was economically stupid and they would only allow us to burn down the death-house after a noble's funeral.
Then the Indonesian government wouldn't even let us do that."
Panoramic visions of the whole village circle going up in flames while our cameras captured the moment danced before our eyes.
 "Well, could it be, sir," I broached, leafing furiously through my dictionary, "that since this is the last Big One it might be, er, acceptable to send these sixty houses to the stars with — his Highness, your dad?" 
The Javanese dignitaries, who would have disapproved of the suggestion, were already stirring to depart in their jeeps for Makassar to catch their plane home.
They seemed more than content to skip the final episode — the half-mile procession on foot to inter the king's body in the death-cliffs.
This left just three hours before darkness in which to follow and film the culminating procession to the burial-cliffs, and to return to the Rante to cover whatever pyromanic tendencies we might have managed to rekindle there.
 "Not a hope," said Ranteallo, but there was uncertainty in his voice.
 "Perhaps," he continued, "perhaps something should burn…" 
 "The death-house, then?" 
Lorne queried, referring to the least ambitious of all the structures in the Rante.
 "Each one of these big houses costs the equivalent of about two blue-eyed buffalo," Ranteallo explained.
 "We can take most of them apart and use the materials again — which is what the government wants us to do." 
 "But you've already sacrificed hundreds of buffalo," I said.
 "Isn't that the chief waste?" 
"Ah, no, although they do represent food and, well, family prestige, all these sacrifices are essentially offerings to the gods.
How could such an offering ever be wasteful?"
 "How much is the death-house worth, then?" 
Lorne persisted.
Considerable discussion, interlaced with esoteric mathematics, resulted in the general agreement that it was worth about the equivalent of one very fat sacrificial boar.
 "It is like this," Ranteallo conceded.
 "If you provide the boar — your sacrificial gift to the funeral — then we will match the gift by burning the death-house anyway, as we used to." 
We realized this would be an appallingly large slice out of our budget, and certainly a piggish way to treat a boar.
It was also, we knew, a slight manipulation of events: in our first test of choosing between the interests of purely "documentary" objectivity, and those of cinematic drama, we came up wanting.
Yet we consoled ourselves with what we took to be a furtive glint of triumph in Ranteallo's eyes as he accepted our pig money, and swore to us that he would not burn the house down before we could make it back from filming the king's burial in the death-cliffs.
The boar's squeals lacerated our conscience.
Briefly.
And as the dignitaries stiffly walked towards their jeeps and their ride home we prepared again for battle: to film, photograph, and record sound, while keeping up with the uproarious final procession to the cliffs.
Keeping up, and close to the sarcophagus, was no easy task, since it travelled along a narrow raised causeway between deep wet rice-paddies.
At the death-cliffs the Tau-Taus lining the balconies were looking appropriately terrible, staring down with their freshly painted eyes.
Puang Sangalla's Tau-Tau now carried his ceremonial keris and his cane.
Its arms clutched these objects as they were individually passed up the ladder to its niche: followed by its disembodied head, with a physiognomy very close to that of the photographs of the deceased.
At the top they were re-assembled again into the macabre manikin which would house his earth-bound spirit.
Much higher up, an eighty-foot bamboo ladder precariously met the small square opening to the chiselled vault.
We were to discover that it was just large enough to hold a corpse and two breathlessly claustrophobic busy-bodies.
 "Come on," said Lorne, as I hesitated at the foot of the cliff.
 "Ranteallo said it's OK, and the ladder is perfectly safe." 
 "Yes, but he isn't going up it," I replied sourly.
Ranteallo was standing nearby at the front of the crowd, urging us on.
"Yes!
Yes!
Film for history,"he was saying.
"Quite safe.
Be careful!"
The ladder was undulating like a sea serpent as the king's coffin, already thirty feet off the ground, was arduously borne upwards suspended on shoulder-straps between three men.
The bamboo rungs, though wide and strong, were loosely lashed with unreliable cordage, and Lorne's and my first simultaneous step onto the lowest rung resulted in it slipping its knots and depositing us both heavily in the mud — myself for the second time in less than twenty minutes.
Everyone went wild with laughter again, except for the three men above us, who received such a jolt that they nearly released their macabre cargo onto our heads.
Connected by our infernal sound cable, and distributing our weight over as broad an area as possible, we crawled upwards again, like bears pretending to be spiders.
By the time we caught up with the three men at the top of the ladder, they were attempting to heave the coffin into its grotto with a series of hefty swings which caused a wave-motion to be generated in the ladder, very nearly sending us all to the ground sixty feet below.
For breathless, white-knuckled moments the five of us clung there while the rhythm abated, then three of us laughed loudly, one of us scowled, and the other nearly lost his liquids.
The king's body, together with a number of priceless gold and bejewelled kerises attached to the scarlet wrappings, was handed into the grotto, but just as the carved wooden cover was about to be hammered into place behind it, Lorne announced that it was imperative to film the door being closed from the inside.
The shrill creak of the hinges as we were closed into the suffocating darkness of that cliff-top grave was a terrifying sound.
It had something of the squeals of the boar beneath our house a few hours earlier, whose execution we had paid for, but declined to witness.
To me, it also rang of the distinct possibility that it would not creak open again — and that the next sound would be that of quickly hammered nails!
These things always take a bit of time — angles, speed of door closing, creak and so on— but this seemed an eternity.
When we finally did make it back to the ground, palpitating and soaked with sweat, there was no sign of Ranteallo, and much of the crowd had already dispersed on its way back to the Rante.
The English girls, as I recall, were still faithfully standing by the camera we had set up for long shots, having been asked to press the button at appropriate moments when we were not in frame.
Anxious to film the final "fire" scene, we desperately tried to overtake the tail of the throng making its way back along the narrow causeway, but our legs were betraying us.
By now we were amongst a group of riotous children, and I asked one of them if the festival were now over.
 "Yes, all finished," he chirped.
 "Just burn down death-house." 
He scampered nimbly ahead through the crowd with his friends — leaving us trapped behind a leisurely army of elderly women.
 "He did promise, didn't he?" 
Lorne mumbled.
 "Well, pasti means something like" for sure "," I answered.
We rounded the final clump of bamboos in a sprint — until my knees gave way completely.
Lorne stood rooted to the spot, squinting furiously through his monocle.
In front of us was ruin.
The death—house had been transformed into a smoking carpet of a few scattered embers.
It had been torched quickly, gleefully, unconstrained by any outsider's opinions of just how or when it should be done.
It had been so quick and thorough that only a few people now remained around it, staring glassy-eyed, and the Rante itself already seemed oddly quiet and deserted.
In fact many people had turned in and were asleep, before dark, as if in trance; others had already started for home, and would be walking all night.
Abu was absent, and would not reappear for a further thirty-six hours, so we had time to watch the painful disintegration of the space-arc village and the departure of lines of subdued barefoot guests, laden with meat and buffalo horns.
We squatted together next to the ashes of the death-house, surveying the dissolution of the Rante and ruminating on what would have been a uniquely dramatic ending to our sequence.
Close by squatted a very young Tominah whom we had often seen behind the older priests but had never talked to.
He addressed us now for the first time, in far more lucid Indonesian than we had ever heard from his elders.
 "Do you know why Toraja houses are built with those curved roofs?" he asked.
 "Yes," Lorne said wearily,"we do.
Your ancestors descended from the stars in them."
 "Ah, perhaps," he responded.
 "What about the shape of our buffalo horns?" 
He gestured at the dog-eaten hoofs and roots of buffalo horn which stretched before us.
 "We're a buffalo culture, aren't we?" 
 "According to our anthropologists," I replied, even more wearily.
He rounded on us with spirit.
"Your anthropologists laugh at us for saying we came from the stars.
They do not think we may mean the "inner stars" .
The old Tominahs say that this crescent-moon shape means the bottom arc of a great vertical circle of our lives — the section at which we are all most deeply plunged into matter.
It's to remind us that we sweep down from the upper world, slide round the bottom of the circle, and sweep up again, no trouble, if we have any sense."
Our young Tominah friend had disappeared by sunset, and it was well after dark by the time Abu returned, together with Ranteallo, jerking about in the front seat like a clownish version of his own Tau-Tau.
They were all grins and seemed to be on top of the world.
A stack of empty bamboo Tuak tubes rattled around in the back.
 "Presents for my wife!" 
Abu gesticulated wildly.
Then, revealing his terrible teeth in his grin-cracked pirate's face, he went on unconvincingly: "Sorry so late.
We got lost."
 "Sorry about death-house," Ranteallo joined in, flapping a hand and exhaling a miasma of fermented rice.
"I lose all control when people know it will burn.
Nearly burn down some other houses as well."
 "We rest for a week now," he went on.
"We sleep and dream.
And then we dismantle the Rante and sell or use the materials — I don't know quite how or what for yet but, first, sleep and dream."
We returned to spend our last night on the top floor of the now abandoned community house, in what was now the distinctly eerie Rante.
Abu, as was his unshakeable wont, slept rotundly upright, like a benevolent corpse, behind the wheel of his jeep.
Early the following morning we loaded our equipment aboard, and left that ghostly cluster of space arcs embracing the reddened circle of standing stones.
The most persistent image is of the forgotten yellow crane.
Weeks earlier, around the advent of the Ma'badong dancers, it had been abandoned by its relay of inexpert operators, and had ceased to scream.
It now stood motionless, upright, next to the stone which it had still failed to raise, and which lay forlornly dangling over its hole.
That monolith to Lasso Rinding Puang Sangalla, the last great king of the Star Children, was still lying in the same position when I next visited the Rante — eleven years later.
After eight miles of rough driving, we reached the local highland town of Makale, and the only petrol-pump for a hundred miles.
We had filled our tank, and were eating at the open food-stall, or "warong" , just across the street when a dilapidated petrol-truck pulled in to top up the filling-station's reservoir.
Its Toraja driver had left the job to the attendants, and had sat down at our warong for a meal, when I witnessed a carelessly tossed cigarette-butt from a passing cyclist ignite the concrete floor surrounding the pump and the petrol-truck with flickering blue flames, like those on a Christmas pudding.
The various attendants and hangers-on departed at great speed, and Abu, Lorne and I rose abruptly and began backing away into the warong.
The truck-driver, on the other hand, tore across the street, through the rising blue flames, and leapt into his cab.
After a few heart-stopping moments the old engine coughed into life, and he managed to accelerate the loaded vehicle through the flames out to safety.
The blue flames were quickly quenched with buckets of earth by the attendants, who crept back sheepishly, and the driver was soon calmly eating his soup with us again.
It looked like a Hollywood film stunt — until we realized with chilling certainty that none of us anywhere near the petrol-pump would have survived if the truck had gone up.
So, at the very last moment of our very first film, we nearly got the fire we didn't want, and we began to feel more sanguine about the pyromania we had tried to incite the night before.
We may not have watched the Toraja dynasty ascend through a flaming village circle, but we had witnessed one of its sons, very close, leap through a flaming hoop and land on his feet.
It was with a certain sense of foreboding — as if we had seen an omen — that we descended from this mountain fastness to the domain of the Bugis, where we knew we had just two months left to find a prahu to carry us eastwards before the monsoon set in…
4 Spice Island Saga
The Bugis were amongst the great seafaring tribes of South-East Asia.
Mentioned by Melville and Conrad, they were the scourge of the East Indiamen seeking the treasures of the Moluccas archipelago.
They were the bejewelled and silken-turbaned villains who coloured the pirate archetype of our Western imaginations, wielding their blades and their sea-skills like demons, and bequeathing us their name for our night-mares.
Yet, long before we clashed, the Bugis had possessed a highly complex written language, in which every letter looks rather like the cross-section of a different but closely related spiral seashell.
They also had tales which recounted the trials and explorations of their Sea Prince heroes who, through numerous incarnations, led their tribal fleets through unknown waters and kingdoms of dragons and witches, whirlpools and man-eating birds, and forests of half-beasts and half-men.
In length and breadth these sagas belittle our Iliads and Odysseys, yet few scholars understand them and few have ever been translated.
For a millennium or so the Bugis have followed the monsoon trading cycle — surging east on the west monsoon all the way to Aru, at the forbidding lip of New Guinea's swamps, and west again on the east monsoon beyond Borneo all the way to Sumatra.
They have fallen much from their early splendour, and are today really just roving gypsies of the Eastern seas, though they ply their various trades in the only true "tall ships" still sailing for a living — for even the giant dhows of the Arabian Gulf are now powered by Perkins, Mitsubishi and Rolls-Royce engines.
The Bugis' prahus are a magnificent hybrid between the original island boats and the seventeenth-century Portuguese spice-trading galleons.
When Wallace embarked in one of these in his search for the Greater Bird of Paradise, he described it as far preferable to travelling in a first-class steamer of the time:
…how comparatively sweet was everything on board…no paint, no tar, no new rope (vilest of smells to the squeamish), no grease or oil or varnish; but instead of these, bamboo and rattan and choir rope and palm thatch: pure vegetable fibres, which smell pleasantly, if they smell at all , and recall quiet scenes in the green and shady forest."
It was in these and these alone that we were determined to reach our goal, for not only was our finance conditional on such a journey, but also it might be the last opportunity for anyone to make this historic voyage before the Bugis' prahus were gone for ever.
We returned to Makassar from the Toraja highlands with dangerously diminished funds, realizing that we had been in Celebes for two months and that the chances of finding a prahu which could carry us the nearly two thousand miles to the Aru Islands were remote.
We had failed to locate a single prahu master, or "nakoda" , who had been anywhere near them, or had the slightest interest in doing so, and it was now so late in the west monsoon that there only remained another six weeks before we would no longer be able to depart without risking the winds dying and starting to reverse themselves before we had reached our destination.
From our base in our waterfront digs, we spent many harrowing weeks combing Makassar's harbour, interrogating the scowling seamen of every arriving prahu, and exploring the coastal villages with Abu.
Here we saw our first knife-fight which was clearly to the death — and Abu hustled us away from the milling throng which surrounded the two furious young combatants who rolled around like snakes in the dust attempting to stab each other with their "badiks" , the seaman's dagger which few of the locals went without.
It was during these anxious weeks of searching that Halim, our grave-robbing friend, took us to another of his Ming-porcelain burial-grounds, located several hours from Makassar and about half an hour's march from the nearest hamlet.
On our way back to the main road, at the end of the day we persuaded the reluctant Halim to investigate with us the loud festivities issuing from an isolated group of stilt houses.
It was to be our first encounter with the "Bisus" , a bizarre peripatetic sect of transvestite and largely hermaphrodite Bugis priests who, it later transpired, were performing the traditional trance rite to accompany rice-planting.
Immediately we could sense a rough and rather unpleasant atmosphere, but we allowed ourselves to be swept up the steps of the first house into a howling throng of excitable spectators.
In their midst about eight Bisus, ranging from fourteen to sixty years old, were "performing" .
They were drenched in cheap perfume, and draped with gaudy women's clothing and costume jewellery mixed with talismans and ritual power objects.
 "Let's get out of here," Halim hissed at us.
 "This can get nasty." 
I was prepared to second that, but Lorne was overcome with delight at finding a sect which had long since officially died out.
Though shoved and pinched and taunted unmercifully by the spectators, the Bisus quietly drummed themselves into a glassy-eyed state, drew their kerises from their sarongs, and proceeded to whirl  furiously about the room while trying to twist the blades into their own throats and stomachs.
There were certain crescendos when a particularly macho spectator would sweep a Bisu off his feet and kiss him furiously before roughly throwing him back into the circle again.
It was an alarming and not very attractive event in which the Bisus were treated more like circus whores than like priests, yet retained a touchingly self-possessed dignity, despite the ragging they received from their "flock" and the abuse to which they subjected themselves with their own blades.
We questioned the elder of the group — a soft-faced grandmother of a man, with wise and watery eyes — who explained:
"These people, our people, don't know who we are any more.
They treat us worse than their women.
Our job has always been to stand just between heaven and earth — to be neither pain nor joy, man nor woman, but to stand beyond the dualities which rule this world.
We can remain sensitive to the voices of spirits, and can dream of events to come — though few people listen to us now.
The adolescent Bisus were coming out of trance, and now sat bruised and perspiring together, simpering and repairing each other 's damaged make-up.
 "How do you become a Bisu?" 
I asked.
 "I thought it was illegal now." 
"Illegal?
Ha!
You don't become a Bisu,"the elder said.
"You're born one, and you usually realize it very soon.
You dream and feel things like a girl as well as like a boy, and you desire to dress and behave like both.
It is then that you find and join the Bisus to learn the old ways of magic.
Sometimes you make a mistake, and you are not a Bisu at all, but simply what they "— he gestured resignedly at the howling spectators —" call us all anyway, just "lady boys" !"
He looked away, embarrassed.
 "At least," he finished quietly, "if you simply have a woman's soul, but are not potentially a priest, you can still find a place of peace and acceptance amongst us, away from the community." 
Peace was hardly the reigning atmosphere when Halim and I managed to haul Lorne and his equipment out of there.
Chaos was prevailing, in which part of the ritual was to douse everyone who emerged from the Bisus' hut with buckets of water.
We were particularly tempting targets and, bombarded with jeers and gallons of water, we finally fled the hamlet clutching our sopping equipment to our bosoms like hysterical mothers — little comforted by the thought that these were the spiritual mediators of the people we intended to sail with over the months ahead…
During our daily rounds at the harbour front contacting the nakodas, we had met a young, strongly built Chinese man supervising the loading of cargo for Java.
Next to Werner, Tan Hans Yong was to become one of our greatest friends and benefactors.
He shared with us a singular fascination for tropical waters and everything in them, and had acquired the franchise for scuba equipment for the whole of the Moluccas.
In his spotless home, amongst his large and benevolent family, we were fed enormous meals, shown their exotic collection of shells and sponges, and pumped for all we knew about the outside world.
The Tans were international traders, in partnership with family members based in Dobu in the Aru Islands, of mother-of-pearl shell and "tripang" — the highly priced sea-slugs which are such a delicacy for the Chinese.
Yong and his father were the first people we had met who had actually been to Aru.
Getting there by the orthodox method of a succession of highly unreliable inter-island launches was a sufficiently bad experience, they claimed, let alone making the journey with the Bugis.
 "Tell you what," said Yong in his excellent eager English.
 "If you can't find a prahu in the next few weeks, we'll tell you how to set about getting there the" modern"way via the inter-island ferry launches.
It may not take you via many of the islands which Wallace visited, but at least you'll arrive.
And we'll have lots of letters and little presents for you to take our family if you do decide to go!"
It was a week later, and feeling increasingly more desperate, that at the suggestion of Werner Meyer we visited the isolated hamlets of Bira and its neighbour Kasuso, on the south-eastern tip of the peninsula.
These proved to be the isolated buccaneer haunts we were looking for, and the hidden source of most of the nation's sailing prahus and their mariners.
It was a good seven-hour jeep-lurch, even with Abu at the  wheel, and for the last two hours we drove over a tyre-tearing track down a parched spit of land.
We finally emerged on smiling white beaches, fringed with palms and the largest fleet of prahus we had ever seen.
They hung at anchor, suspended over brilliant reefs, or lined the strand side by side, in preparation for departure.
Malaria was hyper-endemic by the beach, so the village had been built on the cliffs above it, near the fresh springs.
A few brightly coloured pony-drawn traps, on twisted bicycle-wheels, meandered down the white-sand streets.
The houses were meticulously painted and rose on ten-foot stilts above the ground.
Their roofs were decorated with exotic pre-Islamic symbols of dragons and flying creatures, and even included wooden aeroplanes with wind-driven propellers.
This was "Bugisville" all right, and our arrival was accompanied by the usual howling horde of kids and adults who jostled us up the steps to the house of the Bupati, the government-appointed chief, where we had arrived to pay our respects.
 "Get the hell out of here, you miserable wretches!" came a loud shout from inside.
"Be gone.
Scram.
Remove your horrible faces from my property immediately!"
It was a tall, thin, almost clownlike man with large destroyed teeth in a long mobile face who was the unlikely source of so commanding a voice; and it was a relief to find that it was directed not at us, but at our surrounding mob.
"Ha.
Ha!"he exclaimed on seeing us.
"Englishmen!
Ibu!
Come and have a look at this, will you?"
Although he was the "Keraing" , the local hereditary chieftain, the government title of "Bupati" actually belonged to his wife, who was the first woman in Celebes to hold the position.
A broad and kindly lady of noble birth, Ibu (meaning "mother" ), as she was simply called, indulged her husband's eccentricities, constantly tidied up after him and clearly ruled the household and the village.
 "Perhaps they're not Englishmen," she said; then, shaking us warmly by the hand: "Please, don't be offended if you're not." 
The Keraing was a humorous, somewhat foppish extrovert, in complete contrast to Ibu, who stayed mainly in the background, signed the papers that mattered, and was acutely observant of everything that went on around her.
But they got on famously together and were to become our stalwart allies in a maelstrom of conflicting vendettas which were to unfold around us.
This seemed a far more promising environment, and we quickly accepted the couple's invitation to abandon our base in Makassar and move in with them in Bira, since it would clearly take many more weeks of negotiating before we could be sure of coming up with a prahu, and a crew, reliable enough to carry us eastwards.
That night, with our generator and four lightbulbs, we illuminated the Keraing's house and electrified the village for the first time in the thirty-odd years since the invading Japanese had withdrawn from Indonesia.
As we sat down to the first of many repetitive meals of salted fish and ground corn, I broached the question of finding a prahu which might carry us as far as Aru.
 "I own four prahus," the Keraing stated by way of an answer.
 "Three prahus!" his wife corrected him.
"Oh, yes, one of them sank.
Well, I still own it, don't I, even if it is underwater off Java somewhere?
Anyway, "he continued," two of them are in Borneo — and where's Sinar Surya?"he asked the general assembly of eavesdropping elders in the corner.
They shrugged at each other.
 "Laid up on the beach," Ibu answered from behind.
 "It will need a lot of work — beginning with a new mainmast!" 
 "If you can find someone who needs to send cargo to the Aru Islands," the Keraing announced, "then we can get the boat and a crew ready for you in a month, which is the last possible time for heading eastwards!" 
Since there was no question of us being able to invest in a cargo ourselves, let alone afford to charter the empty vessel, our only solution lay in returning to Makassar and attempting to persuade our Chinese friends to raise the merchandise themselves and to send us along as its stewards and guardians.
Yong's father was appalled at the idea, but was finally persuaded to invest in fifty tons of raw salt, to be used in the curing of the venison which abounded in the Eastern islands, as well as several hundred plastic chairs, and a quantity of spare diving equipment for the pearl-shellers who worked for the Aru branch of the Tan family.
We were ecstatic as we returned to Bira with the good news, but a closer look at the grounded Sinar Surya and the motley bunch with whom we might sail made it clear that our troubles were far from over.
There was still an immense amount of work to do on the boat, not the least of which, it seemed to us, was replacing her rotting mainmast.
The Keraing, however, had put the wheels in motion, and while Sinar Surya was being prepared for the sea, and the pirates were still arguing about where she might go, and with whom, Lorne and I spent the following weeks suppressing our impatience by exploring our surroundings.
In the coconut groves by the beach scores of men were building prahus from scratch, some over 150 feet long.
Their only tools from the outside world were the "parang" , the broad-bladed machete of the East, and a hand-drill resembling an oversized corkscrew, with which they could make all the other tools they required to produce these spectacular Noah's Arks.
Prahu-building is ruled by ancient deities, mediated by specialized shamans who choose the timbers by "calling" to the trees and cutting only those which "reply" .
The boats thus grew from no clear design — but emerged organically, with asymmetrical spars, as if barely freed from the forms of the forest.
Precisely chiselled pegs of a different wood from the rest of the ship, which swelled and secured the timbers once they were immersed in the water, were used instead of nails or screws.
At night the beaches flamed with bonfires lit to extract lime from the coral, which was then mixed with coconut oil to form the white cement with which the hulls were caulked.
Wherever we had been in the Celebes lowlands people would call out to us, "Hello, mister!" — but in Bira it was always "Hello, Inggeriss!" which we assumed was simply because news of our true nationality had got around.
But it was an elderly shipwright on the beach who explained that all foreigners were called that here, since the only other outsider to have lived in the village was an Englishman named Collins, who, it turned out, had spent many months here during the 1930s.
He had his own small prahu built, and finally sailed eastwards, leaving a strong imprint on the group psyche.
There were even rumblings that we might represent a sort of Karmic return of this man — who had apparently shared our obsession for their sailing craft, as well as for Bira's surrounding wildlife."
Fortunately, Collins was remembered with much affection, which, according to the old shipwright, was the only reason why the Keraing was going out of his way to help us.
 "Ibu and the Keraing are good people," he told us unexpectedly, during one of our many conversations sitting one the beach.
"Listen only to them.
There are many bad people here, too.
It was certainly true that now, when at last it looked as if we might have our prahu, an increasing number of extremely sinister nakodas were approaching us with offers to take us to the Aru Islands.
Some already had their boats fully rigged and ready to go — but the temptation to leave immediately was easily outweighed by the transparency of their predatory motives, and our allegiance to the Keraing and his wife.
It was Ibu who told us that her husband was terrified of the water.
 "He can't swim," she said.
"He used to travel in prahus as a young man, then a guru told him that one day he would die by water.
Now you will hardly ever see him in a canoe.
That's fine by me.
He stays behind now with the old men, women and children while the rest of the village puts to sea for nine months."
For that was how long it took before the monsoon carried these men back home again.
The odds on returning at all were fairly poor by the sound of it; for, according to Ibu, of the  ninety prahus which had left Bira the previous year, five had still not returned, and no word had been heard from their crews.
There was no doctor in the region, and Ibu reckoned that the three major causes of mortality were shipwreck, malaria and being killed by a python.
This seemed rather extreme to us until we discovered that Bira was indeed one of the most heavily python-infested regions in all Celebes.
We heard numerous stories about the pythons even entering the houses at night during the arid seasons when game is scarce.
Nearly all our crew were to tell us harrowing anecdotes of personal encounters with hungry pythons — some of which had been measured at over twenty-eight feet long.
They all wore serpent-like black coral bracelets as special protective amulets against snakes.
Laba, who was later to become one of our shipmates, had been a fruit farmer and had only recently taken up sailing on the advice of the local shaman after a string of close calls with pythons.
Laba was quite a celebrity in the village, and from him we learnt just what it is like to be embraced by a really big snake.
His fruit plantation had been a good four-hour walk from the village, and he was used to visiting it alone.
He had found there the stinkingly obvious lair of a large python, a cave mouth which he stuffed with kindling which he then ignited.
He was standing back to admire the conflagration when the full weight of its rightful resident landed on him from a bough above, where it had been watching.
Flattening him to the ground and knocking the wind out of him, it had begun its killing process by throwing a few coils around the tree to anchor itself, and a few more round Laba, pinning his arms to his side.
It doesn't squeeze very hard, Laba explained, but tightens its grip each time you exhale, making it increasingly harder to draw the next breath.
It made no attempt to bite, but held its face close to Laba's, intently watching him while its forked tongue flickered around his nose.
 "They just look at you very closely," he told us.
It was at this point that Laba had effected the only feasible escape procedure for such circumstances, although it required a good deal of luck.
In the coils adjacent to his wrists he located the python's cloaca and managed to give it one hell of a goosing.
The astonished reptile released its grip just long enough for Laba to break free and stagger off down the track — with the serpent in hot pursuit apparently loudly vocalizing with the same sibilant barks which we were later to hear ourselves while filming a python hunt.
The snake caught him again savagely round the legs with its jaws, but he managed to tear himself away and keep running until he finally passed out from shock and blood-loss.
It was after dark when he finally regained consciousness with the jolting realization that the snake should have caught up with him.
But it had not, and he managed to make his way home to safety.
He was still recuperating at home a few nights later when a rustling from the rafters above his bed proved to be yet another python which had entered the village and was lying in wait.
It was then that the local shaman had suggested that unless Laba became a sailor he would probably "die by python" .
Apart from some rudimentary agriculture, and the building and sailing of prahus, Bira's only other income was earned by the village's four intrepid python-hunters, led by Rindi, who sell the live snakes for their valuable skins to Chinese traders up the coast.
Rindi was a shy and diminutive man of indeterminate age, whom we first met at the Keraing's house and persuaded to take us along with him on a number of occasions to record his unenviable working day or, rather, night.
The first was on the local islet of Likangloe, where the once abundant population of wild goats had recently been massively reduced in inverse proportion to that of the snakes which ate them, and where the resident family of fisherfolk had lost a sixteen-year-old daughter to a python only the year before.
Since a python's skin begins to deteriorate in quality once it has grown to about fifteen feet the largest are left alone, which is just as well as each one must be caught at night, alive and by hand, with a lamp to attract them from their lairs, and at least four men to get them into the sack afterwards.
We followed the hunting team in the dark, stumbling across the scrubby terrain, heavily pitted with limestone fissures, until Rindi located a promising lair by cautiously sniffing its entrance for the distinctive aroma of a large reptile which doesn't brush its teeth.
The hurricane-lamp was placed about twenty feet in front and pumped up to maximum brilliance while we lay sweating and mosquito-bitten in the shadows, fingering our cameras and the trigger of our temperamental Sun Gun, expecting that at any moment a curious snake would be drawn to the light from the shadows behind us, rather than from the cave ahead.
As we watched, a leathery doglike head began extending from the fissure on a seemingly interminable, peristaltically moving neck.
When it was fully clear of the cave, three of the hunters then simultaneously seized it by head, tail and centre and held it straight enough to feed head-first into an open sack held by the fourth man.
It was only about twelve feet long a baby by local standards — but it hissed and barked and thrashed and stank until finally converted into a writhing sack of potatoes.
The hunters had drawn straws for their positions of the evening, which in order of desirability were: sack man, head man, tail man and middle man.
The head man could get bitten, the tail man could get doused with noisome excreta — and if they both missed their grasp, then the middle man got both bad ends of the snake coming back at him at the same time.
Although we were suitably impressed by the mere twelve-footer caught in Likangloe, the hunters promised that before we left they would take us into what was known locally as the "Death Cave" to find the really big pythons.
Lorne and I had often visited this particular cave in an attempt to film the Celebes Macaque, a baboon-sized monkey unique to the island, which nested in the giant tree which grew from it, but we had never thought of actually venturing inside.
Every sunset the apes would return from their day's foraging to sleep in the branches of this giant tree, and we were driven to distraction by our repeated attempts to film them properly in the few seconds after  they arrived and before the sun set.
The monkeys themselves turned out to be a highly evolved and accomplished band of thieves, and were treated by the Biranese as a neighbouring tribe.
Their history told of many wars and truces between the villagers and the "men of the trees" , and of how the monkeys would carry their dead down into those same caves which had served as a human burial-ground or, rather, burial-dump since pre-Islamic times.
The Keraing had told us that in the 1950s a military scouting party from Makassar had angered the village by entering the caves with special equipment and making off with a good deal of valuable porcelain — indicating it had also been used as a burial-chamber by early visiting Chinese mariners.
It had been used more recently as well, during the Darul Islam revolutionary uprisings of the 1960s, when the bodies of execution victims were flung into the cave.
For another ten years not a soul had dared enter it, until the snake-hunters steeled themselves to descend in pursuit of a python which had consumed a child in the dry season of 1969.
On closer cross-examination Rindi confessed that since then he and his team had not entered the place until we came along.
We were to understand why.
It was only a forty-minute scramble away from Bira through dry and spiny scrub before we could see the great tree looming far above any of the surrounding vegetation.
But, on reaching it, it proved to be a good twenty feet taller than it appeared, for it grew from the floor of a protective circular sinkhole, perhaps forty yards across, and with vertical walls about twenty feet deep fringed by tangled thorny-vines and spider's webs.
We cut our way through these and, following our python-hunters, who now seemed considerably less enthusiastic about the venture than they had been when they first suggested it, we slid down coconut ropes to the sinkhole floor and to the forbidding cobwebbed entrances which extended from its walls.
It was quickly obvious why this was known as the "Death Cave" — and, indeed, why the great tree had assumed such vulgar grandeur, for the stinking loam around its roots was thick with human bones.
Skulls of goats and apes and people also littered the insides of the caves — where the air was chokingly rancid — and extremely large, spindly white spiders scuttled away from our lights.
The loamy bat-dung crawled with poisonous six-inch millipedes, and at one point we automatically prostrated ourselves amongst them as a horde of disturbed bats swept towards us to escape.
The deeper we went, the more clearly python tracks became apparent.
Even the tracks smelt like pythons, over and above the surrounding stench, and football-sized bundles of bones were pointed out to us as the regurgitated remains of their meals.
There was a passageway which ended with an abrupt vertical drop into darkness, but it had a conveniently adjacent  stalagmite for attaching a rope.
Rindi, whose crew possessed only pressurized paraffin-lamps, asked to borrow our torch, and revealed with it a patch of silt floor a good thirty feet further down, as untrammelled as the bottom of the deep ocean trenches — except for the unmistakable tyre-tracks of several large pythons.
"See, Tuan, a whole other world down there.
We had to go down there in 1969 following the snake which ate Denke's little girl.
We got it and cut the baby out of it.
We need ropes, Tuan.
The snakes don't need ropes', he chuckled feebly,"because they are ropes.
Shall we go down?"
 "Shall we?" 
I turned to Lorne, who was also having difficulty in breathing, and was quite aware of the idiocy of attempting a further rope descent (and hopefully subsequent ascent) with our equipment.
 "Tell you what, Tuan," Rindi volunteered.
"This is bad season for big snakes.
They're not eating now, they're sleeping.
Very easy to find, but very angry.
Not easy getting up that rope with angry snake behind.
Better we find you more big snakes outside Death Cave."
We were not hard to convince.
We already had a fairly impressive snake hunt on film from Likangloe, even if only a small specimen was caught, and the really big ones would definitely have to wait.
Although all this was entertainingly unpleasant, in Bira the most genuine threat to our lives came disguised in the quietest way, when we broke the cardinal rule of touching an unidentified creature.
We had been  snorkelling together in the shallow reefs when we found the most beautiful octopus, barely a hand's breadth in size, which rhythmically glowed with vivid blue circles.
Since eyesight requires that I do most of the close-up camera work, it fell to me to film the creature crawling slowly across Lorne's fingers.
On our return to London, David Attenborough kindly came over to watch the rushes with us, and when he saw this particular episode he shrieked: "You fools!
That is a fully adult and deadly Moluccan Blue-Ringed Octopus!"
We had never heard of such a thing; and apparently it had only recently been catalogued, after a spate of Australian deaths on the Great Barrier Reef.
It is particularly odd to watch that footage now, in the knowledge that a quick nip from that delicate creature would have sent Lorne into a coma in five minutes — and to the Pearly Gates, or thereabouts, shortly afterwards.
We were to witness a different and more promising sacrifice only after we had spent many patient weeks in Bira, when a white cock and a black goat were ritually slaughtered in Sinar Surya's hull, signifying that at last we were about to depart.
It was a messy sacrifice, since the shaman (the very same who had advised the Keraing to avoid the sea, and Laba to avoid the land) was such a trembling wreck that he could barely hold the machete and needed to be supported from both sides to avoid falling on his face.
 "He's been shaking like this ever since he was sixteen years old," the Keraing told us,"when he first had the experience which made him take up the profession.
He was fishing with his uncle, and they caught a large silver fish.
As the fish died it changed colours like a rainbow, and he left his body and has never really returned to it.
So he's the village shaman."
 "Is there always this much blood when he's on duty?" 
I asked.
 "Yes," the Keraing grinned at me.
"No prahus can put to sea before the black goat of stability and the white cock of courage have been sacrificed for a safe journey.
But if you think this is bloody "— and he laughed his hacking tubercular laugh" our ancestors wouldn't think of  going to sea in a new prahu which hadn't first been rolled into the water over the living bodies of seven women in their first pregnancy!
And, by the way, "he added, as if it was all part of the same subject," I think I've come up with the safest combination of captain and crew for your journey.
You'll meet them tomorrow."
Living with the Keraing and his wife was a very public affair; and, although they barked a good deal at the constant throng which invaded their household while we were there, they were traditionally in no position to deny them entrance, and each resident of Bira got his chance lengthily to observe our every blink and mannerism.
When we were asleep, it had ceased to matter, but when we ate it still remained a bore.
Thirty pairs of eyes stared with unwavering concentration as I dipped my hand into the all-too-familiar breakfast of slightly sour rice and salted fish.
 "Look, he's pushed the fish's head aside." 
 "How can he live on such little mouthfuls of rice?" 
The low running commentary on our every move was a familiar background to all our meals in Bira, but there was an added tension in the air today.
They could sense our nervous impatience, and they were determined to remember everything very clearly, for it could be many years before they would again have the opportunity to witness such exotic behaviour.
Today the big hairy visitors were leaving.
The crowd at the door parted to let through a gaunt old man wearing the black peci hat, symbol of Indonesian nationalism, faded sarong and a shirt with so many patches that it was hard to tell which was the original material.
He took a seat in solemn silence and, uninvited, started to roll up some of the Keraing's tobacco.
The Keraing waved in his direction.
"This is Ladjang.
In the days when I travelled in prahus he always went with me.
We even sailed as far as Singapore.
Never again!
I'm sending him with you to make sure you have no problems.
He is very stupid, but you can trust him and he knows more islands than all the crew put together."
Ladjang's brow wrinkled as if focusing on some minor anxiety that nothing could be done about anyway.
His mouth hung slightly open to reveal one enormous tooth dangling in solitary splendour from his upper gum and which wobbled alarmingly whenever he spoke.
He appeared to be an unprepossessing "guardian" until you looked into his humorous and lively eyes.
We had yet to learn that the "problems" the Keraing was anticipating could come from our own crew, and that Ladjang's job as our intermediary with them was to call on all his diplomatic skills and moral courage.
At that moment the principal "problem" , Tandri Dewa, our captain-to-be, stormed in.
Slight and in his mid-twenties, he moved with energetic nervousness, his sharp eyes darting in all directions, as if on constant guard against a knife in the back — a worrying habit which I have since come to associate with compulsive back-stabbers.
 "Where are your things?" he demanded.
 "We're late!" 
In Europe such abruptness might have raised an eyebrow or two, but in Indonesia it was stunningly rude.
There was a shocked hush, and  then the Keraing, with a sly smile, told him that Ladjang would be sailing with us.
I had to sympathize with Tandri.
This was to be his first independent command, and his status and authority were already, threatened by our presence.
Having to take Ladjang the "elder statesman" along as well was a further humiliating blow.
He tried to argue, but everyone in the room knew that the battle was lost before it had even begun.
We couldn't believe that we were actually on our way.
We packed up our possessions and our battered pile of equipment, walked on air, despite our load, through the butterfly and lizard gardens to the high cliff overlooking Bira's deep-water harbour.
The sea was dead calm and the coral a glistening treasure trove of vivid gems.
Seemingly suspended in mid-air, and connected to this world only by their anchor cables, floated the prahus of Bira's magnificent fleet.
That moment will remain forever crystallized in my memory.
Whatever desperate or mundane disappointments might lie ahead, as we gazed down at those phantoms from another age I felt that we had become travellers in time.
For more than a year Lorne and I had struggled towards this moment and, contrary to all the laws of psychology, we were finding that the realization of our dreams surpassed our wildest expectations.
Once aboard Sinar Surya, the idyllic image was shattered.
Frenetic confusion reigned, as new rattan was hurriedly woven into cradles for her steering oars, rips in her old sails were frantically patched and last-minute adjustments made to her standing rigging.
Canoe-loads of coral and sand were being ferried from the beach to fill her empty hold, for she could not sail against the monsoon to Makassar without ballast.
To my inexperienced eyes she seemed still to be floating far too high in the water, and I doubted that we would get away before sunset.
However, in the midst of all that confusion, Bendra, the shaman, was calmly intoning Islamic and animist prayers, and making offerings on deck for the Nuang Ase, or "leaving the land" ceremony.
He, along with some of the older nakodas, had divined through omens and astrological portents that this was the last auspicious day for embarking on the seasonal voyage.
If we were not away by sunset, there would not be another appropriate departure date for more than a month.
We were not alone in our dilemma, for all the other prahus in the fleet around us were up against the same deadline.
The Keraing came aboard with his guests and family in colourful array.
The Nuang Ase is the one day in the year when the taboo against women boarding the prahus may be broken, and they brought with them a feast, including the black goat of the earth and the white cock of the sky which had been sacrificed in our hull the night before.
Even in that dead calm, the ladies turned green with sea-sickness.
Etiquette demanded it, as a display of their femininity.
At midday an unseasonal wind began gusting from the east, and our calm anchorage was transformed into a choppy lee shore.
Tandri Dewa decided that, ready or not, we must make a move, and the guests and grateful ladies were put ashore.
Lustily chanting Bugis sea-shanties, our entire crew edged Sinar Surya directly into the eye of the wind and  beyond the reef.
A safe distance from shore all sails were set and, with the last anchor hauled in, the mizzen and foresails were backed — the crew hanging far out over the deep-blue water to keep the booms at an angle that would force her bows around towards the south so that her mainsails could fill.
Soon her hundred tons were brought to life as all eight sails pulled hard on her first tack of the season.
In the spreaders forty feet above us the agile topmen, Basso and Rasman, executed hair-raising victory somersaults before shinning down the shrouds with the rough wires grasped between their toes.
We had only known Sinar Surya as a lumpish extension of the land — as dependent on it as a baby is on its mother; now she had come of age as she surged south to a thrilling new rhythm, new smells and new sensations.
Every creak and groan was music to me, and the surge of each wave echoed through her entire frame and re-echoed through mine.
Her crew danced to their tasks, and I understood for the first time the meaning of the Indonesian words for "crewman" — "anak prahu" , literally "child of the prahu" .
With a shake of her eight great sails, she had become a mother in her own right, and we were all her children.
Our immediate problems were sorting out our living arrangements, for although it had been agreed with Tandri that we would occupy the ship's only excuse for a cabin we now found our things moved down into the hold.
Rather bitter negotiations resulted in our final victory, and our stuffing our possessions into the windowless cabin astern and ensuring that our toothbrushes — significant status symbols — joined the only other two aboard in the privileged rack at the foot of the  mizzenmast.
One belonged to the one-toothed Ladjang, and was shared amongst a few fastidious members of the crew; the other was Tandri's, to be used by no one, not even himself.
The east wind held firm, the blue waters parted, and we surged south along the fringing reef towards Tanjung Bira, the southernmost point of Sulawesi.
At the top of its high cliffs is the sanctuary of the goddess Sampanena, protectress of mariners.
Our crew's wives would already be heading there to make offerings on behalf of their husbands.
Beneath the point lies Krander's whirlpool, a notorious navigational hazard, powerful enough at times to drag down the smaller prahus, so most sailors steer well clear of it.
For the people of Bira, however, it is a point of honour to scythe through the troubled gap between the whirlpool and the rocks.
The monster was at its most mellow that day, but still energetic enough to toss Sinar Surya's hundred tons around in an alarming manner.
Lorne was dangling over the bowsprit filming as I firmly held his legs, when he was taken off-guard by a violent lurch and dropped our wide-angle lens cap overboard.
He howled with dismay at the loss and was to curse the incident many more times over the months to come.
Old Ladjang, however, nodded his approval.
 "That was a fine offering you made to Krander and Sampanena," he remarked.
 "Now our voyage is sure to be a safe one." 
We were part of a scattered fleet of Bira prahus.
Two were headed south to Flores, one south-west to Bali and Java, and another west to Borneo.
We watched them disappear into the dusk as we anchored at  the little island of Likangloe, where we had witnessed our first python hunt.
Both wind and current were still unseasonably favourable for Makassar, but Tandri decided, probably wisely, that we would need more ballast from the beach at Likangloe.
The cliffs of Sampanena were still in sight, but the required auspicious departure had been made.
The sun came on stage for its evening display of vulgar wealth, and Ladjang turned towards Mecca in prayer.
I found a quiet corner of the deck to gaze up at the moonless sky.
Those who have only seen the northern stars may not realize how much more dramatic are those of the southern hemisphere.
I was absorbed by their brilliance, embraced by them, lost in them, and I slept.
From Lorne's Diary
Our cabin is barely large enough to accommodate both us and our equipment.
We cannot fully stretch out in it, nor sit upright without cracking our heads on the decking above.
It is four foot six inches wide, extending to a princely six foot six, but the forward end is so packed with our gear that there is barely enough room for our legs.
We share it with an unwelcome assortment of fellow travellers.
Some are there to suck our blood, while others are content to compete with us for our meagre stash of private food.
This morning a rat poked his nose in, but they usually seem to prefer the main hold.
It's the insects that enjoy travelling cabin class.
We don't see much of them in the daytime, but at night the bedbugs crawl out from under our mats, and we listen to the cockroaches munching away merrily in the food-basket between our heads, and to the brittle scrabbling of their feet on the ceiling a couple of feet above us.
They haven't found their sea legs yet, and a sudden lurch can bring several of them raining down on our faces.
It's hard to sleep with a panic-stricken cockroach clawing its way out of one's eye-socket!
At dawn we set sail due west along the southern coast of Celebes.
The east wind, which had held all night, chose this moment to reverse itself, and the west monsoon blew relentlessly into our faces.
At the end of every clawing tack we found ourselves back at almost the same place we had started; we began to learn the realities of life aboard a Bugis prahu.
Downwind or on a broad reach they are magnificent craft, but upwind sailing is definitely not their strong suit.
Lightly laden, as was Sinar Surya, they are a disaster.
Pointing, at best, some sixty degrees off the wind, and drifting downwind at an alarming rate, we made little or no progress during the next three days.
The crew were kept occupied completing the many jobs that should have been finished before putting out.
Nobody appeared to give orders, and everyone performed the tasks which most suited his mood of the moment.
There were only two whose work seemed never to end, and they bore the brunt of an endless string of the only direct orders we ever heard aboard.
Amir and Mansur must have been about eight and ten years old.
They were the cooks, washers-up, barbers, lice-pickers, deck-swabbers and general gofers at the bottom of a subtle pecking  order that slowly revealed itself.
This was their first voyage, and their labours were complicated by severe bouts of seasickness, through which they soldiered on valiantly.
At the peak of the hierarchy stood Tandri.
Ah, Tandri!
The very sound of his name makes my sense of humour evaporate.
Every encounter became a challenge, a test of strength.
For hours at night he held court immediately over our hatch, inches above our heads.
His audience was the crew, and the language their own, but he knew we sensed the content of the canisters of venom dropped into our claustrophobic sanctum.
Old Ladjang remonstrated with him quietly, but the others were silent, and we realized that our captain was infecting them with a subtle but poisonous hostility towards us.
It was the beginning of what was to become the greatest and most dangerous hardship of our voyage.
Our immediate conflict was over navigation.
On the fifth dawn we hurried on deck to confirm my certainty that at last we had rounded the south-western point of Sulawesi, and had a clear run north to Makassar.
The previous night we had been well on course for it.
I checked and then rechecked our position before slumping down in despair.
We were in precisely the same place that we had been in three dawns previously!
My despair was caused not so much by the frustration of not reaching our destination as by the final shattering of my most cherished illusion about the Bugis.
Once amongst the world's greatest blue-water navigators, guided by wave patterns and the clues in seaweed and bird droppings, the Bugis had now lost so much confidence in their old ways that they had been reduced to coast-hugging, on the principle that if their ships sank they at least had a chance of making it ashore alive.
It was a reminder of the early days of European seamanship, when captains discouraged their crews from learning how to swim so that they were more likely to sink with their ship than abandon their posts and struggle for shore.
Sinar Surya carried only an antique compass whose oil was so clouded with age that we could hardly read the rose.
I doubt if it had ever been correctly swung, and even our little hand-compass was more accurate.
The only chart was more symbolic than effective.
Dated 1910, it extended from Singapore to northern Australia, so many of the islands on our route let alone the hazards did not even figure.
The Bugis had fallen between two sciences, forgetting the old before they had mastered the new.
"Christ, these characters are bloody hopeless!
We've got to do something,"I fumed.
 "I still think we should let them try it their way and see what happens," Lorne ventured.
It was an argument that had been simmering for two days, and it was clear he was beginning to waver.
"Even you must be getting a pretty clear picture of what happens.
Look at that bastard there he goes again!"
It was the bus that we had seen twice every day for the last three days, making its regular coastal run between Bulukumba and Makassar.
We had both come to hate it and its invisible driver, whom we visualized as a smug glutton sleeping  in a comfortable bed each night and stuffing his face with three square meals a day.
So crazed were we becoming that I was sure that even at that distance we could spot the fiendish grin he directed at Sinar Surya floundering on the horizon each time he passed!
Lorne tried feebly to stick to his final defence.
 "But, hell, they've been navigating safely to Aru for centuries." 
"Aru?
You can forget about Aru.
At this rate we'll be lucky to make it to Makassar before the next monsoon!"
We went below to plot our rebellious strategy.
While waiting for them to reach the outer limit of their seaward tack, we fished for our enormous aviator's chart which was larger and more colourful, if little more useful, than theirs.
Protractors, compasses, rulers, and any other impressive props we could think of — even a film-footage chart, and the monocular (or half a pair of binoculars) inherited from our stepfather.
Judging the moment, we exploded on deck with all our navigational "tools" and I, usually the smooth talker of the family, went into action.
Lorne tells me it was my finest hour — and my most shameless.
Our objective was simple.
It had become obvious that the east-setting current swirled strongest close to the headlands.
We had to keep them heading out to sea as long as possible, so that we could fully clear it on our return tack.
I talked utter rubbish for hours, and on the few occasions that I faltered Lorne would break in and take over until I had recovered my strength.
We never did persuade them, but for six valuable hours we managed to hold them on that course far out into the Flores Sea, until finally they came to their senses, noticed the distant and almost invisible shore, and hurriedly tacked towards it again.
We hadn't gone as far as we would have liked, and it was touch and go until the very last moment, but we just squeezed past the point between Tanakeke island and the mainland.
To us the white sands of Tanakeke looked inviting, but our crew were filled with apprehension the closer we got.
Tasman, with the face and physique of a circus strong man, brought his largest parang on deck and glowered warily at the passing island.
 "This is a bad place." 
 "Spirits?" 
I asked.
"No, the people.
They try to murder everyone who sails too close.
Six years ago they attacked my uncle's prahu, killing him and everyone on board for their cargo."
Tasman understood such things.
He had spent several years amongst the small Indonesian islands off Singapore.
It was a period of his life hat he would never talk about.
We left Tanakeke behind without loss of life, and spent the rest of the day on our well-earned broad reach northwards.
The next day we ghosted into Makassar on the faintest breeze.
Amir and Mansur hung rapt from the rigging, transfixed by the slowly growing image of their future.
Neither of them had ever seen proper shops, nor ice nor electric light — other than the bulbs which we had used with our generator to illuminate the Keraing's house in Bira.
I looked over towards the Pasanggrahan Hotel, and the balcony  from which we had longingly watched so many prahus which we could not sail aboard.
It was a good feeling.
We were not even properly docked before Lorne and I leapt ashore and headed for our favourite Chinese restaurant.
The solid ground rocked and heaved beneath us, but we were soon gorging ourselves on rich noodles and spicy chilled crabs and lobster — forbidden fruit while amongst our Islamic Bugis.
It was a busy four days.
Yong had already put his cargo together, and we helped him supervise its loading aboard Sinar Surya.
At his home his mother earnestly tried to fatten us up for our adventure ahead, as only the Chinese know how.
Yong lent us a precious scuba tank and a regulator to take with us, saying: "Use it as you like, but please keep some air in it for Aru.
You may need it to film my pearl-divers underwater, and to show them how it works.
I've told them that I'm hoping to replace their old hard-hat helmets with this new scuba equipment, but they think I'm joking when I tell them they won't have any hoses to the surface."
There would be no chance of refilling it; and one tank for four months through some of the world's most spectacular coral seas would call for superhuman restraint.
The cost of the charter to Aru had long since been settled: Yong would pay them half the sum now, and his relations would pay the balance once we and the cargo had safely reached Aru.
But Tandri now came up with the bright idea of charging an exorbitant additional fee for every island we needed to call at en route.
After a marathon round of negotiations, lasting almost a whole day, we managed to whittle it down, with Yong's expert assistance, to the equivalent of about twenty American dollars per island visited.
Neither Tandri nor Yong knew — and we were not about to tell them — that we no longer had enough money left to make a single call.
Here, at the very beginning of the voyage we had come to Indonesia to make, we were completely broke.
Werner came to our rescue with the loan of a hundred dollars, which would have to see us through the three or four months it might take us to reach Aru.
Just how we were to get out and home once we had arrived there was a problem we still refused to think about.
We paid a final courtesy call on General Aziz, Werner's friend who had lent us Abu and his jeep to film the Toraja.
He received us wearing a sarong and bouncing a six-month-old grandson in his lap.
He gave us an official letter to show the military commanders we might bump into along the way, and sent one of his high-ranking aides down to the dock to see us off.
The immaculate officer stepped gingerly aboard Sinar Surya and failed to conceal his astonishment at our living conditions.
He informed a grovelling Tandri that we were expected to reach Aru alive, and that if anything unfortunate befell us Tandri and his crew would find their lives very uncomfortable.
It was of course pure bluff, and rank-pulling on a vulgar scale, but from then on the crew was to become almost irritatingly attentive to our safety, if not to our general well-being.
Our next port of call would be Bira again, which anyway lay directly on our course back eastwards, and where some unfinished business remained to be settled.
Sailing conditions were perfect all the way, and we were back there again an unbelievable thirty-six hours later.
The crew had one last night with their families, and the opportunity to share with them some of the advance they had been given by Yong.
A good deal of Yong's salt, we also suspected, was off-loaded secretly that evening, to help tide the waiting families through the subsequent nine months without their menfolk.
The Keraing and his family came to wave us farewell from the cliff-top, and we sailed east into the gulf of Bone, and an empty blue sea.
It was the last time we were ever to see him alive.
Years later we returned to Bira to learn that the shaman's prediction that he "would die by water" had come to pass in rather too literal a sense.
He was hacked to death by one of his own people as a result of a long-standing territorial vendetta over water rights — on the very strand where we were to see him waving us off.
His assailant did not come out of the affair unscathed.
Having badly underestimated his victim's popularity, he had fled with his family to Makassar and boarded a large inter-island ship for Java.
Two days out the ship foundered in a storm, and sank with everyone aboard.
Next day we were visited by a pod of dolphins which behaved as if they had escaped from a circus.
They amazed us by leaping high out of the water and somersaulting two or three times before nosing beneath it again without missing a beat.
We were only later to learn that these were the Spinner Dolphins, the most acrobatic of all their family.
Our ship's most vulnerable spot was the first four feet of her mainmast, which was heavily eaten by rot.
This was considered serious enough by the Keraing to have supplied Tandri with the cost of a new mast which he had promised to have cut from the forest of Bouton, an island we knew nothing about on the south-east of Celebes, a two-day sail across the Gulf of Palopo.
The Bugis step their masts directly on to the deck rather than through it on to the hull floor beneath.
A dismasting often means the dominoing of one mast into the other, down through the decks, cannoning the cargo through the hull below, and sinking the ship very quickly.
This apparently not uncommon event provokes much mirth, but very little change in mast-stepping techniques.
Not even Wallace had been to Bouton, and we were unable to find any reference to it in the literature.
Bau-Bau, the island's main town, revealed itself as a collection of neatly kept white stilt houses, nestling beneath jungled mist-shrouded hills.
It even had a creaking dock at which we could tie up directly alongside.
Our crewmates warned us about the Biranese girls' reputation as practitioners of a dangerous form of magic which could trap a man on their island for ever; then they disappeared ashore into the backstreets.
Going ashore ourselves, we soon realized that the girls' magic was of a very straightforward kind.
Almost without exception, they were breathtakingly beautiful; their every movement a languid dance, and  their smiles open and confident — so different from the shy tittering behind shawls that we had seen amongst the Bugis girls.
Bau-Bau was infinitely more friendly than Makassar, and far less desperate than Bira.
It did not take them long to inform us that we had arrived with their traditional enemies, the Bugis.
In the days when the great Bugis kingdoms had ruled the seas all the way to the Spice Islands they had been unrelenting in their determination to conquer Bouton.
Each year the west monsoon would bring a fleet from Makassar, each prahu bristling with as many as a hundred warriors.
No sooner had they been fought off than the east monsoon brought a fresh invasion from the kingdoms of the Moluccas.
This constant cycle of warfare, involving fleets as mighty as the Spanish Armada, had kept Bouton in isolation up to the present day.
Despite our unsavoury choice of shipmates, our arrival was cause for celebration, and on the very first afternoon we were whisked away from Sinar Surya to stay in the comfort of the sultan's guesthouse, which was far more impressive than anything we had seen in Makassar.
We were surprised that the sultan had even noticed our arrival, but the young courier who had taken us up to the guesthouse laughed.
"Everyone in Bouton has noticed your arrival.
Since World War Two only four other Westerners have been here before you."
He told us we would meet the sultan at his palace that evening for dinner.
Dinner turned out to be a royal-welcome banquet in the great hall, and it was quite literally a glittering affair.
The sultan and his court wore locally woven sarongs and turbans shot through with threads of real gold and silver.
The belts holding their ceremonial ivory-handled daggers were all of beaten gold, as were the jewellery and headdresses of the women.
The walls were hung with elaborate textiles, and a small orchestra of metal gongs and drums played surprisingly watery music.
 "I don't want you to think that we eat like this every night," said the sultan with a smile; indeed, we had seen him earlier in the day wearing well-cut Western clothes.
 "But I hear that you Europeans have very romantic ideas about the East, so I thought this might please you." 
We were sitting cross-legged on either side of him with a vast array of tiny dishes on finely worked brass trays stretching before us, and entirely lit by Aladdin lamps on specially wrought stands.
I wish I could describe the sultan's appearance but my eyes were elsewhere, for on my other side sat Sadria, one of his radiant daughters.
In an island where most of the girls looked like princesses, the princesses looked like goddesses — and Sadria was no exception.
She dipped her fingers delicately into a dish and, to my astonishment, popped a morsel of food into my mouth instead of into her own.
Sadria leant back on her heels, smiling at me expectantly.
I shot a nervous glance at our host.
He, too, was smiling, but with sardonic ambiguity, and my eyes shifted to his ceremonial dagger.
 "Well," he said, "if you don't feed the poor girl soon, she'll starve." 
Not at all sure that I was doing the right thing, I fumbled towards the nearest dish for a finger-load of food, and turned to Sadria.
The sight of those slightly parted lips was almost my undoing but, with the hollow  feeling of a gambler who has laid out far too much on a horse, I plunged the titbit firmly into her mouth before my resolve could falter.
She chewed, oh, so delicately and reached towards another dish.
 "This" , said the sultan,"is how we customarily feed our guests.
It shows we trust each other enough to have no fear of being poisoned."
Trust me enough!
My God, I wasn't at all sure I could trust myself!
So the evening went.
Each of my hand-fed morsels tasted different; indefinable combinations of spices and textures which were quite new and delicious to me.
But my judgement may have been clouded…
Over the days that followed their hospitality knew no bounds.
They drove us as far as the mud roads would allow in the royal land-rover, and down to the bay where a pearl-oyster hatchery was being tried for the first time; and at night there were more festivities, and endless delectable maidens vying for our attentions…
On the fourth day they took us up to Wolio, the old fortress that sprawled across two hill-tops overlooking Bau-Bau.
We had often seen its crumbling ramparts from a distance, and had assumed it was Dutch, but now learnt that it had been built by the islanders, long before the Europeans.
Only once we were inside did we appreciate the immense scale of Wolio.
Its fifteen-foot walls, with occasional gun-embrasures and rusting cannons, extended a full five miles around the old palaces of Bouton, the great mosque and a vast and excited crowd.
All of Bouton was there, while far below us small sailing craft packed with more celebrants were still arriving from the outlying islands.
Drums began pounding, and several seemingly frail old men launched into a frenzied war-dance, prancing and stabbing at each other with their kerises.
At any moment I expected to see one drop with a cardiac arrest, but the sultan told us not to underestimate their power.
They had been his father's personal bodyguards, ready and able to defend him with their lives, and once a year they still performed this fierce dance inside the mosque from sunset to sunrise without pause.
A more melodious music engulfed us as eight girls floated down the steps of the old palace.
Their hair was entwined with golden cords, and their dresses, richly embroidered with beads, pearls and precious metals, flowed almost to the ground.
With impassively inward-turned faces, they performed a languorous dance of infinite restraint.
 "They have been in seclusion for eight days," said the sultan,"learning the secrets of womanhood.
Today they resurface as adults, ready for marriage."
He chuckled.
"My grandfather was something of a scholar.
He brought all his power to bear to force the women of his household to reveal these secrets.
Despite his most terrible threats, he could extract nothing about what went on during those eight days."
We asked the sultan what all these festivities were in aid of and he said: "Didn't you realize this is your welcome ceremony?
I'm sorry we couldn't do it the day you arrived, but it took a little bit of organizing."
Every dance we saw that day had the flavour of a different influence.
Some tasted of the parched winds of the Arabian Gulf; others of the exuberant tribal animism of the South Pacific; while others again echoed the ancient Hindu courts of Java and India.
Even Europe was represented, in what was almost identical to a traditional flag-dance I had once seen in rural Portugal.
I realized also with a jolt that the dancers were wearing a motley of costumes representing centuries of brief encounters with the West — from seventeenth-century Portuguese ruffles round their throats, down to modern trainers on their feet.
The sultan showed us the royal regalia which were secreted in the palace.
The centrepiece was an exact replica of a Portuguese explorer's helmet.
Finely made of solid silver from the local mines, it must have weighed twenty pounds, and was adorned with a shimmering cascade of golden plumage which Lorne at once recognized.
 "The Greater Bird of Paradise feathers symbolize courage," the sultan told us.
 "Those who returned from Aru and New Guinea alive brought these as proof of their valour." 
We left Bau-Bau very, very slowly.
The dock groaned beneath the combined weight of the town waving and singing goodbye to us in full ceremonial dress.
Although a fair breeze was picking up from the south-east, the harbour was aquarium calm, and the poignancy of this departure from a fairytale kingdom in our pirate prahu was marred, alas, by making so little headway that an hour and a half after cast-off we were still within spitting distance of the dock.
Everybody hates a bad leaver but, whereas in the West you can usually close the door on a guest who has finally reached the garden gate, in the islands it is impolite to stop waving and chanting until he is either round a corner and out of sight, or else too distant to be able to see the whites of his eyes.
Whether the people were assembled by order of the sultan or simply from the hospitality of their hearts, they gave barely a sign of diminishing the ardour of their farewell.
Only, perhaps, in the eyes of the sultan's exquisite daughters was a hint of boredom betrayed.
Since our first arrival here, their Seductive Highnesses had flirted with us as consistently as had their father ensured that we were together only during public occasions.
Now, from the instant a hawser no longer connected our prahu to their island, they had cast us unrestrained looks which said: "At last, I'm all yours.
Come and get me!"
But, as time wore on, and the whites of our eyes were still clearly visible, the girls, without missing a beat, subtly modified their glances as if to convey: "God knows we've tried, you heartless bastards." 
It took us eight very wet and almost windless days to inch our way up the ninety miles of the Bouton Straits before we could turn eastwards into the Banda Sea.
Throughout the entire journey we saw perhaps six tiny fishing villages and one ugly landslide scar whose remarkable story we had all heard various times in Bau-Bau.
Only four months previously the land had suddenly plummeted into the straits, taking with it a village of some eighty souls.
The only survivors were one family who had been visiting relatives in Bau-Bau at the time.
They returned in their outrigger at night to find no welcoming lights.
With just the ghost of a headwind, our only method of going about was either by dragging our bows round with ten men furiously paddling the dugout canoe, or simply by drifting into the opposite shore and poling our bowsprit off whatever fulcrum presented itself.
The Bouton Straits became progressively more narrow and sinister.
Their dark waters, in places only a few hundred yards across, were met by vertically plunging forest, wreathed in mist, and for the most part deathly quiet.
Only during the occasional bursts of sunshine did they begin to sing with birds and bugs.
Once, they exploded with a sound so terrifying that it brought all of us below instantly out on to the rain-drenched deck.
We had just cleared a jungle overhang, and slipped beneath it like a snail under a mushroom, when we awakened an enormous colony of giant fruit bats — the "flying foxes" with a wingspan of over three feet.
The first sound was a chilling quadraphonic chitter.
We looked up to see the tree limbs rippling with leather and fur.
The  bats then erupted from their roosts like all the demons of hell, screaming, whirling and excreting partly digested fruit over the full length and height of the ship.
Some caught in the rigging and thudded to the deck, spitting and baring their fangs at us before being hurriedly kicked overboard.
Even our Bugis, quite familiar with flying foxes, paled at the encounter, but Tandri was not deterred from his hazardous method.
The drawback to poling a hundred-foot schooner with ninety-foot masts off vertical jungle was that there was no guarantee of reaching the tree trunks with our bowsprit before reaching their branches with our masts.
To be locked inextricably in the overhang would have been nearly as disastrous as a dismasting.
When we finally reached the top of the Bouton Straits the rain had ceased as completely as the wind and it was only the current which carried us eastwards into the luminous open sea.
For days we drifted within sight of land, beneath a high bright overcast sky which was mirrored perfectly in the polished water.
It was no longer so easy to remain an island of reason when every timber surrounding us had been magically selected; when our departure had been synchronized not with the weather, but with inner portents of another kind of time.
Even the black goat and the white cock sacrificed in our hull for a safe and speedy passage now began to haunt us every bit as solemnly as did the ghosts of our investors in London.
As a parting gift the Keraing had given me a scale model of the prahu we were sailing in, which I had lashed to the hull walls facing backwards.
One night I had a vivid dream that to correct this error would bring us the wind.
The next morning Lorne filmed me cutting the model free and lashing it down again, facing forwards.
The wind came so swiftly that within half an hour we were reducing sail, taking water over the deck, and beginning to lumber into a building seaway.
The wind we had waited for so long quickly rose to gale force, and drove us on a desperate roller-coaster ride for five days and nights.
Our rotten mainmast began whipping sickeningly to and fro and required five men constantly clinging to its lee mainstay to cushion the strain.
The prahu's very short timbers — designed to give flexibility — were now moving so violently against each other that the water pouring between them required the hand-pumps being manned round the clock.
Four men were needed to hold down the steering oars, which bucked in their harnesses like panicked elephants.
Their supporting beams ran through our tiny cabin, and we could put our feet up on them and feel the entire ship squirming and stretching like the spine of a fish.
Sails began splitting with the sound of gunfire, and with no spares they were sewn up in situ— an incredibly dangerous task in a full gale.
Our Bugis performed astonishing feats of skill and bravery.
Unlike the clipper ships of the last century, our prahu had no guard-rails on the deck, and no rigging harnesses or proper ratlines, yet our crew scaled the masts barefoot to cling to the spars with their legs alone, like lemurs.
From these thrashing heights they would then shin ninety feet down to the decks again on single frayed and rusting wires.
Despite the dubious seaworthiness of our ship, for the first few  days of the storm my sense of danger was eclipsed by the exhilaration of at last thundering in the right direction.
My first real fear came only when I caught sight of Tandri's face watching his five strongest crewmen hanging miserably to the mainstay of our rotten mast.
It was the first time I had seen him reveal any emotion in his face, and it had something of the intensity of grief.
My fear was further sharpened when Tooth, the only practising Muslim aboard, stiffly emerged from below wearing his black peci hat, and proceeded to prostrate himself towards Mecca at hours not prescribed by Islamic doctrine.
Finally we limped into Ambon, former jewel of the Spice Islands, written of so glowingly by Wallace, but now all but denuded of trees.
In the harbour lay enormous foreign freighters for carrying the timber away, exuding oil over the graves of what had once been the most famous coral gardens in the Far East.
It was normally polite, and expedient, to pay respects to the military commander of an area on first arriving, but this was the only time when we were actually frog-marched off to meet him before we had time to draw breath.
He sat, rheumy-eyed and suspicious, behind an enormous desk in a crumbling office.
He reviewed our ship's papers and letters from General Aziz at length, and then, finding that our passports were almost new and empty, he began rubber-stamping them viciously.
We were eventually released and returned to find some of the crew busily repairing the mainsail on the dock, while the rest, with Tandri and the officers, were being bullied by lesser officials who were nosing around the hold and demanding to see their personal possessions.
Although we were terrified that they would find where we had hidden our film equipment, it was easier for us than for our crewmates to express our anger, and we blustered the officials off the ship.
That night we had a conference with Tandri for the first time.
 "I told them three days before we can finish repairs," he told us, "but we can do enough tomorrow to hold us to Banda, if weather is good." 
It was an uneasy night, pondering the risks of leaving illegally, with a barely seaworthy vessel, from an island of which we had read so fondly in Wallace and had come so far to see.
The next dawn we had a better look.
During the night two more timber tankers had arrived and anchored.
It was the closest we had come to the outside world in nearly four months yet they were responsible for the oil which glossed the harbour and had killed the coral.
Behind the town, where Wallace had ecstatically rambled with his butterfly-net through glowing forests, the hills were bare.
Not yet halfway to our appointment with the Paradise Bird, each island was already proving to be a kingdom unto itself, and the power of our permits was clearly waning the further we travelled.
Of our ship's company, only Tooth and Tasman had ventured as far east as this, and the waters ahead were equally unknown to all of us.
Even if we could escape from Ambon with our cargo and wallets intact, none of us much cared to think about what receptions might lie ahead, as we approached the isolation of New Guinea.