

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Dr Alan Stewart is a doctor specializing in nutritional therapy and a founding member of the British Society for Nutritional Medicine, as well as medical adviser to the Women's Nutritional Advisory Service.
Alan qualified in 1976 from Guy's Hospital, London, and is a member of the Royal College of Physicians.
Maryon Stewart runs the highly acclaimed Women's Nutritional Advisory Service, which was established in 1987 following the success of the PMT Advisory Service.
Maryon studied preventive dentistry and nutrition at the Royal Dental Hospital in London.
The couple live in Sussex with their three children.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank the many doctors and scientists in the United Kingdom and abroad who have been involved in research into nutrition and obesity.
Their publication have been essential to the writing of this book.
Our sincere thanks go to all the patients who have volunteered to share their experiences and allowed us to divulge intimate details about them, in the hope of helping others.
We also thank the team of dedicated workers at the Women's Nutritional Advisory Service for their professionalism over the years, which has enabled us to collect much of the research referred to in this book.
Special thanks are due to Sarah Tooley, Senior Nurse at the WNAS, for her contributions to the menus and recipes and for her total support; Rosa Fisher, for her ongoing support and optimism; and to Jane Brooker, our wonderful Nanny, who kept our three children happy and occupied while we were burning the midnight oil.
Additionally, we would like to thank Debbie, Jenny P, Henrietta, Gina, Sue, Michelle, and Jenny T, for being so willing to work unusual hours, and maintaining their sense of humour, particularly at the eleventh hours when one word processor blew up and the other erased the text.
Finally, we would like to thank our three wonderful children, Phoebe, Chesney, and Hester, for their patience and understanding whilst we were preoccupied.
Maryon and Alan Stewart 
INTRODUCTION
There have been many books written on diet in relation to weight loss, and therefore one may justifiably ask why there is a need for another book on the subject.
You have probably tried a variety of methods of losing weight with temporary success, only to find that the weight goes right back on again as soon as you return to your normal diet.
Rapid weight loss may have made you feel good at the time, but depression and frustration soon set in as the pounds or kilos slowly creep back on again.
Sometimes, even on the strictest of diets, allowing only a few hundred calories per day, it seems impossible to shift even a small amount of weight per week.
It is disheartening to come to terms with the fact that your metabolism has adjusted to such a small calorie intake, and as a result your weight is unlikely to change.
For years now, at the Women's Nutritional Advisory Service, we have been working with people who have needed to make dietary changes for the sake of their health.
They may have been suffering with anything from stress-related migraines to pre-menstrual tension.
We have noticed that, by making adjustments to their diet, not only did they overcome their symptoms, but those who were overweight very often lost weight without even trying.
They did not have to suffer a very low-calorie diet   or one that involved eating expensive and unusual foods.
Now doesn't that sound appealing?
We discovered that by making permanent changes to their usual diets individuals felt that their general health improved dramatically; they felt far better mentally, and they managed to lose those ugly pounds of flesh that had been slowing them down and stubbing their ego.
It goes without saying that they were delighted with their progress and that their morale got an unexpected boost as a result.
Your individual needs
In order to lose weight permanently, and at the same time to rid yourself of some possibly long-standing unpleasant symptoms, you will need to learn what your body needs.
We seem to know more about car maintenance   than we do about our own bodies.
We know that a car will come to a grinding halt if we put water in the petrol tank, so no one in their right mind does it!
The same rule does not apply to our bodies, because we are not educated about what out individual bodies require in order to function optimally.
In the first part of this book we will be "filling the education gap" .
We will tell you all you need to know about surviving despite the twentieth-century diet, and the real facts about obesity.
We will also help you to understand your own body so that you begin to know what your actual dietary requirements are.
In Part Two of the book we will help you to work out a ten-week programme for your to follow.
During the course of this programme you will learn how to become a "nutritional detective" , and put your new diet into practice.
For each of the first eight weeks there is a weekly plan that will touch on a different aspect of your diet.
By the end of this eight-week programme you will know about your body's requirements, and you should have managed to shake off those excess pounds.
You will then know what a healthy weight-loss diet is for you and be able to follow this for a further two weeks, or longer if necessary.
Read each chapter in sequence and enjoy the knowledge.
You should regard this as a nutritional adventure; one with lessons to last you a lifetime of good health, fitness and slimness.
FILLING THE EDUCATION GAP
As children we are all taught how to read, write, and add up.
Our parents teach us how to eat, dress, wash, and generally look after ourselves.
But where and how do we learn about healthy eating?
In general we are left to care for our own bodies, and those of younger members of the family.
The woman is often regarded as the nutritional head of the household, and yet she has had little or no training for this job.
For most other jobs that we take on in life, there will be an element of training, but, in the case of achieving or maintaining health through diet, this is not always so.
Let us give you some idea of just how important nutrition is.
The major causes of death in developed countries are heart disease and cancer.
Both are influenced to a large degree by the type of diet we eat.
Up to 50 per cent of people with heart disease or cancer could probably have prevented or delayed the onset of their illness if they had eaten a better diet or stopped smoking.
This is particularly important for those who become ill at a relatively young age, i.e. before 65 years.
Furthermore, many minor ill are also influenced by diet.
Problems such as migraine, high blood pressure, arthritis, kidney stones, premenstrual syndrome, eczema, insomnia and anxiety can all be caused by an unbalanced diet.
So learning about healthy eating and what is a healthy balanced diet for you is very important.
At the Women's Nutritional Advisory Service we conducted a survey to find out what people understood by the term "well balanced diet" .
We also asked which foods contained key vitamins like C, B, A, D, and E, and some key minerals like magnesium, zinc and iron.
The results of this survey would have been entertaining were it not for the fact that this is such a serious subject.
The only information that people seemed to have about diet was the basic lesson from school, if they could remember it.
Apart from knowing facts such as "oranges contain vitamin C" and liver contains iron", hardly anyone had a clue as to what actually constitutes a sound balanced diet or even how much of each nutrient is required each day for their body size, or anyone else's body  size for that matter.
In actual fact, there are some 15 vitamins, 24 minerals and 8–10 amino acids that have been isolated as being essential for normal body function.
They are synergistic, which means they rely on each other in order to keep the body functioning at an optimum level.
If you liken the body to a computer for a moment, the computer can only function when it has the correct date and commands fed to it; otherwise it refuses to work or breaks down altogether.
Similarly, our bodies require the correct input of nutrients.
When on or more nutrient is in short supply the body cannot function properly, and the symptoms, be they physical or mental, occur.
 "MS AVERAGE" 
A good example is one of a woman who went through her teenage years coping with the stresses of modern life and the hormonal changes that occurred in her body.
She began to experience mild premenstrual tension, water retention and period pains.
She also developed a sweet tooth, and occasionally had little chocolate binges.
As time went on she settled into a bust, challenging job which she found both demanding and stressful.
She lived alone, and therefore preferred convenience and fast foods rather than cook herself a proper meal with vegetables.
She found that she gradually became prone to weight gain and as a result experimented with several different diets.
She would go from eating little and missing meals to eating heavily at times when she experienced her sweet cravings.
Eventually, she married and had her first baby.
She gained some 25lb (11kg) in weight during pregnancy, half of which she lost whilst breast-feeding for six months.
Her premenstrual tension became worse after the birth of her baby and she felt generally under par.
A couple of years later she had her second baby and again breast-fed for a few months after the birth.
She gained even more weight this time, which she had trouble shifting.
From that point on, her life became a juggling act.
She had to look after the family and the home, and sometimes she even had a part-time job as well.
She had little time to care for herself, and even less time for planning and preparing meals with proper thought and care.
She was now 15lb (7kg) heavier than she had been in her single days; she felt tired and run down, and suffered with migraines, abdominal bloating and increasing premenstrual symptoms including irritability, nervous tension, depression, tearfulness, confusion, weight gain, sore breasts and insomnia.
Worst of all, her self-image was low with the best years of her life fast disappearing, taking her previous good health with it and leaving her with the excess baggage.
It would be the last straw if her husband tried to get romantic at the wrong time of the month.
A common tale, but, we're sure you will agree, not a pretty picture.
This  woman was never taught how to cope with the stresses of modern living and how a good diet and lifestyle can help.
Furthermore, she was not aware that the physical stress of pregnancy and breast-feeding all place greater nutritional demands on the body, which need to be met.
Had she known more about healthy eating and what was right for her body, she might well have been able to prevent most of the problems that she experienced.
If she had been feeling fitter and healthier, she certainly would have been better equipped to deal with the stresses, and to control her weight gain before it got out of hand.
Obviously, in a situation like this it is not only the woman herself who suffers.
Her husband and children can really be in the receiving end of her mood changes, and directly affected by her energy levels and lack of knowledge about good nutrition.
The quality of food she serves at home may influence not only her own health but also her children's growth and development, as well as her husband's cholesterol level.
All these unfortunate factors could have been avoided through good education and adequate nutrition.
Part of our mission in this book is to "fill the education gap" in many people's upbringing.
TWENTIETH-CENTURY DIET
Obesity is an increasingly common problem; and there are many other serious conditions that have increased dramatically in recent years, the more serious of which, such as high blood pressure and heart disease, are associated with obesity.
In Britain alone it is estimated that in excess of 150,000 people die every year from heart attacks and strokes.
In the United States it is reported that some 35 million heart attacks and strokes occur each year.
Problems like premenstrual tension and hyperactivity in children are on the increase, as well as a number of condition that are caused by allergies of one kind or another: hay fever, eczema, asthma, migraine, and even some bowel problems.
You may well ask why we seem to be becoming a sick and overweight society.
The fact is that our twentieth-century diet and lifestyle brings us new experiences that we are not well equipped to deal with.
The diet and lifestyle that are common to many of us are far removed from those of our ancestors.
FACTS ABOUT TWENTIETH CENTURY DIET
Sugar
We have vastly increased our consumption of sugar, averaging some 80 pounds (36kg) of sugar per person per year.
Animal Fat
Our diets are too high in animal fats, also known as saturated fats, which contribute to obesity and heart disease, and are associated with breast cancer.
Tea and Coffee
We are high consumers of tea and coffee, both of which block the absorption of essential nutrients and can aggravate anxiety and insomnia.
Salt
We eat 10–20 times more salt that our bodies actually require.
This can  cause a small rise in blood pressure and promotes water retention.
It needs to be avoided by those who have these problems.
Junk Food
Processed and pre-prepared food have become a tempting and convenient option in recent times.
They are designed to be quick to prepare and even quicker to eat and as a result are highly desirable to anyone who has a busy lifestyle.
The processing of such food greatly reduces its normal vitamin content.
For example, McDonald's apple pie (presumably made with apples) when analysed contained no vitamin C, when according to standard food values it should contain several milligrams.
The famous "Big Mac" has only a fraction of the vitamin B content it should have.
You would have to eat 60 a day in the UK to get your full intake of vitamin B. The Big Macs in the USA contain 6 times as much vitamin B as those in the UK.
Additives
Many of the foods available to us contain chemical additives in the form of colouring, stabilizers, flavour enhancers and preservatives.
While some of these are not harmful, the full effects of many of them are unknown.
Our bodies were certainly not designed to copy with them and some people can be sensitive to them, producing a variety of allergies.
Meat
The meat we consume is often too fatty.
Good quality, additive-free, fresh lean meat is an excellent food, but our fast food philosophy means we may eat a lesser version.
Drinking water
It is accepted now that drinking water in many areas contains certain pollutants which are undesirable.
The quality of drinking water in some parts of the UK does not satisfy the World Health Organization guidelines, particularly with regard to level of lead and nitrates.
Both are toxic.
Though the levels are still low, it is their slow accumulation that appears to be important.
Lead may affect child development and nitrates increase cancer risk.
Social poisons
As well as the dietary factors there are many "social" substances that many of us know and love.
Sadly these also affect our nutritional state and health.
These include alcohol, tobacco, drugs, and even tea and coffee.
Amazingly, for every £1 spent on food in the UK in 1985, 76 pence was spent on alcohol and tobacco.
Drugs
Western societies have become drug orientated.
In the USA in 1984 over one billion dollars was spent on drugs.
In the UK for the same period  £1,600 million was spent on drugs, 50 per cent more than was spent in 1980.
In the UK alone, over £40 million per year is spent on tranquillizers, and it is estimated that at least 3 million people are addicted to them Some drugs affect appetite and also increase the need for vitamins and minerals.
This particularly affects the elderly, those on long-term drugs for epilepsy, and those taking water pills for heart disease and high blood pressure.
What does this all mean?
These are all the potential problems we are exposed to in the twentieth century.
the new is by no means all bad; quite the opposite.
In practice we know have a greater quantity of food, more choice of different foods with less seasonal variation and of better quality than every before, all at a cheaper price.
Consequently, we have, in fact, been able to eat a better diet this century, and this — combined with improvement in housing, immunization and some modern drugs — has meant a greatly improved standard of health and life expectancy.
In the main, the biggest improvements have been in child health and the process of childbirth.
The point is that we have a choice, in fact, a great variety of foods to choose from — many good, some bad.
In order to make the right choices we need two things: some reliable facts to educate ourselves with, and some experience of how different foods affect the body, our own in particular.
So, in Part One we are giving you the education, and in Part Two we will introduce you to some carefully designed experiments, as well as some more education so you can become your own diet and weight-loss expert.
You can more than survive the twentieth-century diet; you can flourish on it if you know how to make the right choices.
FAT CHANCE — WHERE OTHER DIETS GO WRONG
Somehow we are sure that this is not the first diet you have ever bought, or indeed the first time you have tried to lose weight.
If you have tried other diets, it might help to know something about some of the most recent and popular ones.
Many previous, and indeed popular, diets have been based upon fads and fashions and not as scientifically based as they might be.
All these diets are low-calorie ones, and for many people they have been highly successful.
Any low-calorie diet will work, if adhered to.
What determines their long-term success is whether they suit your metabolism or not.
If a diet contains foods that you find hard to digest, or react to, then quite simply you are not going to stick to it.
So let's look at some diets.
The Scarsdale Medical Diet was developed by Dr Tarnower, a family doctor from New York.
His diet was a very high protein, low carbohydrate diet.
The disadvantage is that it was very expensive, low in fibre, and not well balanced for use in the long term.
It was probably most useful as a crash diet for two or three weeks.
The Beverly Hills Diet, by Mazel and Schultz, was a good example of on of the fad diets emanating from the USA.
The diet was mainly based upon fruit, and was thus high in fibre but extremely low in protein, and poorly balanced for nutrient intake.
It could only be followed for a limited period of time.
Living off paw-paw (papaya), mango and pineapple might sound delicious, but is not practical for the long term.
The "F" Plan Diet, originated in the UK by Audrey Eyton, is one of the most successful diet books in recent years.
Quite rightly the stress was on fibre, but to point that each day was yet another round of bran, wholemeal bread and baked beans.
If you could digest it, it was excellent, but many women found its side-effects intolerable.
For them, the "F" stood not for fibre, but for flatulence.
We now also know that high intakes of bran may have a variety of adverse effects on nutritional balance, and in general vegetable and fruit fibre is a better bet.
Calorie Counting is used by professional dietary advisers, including hospital-based dietitians and weight-watchers.
It is probably the best method for long-term weight control, since it educates you as to the calorie content and nutritional value of different foods.
For the seriously overweight, we think that this is the best long-term method.
However, like all the other diets listed, it takes no account of individual variations in ability to tolerate certain foods.
Ideally, you want a diet that not only helps you to shed pounds in weight, but really makes you healthy, and the best way to do that is by finding out which foods suit you.
If you have genuine difficulty in keeping to the diet in this book or any other diet, your best bet is to go back to the calorie-counting method, supervised by a diet club, dietitian, or doctor.
The Hip and Thigh Diet, a recent book by Rosemary Conley, recommends a diet and series of exercises to help lose weight, particularly from the hips and thighs.
The principle is highly attractive.
This is a high-fibre, well-balanced diet, but allows substantial quantities of dairy products and bread, which your body may not be able to tolerate.
Furthermore, there is a fundamental fallacy.
Fat deposition in the areas of hips and thighs is mainly related to the female hormone, oestrogen.
Women naturally have larger bottoms and smaller waists than men, whose male hormone testosterone leads mainly to weight gain around the abdomen.
There is no particular food that you need to avoid in order to help lose weight from the hips and thighs.
The best way to improve your shape is by exercise, of course.
The BBC Diet, as you would expect with this sort of title, is a very reliable sound diet that is recommended.
Again, there is nothing wrong with it except that it is "do as I say" and not "let's find out what is right for you" .
If it works and you felt great on it — then do it again.
Finally, if you have tried one or more of the above diets with lasting success, you wouldn't be reading this book!
What we are going to do is find a diet that not only helps you to achieve effective weight loss, but is really healthy, suits your individual needs, and can be followed for years to come in order to maintain the weight and shape you want.
WHY DO FAT PEOPLE KEEP HAVING TO DIET?
Many weight-loss diets are successful in the short term but fail to keep the weight off long-term.
However, if you have a car tyre that has a slow puncture, and you have to take it to the garage every week to put air into it, it doesn't mean that there is anything wrong with the pump: there must be something else wrong to make the tyre lose air.
Likewise, there must be factors other than the diets themselves that cause them to fail.
The tyre has a "fault" and so, very often, has the overweight person.
In the past it has been thought that the fault was greed, but this is too simple a view.
The fault often lies within the body and with there person's  perception of good health.
In short the healthier you become — by eating healthily, and choosing the foods that suit you — the more likely you are to eat healthily and maintain your correct weight in the long term.
Eating badly and gaining weight is an unpleasant experience, and should be so different from your new lifestyle that you never want to do it again.
A DIET TO MAKE YOU SICK
You may feel that we have been exaggerating about the goodies we like to consume causing us shape and health problems.
There is, however, no getting away from the truth that alcohol, cigarettes, sugar, tea and coffee do interfere with the balance of nutrients in the body.
THE EXPERIMENT
The idea was to take a person who was in excellent nutritional shape and consuming a good, better than average diet without taking any vitamin or mineral supplements, who was a non-smoker and moderate consumer of alcohol, sugar, tea, coffee and chocolate; and to see what effect consuming the national average amount of alcohol, cigarettes, sugar, tea, coffee and chocolate would do to this fine healthy specimen.
As Maryon had not long had a baby, we decided that Alan should volunteer, as he did not have such a valid excuse!
So he became our guinea pig.
Two weeks before the experiment began, Alan's blood levels of vitamins and minerals were measured.
They were measured again at the start of the experiment and every two weeks during the "active" phase which was due to last for eight weeks.
As well as his usual diet, Alan had to consume the following each day:
tea 4 cups per day
coffee 2 cups per day
alcohol 3 units per day (1 unit = 1 glass of wine, 1 measure spirit or half a pint of beer or lager)
chocolate 1 small chocolate bar per day (approximately half a large Mars Bar)
soft drinks half can of cola
sugar 12 teaspoons per day, i.e.two teaspoons in each of the hot drinks
cigarettes 6 per day
The tea was made according to the instruction given by the Tea Council in London — brewing the tea bag for three minutes then squeezing it.
The cigarettes were smoked properly with each being inhaled as much as possible.
The First Week
Maryon felt quite apprehensive about the experiment and wondered what it would be like to live with Alan during the diet.
She also had some concern as to whether in eight week Alan might develop a taste for the alcohol, the chocolate, and even the cigarettes!
The first few days were very trying for Alan as he went on to the new regime suddenly rather than gradually.
He had previously drink hardly any tea, one or two cups of coffee without sugar per day, had the occasional alcoholic drink, and smoked only the occasional cigar.
He developed quite a severe migraine headache and felt very sick by Day 3 and he was on the verge of giving up.
However, as he had made a start, he was determined to continue come what may…
The Second Week
During the second week Alan felt very run down.
He developed a flu-like cold which lasted for several days.
This again was most unusual, as he is rarely ill.
He found that he was so full-up from all the liquid in his diet that he hardly had room for his evening meal.
His usual hearty appetite for three courses was reduced to the point where he was pushing his main course around his plate complaining that he felt nauseated and tired.
The calories provided by the extra alcohol, sugar, and chocolate were some 500 to 600 per day, and as Alan did not gain weight during the experiment we know that his intake of good foods must have fallen by this amount, some 25 per cent of his normal daily intake.
The Third Week
Alan is usually a very even-tempered individual who has endless energy.
He is often perky until at least midnight.
By week 3 he was nodding off to sleep in an armchair as soon as he had finished dinner.
By 8.30pm he was unconscious, and could not be roused.
He also developed a slightly aggressive attitude, and became a bit short-tempered at times.
He was still feeling the nausea, especially after smoking.
Constipation was becoming a problem.
He just couldn't eat the amount of fruit and vegetables he had tucked into before.
Also, the tea and coffee with two teaspoons of sugar in each were not helping.
By the time he had drunk them, mainly in the morning, his stomach was rumbling and churning like a cement mixer.
The Fourth Week
By week 4 Alan's libido began to wane.
His usual enthusiasm had definitely disappeared; more often than not he was unconscious anyway.
By this time our former lifestyle was fast becoming a memory.
The Fifth Week
We wondered during the fifth week how Alan was going to manage to   keep going for another four weeks.
Maryon was getting a bit worried about him after an evening out in a restaurant: he had been getting behind with his alcohol intake so he decided to catch up.
He consumed a bottle of Frascati and smoked two cigarettes, then turned green, almost passed out, and fell asleep sitting up in the chair.
Although the Laboratory was not meant to divulge any results to Alan until the eight-week period was over, it was decided that it might be better to know the results at six weeks, and perhaps to end the experimental diet at this point.
Alan and Maryon both felt that six weeks would probably be enough and did not think he could manage to continue on this diet for another three weeks.
The Sixth Week
By the sixth week Alan was feeling pretty ill.
He was very tired and found it hard to concentrate for long periods of time.
One lunchtime, after consuming his ration of junk food and two cigarettes, he fell asleep in his waiting room with a can of cola in his hands.
When his first patient of the afternoon arrived before he awoke he knew it was time to abandon the diet.
Fortunately, the patient saw the funny side of the situation!
By that time we both knew that enough was enough.
The smoking, the drinking and the sugar were obviously not for Alan so we ended the experiment there.
LABORATORY RESULTS
It was just as well that Alan did decide to complete the diet after six weeks, as it turned out that many of his vitamin and mineral levels were sinking fast.
Vitamin A
Alan's vitamin A levels fell by nearly 50 per cent in six weeks.
Vegetable vitamin A, carotene, fell by 30 per cent, and both were now at the lower end of the normal range.
Vitamin A is necessary for healthy vision and resistance to infection, and a good intake reduces the risk of cancer.
Vitamin A deficiency usually only occurs in the presence of a grossly inadequate diet or when severe digestion problems exist.
Vitamin B Group
Vitamin B1 (thiamin), B2 (riboflavin) and B6 (pyridoxine) were measured.
From their healthy normal levels at the start, mild deficiencies of all three developed after six weeks.
B-group vitamins are necessary for protein and energy metabolism.
Deficiency can affect mood, energy level, skin quality, and resistance to infection.
Vitamin C
Alan's vitamin C level fell rather dramatically, from the top end to almost the bottom end of the normal range by the end of the six week experimental diet.
This level was by no means low enough to cause scurvy as Alan was still eating fruit and vegetables, though less than before.
Interestingly, the first symptom of vitamin C deficiency is depression.
Smokers are known to have lower vitamin C levels than non-smokers.
It was probably this that affected Alan's vitamin C level the most.
Vitamin E
Alan's vitamin E level also fell by 30 per cent form the middle towards the bottom of the normal range.
The vitamin E level would have had to fall much further to produce a deficiency and this would have been unlikely to happen in Alan or anyone else unless they are eating a very poor diet indeed.
Zinc
This important mineral also fell slightly by some 15 per cent.
No deficiency developed, which is just as well because zinc has important functions influencing sex hormone and sperm production, resistance to infection and appetite.
Magnesium
This fell by 10 per .Again, no deficiency developed and this fall was almost certainly caused by the reduced intake of green vegetables, a major source of magnesium, and the increased losses from the body that can occur with alcohol and coffee consumption.
Magnesium is needed  for the energy-producing steps in normal metabolism.
Chromium
The blood level of this mineral also fell from a very good healthy level to the lower end of the normal range.
Chromium helps to control blood sugar and cholesterol levels in the body.
A high sugar intake, which was part of Alan's diet, greatly increases the loss of chromium in urine.
It is thought that high sugar intakes and low chromium levels predispose to hardening of the arteries and raised cholesterol levels later in life.
Selenium
This mineral dropped by 15 per cent during the six weeks.
This small fall did not produce a deficiency which anyway is rare in the well-fed normal population.
However, those who have lower levels of selenium may have an increased risk of cancer in later years.
The same seems to be true of vitamins A and E. The best food sources of selenium are fish and whole grains.
Other minerals
Levels of calcium, iron, copper, and manganese were also measured without any fall being evident.
Well, what does all this mean?
Certainly, the average consumption of alcohol, cigarettes, sugar, and possibly even tea, coffee and chocolate do not help our nutrition balance.
People will vary enormously as to how their bodies tolerate these dietary items and you will learn in Stage II of the diet how your body gets on with some of these.
After the end of the sixth week Alan stopped the cigarettes, sugar and tea, and the extra coffee, alcohol and chocolate.
Within three days he felt that he had been born again.
Only then did he fully realize that he had been experiencing a mild dull pressure in the head, as well as the nausea, physical and mental fatigue.
For the next eight weeks, Alan went back to his old diet — again not taking any supplements.
Within that time, all the vitamin and mineral levels were restored and Alan once again enjoyed good health apart from another cold, two weeks after stopping smoking and drinking.
CONCLUSION
What does this rather unusual experiment mean?
Firstly, it is difficult if not dangerous to argue that what happens in one case happens in all.
It does not.
Some can smoke heavily, drink significant amounts of alcohol and get away with it.
We know that it is easier for your body to tolerate the habit if you also eat well but many do not.
Others feel ill at just the smell of cigarette smoke or even a glass of wine.
We are all different: but, certainly it is possible that for many of us our current consumption of cigarettes, alcohol, tea, coffee, sugar, and even chocolate are enough to adversely  affect our health and our nutritional balance.
Even the average consumption of these can be harmful for us. for many of us, reducing our consumption or even stopping all of them for a while is likely to help us in a number of ways.
For example, on average some 25 per cent of calorie intake is derived from alcohol and sugar.
As they are very poor quality foods they really form no part of a weight-reducing diet.
Consumed in small quantities as part of a healthy diet (once your weight is normal), they probably do no harm and their pleasures are of course well known.
More details about alcohol, sugar, tea, coffee, chocolate and cigarettes are given in Part Two.
So we have seen how ill the average consumption of these can make one person feel.
We will see, in Part Two, how much better stopping them could make you feel.
Remember, we want you not only to lose weight but to feel really healthy with your body in good nutritional balance.
UNDERSTANDING OBESITY
In developed countries, obesity is now probably the most common diet-related disorder.
In developing countries, obesity is usually a mark of prosperity.
Being overweight may be a distinct advantage in a country or community that is used to food shortages.
Those who are thin and lean may fare less well than their plump counterparts at times of shortage.
Unfortunately, we cannot use such excuses for ourselves, and so let's get down to some hard facts; facts which we think will give you an understanding of why you are overweight, and how this can best be tackled, in the short and long term.
First of all, how do we define obesity?
On this page you will see a graph which gives measurements for height and weight.
The graph is divided up into five sections, -1,0,1,2,3.
These are grades of weight and height, from a formula originally derived from a Belgian scientist, Quetelet.
He developed an index known as Quetelet's Index, which is widely used in the assessment of obesity.
The categories are as follows: Normal or ideal weight is grade 0.
Grade 1 is overweight, usually between 10 and 20 per cent above the ideal weight; grades 2 and 3 are   regarded as obese — more than 20 per cent above the ideal weight.
As measured by Quetelet's Index, the range associated with the greatest life expectancy and lowest death-rate is 20–25.
There is a very slight rise in death-rate in those who are mildly overweight, grade 1, and also in those who are underweight, grade-1. but this low rise is so small as to be insignificant.
It is grade 2, and especially grade 3, obesity, which carry the greatest risk to health.
An individual with a Quetelet's Index of 40 has three times the risk of dying in a year than someone whose weight is deal.
An individual with a Quetelet's Index of 35 has approximately twice the death rate of his or her ideal counterpart.
In the UK, it is estimated that 1 in 4 people are overweight, grade 1 obesity, the major reasons for dieting are cosmetic and a sense of well-being.
Not being overweight, and having a slim, attractive shape, is by current fashion desirable.
Many of us will feel better psychologically when that spare tyre has been slimmed away, and if the diet combined with an exercise programme there can be a very real improvement in feelings of overall fitness.
Medically there is little change in factors such as blood pressure, and risk of heart disease, though there could be a moderate fall in blood cholesterol level if this is elevated at the start of the diet.
For those with grade 2 or 3 obesity, the potential benefits of losing weight are very real, and the effects on psychological state of a successful weight-loss programme can be dramatic.
For example, normal employment is very difficult for those who are grossly overweight, grade 3 obesity.
THE HEALTH RISKS OF OBESITY
The obese, grades 2 and 3, especially the young, have a shorter life expectancy, and an increased risk of many illnesses, including diabetes, high blood pressure, heart disease, osteoarthritis, gout, gallstones, reduction in exercise tolerance/level of fitness, and depression.
Furthermore, general medical problems may be more difficult to care for in those who are obese.
Gastro-intestinal disorders including indigestion, heartburn, and constipation, may be more difficult to asses in an obese individual, as the information obtained from a medical examination may be limited.
Additionally, the survival rate of the obese woman with breast cancer is less than her thin counterpart.
The young obese individual who loses weight to normal or near-normal value may have a substantial improvement in life quality and expectancy, and reduction in risk in practically all of the above.
The improvement in arthritis, gout, blood pressure, diabetes, or blood cholesterol level may be dramatic, and evident within a few weeks or months of a dietary programme.
WHAT CAUSES OBESITY?
Genetic Factors
Analysis of families show that if both parents are obese, 70 per cent of the children will also be obese.
If one parent is obese, 40 per cent of the children will be obese, and if both parents are lean, then only 10 per cent will be obese.
Clearly, the predisposition of the parents is carried down partially to the children.
Of course, we could argue that obese parents eat too much, and are thus likely to overfeed their children, making them obese, and that it has nothing to do with genetics or inheritance.
However, in studies of children who have been adopted, the adopted children take after the weight characteristics of their biological parents, rather than after their adopted parents.
This and other work lends substantial support to the idea that a tendency to obesity is to a large degree genetic.
If this was the only causative factor, there would be little that we could do about it, but there is another side to the coin.
Environmental factors
By environment is meant all the factors that occur around us and potentially influence our internal metabolism, which we have already seen is initially determined by genetic make-up.
With regard to obesity, the most important environmental factors are the food supply, level of exercise, lifestyle and social pressures.
If the food supply, for example, is so meagre that there is barely enough food to go round, or starvation conditions exist, then obesity will obviously disappear from the community at large .
In such a situation, with a limited food supply, environment is more important than any genetic factor.
However, when there is an abundance of food, this allows the obesity tendency to express itself fully.
When food is plentiful, some 25 per cent of the population may become obese.
This is practically the situation in the UK, and has been fully achieved in the most prosperous countries in the world, notably the USA.
The majority of obese individuals will have one parent who is overweight, and only a minority would be the offspring of two obese or two thin parents.
At this point you might feel like going out to shoot your mother and father, and they in turn would feel like shooting their parents, but this isn't a very practical solution!
Further impractical solutions include forbidding obese people to reproduce: the effect of this would be surprisingly small, and it would take several generations of extremely unpopular enforced birth control to even halve the rate of obesity in the population.
Another equally undesirable solution is to restrict the food supply to the whole population, punishing lean and obese people alike.
Again, this is unlikely to win any favour with the population at large.
The only practical solution is in some way to limit the calorie intake of those who are overweight, while taking other steps to improve their rate of weight loss.
In conclusion, it does seem that some people were born to be fat, but are only able to be fat because of the relatively affluent society in which they live.
In the next chapter we will learn what factors control appetite and metabolism, and how we can use this to build a successful weight-loss programme.
OBESITY — YOUR QUESTIONS ANSWERED
WHAT CAUSES OBESITY?
Quite simply, having a calorie intake greater than your needs causes obesity.
WHAT ARE METABOLISM AND METABOLIC RATE?
Metabolism is the series of chemical reactions that occur in each cell and each organ to keep the body running properly.
DO FAT PEOPLE HAVE A SLOW RATE OF METABOLISM?
No.
The metabolic rate, i.e. the rate at which calories are burnt, is the same in obese individuals as it is in those of normal weight.
At times it can be higher.
The metabolic rate is mainly determined, not by body weight, but by the amount of muscle and other lean tissue in the body.
Obese subjects have a slightly greater muscle mass than thin subjects, as they have to do extra work carrying the weight of their fat stores.
DOES METABOLIC RATE VARY WITH AGE?
Yes, as you get older, there is a slight decrease in metabolic rate, but this effect is very small.
DOES METABOLIC RATE VERY FROM PERSON TO PERSON?
Yes, people of the same age and build may have a difference in metabolic rate of up to one-third.
That means some people may require one-third fewer calories than others, depending upon their metabolic type.
WHY IS IT EASIER TO LOSE WEIGHT IN THE FIRST WEEK OR TWO?
In the first weeks of a diet (up to four), half the weight loss is fat, and half is water, as a result of changes in sugar and protein metabolism.
This makes it easier to lose weight in the first few weeks, at a rate which can be up to 4lb per week.
Thereafter, the weight loss slows down to approximately  1–2lb per week, depending upon the type of diet.
DOES MY METABOLIC RATE VARY WHEN I DIET?
Yes, the metabolic rate can reduce by 10 per cent during a calorie-restricted diet.
The amount of fall in metabolic rate may vary considerably from person to person, just as metabolic rate varies from person to person.
Some find losing weight easy and some difficult.
HOW LONG WILL IT TAKE ME TO REACH MY IDEAL WEIGHT?
If you have grade 1 obesity, it amy take between six weeks and six months; grade 2 obesity, three to eighteen months; and grade 3 obesity, on to three years, depending upon your starting weight and closely you adhere to a weight-loss programme.
This assumes that the diet you are going to follow is reduced by 500 to 1,000 calories per day, which will then have to be derived from your body's fat store.
DOES MENTAL EXERCISE OR STRESS BURN UP CALORIES
As a rule, no.
Mental exercise, including reading this book, will not help burn up any calories.
Stress, stimulating certain hormones, may produce a small increase in metabolic rate, but this is not yet certain.
Worrying about your weight is more likely to lead to comforting yourself with a piece of chocolate that it is to assist in burning up calories.
HOW HEALTHY ARE CRASH DIETS?
Any severely restricted diet, particularly one providing in the region of 400 calories a day, can be highly successful, particularly in the short term.
However, if weight loss is excessive, then muscle tissue rather than fat tissue is lost, and this in turn will slow down the metabolic rate, making it more difficult to lose weight thereafter.
WILL I HAVE TO DIET FOR EVER?
In one sense, yes; the diet which has resulted in excessive weight gain or inability to lose weight is not the diet that you need to eat in future.
In this sense, you need to change your diet and will be "on a diet for ever" .
It all depends on what you consider to be a normal healthy diet.
The vast majority of obese people have been eating a normal unhealthy diet, and changing is a matter of education and attitude as well as trial and error.
That's what this diet is all about.
HOW CAN I TELL HOW MANY CALORIES ARE IN EACH MEAL?
In carefully conducted experiments, neither fat nor normal-weight subjects have been particularly good at estimating the calorie content of a meal.
Only reading and learning about nutrition and the nutrient values of food will help you.
In this respect, you have to become you own nutritionist.
WHAT STOPS NORMAL-WEIGHT PEOPLE BECOMING FAT?
The precise factors that control an individual's body weight are not yet fully known.
It does seem, however, that normal-weight people know when to stop eating, and fat people simply go on too long.
A carefully constructed calorie-controlled diet, with eating plans and education, is a good way for you and your body to learn when to say no, and switch off the desire for food.
WHAT CONTROLS MY APPETITE?
There is a part of the brain called the hypothalamus, which contains an appetite control centre.
A variety of factors seem to influence this part of the brain, including the sight, smell, and taste of food, as well as one's knowledge about healthy eating.
HOW CAN I INCREASE MY METABOLIC RATE?
The most consistent way to increase metabolic rate in both obese and normal-weight subjects is by physical exercise.
Physical activity will maintain or increase the amount of muscle in the body and it is muscle that controls metabolic rate.
Exercise raises the metabolic rate, not only at the time of activity, but also for a little while afterwards.
In athletes, and Arctic explorers, there can be as much as a two-fold rise in metabolic rate, requiring the calorie intake to be doubled in order to maintain normal weight.
WHAT DOES MY BODY DO WITH THE CALORIES I EAT?
Four fifths of the calories in the diet are required to maintain the normal energy production and metabolism of the body — just keeping the engine ticking over even if you are resting completely.
We are aware of this calorie usage as production of heat by the body — in order to keep the body at 37 degrees C, our normal temperature, a certain amount of energy is required, and this requires some 80 per cent of our calorie intake.
Only 20 per cent is used in physical activity such as climbing stairs or carrying shopping.
COULDN'T I LOSE WEIGHT BY MAKING MY BODY NEED MORE CALORIES?
One could in theory increase calorie requirements by wearing fewer clothes, so that the body's metabolic rate has to increase in order to maintain a normal body temperature.
while this is true in normal-weight  subjects, it unfortunately is not true in the obese!
Fat is an excellent insulator against the cold.
If anything, the metabolism of the obese becomes more sluggish when exposed to the cold.
Perhaps this is why some overweight people feel the cold more than their normal-weight fellows.
IS FAT JUST A MEANS OF STORING CALORIES?
For the most part, fat is simply a store of calories, but there are specialized areas of fat, called brown fat, which are found in the back between the shoulder blades and around the area of the kidneys.
In response to certain hormones, brown fat burns extra calories to generate heat.
The type of diet we eat may influence the activity of brown fat, and thus our metabolic rate.
However, this effect is small, but it may not be insignificant.
Certain animals, and possibly some humans, show differences in the metabolism in their brown fat.
Obese subjects have a slower rate of brown fate activity than those of normal weight.
In this respect, they may truly have a lower metabolic rate.
DO HORMONES INFLUENCE OBESITY?
Very occasionally, serious hormonal problems may lead to obesity, but the vast majority of those who are overweight do not have any serious hormonal imbalance.
However, hormonal levels may very widely from person to person, just as metabolic rate may.
Some hormones, such as insulin, are needed to control rises in the level of glucose in the blood.
Obese people tend to have higher levels of insulin than those of normal weight, and the disadvantage of insulin is that it tends to further encourage the body to deposit rather than burn up fat.
This may start a vicious circle and reducing levels of insulin are by losing weight, taking more exercise, and improving the quality of your diet.
In summary, the factors that control obesity are:(1) calorie intake (2) metabolic rate, which varies from person to person, and is mainly determined by the amount of muscles in the body (3) exercise level, and how much this stimulates you body's rate of metabolism (4) hormonal balance  
IS IT BETTER TO EAT ONE LARGE MEAL A DAY?
There seems to be little difference in the actual amount of weight lost whether you eat all your calorie allowance in one go, or spread it over the day.
However, you body will lose more fat tissue and less muscle tissue if calorie intake is spread over three to five meals and snacks during the day.
This is why we will be advising you to have three meals and on or two snacks per day.
Nibbling, rather than gorging, is a healthier way to lose weight and a better way of satisfying your appetite.
Occasionally, hormonal disturbance, particularly of the thyroid gland, may lead to a slowing down or speeding up of the metabolic rate.
Going on to a weight-reducing diet actually reduces the rates of hormone production by the thyroid, and in turn slows down the metabolic rate.
CAN I CHANGE MY METABOLIC RATE?
In brief, yes, you can, but it is going to take some doing.
Exercise
Firstly, the most powerful stimulus to metabolic rate is exercise.
Physical exercise raises your metabolic rate, and if the exercise is prolonged and undertaken regularly, your metabolic rate will rise even at rest.
Exercise does not necessarily have to be very vigorous, but it does need to be regular, and for a significant duration.
The minimum amount would be three sessions of exercise per week, each lasting 30 minutes.
Protein intake
Secondly, ensuring a good intake of protein in the diet will help to minimize loss of muscle tissue during a weigh-loss programme.
Losing muscle tissue will slow down your metabolic rate, and this is just what you don't want.
That's why we have devised a low-calorie, high protein diet.
Intake of vitamins and minerals
Thirdly, certain vitamins and mineral may influence the production of thyroid hormones.
Zinc and vitamin A, if deficient, may lead to a reduction in the output of hormones by the thyroid, and in turn a relative slowing of metabolic rate.
While this is unlikely to be a problem in the early stages, being on a prolonged low-calorie diet which does not provide an adequate intake of these and other nutrients might have an adverse effect upon the body's metabolism, and make it increasingly difficult to either lose weight or to maintain your exercise level.
This may well be a reason why previous diets have failed.
Details about nutritional supplements to prevent this are on page 55.
Nutritional deficiencies
Finally, your level of physical activity is going to be influenced to a large degree by how well and fit you feel.
Muscles require substantial amount of magnesium, potassium, vitamin B, protein, and zinc in order to work effectively.
Severe deficiencies of these nutrients occur only rarely, but it is becoming increasingly appreciated that mild or borderline levels of these nutrients may be found not infrequently in the "normal population" .
Obese individuals, because of their less prudent eating habits, and/or differences in metabolism, may be at risk for mild deficiencies in these nutrients.
Going on to a weight-reducing diet that is not adequately balanced may further compromise your feelings of well being and energy, and limit the degree to which you can undertake an increased level of exercise.
In the long run, this may have a significant effect upon your ability to control your own weight.
GETTING THE BALANCE RIGHT
Now we are going to take a look at what it takes to keep a body healthy, and in particular at your nutritional requirements.
The two essential parts in looking at the adequacy of the diet are:
whether the intake is adequate in amount
whether the balance is correct.
Nowadays, lack of intake is not usually a problem, so we will turn our attention to balance.
The body could not survive healthily for very long on a diet composed of any one type of food.
Not only would it be monotonous, it would also fail to provide the range of nutrients that the body requires for health.
These are proteins, fats, carbohydrates, vitamins, minerals, and fluid.
ESSENTIAL NUTRIENTS
Proteins are the building-blocks of the body.
Tissues, such as muscle, heart, liver, kidneys, and most other organs, are rich in protein.
Skin, bones and hair also contain certain amounts of protein, which contributes to their structure.
The main role of protein, however, is to perform the functions of each individual cell.
Thus protein is necessary for the ovaries and thyroid to produce hormones, for the kidneys to make urine, for muscles to exercise, and so forth.
If a large amount of protein is used in the diet, then some is used for energy purposes, and during starvation, protein is taken from the muscles of the body and used as a fuel supply.
This tends to slow down the body's metabolic rate, and for that reason weight-loss diets should have plenty of protein.
On average for every one stone (14 pounds/6.5kg) of body weight, we require a daily intake of some 5 grams of protein (about half an egg).
This is essential to keep the body healthy.
Carbohydrates come in a variety of different forms, all of which are best regarded as sources of energy.
The simplest forms of carbohydrate in our diet are glucose and fructose.
These are single sugar units, and fructose is found particularly in high amounts in  fruit; hence its name which means fruit sugar.
Fructose and glucose can be joined together to make sucrose or table sugar, normally prepared from sugar cane or sugar beet.
mild contains yet another type of sugar called lactose, which itself is composed of two single units of sugar: glucose and galactose.
So much for the simple carbohydrates.
The complex carbohydrates, which are found in vegetables, cereals and to a lesser degree in fruits, are composed of numerous sugar units joined together in a complex way.
These have to be broken down by the digestive system before they are absorbed as single units of mainly glucose and fructose.
Complex carbohydrates are desirable for three reasons: they are slowly digested and release their energy at a steadier rate foods rich in complex carbohydrates are also rich in vitamins and minerals, which are essential for the metabolism of sugar and the steady release of its energy such foods are also high in fibre, high intakes of which are associated with many health benefits.
Refined carbohydrates, such as sucrose and pure glucose, may be a convenient source of quick energy, but they lack vitamins, minerals, and fibre.
They are all too easily   consumed to excess, and thus may lead to obesity.
Fats are a major source of energy in the diet, and provide twice as many calories as protein or carbohydrates for the same amount in weight.
In developed countries, fat intake has increased at the expense of a reduction in complex carbohydrates.
In order to lose weight, we almost always have to cut down on fat intake, but some fats are essential, just as vitamins and minerals are.
These are the polyunsaturated fats, which are derived mainly from sunflower, safflower and rapeseed oils, vegetables, nuts, seeds and some fish.
Foods of animal origin, e.g.lard, dripping, butter, milk, cream, cheese, and meat and some vegetable oils, notably palm oil and coconut oil, are rich in saturated fats.
These are not essential, and have the undesirable effect of stimulated the liver to produce more cholesterol, and raising its level in the blood.
Both saturated and polyunsaturated fats contain the same amount of calories.
Finally, cholesterol is a specialized form of fat which is found particularly in eggs, dairy products, and meat.
Most of the cholesterol in our blood is actually made by our liver and approximately one-third is derived from our diet.
Dietary cholesterol is not the ogre the experts once thought it was.
Our dislike of late has turned quite rightly to an excess of animal fats, combined with a lack of fibre in the diet.
Approximately 15 per cent of our diet is composed of protein; 55 per cent is composed of carbohydrate, and 40 per cent of fat.
Vitamins and minerals are essential nutrients that are required not for their calorific value, which is negligible, but because they help regulate the body's metabolism.
All vitamins and essential minerals are necessary to assist in normal functioning of the thousands of different chemical reactions that make up the body's metabolism.
If the supply of vitamins and mineral in the diet is inadequate, this will result in changes in body chemistry, and a slowing down or altering of the body's metabolism, usually with some deterioration in body fitness or health.
Vitamins and minerals often work together in this respect, and some are necessary for normal energy production, the use of protein in growth and tissue repair, and in many other functions, ranging from hormone production to effects on skin quality.
Additionally, some minerals, particularly calcium, phosphorus and magnesium, are necessary with certain types of protein for the formation of the skeleton.
FIBRE
Fibre is a specialized form of complex carbohydrate, which cannot be broken down by the normal human digestive system.
It thus becomes a major constituent of the waste product, faeces.
Diets high in fibre are  often high in vitamins and minerals, and a high-fibre diet is an important part of a weight-reduction programme — more of this in Chapter 9.
BALANCE
Part of a healthy weight loss programme is to get the nutritional balance right.
On average, we have an adequate or slightly excessive intake of calories derived from fat and carbohydrate.
Protein intakes are normally adequate, unless the diet is very restricted.
The intake of vitamins and minerals is, if we are eating a healthy well-balanced diet, almost certainly adequate, but how many of us are already eating a healthy, well-balanced diet?
At certain times in our lives, and in certain situations, it may be difficult to achieve a proper balance of all the vitamins and minerals in the diet.
These situations include: episodes of rapid growth, e.g. puberty; pregnancy; breast-feeding; prolonged adherence to a weight-loss programme; adherence to a very restricted or fad diet; adherence to a vegetarian or vegan diet, unless it is well balanced; old age; taking long-term drugs, such as steroids, diuretics (water tablets), anti-epileptic drugs, and possibly the oral contraceptive pill.
If you fall into any of the above categories, you may need to take a daily multi-vitamin and mineral pill as your nutritional insurance policy!
(See Chapter 10.)
CONTROLLING YOUR APPETITE
Certain factors switch the appetite on and off.
If it is too readily switched off, we become underweight, and if it is too readily switched on, we become overweight.
It is still not year fully understood how the appetite is controlled.
Hunger, caused by lack of food, is the most obvious and indeed the most powerful stimulus, but often we haven an appetite even though we are not very hungry.
In such circumstances, the sight, smell, or indeed taste of food and drink, serve to stimulate our appetite.
Something looks delicious, we have eaten it before, and know it tastes delicious, and hey presto, we have an appetite for it.
Social circumstances also dictate our eating habits and appetite.
It is customary to offer a drink or a snack to guests and, in some circumstances, it is impolite for them to refuse.
Indeed, you have probably broken previous weight-loss diets because of social pressures, such as eating in a restaurant, or eating in a friend's house, where their encouragement, "go on it won't hurt" , and your response, "just this once," are the first fatal steps to weight gain.
Also, knowledge of what is good food to eat, and indeed what might be harmful to health, can control our appetite.
Certain drugs, including some sex hormones, anti-depressants, and steroids, all serve to stimulate appetite.
Emotional factors, in particular recovery from depression and sometimes response to depressive episodes, may also result in an increased appetite.
CURBING THE APPETITE
So much for what switches it on; what, if anything, switches the appetite off?
The sensation obtained from a meal does usually switch the appetite off.
This is a combination of factors, including abdominal fullness and an inner feeling of satisfaction, sometimes mingled with the horror of further weight gain.
Physical or emotional pain, illness, and some drugs also tell us that now is not the time to eat.
A further important factor is body image.
Some people of normal weight  feel that they are grossly overweight, and must diet to obtain a "normal body shape" .
Their image is to some degree distorted, and they will all too easily switch their appetite off, rather than let normal hunger and a normal appetite for food develop.
At its extreme, this becomes the slimmers' disease, anorexia nervosa.
The reverse, thinking you are of normal weight when you are overweight, is, if anything, a rarity.
Most of us know we are overweight.
Unfortunately, there are no magic diets, vitamins, or minerals that will switch your appetite on or off.
Slimming drugs do help to suppress appetite and can be quite successful in assisting short-term weight loss.
The tremendous disadvantage is, however, that when the drugs are stopped, the amount of weight regained is almost exactly equal to that lost, and long-term loss from short-term use of appetite-suppressant drugs has yet to be demonstrated.
IT'S A GOOD LIFE
The difference between fat people and thing people is that thin people's bodies tell them when they have had enough to eat.
Fat people's bodies just don't know when to say no. for example, it is easy to tell when your body has a fever, is in pain or is tired.
These are all experiences we have had that tell us about the body's state at the time, and we do not have difficulty in interpreting them.
We have all experienced times of good health, too.
If you can't easily remember this, just close your eyes for a moment and recall a time when you felt really well.
Probably your weight was less than it is now, and you were physically more active.
Perhaps you were on holiday.
Just close your eyes and think of that time when you were really well.
Remember how your body felt different to how it feels now.
The difference is, however, subtle, and not as obvious as being in pain or having a fever.
Eating too much can easily produce abdominal discomfort and a feeling of being stuffed or bloated.
This might be associated with physical feelings of lethargy, sleepiness, or a migraine headache, as well as feelings of guilt or depression.
Now, if you didn't feel healthy to start with, and if you feel lethargic and bloated most of the time, your body is not going to notice easily when you overeat.
What we want to achieve is you losing weight and feeling healthier and having greater awareness of your body.
Only in this way will you know when you have overeaten.
That feeling of bloating, being stuffed and lethargic, will be so unlike how you normally feel that it will be easy for you to tell when you have eaten too much before you really eat too much.
To achieve this, we need to help you to do three things: to lose weight to eat a diet that is really healthy and nutritious, providing all the vitamins, minerals and protein you need  to feel really well, having found a diet that suits you.
In this way, if you stray from the healthy diet, you will know immediately; your body will protest and send you a clear message, just as it would if you were too hot or too cold.
It is important to learn the skill of knowing when you have had enough!
FIBRE AND WEIGHT LOSS
In recent years, a lot of attention has been given to fibre.
A great deal has been said and written, and food manufacturers have been in a hurry to extol the virtues of their food based on its fibre content.
However, things are not as simple as they seemed at first.
So let's put the record straight and see what part fibre plays in weight loss, health, and appetite control.
WHAT IS FIBRE?
Fibre is the indigestible component of our diet, almost always derived from vegetable produce, and it is those components of the diet that cannot be broken down by the digestive system which in turn pass into the large bowel and contribute to the bulk of faecal waste matter.
WHAT FOODS ARE RICH IN FIBRE?
Fibre is widely distributed in the plant kingdom, and good sources are wholegrains and foods made from them, such as wholemeal bread, coarse oats and sweetcorn.
All fruits, and leafy and root vegetables are food sources of fibre.
The processing of food, for example turning a whole potato into chips, almost always lowers its fibre content and increases its fat content.
That is why consuming refined, processed food makes it easy to you to gain weight.
WHY ARE WE ENCOURAGED TO EAT MORE FIBRE?
People who consume fibre-rich diets do not tend to have many of the diseases associated with the developed countries.
Such conditions as coronary artery disease, gallstones, appendicitis, diverticulosis, constipation and other digestive troubles, as well as varicose veins and obesity, occur less often when large amounts of fibre are consumed in the diet.
ARE THERE DIFFERENT TYPES OF FIBRE?
Yes, fibre is a term for many different substances which have different properties.
They all provide bulk in the diet, but some are better at  retaining water, and thus softening the stool, which is of benefit for constipation, for example, and others are better at lowering the blood cholesterol level than others.
The fibre from fruit and vegetables seems to be particularly beneficial, whereas that from grains may carry fewer benefits.
WHAT HAS FIBRE GOT TO DO WITH WEIGHT LOSS?
Overweight people tend to consume less fibre than their normal-weight counterparts.
Concentrating on fibre-rich foods achieves three things.
Firstly, fibre-rich foods are more filling and thus satisfying, though of course they take more work to consume as they require more chewing.
Secondly, most but not all fibre-rich foods are very nutritious.
For example, eating a diet rich in fibre from green vegetables will also provide you with large quantities of vitamins A, B, D, and E, magnesium, and a wide range of other minerals.
A tablespoon of bran, which might provide you with the same amount of fibre, is not nearly so nutritious.
Thirdly, those of us who are overweight tend to have higher levels of fats in the blood, and fibre-rich foods, when combined with weight loss, can help this enormously and thus lower the risk of heart disease.
ARE THERE ANY SIDE-EFFECTS OF FIBRE?
Surprisingly, yes.
Fibre by definition cannot be broken down by our digestive systems, but it can be broken down by normal healthy bacteria in our large bowel.
This may have the side-effect of producing gas and wind.
People vary considerably as to how much gas or wind they produce in response to eating different types of foods.
Foods that can commonly cause these include onions, cabbage, beans, bran and large quantities of wholemeal bread.
At present, there is not easy way of predicting who may produce gas in response to which foods, and this is a matter for trial and error.
This is something you will be exploring in Part Two of the book.
this effect however, tends to minimize as one continues with a high-fibre diet.
the body is able to adapt, though this process can take several weeks.
IS IT TRUE THAT BRAN BLOCKS THE ABSORPTION OF CALCIUM?
Yes, bran, wholewheat pasta, chapattis, and large amounts of wholemeal bread contain a substance called phytic acid which blocks the absorption of calcium, magnesium, iron, zinc, copper, and vitamins B. It is best not to eat too much of these sorts of fibre in your diet.
For this and other reasons we recommend that most of the fibre is obtained from vegetables, salad, and fruit, which does not have this effect, and that you do not simply spoon on dollops of bran in order to increase fibre intake.
Fruit and vegetable fibre is preferable  to cereal fibre for the following reasons: generally has fewer calories green vegetables have more vitamins and minerals it is better at lowering blood cholesterol levels higher consumptions of vegetables and fruit are associated with a lower risk of coronary heart disease it does not contain phytic acid which blocks the absorption of many important minerals and some vitamins.
Note: In the UK, white bread is fortified with calcium, iron, and some B vitamins.
Although it is lower in fibre it may provide more calcium in the body.
Thus white bread may be better for those at risk of osteoporosis (thinning of the bones), provided the diet has plenty of fibre and B vitamins from other sources, e.g. green vegetables, salads and nuts.
BECOMING A NUTRITIONAL DETECTIVE
Getting to know your body is a bit like learning to use a highly complicated machine without a manual.
It can be a difficult process and on that requires time and patience.
Although we each have a body, that is where the similarity ends.
Each individual body has slightly different requirements.
The type of metabolism we have inherited.
There are the lucky ones who have a superbly adapted metabolism: they naturally have a low blood cholesterol level, they can eat almost any type of food, in large quantities, and yet remain healthy and slim.
It is highly unlikely that you are reading this book if you happen to be one of the fortunate few!
We have come to terms with the fact that most of us have subtle differences which determine the strengths and weaknesses of our make-up.
If you can accept this concept, you will then be able to understand in principle why some people are predisposed to some illnesses or tend to be sensitive to certain types of dietary changes, groups of food, or nutritional deficiencies.
This can also explain why only some people on similar sorts of diet get sick and overweight, while others seem to stay slim and healthy.
ONE BALANCED DIET FOR ALL IS A MYTH
Having accepted the fact that your body is a machine for which you do not have the manual, and that it is not like anyone else's body, what can you do about it?
The purpose of the rest of this book is to give you the information you need to compile the missing nutritional manual that will tell you what is just right for your body.
The programme is broken down into three sections.
The first part, lasting four weeks, is a "clean up" , which will prepare your body for the second phase, also four weeks.
this is a "trial and error" phase.
As you work through the second phase you will be working out the diet that is as near to perfect as you can get it for your own body.
During the third phase, lasting two weeks, you will follow a diet that allows you to feel really healthy and  to continue losing the unwanted pounds and inches.
GETTING CLUED UP
To become a Nutritional Detective you have to know what you are looking for — the signs and clues that will eventually lead you to an understanding of your body's individual needs.
It would be a good idea to complete the following questionnaires to give some guide as to your health in a number of important areas.
GENERAL HEALTH AND NUTRITION QUESTIONNAIRE
Let's start with a general questionnaire about your health.
This is to see whether any health problems you might have had recently could be affected by your diet, or alcohol and cigarette consumption.
Each one of these common problems could be related to your diet, or alcohol or cigarette consumption.
There are of course other reasons for each one, so it is impossible to say exactly how much you can do yourself for any of the conditions mentioned.
Certainly if you ticked two or more then it is time to take stock of the situation.
Improving the quality of your diet, and reducing your intake of alcohol and cigarettes if you consume them, must help with the problems — and for some it would make a very big difference.
If you have any of the conditions   listed, your doctor may have already spoken to you about the importance of healthy eating, and a healthy lifestyle.
If you are receiving medical treatment for any of these conditions, or any other condition for that matter, do check with your doctor before starting this or any other diet.
There should not be a problem but it is best to check.
Now let us take a look to see what the future might hold.
We have referred before to heart disease and stokes.
These remain the biggest killers in most developed countries, and more important the largest preventable cause of premature death (i.e. before the age of 65 years).
This is a Questionnaire to asses your risk.
Remember that heart disease risk increases substantially if you are seriously overweight of smoke.
If you scored only one point, you probably have only a slightly increased risk of heart disease.
If you scored two or more points you should, if you have not already, see your doctor and get further advice from him or her about what you should do to reduce your heart disease and stroke risk.
Almost all the risk factors can be easily corrected.
No matter what your score, you can still do the diet in Part Two.
The only exception are diabetics who should obtain advice from their specialist, dietician, or family doctor first.
Finally, lack of exercise is also a risk factor for heart disease but it's relatively small when compared with the others.
Next we are going to look at nutritional deficiencies.
Few areas in nutrition and medicine are more hotly debated than whether or not people should take vitamin and mineral supplements.
Many experts say no.
Many vitamin companies, health food shop owners, and writers on nutrition say yes.
As is often the case in this sort of situation, both sides are right to some degree.
Certainly, if you are eating a good diet, not smoking cigarettes, consuming little alcohol, are physically and mentally well, aged between 18 and 65 years, and not pregnant or breast-feeding, then you should not need any nutritional supplements.
We hope that you fall into this category.
If you don't, the answer us a definite "maybe" !
So let us see what the questionnaire can tell us.
Your score will give some idea as to the likelihood of having a deficiency of vitamins and minerals.
If there is a deficiency it is important that it is corrected by good diet and appropriate nutritional supplements.
If in doubt, you should of course check this with your family doctor.
In the UK, the commonest deficiencies are of iron and vitamin B. A mild deficiency detected by blood test may not matter if the diet is essentially well-balanced and the person is well.
However, if symptoms or signs of deficiency are present then treatment is indicated.
The signs of iron deficiency are a sore tongue, recurrent mouth ulcers, cracking at the corners of the mouth, flattening of the normal curve of the     finger or thumb nails, and a pale complexion due to anaemia.
If these are present you will need a blood test from your doctor and should not start a special diet without checking with him or her first.
A supplement of iron may well be needed and possibly tests to determine the cause of deficiency.
Lack of vitamin B can produce a variety of symptoms and signs, some of which are similar to iron deficiency.
They include redness or greasiness at the side of the nose, cracking at the corners of the eyes, or at the corners of the mouth, a sore tongue, recurrent mouth ulcers, and cracking or peeling of the lips.
Furthermore, a lack of either iron or vitamin B can cause fatigue, and vitamin B deficiency is sometimes the cause of depression, anxiety, or insomnia.
If you are in doubt about the adequacy of your diet, need to lose more than 10 pounds (4.5kg) in weight, but are otherwise in good health you are probably well advised to take a low-dose multi-vitamin and multi-mineral supplement.
If you are generally unwell with any of the above symptoms you should of course consult your doctor first.
Here is a look at some of the nutritional supplements that are available at either your chemist or health shop:
Sanatogen; Boots Multi-vitamins; Multi-vitamins BPC
These are cheap multi-vitamin supplements which contain many of the nutrients that might be required by those on a restricted calorie intake.
Sanatogen With Iron; Boots Multi-vitamins With Iron
Multi-vitamins with iron are a good idea if you have heavy periods, particularly if you are a vegetarian.
Health Insurance Plus; Canamega 2000; Quest-One-A-Day
These are all other similar products all strong multi-vitamin multi-mineral supplements.
They are quite expensive and contain substantially more than is usually needed.
It may be good idea to take them if you are ill or if you are a heavy alcohol consumer but they should not be routinely necessary.
Optivite
This is a strong multi-vitamin, multi-mineral supplement of proven efficacy in the treatment of premenstrual tension.
I is also rather costly and too strong for routine use by those on weight-loss programmes.
Evening Primrose Oil (e.g. Efamol) is helpful for PMT but does not contain any vitamins or minerals.
It is a specialized oil supplement.
Diet Balance
This is a new multi-vitamin, multi-mineral supplement which contains a wide range of vitamins and minerals at levels very close to those provided by a healthy diet.
It is moderately priced.
It is designed to be taken by people who are on a weight-loss diet, in order that they get the correct daily balance of vitamins and minerals.
It is important to remember that there is not special supplement of vitamins, minerals or anything else for that matter, that will melt your excess weight away.
There is not substitute for a well-balanced calorie-reduced diet.
It is important that those who are on such diets long term take care to ensure an adequate intake of essential nutrients.
FOOD ALLERGIES AND HOW TO DETECT THEM
After the question of nutritional deficiencies, few subjects are more topical than food allergy and intolerance.
For many year, the majority of doctors questioned whether food allergies occurred at all, but things have changed, particularly in the last decade.
Many of us are aware that some foods agree with us and some do not.
This is part of the individual nature of our body's metabolism.
Part of our individuality is determines by the functioning of the immune system.
This system produces white cells and antibodies that help us resist infection.
It has a particular quality to recognize substances as being either "self" , i.e. part of the normal body's metabolism or "non-self" , i.e. a foreign substance from outside.
Some individuals may become unusually sensitive to such foreign non-self substances, and this is turn can cause an allergic reaction.
Good examples are grass-pollen producing hay fever, some constituents of perfume or make-up producing contact dermatitis, and sensitivity to gluten — a protein found in wheat — producing coeliac disease.
In this latter condition, gluten (which is also found in oats, barley, and rye) produces damage to the lining of the bowel, preventing normal absorption of nutrients from the diet.
These are all classical examples of food allergy.
Sometime, changes in blood either in the white cells or in the blood proteins, i.e. antibodies, cannot be detected in people who react adversely to foods.
In such cases, the term "food intolerance" is then used.
It is becoming increasingly appreciated that while food allergies may be relatively rare, food intolerance may be much more common, and usually produces milder symptoms.
Conditions in which food allergies are known to play a part include eczema, asthma, nettle-rash(urticaria), rhinitis, swelling of the lips or throat, rheumatoid arthritis, and migraine.
Food intolerance may certainly aggravate a common bowel disorder called irritable bowel syndrome.
In this condition, the sufferer experiences either constipation or  diarrhoea, often in association with excessive abdominal bloating and sometimes pains, usually cramp-like and situated either in the middle or lower part of the abdomen.
This is a common disorder, affecting some 11 per cent of the population.
Such symptoms may be present for a days or weeks and then clear up but in many, the symptoms are persistent.
There is not satisfactory drug treatment for irritable bowel syndrome, and a variety of diets have been recommended.
At one time it was thought that high-fibre diets containing bran would be successful, but this has not proved to be the case.
More recent research has suggested that approximately two-thirds of individuals may improve by changing their diet and avoiding certain foods.
Constituents of the diet such as mil, bread, cheese, butter, tea, coffee, alcohol and even cigarettes have the potential to aggravate or cause the symptoms or irritable bowel syndrome.
A leading group of doctors who have researched this condition are at Addenbrooke's Hospital in Cambridge.
Their research, led by D John Hunter, Consultant Gastroenterologist, revealed the connection between diet and irritable bowel syndrome(IBS).
Surprisingly, one of the commonest foods found to cause IBIS was wheat, especially in the form of bran and wholemeal bread.
This was a real turn up for the books, and is an observation still not accepted by all medical practitioners.
Of course, not everybody with irritable bowel syndrome has food intolerances, nor are they going to be intolerant of every food they eat.
Sometimes it is just one food, or perhaps three or four, and this is yet another example of individuality.
Migraine headaches are another condition that need a mention.
A severe headache with nausea or vomiting, and often with disturbance of vision or sensitivity to light, typify a migraine.
It is now widely accepted that such headaches can be precipitated by foods as well as stress, the oral contraceptive Pill, and the build-up to a period.
The commonest foods to cause a migraine are alcoholic drinks, cheese, pickled foods, chocolate, tea, coffee, and foods rich in yeast such as Marmite and savoury foods or sauces containing yeast extract.
(look at the label).
The great unanswered question about food allergy and intolerance is what causes it?
Many children develop allergies in the first few weeks or months of life, and often these improve as the years go by.
Many cases of childhood eczema may be due to allergy to cow's milk, but some 50 per cent or so may clear up quite spontaneously, without any change in diet.
This is just the newly-born body becoming acclimatized to the type of diet and foodstuffs that we now eat.
Food allergy and intolerance have certainly become much more common in the adult population and the reason is unknown.
Perhaps changes in the type of foods we eat, exposure to environmental chemicals and pollutants, and changes in  the type of infections we now experience have caused this.
Each of the eight conditions listed in the questionnaire can be caused by factors other than food allergy or intolerance.
So if you marked just one, food allergy or intolerance is a possibility but not certain.
If you marked two, the chances are definitely increasing, and with three or more it is well worth considering a change of diet to see if this helps.
This is one of the key points about the diet in Part Two.
The foods that commonly cause or aggravate these conditions are for the most part excluded from the diet.
Previous weight-loss or crash diets may well have failed in the short or long term because they did not take into account problems you might have had with food allergy or intolerance.
Do you think that you have to have one of these conditions in order to do the diet — you don't.
You should be starting to realize that there are many ways in which improving your diet can help.
Also in Part Two you will learn much more about some of the suspect foods including sugar, animal fats, dairy products, wheat and other grains, tea, coffee, chocolate, yeast products and alcohol — as well as cigarettes.
DIETS IN PRACTICE
The diet that we eat is influenced by a variety of different factors, both consciously and subconsciously.
No single factor is dominant and all are important to varying degrees, depending upon the individual, and the circumstances in which she or he lives.
I would be nice to think that if people knew the correct diet for them particularly the correct diet for weight loss, they would simply go and follow it, and that would be the end of obesity.
Little could be further from the truth.
Many of us have tried to lose weight and failed miserably for one reason or another.
Success is usually followed by failure until the next successful dietary regime is found.
We can only break our of this vicious circle by understanding the factors that influence the dietary choices we make.
THE KEY FACTORS
Cost
Most if not all of us run our lives on some kind of budget.
We have money for clothes, the housekeeping, for paying the mortgage or rent, the house bills, car, holidays.
Instinctively we know which foods are expensive, and which are cheap, and purchase foods using this knowledge.
In the UK the current average expenditure on food is just under £2 per person per day.
In addition, for every £1 we spend on food, we spend a further 50p on alcohol and 22p on cigarettes.
On the weight-loss programme in Part-Two you should not spend any more than usual on your week's shopping.
You may find that you spend a little more on food, but savings are made because of the reduction in expenditure on alcohol and perhaps cigarettes.
Tradition
We are, by and large, creatures of habit.
When looked at on a year-to-year basis, our diets may very little.
There are of course substantial variations in dietary habits from country to country, and from family to family.
Dietary habits are also  influenced to some degree by social class; for example, those from a working class background tend to eat less fruit and vegetables than others.
To some degree we tend to eat the foods that we ate as children.
Only in more recent years have our dietary habits changed.
From 1976 to 1984, all social groups made small but significant reductions in the consumption of refined sugar, saturated animal fats, and white breads.
We have on average increased our consumption of fruit and vegetables by approximately 10 per cent, with the exception of those in the unemployed and working class categories.
Unfortunately, people in this latter group have decreased their consumption by 10 per cent, thus widening an important dietary difference between the social groups.
Having a good consumption of fruit and vegetables is a very important part of a healthy weight-loss programme.
To lose weight means changing your diet, and to do that means changing some of your shopping habits.
Buying this week what you bought last week is only going to end in failure.
The changes are coming.
Choice and availability
In times of hardship, as in the depression in the 1920's and 30's and rationing during the 1940's and 50's, there has not always been a great choice of food.
Nowadays, in developed countries, we live in times of plenty, and every supermarket and greengrocer is offering an ever-increasing choice of food products.
It has never been easier to change and choose a healthier weight-loss programme.
Lack of choice is rarely a limiting factor.
We have taken great care to make sure that the foods recommended on the diet are all widely available, little influenced by seasonal variations.
Taste
Of course, the taste of food is an overriding factor.
Nowadays, in times of plenty, we naturally eat only foods that we enjoy the taste of.
With so much choice we almost never have to eat foods that we don't enjoy.
Tolerance
As well as you liking the food, the food has to like you.
This is a whole subject in itself, which we have already mentioned.
There are many foods that are commonly not well tolerated, and the basic structure of the diet is not only to remove the calorie-rich foods that cause obesity, but also those foods that are commonly not tolerated.
In the long run, you are best to avoid or severely limit those foods to which you are intolerant.
The careful design of the diet will allow you to determine for yourself which foods you can tolerate and which you cannot.
Convenience
We do not just mean convenience  foods, but the convenience of eating a meal in relation to the time allowed, and the situation.
Our expectations of achievement have been steadily rising.
We have become busier and more efficient and the productive with each passing decade, and this has meant cutting down on the time spent on more mundane activities.
We no longer grow, harvest and prepare all our own food.
It is more convenient to have it grown for us, harvested for us, and in some cases, meals actually prepared for us.
If your life is so rushed that you only have five to ten minutes for lunch, and your body knows that you have to consume at least 300–400 calories in order to make it through until the evening, it is going to look for a very convenient solution, and that means, high calorie, low volume food that is readily available, such as a chunky cheese sandwich, or worse still, a chocolate bar.
None of these foods are going to help you lose weight, though they are all quick and convenient.
To achieve a lasting weight loss, you are going to need to set aside time for preparation and consumption of food, and that may mean altering your lifestyle.
Knowledge
Last, but by no means least, comes knowledge of what is a healthy diet.
For hundreds and indeed thousands of years, this knowledge has only been intuitive, passed on from generation to generation.
Different cultures have had different views of what a healthy diet is.
With the arrival of scientific methods in the twentieth century, we have been able to determine the essential nature of a healthy diet, and with it make dietary changes based on knowledge.
This book will provide you not only with a healthy weight-loss programme that will suit your metabolism, but also the knowledge that is necessary to help you adhere to it.
The knowledge is not just dry pages of fact after fact, but knowledge gained from analysing your first-hand experience.
You are going to find out what foods suit you, and turn that knowledge into a long-lasting, successful weight-loss programme.
Just as we are all different in our body weight and metabolism, so the type of diet we eat is influenced by factors which differ from person to person.
For some, cost may not be a factor, but for many it is.
For others, convenience and speed of preparation is everything in their hurried life-styles.
For those of us with children, we may have more reason than just our own good health to consider in trying to find out what a healthy diet is.
MENTAL WELL BEING Most of us have dieted at some time in our lives, and have been able to stick to the new regime quite rigidly for a little while.
It is not your ability to diet that is in question.
However, it is a staggering fact that 9 out of 10 people who successfully lose weight on a "diet" put the weight back on again afterwards.
It is important to identify why this occurs, and then to find a solution for each reason.
This will mean that you can confidently go ahead and lose weight, knowing that you are able to maintain the weight loss afterwards.
The way we are feeling mentally may have a direct effect on our shape.
If you are one of the comfort eaters and find that your mood patterns have a direct effect on your eating habits then it must be a good idea for your to examine just how the various moods you experience affect your eating habits.
See how you get on with the following questions: if you answer"yes' to one or more, then we have some further work to do in this area!
In theory, a positive answer to one or more of the following situations could open the door to your regaining weight after this diet.
All the questions represent potential weaknesses in our ability to stick to diets.
Those questions that you answered positively may well prove to be a threat to your ability to maintain a good figure and an optimum state of health.
In an attempt to prevent you regaining the unwanted pounds we have looked at each individual question and made some suggested solutions.
DIET HISTORY QUESTIONNAIRE
Question
Can you manage to stick to a weight-loss programme when you have defined a time period, i.e. the three weeks until your holiday, or if you have to fit into certain clothes for a special occasion which is soon to be upon you, and do you generally find it difficult to stick to a diet for a longer period 
Reasoning
If you are getting on to a diet which involves being very restricted for  choice, and in some cases, missing out meals altogether, you are perfectly normal if you find it difficult to stick to this in the long term.
It may be all very well when you have a goal in sight and you have only a few weeks to get through.
However, in order to be successful in the long term, you need to learn how to change your eating habits permanently, to suit your own body.
You need to be on a diet that is healthy, well-balanced, and that you enjoy and makes you feel good.
Question
Does your eating pattern change according to how you are faring emotionally?
For example, if your love life is thriving you can manage to maintain your diet, but as soon as there is an upset, or things are not going to smoothly, then your dietary resolutions go out of the window?
Reasoning
If you fit into this category, you are more likely a comfort eater.
It would seem that you have some undesirable dietary habits lurking in the wings.
At the first sign of the emotional see-saw that life so often presents, you go scurrying off for the goodies that give you comfort.
By changing your dietary habits and helping to keep your blood sugar on a more constant level, we would hope to have you in better physical and mental shape.
As a result you should fell good enough to communicate your way through whatever problem presents itself, and bring about a fast resolution.
If you don't feel so good, the problems tend to look larger.
Once you feel "on top" physically and mentally, you will find that the problems seem far more manageable.
Question
Do you find that you tend to generally eat more, or crave sweet food more when you are feeling tired or have gone without food for a long time?
Reasoning
As times when you have been very busy and may have missed or delayed a meal, your blood glucose levels can fall.
The brain needs glucose to function and the body reacts causing you to feel faint, sweaty and light-headed, and to experience difficulty in concentrating.
This produces a desire to eat sweet snack foods.
Apart from changing your diet, it would be a great idea if you could grant yourself a little more importance, and make sure you avoid getting overtired or missing meals, when at all possible.
Question
When the heat is on at work and you are required to work longer hours, are you unable to maintain your eating pattern?
Reasoning
It is obviously more difficult to set aside time for meal planning if you happen to be going through a heavy time at work.
However, if you know exactly what you need to be eating it is far easier to ensure that your body gets what it needs.
In the menu section, you will find a series of suggestions  for packed lunches, and also for acceptable meals that you should be able to buy from snack bars or small supermarkets in the vicinity of your workplace.
Question
Do you often feel stressed and overstretched in life, and during these times feel that you tend to eat more, particularly the foods of the fattening variety?
Reasoning
Taking a bit more than you can happily copy with in life can result in feelings of distress and overwhelm you to some degree.
When your attention is so wrapped around the problems or situations in hand it is easy to lose sight of your own body's requirements.
Taking the example of the working mother: she usually has so many roles to fulfil that her needs very definitely take a back seat.
If you are in this position it is important to take stock of what you have taken on.
You have to realize that to a large degree you are the master of your own destiny.
Your mental and physical well-being are vital, as without them you will not be able to fulfil the tasks you have before you.
You must make sure that you only take upon yourself those things that you know you can manage comfortably.
You have to learn to say "no" .
It is very important for the sake of your own sanity.
It would be a very good investment for you to set aside time for yourself each day, even if it's just time for a bit of personal planning and some gentle exercise.
Question
Do you just drift along and accept what comes your way, rather than having specific goals that you are working towards in life?
Reasoning
Having a direction in life is very important.
If you don't already have goals that you are aiming for a (at work, at home, and in leisure), it is advisable for your to spend some time and work out what you really want to achieve.
Then work out a way that you can attain that goal over a period of time.
If you have trouble sorting out what your exact goals are, try thinking back to some time in your childhood when you had dreams and aspirations.
You can usually find some of your basic goals became apparent during this period of time.
There is nothing so soul-destroying as living from day to day with no purpose.
It's hardly surprising that you would turn to food for comfort under these circumstances.
Question
Are you aware that you eat differently at certain times of the month and perhaps even crave sweet food when your period arrives?
Reasoning
If you are not aware that your eating habits change depending on the time of your menstrual cycle, it would be worth keeping diary for a few months to check.
It is very common for eating habits to change during the week or two leading up to your period, particularly cravings for sweet foods.
The hormone changes that occur are closely linked to nutritional changes in the body.
Blood sugar levels and nutritional requirements do fluctuate, and so it is particularly important to be aware of what is occurring and to be educated to the point where you know how to treat your body at any given time of the month.
Question
Do you sometimes find that you are doing very little in the way of physical exercise for several weeks at a time?
Reasoning
Exercise is an extremely important tool in increasing your body's metabolic rate.
There are few ways of increasing the speed at which your body metabolizes food, but this is a very valuable one.
If your exercise programme has lapsed it is time you reinstated it on a regular basis.
If you do not participate in regular exercise, then you should begin some sort of exercise programme at the same time as you begin your diet.
You would be advised to read Chapter 15 before choosing the type of exercise that would be best for you.
Question
When you are busy and time is at a premium, do you end up "snacking" rather than bothering to have proper meals?
Reasoning
It's all too easy to get carried away with the business of everyday life, and to put your own requirements tot he bottom of the pile.
You must appreciate that the health and well-being of your mind and body are of paramount importance.
If you regularly take snacks instead of eating properly, you will deny yourself the nutrients that your body requires.
Ultimately you will not feel so well, and will find it difficult to maintain your figure as a result.
Question
Do you sometimes eat through boredom?
Reasoning
There is really no need to be bored these days as there is so much going on.
You must make sure that you are occupied to the point where you do not feel bored.
Many pounds of weight are put on through "private" eating sessions.
Don't sit alone.
Either visit friends, or invite them to your place.
Join evening classes or some sort of club that could further one of your dormant hobbies.
Question
Is you home environment fairly disorderly?
Reasoning
If the answer to this is"yes', you will be surprised how much better you will feel once you have carried out a clearing-up project.
It's like mental spring-cleaning!
You should use the time to have a good clear out, and then implement new systems, e.g.  new homes for different sorts of clothes and belongings, and perhaps a formal filing system, if you do not already have on, for your loose papers.
There is nothing like putting off the chore to send you diving to the cookie jar!
Question
Can you think of many projects, either at work or at home, that you have begun, but not completed?
Reasoning
If you fall into this category you should make a list of all the outstanding and unfinished projects you have on the go.
Begin the list with the projects that have been waiting to be finished for the longest period of time.
Decide on a time each week to work on finishing off projects, and make a start at the beginning of the list, and work your way through it, ticking off the completed projects as you finish them.
Pay particular attention not to take on any new tasks during this period.
Simply concentrate on getting through your list.
You will find that you feel much better once you get started, and that need to snack and pic at extra food between meals will disappear.
Question
When you are feeling worried or anxious do you noticeably eat more as a comfort?
Reasoning
It's fairly natural to either stop eating well at times when you fell nervous or anxious.
to go to the other extreme and over-indulge you must make a concerted effort to curb this.
Very often you can't change the situation immediately.
You can talk about it to a close friend, though, which very often helps to ease the situation and subsequently make yourself better.
Whether it's a long-term or short-term problem you will find gentle exercise and relaxation through yoga will be beneficial to you mentally and physically, and we always find that a good massage goes a long way to easing tension and making you feel better.
RELAXATION
Taking time out just to relax each day is highly desirable, even if you have a really comfortable place to lie down take fifteen to twenty minutes.
Find a really comfortable place to lay down and cut loose.
Day-dreaming is very often therapeutic.
Just let your mind wander to sunnier climates and pretend you are indulging in your favourite pursuit, or as an alternative you can concentrate on getting each of your body to relax.
Begin with your toes on the left foot, then the toes on the right foot, followed by each foot separately, and then slowly work your way up to your face and head.
there is an art of doing this, and it does take a bit of practice.
You should relax for a while when you  have finished before rushing off to get on with life.
Once you are practised at this sort of relaxation you will feel quite refreshed afterwards.
Your mental attitude and well-being has great influence over how much you indulge, so relaxation should become an important feature in your day, to help you feel good.
CONTROLLING SUGAR CRAVINGS
All the new year's resolutions in the world will not necessarily curb your cravings for sweet food.
As firmly as you may resolve to leave the sweet foods alone, when the "munchies" arrive, your resistance is often overwhelmed without too much difficulty.
There are good reasons for this mechanism.
You can rest assured that you do not dive in just because you have a weak constitution!
A craving for sweet foods can be the body's way of saying that the blood glucose level is low.
While a sugary snack may temporarily raise blood sugar levels, it is certainly not the long-term answer as the refined foods soon metabolize and the blood sugar levels will rapidly fall.
Nothing short of changed dietary habits and a good vitamin and mineral balance will resolve the problem in the long term.
SUGAR CRAVING — THE PROBLEM
As a result of treating thousands of patients with sugar cravings, and discovering that nearly 80 per cent of a groups of 1,000 women with pre-menstrual syndrome also claimed to be suffering with sugar cravings, WNAS undertook a national study to determine the degree of the problem in general.
From the 500 women who were questioned all over England and Scotland the following facts emerged:
72 per cent of the women said they would like to consume less sugar
60 per cent admitted that consuming sugar was a problem
just under 40 per cent admitted that weigh gain was the worst problem created by their sugar cravings
23 per cent said they became noticeably moody and irritable shortly after consuming sugar
78 per cent most of all wanted to eat chocolate.
SUGAR'S SWEET SECRETS QUESTIONNAIRE
The following questions relate to your consumption of sugar-containing foods over the last seven days.
Before answering them, just   just spend a minute thinking back over the last week.
Now answer the questions.
Ring the grade that applies to you, then total up your score.
5 Low consumer 6–10 Moderate consumer 11–15 High consumer 
DIETARY FACTORS
An inadequate diet, as well as large amounts of sugar, can also lead to craving, which then results in some very unpleasant symptoms: nervousness and anxiety palpitations headaches  dizziness and fainting weight gain.
It is important not to skip meals as this will serve to make matters worse.
If you miss breakfast, energy levels tend to crash by mid-morning, with symptoms including craving for sweet foods.
When sugar cravings are severe, it is better to eat smaller meals more often, as this also helps to balance blood sugar levels.
Large amounts of coffee, alcohol and cigarettes as well as usage serve only to aggravate the problem, particularly if they are taken in place of a meal.
THE "MAGIC" MINERAL
Chromium is a mineral which is thought to play a very important part in the regulation of blood sugar in the body.
Only minute quantities are required by us and a lifetime supply of chromium weighs only a fraction of an ounce.
Although small, this tiny   amount of chromium has a critical part to play.
Babies are born with a good supply of chromium, but the level tends to fall as we get older.
It is difficult to test reliably for chromium deficiency, as most laboratories are not equipped to perform accurate tests.
However, in view of the low toxicity of chromium, when suffering with sugar cravings it may be worth trying chromium supplements as a way of overcoming the sweet cravings.
Chromium supplements have been shown to help stop the swings both high and low in blood glucose levels.
A well-balanced diet, rich in complex carbohydrates such as vegetables, fruits, beans, nuts and seeds, as well as protein-rich foods, also helps   enormously.
The Women's Nutritional Advisory Service have formulated a special supplement especially to help deal with the problem of sugar cravings, called Sugar Factor.
This supplement is designed as a temporary nutritional prop while you are making dietary adjustments.
It is available by mail order, details of which are on page 234.
PAYING ATTENTION TO THE BODYWORK
If your aim is to look good and feel good, then you need to follow some sort of exercise programme.
The positive value of exercise should not be under-estimated.
It is a fact that exercise is of general benefit to people of all ages because it is necessary for the optimum function, structure and preservation of muscles, bones, joints, and the heart.
Regular exercise can improve the quality of and extend an active life, and plays a vital part in the prevention of many chronic conditions.
Weight loss has been found to have a direct relationship to the amount of exercise taken.
The increased energy expenditure of exercise assists in weight reduction.
Obesity is associated with a raised blood cholesterol, heart disease, and high blood pressure.
Exercise lowers the risk or effect of these conditions aside from any effect of diet or weight loss.
Vigorous exercise reduces the risk of an overweight person contracting one of these conditions to almost the same level as a non-overweight person.
HOW DOES EXERCISE HELP PROMOTE WEIGHT LOSS?
The energy you use in the process of exercising burns up extra calories and may help to increase your resting metabolic rate.
Providing you stick to your diet, and don't consume lost of extra calories, you get what is called calorie deficit.
This means that if you do an hour's vigorous exercise instead of sitting in a chair for an hour, you could burn up an extra 100–200 calories which would not have otherwise been used up.
As long as you also stick to your diet, weight loss will occur.
WHAT SORT OF EXERCISE?
Physical exercise is an important factor in maintaining fitness and energy balance.
You should begin exercising at the correct pace.
If the exercise programme you choose is too vigorous for your it will only leave you feeling tired, achy and disappointed.
If, on the other hand, your exercises are insufficient to stimulate your  limb and heart muscles, thus providing aerobic exercise, then you will be effectively wasting your time.
What is aerobic exercise?
Contrary to popular belief, aerobic exercise does not necessarily mean jumping around in your local keep fit class for an hour.
Aerobic exercise is exercise that stimulates the large groups of muscles in your body, getting them to contract rhythmically.
Over a period of time these muscles, including the heart which is a muscular organ, become more efficient.
Eventually the heart in particular can work can more slowly, but with increased efficiency.
Once in this condition, you will usually experience an increased sense of well being, on both a physical and a mental level.
It also means that your chances of having heart disease are less.
In order to reap the benefits that aerobic exercise can provide, you have to exercise regularly, and for art least half an hour each time.
You need to engage in aerobic exercise three to four times per week in order to make physical progress.
Apart from those exercise classes that are called"Aerobics', there are many other forms of exercise that qualify.
For example, brisk walking, swimming, cycling, and jogging are all aerobic exercises.
Where do you start?
In order for us to asses where you should make a start you need to answer the questionnaire overleaf, unless you are already on a really good exercise programme, which gives you at least three half-hour sessions of vigorous exercise per week.
HOW TO CHOOSE YOUR EXERCISE PLAN
More than 30 per cent overweight and unfit If you are more than 30 per cent overweight and you get puffed our easily, do little or no exercise, and consider yourself unfit, you should begin by following the recommendations gradually.
Begin by exercising moderately for 5–10 minutes per day, and build up gradually over a period of a month.
Walking and swimming are good stamina-building exercises.
10–30 per cent overweight and not as fit as you should be If you are between 10 and 30 per cent overweight, and similarly you get puffed out easily, do little or no exercise, and consider yourself unfit, you too should begin by exercising gently.
If you are less then 20 per cent overweight, you will be able to increase your pace much faster.
You should begin by going for a walk each day for half an hour or so.
Gradually, you will need to increase your pace to the point where you are walking briskly and you can feel your heart pumping away efficiently, but not to the point where you feel at all overwhelmed.
You should still be able  to talk whilst you are exercising; that is a good guide to know whether you are overdoing it or not.
Up to 10 per cent overweight and exercise occasionally If you are a little overweight for your height and are doing some moderate exercise each week, but agree that it's not really optimum and you could be doing a lot better, you need to follow an "improver" programme.
This will involve stepping up your pace gradually, and increasing the number of times you exercise per week.
Swimming is great training exercise.
It is a good way to get all your muscles working without experiencing the aches afterwards.
Overweight but fit
If you are overweight, but are happy with the exercises you do at least three times per week, then far be it from us to interfere — continue, you are obviously doing a good job!
ENJOY YOUR EXERCISE TIME
It is really important that you look upon your exercise time as an enjoyable experience.
If you do not select the sort of exercise that your enjoy, there isn't very much hope of you sticking to it, is there?
Some of us are sporty and other just are not.
There is not point arranging to play squash if you dislike the game, or vowing to go for a jog each day, if you hate running.
So select the sort of exercise that you like.
Also, you can very the type of exercise you do during the week.
For example, you may like to swim on Mondays and Fridays, play squash on Wednesdays, and go for a long brisk walk or jog on Saturdays and Sundays.
There is no reason why you can't do the same exercises each day, but obviously increasing the amount gently.
The only reason we suggest you vary it a bit is to prevent boredom.
Here's to a new you!
PREPARING FOR THE DIET
This is not a diet to launch into as soon as you have finished reading about it.
This time, a little less haste and a little more care and planning is necessary.
First of all, you have to finish reading up to page 100, and don't skip any pages, and don't read any further either, because thereafter you read one page per day.
WHO SHOULD NOT DO THE DIET
There are certain people who should not attempt this diet.
For some individuals, a substantial weight loss or sudden change in diet is inadvisable.
You should thus not attempt this diet:
if you are underweight
if you are already on a diet from your doctor or a dietitian
if you have any serious illness
if you are pregnant or breast-feeding
if you have diabetes — unless your doctor approves.
PREPARATION STEPS
You are going to need to buy some bathroom scales if you haven't got any, or if the ones you have got aren't accurate, because each day you are going to weight yourself to the nearest pound (0.5kg).
The best time to do this is first thing in the morning, after going to the bathroom, wearing your night clothes or nothing at all, but keep it the same every day.
Of course, you can take your clothes off and wash them, or change them as appropriate!
You are going to need a pair of kitchen scales or letter scales to weigh your food accurately.
We are sorry to be negative but, quite simply, we just don't trust you, or rather we don't think that you yet trust yourself to know exactly what 4oz (115g) of lean meat, 6oz (170g) of fish, 2oz (55g) of carrots, or 4oz (115g) peas really look like.
By the end of the diet you will know exactly what they look like, and you won't need to weigh them.
This is part of the knowledge that you are going to have, and it is a very important part.
Classically, overweight people under-estimate the volume of food and the amount of calories that they consume.
We need to break that dangerous little habit and the only way is by education.
A pair of kitchen scales will do that easily.
Make sure the scales read accurately and by at least half-ounce or 10 gram divisions.
You will need some organization.
The best time to do this diet is when you have two months uncomplicated by going on holiday, moving house, changing your job, doing large amounts of business travel, or entertaining at home or at work.
If you want to change your weight, you are going to have to change your diet, and to do that you are going to need a regular, orderly lifestyle.
If you have a rapidly changing lifestyle, it is going to be very difficult indeed to make changes in your diet as well.
You need to be in control of, and not controlled by, the day's events.
An absolutely essential ingredient is time.
You are going to need time to go shopping twice a week, time to prepare your food, time to eat it and five to ten minutes at the beginning of each day to read a page of the book, record your weight, and record any symptoms you're experiencing.
At the end of each week, which we suggest is a Saturday, you will need a little extra time to review your progress, and work out your weight loss for that week.
You will also need some willpower, but we are not asking for very much.
We are sure you have tried to lose weight before, and have had some success and some failures.
There are good reasons for the failures, we are sure.
We can't control all of these, but one that we can control is your knowledge of what a healthy weight-loss programme is, and what foods suit your body's metabolism.
Armed with this information, we are sure that you have the willpower to succeed.
Finally, tell your family and friends that you are starting a diet.
Maybe they will want to join in too.
Doing the diet with someone else or in a small group will help you to be successful.
But take care; not everybody's response to certain parts of the diet will be the same.
That's the whole secret.
This diet will determine what's right for your, and only you can find out.
VITAL DIETING TIPS
In the fight against obesity you have, no doubt, often regarded yourself as your own worst enemy.
Equally, you can be your own best friend.
But to do so, you are going to have to treat yourself, your eating habits, and the question of weight loss quite seriously.
This is not a matter of sticking doggedly to a particular diet, but also of looking at your eating habits.
Your day-by-day programme will take you through the necessary steps but, first, here are some important tips on the subject of food.
Start the diet when you are ready to do so.
You are going to need time.
This is not a diet to do in a hurry and it is certainly not a crash diet.
Plan ahead.
You will need to plan and set aside time for shopping, preparation, and consumption of meals.
Ideally, you will need two shopping days per week.
Decide which these are now, and in this way you will have a good supply of fresh vegetables and fruit, an essential part of the diet.
If you really can only go shopping once a week, you will have to store all you fruit and vegetables in the refrigerator or somewhere cool to prevent them from spoiling.
This is particularly true during the warmer months of the year.
Go shopping before beginning your diet.
Supermarkets, as well as health food shops, have a wide range of the necessary foods.
Rice cakes and low-fat polyunsaturated margarine will be advisable for most people.
When you go shopping, go with your shopping list and stick to it.
Don't try to remember what to buy when you are in the supermarket.
The presentation of foods in the supermarket is designed to stimulate your appetite, not your memory.
Go shopping after you have eaten, not before.
Letting someone who is hungry and overweight, and who hasn't eaten for six hours, loose in a supermarket should be a criminal offence!
During the week, we suggest that you go shopping after breakfast or lunch, or perhaps after your evening meal.
During the weekend, go shopping on Saturday after breakfast.
If you have to do a major shop without having had a meal, eat one of your snacks first.
Eat regularly, at least three meals a day, preferably with two small snacks.
Never miss meals.
Irregular eating leads to less healthy weight loss, and an increased feeling of hunger.
Eat from a small plate, not a large one.
A well-stocked medium sized lunch or breakfast plate looks more satisfying than a large dinner plate that is only half-filled.
Eating is an experience in its own right.
Make it one.
Firstly, set aside time for preparing the meal.
Always eat sitting down, and only sit down to eat when everything is ready: the meal itself, drink, cutlery, condiments.
Do no listen   to the radio or watch television while eating.
Look at your food.
Try to eat in company.
The company of your own family, partner, or friends will help you to maintain self-discipline, and increase your enjoyment of eating.
Savour the flavour of each mouthful, and chew your food well.
Stop and try to detect the sensations in taste of each type of food that you are chewing.
Eat a wide variety of foods.
Do not eat a lot of one type of food.
Eat fresh foods whenever possible.
Frozen is acceptable if fresh vegetables or meat are not obtainable.
Never eat your meals in a hurry.
You are better eating just a small snack than hurrying a main meal.
A good way to break the habit of eating too quickly is to put your knife and fork down after each mouthful.
A return to the formal table manners of Victorian times may be the best way to stop us all eating in a hurry.
Another good way is to say grace before meals, which is another way of appreciating what we are about to consume.
Always prepare one meal at a time if at all possible.
If this is not practical, you could try cooking a chicken to eat cold over several days; but once it is cooked, divide it up into the meal portions you require, and place them in the freezer or refrigerator as appropriate.
Use non-stick, iron, stainless steel, enamel, or glass cookware.
Avoid physical contact with prohibited foods, e.g. when preparing foods for others.
DECISIONS TO LIVE BY
It is important to identify your personal reasons for wanting to be slimmer and feel healthier.
Recent research has shown that people who list the consequences of dieting, positive and negative, and remind themselves of them regularly during the day, do twice as well on their diets as those people who just have routine dietary advice.
It is a good idea to list the positive and negative consequences of dieting on an index card, which you can then carry around and refer to prior to eating, or exercising.
An example of a chart that you could construct on a card, or in your diary is shown opposite.
Give some thought to each column before listing the reasons you want to lose weight.
Complete it after eating — not before.
Once the chart is complete, refer to it at least at meal-times, and any time you feel tempted to cheat!
THE BASIC GUIDELINES
Now let us look at the diet.
It is probably similar in many ways to diets you have seen or ready about before, but there are some very important differences.
STAGE I
This will provide, per day: 1,000–1,500 calories per day, depending on your needs 65 or more grams of protein 25 or more grams of fibre a good balance of vitamins and minerals.
This diet is relatively high in protein and fibre, and is very nutritious.
The first stage of the programme is designed to get you on to a balanced, low-calorie diet, and to cleanse you system so that in Stage II you will be able to tell which foods suit your body the most.
There is a suggested menu for each day of the four weeks with guidelines for you to follow.
You can adapt the menus for eating away from home, i.e. at work or even in a restaurant.
Eating out will be the most difficult for the first two stages, but you can certainly get away with it from time to time.
There are packed lunch menus on page 151.
HOW TO WORK OUT YOUR CALORIE REQUIREMENTS
Fro women who wish to lose weight quickly and who are not physically active, and intake of 1,000 calories per day should be sufficient.
Most men should have 1,500 calories per day (and even more if physically active) as part of this weight-loss programme.
The menus are presented as a 1,000 calorie diet.
If you feel when you read each day's diet that you will need more to eat, then you can increase the amount quite easily.
By increasing the portion sizes by 25 per cent(a quarter), you will then have a 1,250 calorie intake per day.
By increasing the portion sizes by 50 per cent(a half) you will bring your calorie intake up to 1,500 calories per day.
In this way the diet is easy to adjust to your own requirements.
If you do increase your calorie intake, ensure that you increase all portions of all the  foods and not just some, so that the nutritious balance of the diet will be maintained.
FOODS THAT CAN BE EATEN
In the first four weeks during Stage I, it is very important to eat only the allowed foods.
If you introduce other foods you will lose the beneficial effects of the diet and it will be necessary for you to begin again!
Meat and poultry
All meat, including lamb, beef, pork and game, and offal, such as liver, kidneys, sweetbreads and hearts, can be eaten if desired.
Meat and Poultry can be fresh or frozen.
Meat must be lean, with all visible fat trimmed before cooking.
Do not eat the skin of chicken or other poultry; it should be removed before or after cooking.
Fish and shellfish
All types are included and they may be fresh or frozen.
Do not eat the skin of fish as it is high in fat and calories.
Note: all meat, poultry, and fish should be cooked by grilling, dry roasting, steaming, baking, or stir-frying with low-fat ingredients, e.g. tomatoes or vegetables.
All vegetables
You can and should eat large amounts of vegetables, especially green ones or salad foods daily.
Your allowance will be detailed in the daily menus.
Root vegetables, e.g. potatoes and parsnips, are limited to 4–6oz (115–170g) per day.
Beans and peas, which are protein-rich vegetables are also included in moderate amounts.
Fruits
All fruits are allowed, except dried fruits, glacé fruits, dates, figs, mangoes, and tinned fruits with sugar.
Keep tinned fruits without sugar to a minimum also.
If you want to eat bananas (the world's most popular fruit), half of one is equal to a single fruit portion.
Your fruit allowance amounts to three pieces of fruit per day.
Fruit can either be eaten whole or as a fruit salad.
There is a recipe for Fruit salad on page 146.
Reduced-calorie foods
Fortunately, there are now many excellent calorie-reduced version of such foods as salad dressings, mayonnaise, soups, and baked beans.
There are also a few low-calorie convenience dinners that are allowed.
We have incorporated some Findus Lean Cuisine dinners and some of the Heinz Weight Watchers dinners into the menus.
Do remember to read the labels carefully, though, while you are on a restricted diet.
Vegetables oils and vegetable mayonnaise
A small amount of these are allowed  daily.
You can have up to two teaspoons of a low-fat polyunsaturated rich margarine, such as Flora Light per day.
There are no fried foods on the diet (you really didn't expect them, did you?), but there are some stir-fry dishes and here you just wipe the inside of the pan or wok with a piece of kitchen roll dipped in sunflower or corn oil.
Nuts and seeds
Peanuts, Brazil nuts, almonds, pistachios, cashews, sunflower seeds, and sesame seeds are very nutritious, but unfortunately high in calories.
A few nuts or seeds occasionally, perhaps half an ounce (15g) chopped up, may be used.
they can help to liven up a salad or be used a nutritious snack, combined with an apple or another fruit.
Rice and other salads
White or brown rice of any variety — long-grain, short-grain or basmati — is allowed.
It will often be used instead of potatoes.
Rice-cakes (a rice crispbread) can be used in place of bread.
Additionally, buckwheat, bamboo shoots, millet, sago and tapioca can be used from time to time, but these are not usually very popular.
Breakfast cereals
Only cornflakes and Rice Krispies are included in Stage I. they contain a good amount of protein and are fortified with extra vitamin B and iron.
Other breakfast cereals are not allowed.
Eggs
Up to seven eggs per week are allowed, unless you are known to have a very high cholesterol level.
They are highly nutritious and very good value for money.
FOODS TO BE AVOIDED OR SEVERELY LIMITED
Wheat, oat, barley, and rye
All foods made with these, apart from the exceptions given below, are to be avoided.
This means no cakes, biscuits, puddings, pasta, pastry, pies, porridge, or breakfast cereals (apart from cornflakes or Rice Krispies).
Bread is severely limited to two slices of white low-calorie bread, e.g. Slimcea.
Dairy products
Cream and cheese are forbidden — even low-fat cottage cheese is out.
Your milk allowance is very low, only 3 fluid ounces per day of skimmed milk, 1 pint (20floz/570ml) per week.
You can use dried skimmed milk instead, or low-fat plain yoghurt.
Butter or a polyunsaturated low-fat spread is allowed: one or two level teaspoonsful per day.
However, if you have premenstrual tension, painful breasts, or an elevated blood cholesterol level, you should have a  low-fat polyunsaturated spread instead of butter.
Foods containing milk, cream, cheese, milk solids, non-fat milk solids, lactalbumin, whey, caseinates, and lactose should be avoided.
The only exception to this polyunsaturated margarine which often contains a very small amount of milk protein, lactalbumin or whey.
Animal fats and some vegetable fats
Animal fats, some vegetable fats, hard margarines, lard, dripping and suet are out, as are palm oil and coconut oil, and foods containing them.
Chemically, these vegetable oils are much more like saturated animal fats than good quality sunflower or corn oil which are high in the healthier polyunsaturates.
Hard margarines which are made from hydrogenated vegetable oils are also off the menu.
Sugar, honey, glucose, and fructose (fruit sugar)
Any food made with these should be avoided in the main.
This means cakes, biscuits, most ice-cream, sweets of all kinds, chocolate, and puddings.
This is not as depressing as it sounds.
You will find that we have provided suggestions for low-calorie desserts for each evening of the diet.
We must stress the importance of reading the labels carefully before purchasing sweet food.
Weight Watchers produce very good ice-cream, so hunt around until you find what you need.
Fruit juices are high in fructose, which weight for weight has the same calories as sucrose (ordinary sugar).
Leave the large helpings of honey for the bees!
Alcoholic beverages
You name it — alcohol's out.
Sorry!
Don't do this diet over Christmas.
Even low-calorie alcoholic drinks, though they are a great improvement, are all too high in calories.
You will, however, get the chance to try out alcohol in the third week of Stage II of the diet.
Yeast-rich foods
This includes any foods containing yeast extract: Marmite, Oxo, Knorr and other stock cubes, vinegar, any pickled food, chutneys, piccalilli, sauces, or condiments containing yeast extract or vinegar.
Salt
Salt should not be used in cooking or at the table.
This is particularly true if you experience fluid retention or high blood pressure.
Salty foods such as ham, bacon and other salted meats should be eaten sparingly.
Crisps, peanuts and many convenience dinners are not on the menu at all.
If you really cannot do without salt, then use a very small amount only.
Put it on the side of your plate.
Try flavouring any salads, vegetables, or cooked main dishes with pepper or  herbs instead of salt.
You should find that your taste for salt becomes less as you progress through the diet programme.
Foods with additives
These cannot be avoided completely, but it is best to avoid those with some types of colouring and preservatives which can cause asthma, and possibly migraine.
Avoid the following additives where possible:
E102 Tartrazine E104 Quinoline Yellow E110 Sunset Yellow FCF and Orange Yellow E122 Carmoisine or Azorubine E123 Amaranth E124 Ponceau 4R or Cochineal Red A E127 Erythrosine BS E131 Patent Blue V E132 Indigo Carmine or Indigotine E142 Green S or Acid Brilliant Green BS or Lissamine Green E151 Black PN or Brilliant Black PN E180 Pigment Rubine or Lithol BK E220 Sulphites — these may worsen asthma in very sensitive 227 individuals.
Other colourings are not likely to cause any adverse reactions.
Suspect foods
Avoid any foods that you know or suspect do not suit you.
For example, many people find some fruits, such as oranges or pineapple too acidic.
Even though they are not particularly high in calories you should avoid them.
A not-infrequent problem is inability to digest beans, peas, and some vegetables properly, resulting in excessive wind.
Possible vegetables in this group include cabbage, cauliflower, onions, and sweetcorn.
At this point, trust your own knowledge and experience.
After all, it is this that we want to increase, so let's not go against anything you know already.
Accordingly you may have to adapt the day's menu or recipes to suit yourself.
MODIFICATIONS
Vegetarians/vegans should also allow peas, beans, lentils, soya milk, non-fermented soya produce, and increased amounts of nuts, seeds and rice.
SYMPTOMS
You may notice during the beginning of Stage I that you experience some withdrawal symptoms as a direct result of giving up certain foods and drinks that you usually consume.
These symptoms may be anything from headaches to fatigue or even depression.
This will depend on your existing diet.
For example, if you are consuming lots of cups of coffee or tea, cola drinks, or refined sweet foods, you may find the first week of the diet quite a challenge!
It is probably best to begin the diet when you have a quiet week to spare.
A word of advice to women of child-bearing age is to begin the diet just after your period has arrived and not in the week your period is due.
The reason for this is to prevent additional symptoms occurring at a time when you might be suffering from PMT.
You will need the time to orient yourself to your new way of eating and to get plenty of relaxation.
This doesn't mean that you should take time off work; quite the opposite, as it is preferable that you remain occupied while on the diet.
Just keep social engagements that involve eating to a minimum.
Then, if you feel tired or experience any withdrawal symptoms, you can go off to rest without any guilty feelings of having let others down.
After the first week or so of following the diet, with any possible withdrawal symptoms behind you, things should look up.
By week 3, you should have lost a few pounds — at least four, possibly as many as eight — and you may notice a number of minor health problems have begun to improve.
By week 4, you should be feeling quite well, perhaps better than you have felt for some time and, with any luck, you will be a good deal nearer to your target weight.
Stage II
You start becoming a "nutritional detective" during the second four-week period: trying out groups of foods to see whether they push your weight back up or produce other unwanted symptoms or side effects.
For each week there are different instructions.
You will need to follow these carefully as this is an important stage of the diet.
If you follow the instructions precisely, you will end up with a diet that is really tailored to suit your own body.
You may experience some symptoms or"side effects' from the foods under test.
These should pass off within two or three days.
There are a large number of symptoms that could be experienced, but these should only be those that cleared up in Stage I. they include migraine, headaches, eczema, nettle-rash (urticaria), rhinitis, asthma, abdominal bloating and discomfort, constipation, diarrhoea, wind, anxiety, irritability, insomnia, and possibly premenstrual tension.
If and when you do have a reaction to individual food groups, you may feel that you have had a setback.
On the contrary, any reaction should be regarded as a positive step.
It means that you have discovered some foods that don't really suit your body at the moment.
Any reaction, should it occur, should not be worse than those you have already experienced, and is likely to last no more than three days.
If you do experience a reaction, you will need to stop eating the foods that are causing the problem.
You will find instructions on how to go about this in Stage II.
Daily diaries
It is vital to make sure that you  complete the daily diaries during each stage.
You will need these as you go along, so do ensure you keep accurate records.
STAGE III
During the final two-week period you will be eating a diet composed of the foods you have selected through trial and error in the preceding four weeks.
You should continue to lose weight and to feel more and more healthy as the weeks go by.
You will have gained the knowledge of how to tell when a particular food does not suit your body and how to deal with any bloating or other symptoms that may occur as a result.
If you have lost enough weight, you will be able to increase your calorie intake by 20–40 per cent.
By that stage, you should feel totally at home with your new diet and confident that you can maintain it as a lifestyle with ease in the place of your former diet.
STAGE I — THE FIRST FOUR WEEKS
So now you are ready to begin.
Make sure you read the instruction carefully and only begin when you are satisfied that you have a good understanding of what is needed.
For the next four weeks you will need to follow the diet outlined as closely as you possibly can.
There is a page set aside for each day which consists of the following: your daily diet sheet some key facts a weight and symptom chart.
DAILY DIET SHEET
For each day of the diet we have devised a specific menu to follow, which amount to approximately 1,000 calories per day.
The daily recommendations are fairly basic.
We have tried to keep them simple to prepare, bearing in mind that most of us are busy and therefore prefer to spend the minimum time possible preparing food.
If you like cooking and have the time to experiment, there is a recipe section on pages 133–150, which you might like to try, and in the reading list you will find a selection of recipe books that you might like to dip into.
You may prefer to keep the diet simple during your working week and to save the more elaborate meal for the weekends of, if you feel really adventurous, for dinner parties.
Unless you absolutely hate cooking, or are just too busy, it is preferable that you experiment with some of the recipes in order to keep the diet interesting.
It really is not necessary to get bored with eating the same foods over and over during the next four weeks.
The main point to understand is that the diet is flexible, but you must: stick to 1,000 calories per day (unless you have chosen to increase your calorie allowance) eat only the foods allowable in the stage you are currently on.
FACTS
There is much important information relating to diet and lifestyle, of which you may not be aware.
So there are two or more key facts each day for your education.
All facts are interesting; some may come as quite a surprise, while others may not.
Apart from being slimmer and healthier at the end of the diet, you should also be quite knowledgeable on the subject of diet in general, and be your own expert on the diet that's right for you.
WEIGHT AND SYMPTOM CHART
At the foot of the page for each day you will see a little weight and symptom chart.
We have provided this so that you can keep a daily record of your progress on the diet and of your weight.
Make sure you weigh yourself daily, preferably at a similar time each day and in a similar state of dress or undress.
For example, you could try to get into a routine of weighing yourself first thing in the morning before you get dressed.
Don't forget to make your chart for each day as you go along.
It's not wise to rely on your memory, which may not be quite so accurate.
You will also need to complete the symptom section of the chart on a daily basis.
Mark in any symptoms that you have experienced on that day only.
On any day that you are symptom-free, just mark in"no symptoms'.
MAKING A START
A shopping list
Read through the diet section for the first four weeks and read through the recipes if you are likely to be using them.
Then with a full stomach after a meal make yourself a shopping list, and go shopping.
Most of the foods suggested will fit into a moderate budget.
Some foods, however, are seasonal, so when it comes to buying fruit, vegetables and salad, for example, you will need to look out for those products that are in plentiful supply at the time, and consequently more reasonably priced.
A DIET TO SUIT YOUR LIFESTYLE
Although we have prepared suggested menus for each day, it is important to stress that these meals are flexible as long as you stick to the suggested foods for each week and the calorie allowance per day.
If you prefer to select your own meals, rather than follow our suggestion for the day, you will find selections of breakfasts, salads and snacks to choose from, with precise calorie values for each, on pages 99–100, and main meal recipes at the end of Stage I and each week of Stage II.
Do not forget to weight your food to get the portion sizes right.
Breakfast
We have suggested a variety of breakfasts to keep the menus interesting and to demonstrate the variety possible on this diet.
We do, however, appreciate that being creatures of habit, many people may prefer to have a similar breakfast each  day, for the sake of speed and perhaps taste also.
While fruit and cereals may seem appealing to some of us for breakfast, others may prefer fish or even bacon and tomatoes.
Lunches
If you are out of your home at lunchtime, you will need to keep lunch as simple as possible.
On page 151, you will find a selection of packed lunches which we hope you will agree are relatively portable.
Desserts
We have planned the desserts to follow on from the evening meal, as after the main meal we often like to have something sweet to eat.
However, if you happen to be in a situation where you are out for lunch, then you can happily have your dessert at lunch-time instead of that evening.
On pages 146–150, there is a selection of desserts you can choose from during the four weeks of Stage I. 
Snacks
You will probably feel better if you eat little and often, so this helps to maintain your blood sugar level, and prevents you from getting"the munchies', especially during the first four weeks of the diet, when you are first restricting your diet.
Beverages
You can drink water freely during the course of the diet.
Apart from that you have an allowance of the following:
SUMMARIES
To help you work our your own menus, here are summaries of the salads and the foods that go to make up breakfasts and snacks.
You can avoid any foods you do not like and replace them with others from these lists so long as you do not exceed your daily calorie allowance.
STAGE I-MENUS
Foods marked with an asterisk (*) are included in the recipe section on pages 133–150.
FACTS
A calorie is a unit of energy and each food provides a certain amount of energy when it is "burnt" or metabolized by the body.
A calorie is actually a tiny amount of energy.
When we say a food contains so many"calories' we really mean kilo-calories or thousand calories.
So an apple contains 50–60 kilocalories, not 50–60 calories.
We, welcome to your 1,000 kilocalorie (1,000,000 calorie) diet!
FACTS
Different foods have different calorie values for the same weight.
Water and fibre in food provide no calories at all, so vegetables and salad foods which are high in both water and fibre are low in calories.
Fats contain more than twice the amount of calories as carbohydrates or proteins for the same weight.
FACTS
An individual's calorie requirement varies with age, sex physical activity and other health factors.
To lose weight the intake of calories from the diet must be less than required — so that the shortfall is made up by burning off some of the excess weight, which is mainly, fatty tissue deposits.
FACTS
The rate of weight loss is not influenced particularly by what form the calories are in.
But if you do not take enough protein and just live on carbohydrates, e.g. and all-fruit diet, you will lose muscle tissue, rather than fat.
Taking in too much protein will result in you putting on weight, as it can be converted to fat.
It is a matter of getting the right balance of protein, carbohydrate and fat.
FACTS
Getting the balance right means getting adequate amounts of different vitamins and minerals that your body needs.
Lack of them can produce a number of illnesses.
This weight-loss diet is very carefully balanced to help minimize these problems.
Taking more or extra vitamins will neither make you into Superwoman or Superman, nor speed your rate of weight loss.
Some diets will need a supplement to make sure that deficiencies do not develop.
FACTS
There are two sorts of vitamins: some are soluble in fat (vitamins A, D, E and K), and some soluble in water (vitamins B and C).
Vitamins, unlike proteins and calories, are required in only tiny amounts, fractions of a gram per day.
They are needed to help along important steps in the body's metabolism, influencing growth, producing energy, controlling hormones, helping resistance to infection, and maintaining the health of all the tissues in the body.
FACTS
Deficiency of fat-soluble vitamins is quite rare, as the body stores them in the liver and other organs.
You would have to eat a very poor diet, lose a lot of weight, or be very ill for any serious deficiency to occur.
The water-soluble vitamins, however, are not usually stored in the body in any great amount, so deficiency can develop within a few weeks or months if the diet is poor.
FACTS
Animal vitamin A, retinol, and vegetable vitamin A, betacarotene, are needed for healthy eyes, good vision in the dark, healthy skin, and adequate resistance to infection.
The best dietary sources of vitamin A are liver, carrots, milk, eggs, butter, margarine, and all yellow/green vegetables and fruits.
FACTS
Vitamin D is not really a vitamin!
It's a hormone that is produced in the body as a result of skin exposure to sunlight.
As a hormone it stimulates the absorption of calcium from the food we have eaten and the healthy development of teeth and bones.
The reason vitamin D was regarded as a vitamin is because it is found in our food, and this is important for those who do not receive adequate exposure to sunlight — for example, the house-bound elderly.
Good example of vitamin D in the diet are butter, margarine, milk, eggs, fish, and fish liver oil.
FACTS
Vitamin E is really a group of plant oils called tocopherols. they have the unique ability to prevent the deterioration that occurs in certain fats as a result of exposure to oxygen in the air, and so help to prevent deterioration of fats in the healthy body.
This is needed for healthy skin and nervous system function.
Though deficiency is very rare indeed, you can ensure a good supply of vitamin E by eating nuts, seeds and their oils, green vegetables, and wholegrains.
FACTS
Vitamin K, the last of the fat-soluble vitamins, is needed for the body to heal cuts and bruises.
Deficiency results in excessive bleeding or bruising after even minor accidents or injuries.
Again, deficiency is rare and occurs only in very ill people, newborn children, or those on prolonged courses of antibiotics.
FACTS
The water-soluble B vitamins contain several different types: vitamin B1 (thiamine), B2 (riboflavin), B3 (nicotinic acid), B5 (pantothenic acid), B6 (pyridoxine), B12 (cobalamin), and folic acid.
The worst enemy of B vitamins is alcohol — consuming more than 2 units per day for women, or 3 units per day for men, puts them at risk.
Smokers also have lower levels of some B vitamins.
FACTS
Vitamin B1 (thiamine), is needed for healthy nerves and muscles.
Good food sources are wheat, other grains, pork, other meats, peas, beans, and nuts.
Deficiency is particularly likely in moderate to heavy alcohol consumers, the elderly, and those with mental problems.
Deficiency can produce poor memory, mental deterioration, mood changes, painful weak muscles, and nerve and heart damage.
FACTS
Deficiency of vitamins B2 (riboflavin), B3 (nicotinic acid), or B5 (pantothenic acid) is not common.
They are all needed for energy, fat, or protein metabolism.
Good sources are dairy products, meat, fish, beans, peas, and grains.
A deficiency could produce cracking or peeling of the lips, a sore tongue, depression and mood changes, but this is likely only in the elderly, heavy alcohol consumers, and those on a prolonged weight-loss diet.
FACTS
Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine) is essential for protein metabolism and the production of brain chemicals that affect mood and mental function.
Good sources of B6 include beef, chicken, nuts, cauliflower, potatoes, peas, bananas, and wheat.
Mild deficiency of vitamin B6 is not uncommon in the "normal population" , particularly in women and smokers.
It is not certain how important this is but it might influence mood, hormone function, and resistance to infection.
It is obviously wise to ensure a good intake of this vitamin.
FACTS
Vitamin B12 and folic acid are needed to produce healthy red blood cells and to maintain the health of the nervous system.
Good sources of vitamin B12 are all meats and other animal products, especially liver.
Strict vegetarians and vegans are at risk of deficiency.
Folic acid is plentiful in liver and all green leafy vegetables.
Deficiency of either of these two vitamins can produce anaemia and nerve damage.
Lack of folic acid in women in the first part of pregnancy increases the risk of the baby developing spina bifida— a serious defect of the nervous system.
FACTS
Vitamin C (ascorbic acid) is needed for healthy blood vessels and good tissue healing.
Deficiency occurred during prolonged sailing voyages in the eighteenth century, when lack of fresh fruit and vegetables produced the condition scurvy.
Depression, poor appetite, bleeding gums, and poorly healing wounds were the main problems.
Nowadays, vitamin C deficiency is rare.
You would have to eat a very unhealthy diet indeed, avoiding all fresh fruit and vegetables.
Smokers have lower levels of vitamin C and should take extra care with their diet — or better still, give up smoking.
FACTS
The minerals can be divided into bulk minerals and trace minerals.
Both sorts of minerals, like vitamins, are needed by the body for a normal healthy metabolism.
Bulk minerals are needed in substantial amounts as they are used for the formation of the skeleton.
They include: calcium, magnesium, phosphorus, sodium, potassium, and chlorine.
There are several trace minerals and these serve very special functions.
FACTS
Calcium is found in large amounts in all dairy products except butter, and in sardines, nuts, and green vegetables.
Magnesium is plentiful in all green vegetables, wheat, other grains, nuts, seeds, and beans or peas.
Both are needed for healthy bones, muscles, and nerves.
In the long term dietary adequacy is important.
Calcium absorption is reduced by poor protein intake, bran, excessive amounts of wholemeal bread, coffee, or alcohol.
Regular exercise greatly assists in the calcium being laid down as bone.
FACTS
Sodium and potassium are two similar minerals which act as opposites in the body.
Large amounts of sodium are found outside the cells of the body, such as in the bloodstream, and most of the potassium is found inside the cells.
The difference is needed for the proper function of all cells, especially the nervous system and muscles.
A lack of potassium or sodium can cause muscle weakness.
The best sources of potassium are vegetables and fruit.
Most of our sodium comes as salt added to our food in preparation, cooking, or at the table.
Too much salt can cause a rise in blood pressure or aggravate fluid retention.
FACTS
The trace minerals, like some vitamins, have very particular functions.
Iron is needed for forming haemoglobin, the red pigment of the blood, and lack of it will cause anaemia.
Iodine is needed for the function of the thyroid glands which control the metabolism.
Zinc is needed for growth, healthy skin, and hormone production.
Chromium is needed for good control of the blood sugar levels.
The best way to get all your trace minerals is to eat a wide variety of foods from animal and vegetable sources, avoiding refined and processed foods.
FACTS
Table sugar (sucrose) is a carbohydrate made up of two other"sugars', glucose, fructose (fruit sugar), joined together in equal amounts.
All sugars provide 4 calories per gram, less than half the amount of fat — so you could provide all your daily calorie needs with a pound (just over half a kilo) of sugar a day!
But you would lack all the vitamins, minerals and protein needed for a healthy diet.
FACTS
On average we eat approximately 80lb(36kg) of sucrose per year in the UK.
The highest sugar consumers are male adolescents; females consume less, and consumption decreases with age.
On average, 18 per cent of our daily calories come from sugar.
In children it can be as high as 50 per cent.
FACTS
Honey contains some sucrose as well as glucose and fructose; 1 teaspoon of honey has the same amount of calories as one teaspoon of sucrose.
There are no major differences in the nutritional qualities between white and brown sugar or, for that matter, honey.
Fructose (fruit sugar) teases one-and-a-half times sweeter than the equivalent weight of sucrose or glucose.
Hence honey tastes sweeter, weight for weight, than plain sucrose.
FACTS
The world production of sugar has increased by nearly thirty times in the last hundred years.
This is the largest change in any food that we now commonly consume.
The vast majority of manufactured foods sweetened with sucrose use white refined sugar.
FACTS
A high consumption of sugar is linked with obesity, heart disease, high blood pressure, appendicitis, gallstones, and many other diseases of civilization.
Only one-third of sucrose consumption is visible, as that added to our tea and coffee or used at home.
The remaining two-thirds of the sucrose we eat is in "hidden" form, as in chocolate, confectionery, biscuits, cakes, soft drinks, and ice-cream.
FACTS
In the UK, on average, men smoke seven cigarettes a day and women five cigarettes a day.
For every £1 we spend on food, on average we spend 22p on tobacco.
Smoking is a powerful appetite suppressant.
On ceasing smoking many people gain weight, which can be 10lb (4.5kg) or even more.
FACTS
In recent years, some groups have decreased their cigarette consumption.
This is particularly true for men, especially those who are better educated.
Many women have started smoking or increased their consumption.
Smoking increases the level of cholesterol and the other fats in the blood which leads to heart disease.
Smokers have lower levels of vitamin C. It seems they require 2–300mg per day, up to ten times the daily RDA (recommended daily amount) to bring their levels up to normal.
RECIPES
For American readers NB: Please note the following differences between American and British cookery terms                                    
PACKED LUNCHES
If you are working full-time, or even part-time, you may need to take food with your to work.
Some work canteens do serve salads or jacket potatoes, which will be useful when you reach Stage III of the diet, but initially it is important that the weight and calorie content of your diet is exact or as near as possible.
It is, therefore, better if you prepare your own lunches initially, rather than rely on canteens.
Planning is all-important.
When preparing your evening meal, give a thought to tomorrow's lunch.
You can boil some brown rice and leave to cool for tomorrow.
Make an extra portion of salad if you are eating salad that evening, and leave it in the fridge to be collected as you leave for work in the morning.
In Stage I you will need to avoid all the wheat, dairy, yeast and other foods in your packed lunches.
In Stage II you can use the foods that you are introducing for that week.
Some examples are listed below to help you.
Where an asterisk (*) is marked you will find the dish in the Recipe section.
STAGE II — THE CHALLENGE BEGINS
First of all, take a pat on the back for successfully completing the first four weeks of the diet.
You should be feeling slimmer and healthier than when you began.
The next four weeks require the most skill and perseverance.
You will be experimenting to identify any foods that may be causing you health problems and weight gain.
Stage II is broken down into four sections of one week each.
There is a specific diet to follow for each of the four weeks.
Each week, you will be concentrating on eating specific group of foods and carefully noting any reactions or changes in your physical or mental well-being that may occur.
For each day there is a diet sheet, more interesting key facts, and a weight and symptom chart for your to complete as you did for Stage I. It is vital that you keep this chart up to date: you will undoubtedly need to refer back at some point during the next few weeks, so the records are nothing short of vital!
At the end of each of the following four weeks there is a recipe section which you might like to try if you have the time and the inclination.
Unless you absolutely hat cooking it is advisable to experiment with some of the recipes in order to keep the diet interesting.
It is really not necessary to get bored with eating the same foods during the next four weeks.
Desserts are suggested especially for each of the four weeks of Stage II, as there are more specific requirements for these weeks.
Desserts can be substituted by a portion of fresh fruit, or fresh fruit salad, but if possible in Stage II try to prepare the suggested desserts from the recipes provided.
Follow the suggested menus each day, introducing new foods as directed and keeping within the framework of 1,000 calories per day.
If you experience the return of any symptoms, or any new symptoms, during this week, mark them down on your daily chart, and go back to the diet in Stage I for the remainder of the week only.
SUSPECT FOODS
Any foods that you suspect are  causing problems during the course of Stage II must immediately be struck out of your diet.
This is very important.
Failure to eliminate a suspect food will undoubtedly cause confusion and cloud the whole picture.
It's far better to be safe than sorry!
If you even mildly suspect a particular food may be causing a problem, set that food aside, for now at least.
It will be possible for you to retest potentially suspect foods later on, but not during Stage II.
We cannot emphasize enough how important it is to set aside from your diet foods you suspect or know cause you problems.
YOUR QUESTIONS ANSWERED
How do I tell if I'm reacting to a food?
Sensitivities to foods manifest themselves in many different ways.
For example, a reaction to a particular food may occur within a few minutes of eating a food, or after a day or two.
It is for this reason that we allow a whole week to try eating each group of foods.
It gives you plenty of time to be certain about whether the food suits you or not without confusing the issue.
What sort of reaction can I expect?
The types of reaction to food are also very varied.
Any of the following signs or symptoms may cause you to be suspicious: water retention asthma abdominal bloating migraine headache abdominal wind insomnia abdominal pain anxiety or irritability diarrhoea constipation eczema puffy eyelids rhinitis (sneezing or a runny nose) swollen fingers or ankles 
What happens if I get a mild reaction?
If you get only a mild reaction to a particular food, watch it carefully until it either disappears or increases into a full-blown reaction.
What happens if I don't usually eat or drink foods in one of the sections of Stage II?
If you genuinely don't eat any of the foods that we suggest you test in one of the weeks of Stage II, there will be no need for you to follow the instructions for that week.
However, if you consume some of the foods or drinks then it is advisable to include that week.
For example, on Week 3 of Stage II, you are asked to concentrate on consuming foods containing yeast or alcohol.
If you don't drink alcohol but do usually eat bread, marmite, and vinegar, you should undertake this week, concentrating on those foods.
IMPORTANT NOTE
During Stage II you may well find that you will need to give up one or both of your snacks each day in order to make way for the higher calorie foods that you will be adding to your diet.
Plan your menus in advance at the beginning of the next four weeks.
So, for example, if you want to eat more foods containing dairy produce in Week 2, or more chocolate containing foods in Week 4, you will need to compensate by dropping your mid-morning and possibly your mid-afternoon snack.
WEEK 1 — WHEAT AND OTHER GRAINS
During the first week of stage II you are going to introduce grains back into your diet.
We will concentrate mainly on foods containing wheat, because these seem to be the culprits more commonly that other grains — perhaps because they are more commonly consumed.
However, if your usual diet incorporated oats, barley or rye or if you would like to experiment, you can include foods containing these this week.
JULIE ASPINALL
For a year after the birth of her third child Julie was two stones (28lb/12.5kg) overweight.
"I tried 1,000 calorie per day diets.
In fact, my doctor even put me on a diet.
I did manage to lose half a stone (7lb/3kg), but I was so hungry all the time that I would not keep the diet up for longer than a month.
I only felt well for one our of every four weeks.
I had abdominal wind and suffered with thrush on and off.
"When I began the WNAS diet I was asked to cut out bread, biscuits and cakes as well as cutting down on dairy products and sugar, I found that I was sensitive to wheat.
I was given exercise recommendations to follow as well.
"I lost on-and-a-half-stones in three months on the WNAS programme.
I'm now down to the weight my doctor said I should be.
Whereas on other diets I had felt hungry and unwell, on the WNAS diet I didn't feel hungry at all and I felt very well.
All my abdominal bloating symptoms disappeared as well as the indigestion and heartburn that I always used to suffer.
"Apart from being stably slimmer in that I have managed to maintain the weight loss this time, I feel a great deal better in myself.
I can cope with things in a better manner and am able to take on far more.
My husband says I am calmer and more relaxed and that I have had a much more positive outlook on life!
FACTS
The term "fibre" refers to the parts of our food that are indigestible by the human digestive tract and go to form the majority of waste from the gut.
Fibre is almost entirely of plant origin.
Small amounts may come from shellfish.
In the main, most of the fibre in plants is found in their supporting structures and thus is in the walls of cells and the outer parts of the plant, e.g. stems or skins, rather than the leaves or inner part.
FACTS
The slower the passage of food fibre and food residues through the colon, the greater the breakdown of the fibre and release of energy.
Women, who have slower moving bowels than men, could derive a few calories less than 50 a day.
As fibre-rich waste products are broken down in the large bowel, a number of products are formed apart from the release of calories.
Gases, especially, are formed from certain types of fibre, leading to flatulence (wind).
The fibre of beans and lentils are easily turned into some foul-smelling windy by this process.
FACTS
Different types of fibre may help to protect you against different types of disease.
Fibre from cereals such as wheat bran or wholemeal bread may be good for constipation, but the fibre from fruit and vegetables is associated with a lower risk of appendicitis and coronary heart disease.
On average, fruits contain 1–3g of fibre per 100g (3 and a half oz) and green vegetables 2–4g.
Peas have 7g, cooked beans 10g, baked beans 7g, dried fruit 10g, dried figs 17g, nuts 5–10g, wholemeal bread 9g, and finally brown and white rice less than 1g.
FACTS
The greatest consumers of fruit and vegetables are the Italians, French and Swiss.
The greatest consumers of beans and pulses are the Japanese.
The greatest consumers of root vegetables are the French, Belgians, and Irish.
The greatest consumers of wheat fibre are the Slavs (from Yugoslavia) and the Greeks.
The greatest consumers of corn are the Mexicans.
The greatest consumers of rice are the Japanese, Chinese and Singaporeans, and the Scandinavians are the largest consumers of rye.
FACTS
To obtain your recommended daily intake of fibre, approx. 30g, you would need to consume 1,000 calories worth of brown bread, 3,000 calories of white bread, 1,400 calories of corn/maize, 1,400 calories of brown or white rice, 1,100 calories of root vegetables, 600 calories of pulses, 2,000 calories of peanuts, 300 calories of green vegetables, or 600 calories of fruit.
The richest source of fibre and lowest source of calories are therefore green vegetables, beans and fruit.
FACTS
Iron availability from fibre-rich vegetarian foods can be quite poor and worsened by wheat bran if taken in large amounts.
This effect is reduced if extra vitamin C (e.g. one or two pieces of fruit) is eaten at the same time.
Fibre-rich diets may help with weight loss by: reducing the amount of calories in the same volume of food; increasing the amount of chewing and so slowing the rate of intake; increasing the feeling of satisfaction; helping to balance the body's glucose and hormonal metabolisms; and being more nutritious.
FACTS
Some foods rich in fibre contain phytic acid.
This substance blocks the absorption of zinc, calcium, copper, and vitamin B6 from other foods in the diet.
This is a distinct disadvantage of some fibre-rich diets.
The highest sources of phytic acid are, in descending order, wheat, bran, wheat germ, brown rice, corn bran, oats, beans and peas.
The amount in carrots and other vegetables is very small.
REVIEW YOUR PROGRESS
If you have experienced adverse symptoms this week, you may not be feeling as well as you did at the end of last week.
You may find that your weight has fluctuated or even gone up.
Do not be discouraged if this has occurred.
Simply record the suspect foods, discard them from your diet, and continue without them.
If you are not feeling as well as you did at the beginning of the week, go back to the Stage I diet for two or three days; your weight should fall again if it rose during this week.
Don't forget to record positive foods As well as making a not of any foods that have caused reactions, keep a note of all the foods that you feel happy about eating, i.e. those that have not caused you any problems or any weight gain.
If you were able to eat wheat or any of the other grains this week without any ill-effects, you will be able to include this food in your diet in Stage III.
that is why it is vital that you keep accurate records.
You will not be eating even positive foods from the "wheat" week again at any time in Stage II.
It is essential to remember this.
RECIPES
ELIZABETH MARSHALL
Elizabeth is a 27-year old midwife who considers she has been at least a stone (14lb/6.5kg) overweight since she was aged 16.
She also suffered with abdominal bloating, headaches, irritability, depression and severe cravings for sweet foods.
"I used to get desperate for chocolate.
On my worst days I would eat five or six bars of chocolate.
I tried calorie counting and also the Cambridge Diet.
I could not stick to any diet for very long because of the chocolate cravings.
"I lost one-and-a-half stones on the WNAS programme.
I had to cut down on dairy products and grains.
It took me three months to lose the weight, but I felt so well on the programme and was never hungry.
I found I would eat as much of the unrestricted foods as I wanted and I still steadily lost weight.
"I have experienced long-term changes as a result of the WNAS programme.
I have been struggling with my marriage for years largely because of my mood swings.
As I feel so well now I have been able to sort out the problems with my husband and we now feel that we have got back the relationship we got married to share.
"I am generally more positive and interested in life.
I now have a regular exercise programme which I enjoy and I am a trim one-and-a-half stones lighter which makes all the difference to how I feel about myself".
WEEK 2 — DAIRY PRODUCE
During this second week of Stage II you will be putting dairy produce back into your diet: extra cow's milk, yogurt, cheese, butter, and cream.
You should not be eating any of the grain products from last week, whether they suited you or not.
Use the suggested menus as a guide.
You can vary the menu according to your taste within the restrictions mentioned, but make sure you do not exceed your daily calorie allowance.
Again, you must complete the chart daily.
If you experience reactions to any dairy produce then you must record these and exclude the food again from your diet.
Remember, if you get a mild reaction, you will need to proceed with caution until you can tell whether that food or food group is causing you to feel less well or less able to lose weight than you were at the end of Stage I.   
FACTS
On average, some 10 per cent of daily calorie intake comes from milk, a further 4 per cent from cream and cheese, and 7 per cent from butter.
Dairy products make up over 20 per cent of our calories and they also provide over 20 per cent of our protein intake and much of our calcium.
FACTS
Butter provides 200 calories per ounce; half a pound of butter is almost a day's calorie intake for an adult female!
It contains good amounts of vitamins A and D, but no minerals and not protein and is almost 100 per cent fat.
There are different types of fats: saturated fats, which are found mainly in animal produce, and unsaturated fats, which are found mainly in vegetable produce.
Both are important and concentrated sources of energy but some unsaturated fats are needed for good health.
FACTS
A diet high in saturated (animal) fats and low in polyunsaturates increases the risk of heart disease.
Mediterranean countries, where there is a lower intake of saturated fat and a more balanced intake of unsaturated fat, have a lower heart disease risk.
A diet low in saturated fats and with a higher percentage of polyunsaturates (just like the diet you were on) has been shown to help premenstrual breast tenderness.
It may also reduce the risk of breast cancer in the future.
FACTS
Some unsaturated fats are chemically altered in the process of being made into margarine.
This process, called hydrogenation, makes the fate more solid, giving us hard rather than soft margarine.
The hard, hydrogenated margarines do not carry the health benefits of polyunsaturated margarines, and are best avoided on this diet programme.
Fish and chips, and other fast foods, are usually cooked in palm oil or palm oil blends.
They are too low in polyunsaturates.
FACTS
Diets high in saturated fats are often, but not necessarily, high in cholesterol.
The saturated fat in a diet, more importantly, stimulates the liver to produce more cholesterol in a form that is easily deposited onto the linings of the arteries.
On average some 40 per cent of our daily calories are derived from dietary fats.
Several expert committees now recommend that this is reduced to 30–35 per cent of the calorie intake.
This means reducing your fat intake to three quarters of it current level.
FACTS
Fat delays the emptying of the stomach, thus producing a feeling of satisfaction after a meal.
However, because fatty foods contain lots of calories in a small space, it is easy to eat such foods quickly, and potentially to put on weight.
Fish oils contain a special type of polyunsaturated oils and good sources of these are mackerel, herring, salmon, sardines and tuna.
Such oils may help to lower the risks of heart disease by reducing the stickiness of blood that can lead to a heart attack.
FACTS
Allergies to cow's milk protein are quite common in childhood and present a number of problems, including eczema, asthma or wheezing, infantile colic, hyperactive behaviour, nettle rash (urticaria), constipation, diarrhoea, and even bleeding from the bowel, catarrh, and recurrent ear infection of"glue ears'.
In adults, milk can cause asthma, rhinitis (a stuffy or runny nose), urticaria, diarrhoea, and other bowel problems.
REVIEW YOUR PROGRESS
After eating dairy produce for a week, you should have a pretty good idea about whether it suited you or not.
If you sailed through this week without any problems, than all you need do is mark you end of week chart"no symptoms'.
If you have experienced an adverse reaction this week, then you will have to discard some of the dairy products from your diet.
Make sure your records reflect this before you move on to Week 3 of Stage II.
Don't forget to record you weight loss for the week, and to make a note of the foods you discovered you felt well on.
Also remember that you will not be using dairy products next week, but you will be introducing foods that contain yeast and alcohol.
WEEK 3-YEAST AND ALCOHOL
The third week of Stage II includes a variety of foods containing yeast, together with alcoholic drinks which also contain yeast.
As the Women's Nutritional Advisory Service, we find that sometimes yeast foods cause migraine headaches and abdominal symptoms or skin rashes.
We have found that, often, when patients eliminate these foods from their diet, they feel well again and find it easier to lose weight.
This week we are asking you to reintroduce to your diet foods containing yeast, including: marmite and other yeast extracts vinegars mushrooms Oxo, Knorr and other stock cubes pickled foods condiments or sauces e.g. pickle or chutney you will need to ensure you read the labels carefully when shopping, as many different types of food contain yeast or yeast extract.
Again, you may use the suggested menus as a guide, but regard the diet as flexible as long as: you include alcohol and yeast foods this week you keep within the confines of your daily calorie allowance.
Do remember to complete your daily chart if you experience any reactions, positive or negative.
If you like to drink alcohol regularly, you will probably find this is the most pleasant week of the diet, provided you don't experience a reaction to it.
We trust you to be honest and note any adverse reaction on your chart!
One alcoholic drink is to be taken as half a pint of beer, one glass of wine, one small glass of sherry or one small measure of spirit.
Points to remember If you experience a reaction, immediately cut out the offending food or beverage You will not be eating any grains or dairy produce this week apart from the permitted 2 slices of slimmer's  bread and 3floz (85ml) skimmed milk or low-fat yogurt.
Please complete your weight and symptoms on a daily basis so that you have all the information you require to complete the week-ending chart.
ELEANOR DODD
Since having her children five years previously Eleanor was unable to shift the stone (14lb/6.5kg) in weight she had gained.
She had thrush 30 times in two years and experienced severe mood swings and bouts of anger.
She and her husband were on the brink of breaking up and she could not cope with personal relationships.
"I was 11 and a half stone (160lb/73kg) when I began the WNAS diet.
I had tried to diet many times before.
I had been on low-calorie diets and diets out of newspapers, but I just could not stick to them.
I could manage to lose five or six pounds and then I would break the diet, go back to normal food and put all the weight back on again.
"I used to feel so miserable dieting, always thinking about foods I wanted but could not eat.
I used to crave all sweet foods badly, and alcohol as well.
"I feel well again after following the WNAS programme.
I no longer lash out at my husband and the children.
In fact I feel happy to be alive and I am enjoying my relationship with my husband and my children.
Plus I lost one stone in weight and this time I have not put the weight back on again.
"I felt fine on the WNAS diet.
I felt that with the new knowledge I had gained about my diet I was eating sensibly, I no longer crave sweet foods, chocolate and alcohol and I feel that I'm physically on an even keel now.
"I feel that cutting out dairy products has eased the feelings of irritability that I used to suffer from.
"I am definitely able to cope with things better now, especially the children.
I have a new lease of life and will be forever indebted to the WNAS for their help and guidance."
FACTS
For every £1 spent on food in the UK, 50p is spent on alcohol.
On average, men consume three units of alcohol per day and women one unit per day…
However, many of us are teetotal or are low drinkers.
Yeast is used primarily in the baking and brewing industries.
It is like a digestive aid breaking down some foods, such as wheat, into more digestible and more edible forms.
FACTS
In the last 40 years, total alcohol consumption has doubled.
The main increase has been in wine and spirits with a small fall in beer.
On average, 6 per cent of our daily calorie intake comes from alcoholic beverages.
In alcoholics this can be as much as 50 per cent.
Baker's yeast breaks down some of the indigestible phytic acid in wheat and generates carbon dioxide in the process, causing the bread to rise.
This makes it easier for us to digest the wheat.
FACTS
Most alcoholic drinks, like sugar, are empty calories, as they do not provide any significant amount of protein, vitamins or minerals.
Small amounts of vitamins and minerals in beer are more than offset by the adverse effect of the alcohol on your nutritional state.
Alcohol in conjunction with sugar increases the release of insulin, a hormone which may cause a lowering of blood sugar and may lead to obesity.
Brewer's yeast is used to turn sugar into alcohol — a process that also generates carbon dioxide which puts the fizz in Champagne.
FACTS
The effect of alcohol on nutrients is particularly powerful against vitamin B, magnesium and zinc.
Not only does alcohol displace essential nutrients from the diet, but it blocks their absorption by the body.
Alcoholic drinks have a significant calorie content ranging from about 50 calories for a small measure of spirit to 70–130 for a glass of wine and 90–130 for half a pint of beer.
Excess alcohol consumption is associated with premature death, and some 1,100 people are killed on the road in the UK each year as a result of drunken driving.
FACTS
Alcohol is toxic to the ovaries and the testes.
Levels of oestrogen in women and testosterone in men are reduced by heavy drinking.
In men this results in loss of libido and reduces sperm formation and size of testes.
In women it results in irregular, heavy or even absent periods.
Ovaries, breasts and external genitalia are reduced in size, and vaginal secretions reduced.
Some people can be quite sensitive or allergic to baker's or brewer's yeast and this can cause skin reactions, including urticaria (nettle rash) and eczema, and sometimes bowel problems.
FACTS
Alcohol can cause low blood sugar (hypoglycaemia), usually 6–36 hours after a binge; it is worsened by not eating food.
Ten per cent of alcoholics develop liver disease.
The rest often develop high blood pressure, heart disease, heart disease, kidney or brain damage, stokes, peptic ulcers, obesity, loss of libido, infertility, and mental illness.
Yeast extract e.g. marmite, some wines, vinegar and also cheese are all very rich in certain chemicals called amines, which trigger off a migraine headache in sensitive people.
FACTS
Women consuming one unit of alcohol per day at the time of conception and during pregnancy have babies that are smaller and thus at greater risk of illness.
Foods rich in yeast include all bread except soda bread, all yeast extract spreads e.g. marmite, many savoury snacks, alcoholic beverages, vinegar and foods preserved in or containing vinegar.
REVIEW YOUR PROGRESS
If foods containing yeast and alcohol were a surprise to you, i.e. you had to cut them out of your diet, don't feel too disappointed.
Be encouraged by the fact that you will be feeling healthier and lighter by the end of the diet.
If the yeast foods caused you to have an abdominal reaction, then you may find the weight loss came to a standstill this week.
Do not be too concerned as you will find you lose the extra weight once you have eliminated the offending foods again.
Make sure you complete your week-ending chart accurately, and remember: to record your weight loss for the week to record all details about any foods or drinks that may have caused symptoms or weight gain that you will not be drinking alcohol or eating foods that contain yeast next week — which is the final week of Stage II.
RECIPES
WEEK 4 — TEA, COFFEE, CHOCOLATE AND COLA
Having eliminated some traditional habits such as drinking tea, coffee, and cola-based drinks, and eating chocolate for seven weeks, you now have the chance to include these in your diet once again.
Before getting too excited, you must remember that this is a weight-loss diet and consequently drinks and foods containing chocolate must be included in the diet within the confines of your calorie allowance, and that doesn't mean just eating 1,000 calories worth of chocolate per day (equal to 2 and a half king-size Mars Bars).
ALLOWANCES
The daily allowances for this week are as follows: Tea up to 6 cups per day Coffee up to 6 cups per day Cola* 1–2 cans per day Chocolate 1x2oz (55g) bar of chocolate per day *Not caffeine-free, but low-calorie.
This week you can drink your tea and coffee with milk if you would prefer.
Bear in mind that 1floz (30ml) of skimmed milk has 5 calories.
SIDE EFFECTS
The reactions you may experience to these drinks and chocolate, having cleansed your system of them or more importantly having overcome any addiction you may have had, may include: migraine headache irritability depression anxiety shaky nervous feeling increased passage of urine mental overactivity insomnia weight gain.
There are suggested menus for each day as for the previous weeks, with the key facts, and daily charts to complete.
By now you will have become an old hand at completing charts, logging your daily weight and entering any adverse reactions and symptoms you may have experienced.
SALLY CLARK
Sally had been two stones (28lb/12.5kg) overweight for ten years following the birth of her son.
She was always looking for quick weight-loss diets.
She tried low-calorie diets for a few week.
"I tried the Univite diet and any other diet from a women's magazine that I came across.
I did lose weight but found that the weight returned as soon as I returned to my normal diet.
Whilst dieting I felt that my attempts were always too drastic.
I didn't have the correct nourishment.
I used to skip breakfast, and as a result felt unwell.
I was always looking for a short-term miracle.
"I felt so unwell.
I was awful, mentally, to my husband and my son.
I realized I had to do something about it myself.
"I began the WNAS diet.
It took me four to five months to get back to the weight I was before I was pregnant.
I lost two stones in all.
I lost about 1-1 and a quarter lb(455–570g) per week steadily after the initial weight loss on the WNAS diet.
I felt much better on the diet.
I no longer had cravings for sweet or spicy food.
I was calmer, nicer to my family and much more like my old self.
I found that caffeine in coffee was contributing to my feelings of nervous tension.
As soon as I cut out brown bread my stomach cramps went, and all my unpleasant bowel-related symptoms went also, as well as my headaches, sore tongue and dandruff.
"I feel far more contented and in control now.
The WNAS diet has taught me which foods suit me most.
"I have much more energy.
I walk two miles a day and I have taken up gardening again."
You are welcome to vary the diet, but do make sure you eat other foods besides chocolate this week!
POINTS TO REMEMBER
Once again, just to refresh your memory: If you experience any signs or symptoms that indicate you may be allergic to a food or drink, eliminate if from your diet quickly.
You will not be consuming any grains, dairy products, yeast, or alcohol this week.
Please complete your daily charts so that you have an accurate running record.
From this you can record information required on the week-ending chart.
You will also be able to do the grand progress review (page 227).
FACTS
Tea and coffee are the most popular beverages in the UK.
On average, British adults consume four cups of tea and two cups of coffee per day.
Tea and coffee both contain appreciable amounts of caffeine, a drug with stimulant properties.
Our average intake of caffeine from tea and coffee is around 500 milligrams (mg) per day, enough to produce a significant effect.
Smaller but still significant amounts of caffeine may be found in cola-based drinks, some pain-killing preparation, and in chocolate.
FACTS
A cup of black tea or black coffee contains no calories, but a cup of white tea or coffee with 2 teaspoons of sugar can provide up to 60 calories — and with an average of 6 cups per day, that could be 360 calories per day!
The tannin in tea and coffee inhibits the absorption of iron and zinc from the diet.
This effect is particularly on iron from vegetable, non-meat sources, so that the tea-drinking vegetarian may be particularly as risk.
FACTS
Caffeine, at a dosage of 200–250mg (approximately half our average daily intake) can be mildly stimulating, elevating mood and improving concentration.
Larger doses produce symptoms like those of anxiety or nervousness — increased passage of urine, insomnia, withdrawal headache, diarrhoea, anxiety, rapid heart-beat and tremors.
At higher doses, caffeine is truly a drug of addiction.
Withdrawal produces emotional changes, immobility, lethargy, and headaches which can be severe.
These symptoms are usually worse in the first few days, lessening thereafter.
FACTS
Those with a nervous disposition and who are anxious or panicky are more likely to be sensitive to the adverse effects of caffeine.
It is these people who should avoid it.
Insomnia can easily be caused by caffeine from tea and coffee, especially when either are consumed in the evening.
Caffeine delays the onset of sleep, keeping you wide awake until the small hours.
Again, the effect varies a lot from individual to individual.
FACTS
Caffeine has stimulant effects on the heart and may cause a mild increase in blood pressure or heart rate.
Palpitations — irregular or rapid heart rate — can be caused by excess tea or coffee in susceptible individuals.
Caffeine may cause a rise in blood sugar and this, by stimulating insulin release, may lead to fat deposition.
Even decaffeinated coffee may stimulate acid production by the stomach and then predispose you to indigestion, heartburn and peptic ulcers.
FACTS
Large amounts of coffee (and possibly tea) interfere with the absorption of magnesium.
This mineral is important in the health of the nervous system and often deficient in women with pre-menstrual syndrome.
Tea in large doses can have adverse effect on vitamin B1 (thiamine) also very important for the nervous system.
FACTS
Chocolate or chocolate liqueur is prepared by grinding the kernel of the cocoa bean and can be divided into two parts: the fatty part, cocoa butter, and the less fatty cocoa powder.
Chocolate contains several amounts of caffeine and related compounds called methyl xanthines, and a further mood-stimulating substance, beta phenyl ethylamine.
Chocolate and other forms of confectionery are the biggest source of hidden sugar in the average UK diet, comprising some 10 per cent of total sugar intake.
REVIEW YOUR PROGRESS
Ideally, you will have come through this week and found that your liking for tea, coffee, chocolate, and cola is now influenced by how much they like you.
While we firmly believe that "a little of what you fancy does you good" , you need to understand that none of the drinks or foods in this group are good, when taken in excess, for the human body.
Quantities above six cups of tea and four cups of coffee per day provide enough caffeine to aggravate anxiety, depression and insomnia.
Chocolate is best reserved as an occasional treat if you have weight-gain problems.
Once again this week you need to do the following in preparation for the "Grand Review" : review your weight loss record any reactions you experienced make a note of any foods you have discarded note the positive drinks or foods that you have discovered.
RECIPES
STAGE III — YOUR LONG TERM DIET
THE GRAND PROGRESS REVIEW
You will need to set aside a bit of time to review the events of the last eight weeks.
The simplest way to record your findings is to complete the chart on the next page.
If you mark the details from your eight week-ending charts, this will give you easy reference to your records.
Complete the chart now.
YOUR FINDINGS
Once the chart is complete you will be able to see your findings at a glance.
You will be able to see exactly which foods you felt well with and which foods you did not.
Your next step is to become familiar with all the foods in the second column, Suspect foods, and to make a plan to avoid consuming these for the next few months.
Now you can move on to the final stage of the diet.
In this final stage of the diet we are looking to put together the best diet for your own metabolism and make-up, based on your findings.
You will essentially be following the diet in Stage I, but adding to it any food or drink you now have listed in column 3 of the Grand Review Chart on page 228.
You will need to work out a menu for yourself to follow, using the Stage I menus as a guide, but adding your own safe foods and drinks.
Follow your amended Stage I menu for the next two weeks, this time completing the charts on pages 230–231.
Continue to weigh yourself daily and mark your weight into the chart each day.
What should I do if I want to go on losing weight?
You should simply continue to follow your amended Stage I diet, which includes all the food from you "safe" list, and keep your consumption down to around 1,000 calories per day.
You can happily go on doing this until you reach your target weight.
When that day arrives, you may follow the instructions in the next answer.
What should I do when I have reached my target weight?
Simply increase your calorie consumption by up to 50 per cent.
It is now recognized that people who have been on weight-reducing diets subsequently have a lower calorie requirement than they previously had.
Do bear this in mind when increasing your volume of food.
So, for example, if you previously ate 2,000 calories per day, you may now need to consume 1,500 to 1,800 instead, in order to maintain your new weight.
What if I get a reaction to a particular food after I have completed the diet?
If an adverse reaction to a food or drink occurs, you will recognize it!
Now that you have the wealth of information about diet at your fingertips and the invaluable personal experience, you merely proceed in the same way as you did in Stage II of the diet.
For example, if you suddenly feel unwell after eating, either cut out the food you suspect for several weeks before trying it again, or if you are confused about which food or drink may be causing the problem, go back onto the Stage I diet for a week or so.
If you are no longer on a weight-loss programme, don't forget to add more volume of food daily.
Long-term dieting
If you are dieting in the long term, you may need to take multi-vitamin/multi-mineral supplement (e.g. Diet Balance)— if you need to be on a weight-loss programme for more than 10 weeks, or if you have to rely on prepared reduced-calorie meals, and especially if you have any of the signs of vitamin or mineral deficiency.
Should I follow the Stage III diet on a permanent basis?
The answer is simply "yes" !
Now that you have found the optimum diet for your own body — cherish it!
Of course you can deviate occasionally, as long as you always come back to the diet as a routine.