

MIDDLE RING
1
Light.
Chesarynth was drowning in light and it had a message.
Peace.
Love.
Security.
Acceptance.
Beauty inside her, and the beauty was light that came in sizes which spanned the galaxies or spun inside electrons.
Beauty was communication, each mote of light shaded with one nuance of meaning and each meaning had a colour.
There was a grammar of colour and shape and size, and each shimmering evanescent bubble was ashine with love.
With peace and security and acceptance that had no limit.
At first there was no top nor bottom to this universe of shining love and she floated at peace in its centre, gazing at infinity.
She was not falling; there was no place to fall to.
Then there arrived a rainbow of stronger colours and she could have wept for its strident spectrum that came to disturb the pastel gavotte of suns, but it had a strength she could not resist and a hundred thousand pullulating meanings that tugged at her.
She didn't want to get closer to it but there was nothing else she could do.
Its crassness repelled her but it slid inside her because she recognized it as her name and suddenly there was a dark pit, a chasm, a void, and the gravity of being dragged her down into the dark heart of weight.
Chesarynth.
Her hand twitched.
Her body jerked out of endless sleep.
Her eyelids flipped open, and the world was hard-edged, dull and ugly, and so big, so big it squashed the tiny meanings out of sight but still they hovered on the borders of her mental vision and she would have dreamt her way  back into that fae¨rie ether but a harsh voice slurred a saw of sound at her.
Her face sketched a query.
‘Are you all right, Ms?’
Now Chesarynth's throat worked — she hadn't known it was going to, didn't know why it should — and her own voice scratched the poor air that smelt only of hospitals.
‘I want…’
But how could you speak the constellations of wonder with the coarse geometry of sound?
‘I know, I know,’ soothed the face that swam above her.
‘But you can't go back there yet.
Soon.
When we've fixed up your plumbing.’
Oh, ‘soon’ is a glimmer in the darkness.
The rest doesn't matter.
But soon….
And soon was a flame, a fix to an addict.
She shut her eyes, waiting, hiding from their giants' toy-shop of beds and cubic rooms.
Every time she closed her eyes they prodded her awake with their cold-smelling hands or their metal-tasting equipment.
Or shook her.
Or slapped her gently, until a scent that was perfumed with tea sang through the real air to her and she identified one of the sea of aches as thirst.
Since they wouldn't let her sleep, she drank tea.
She felt regret undulate through her system as the hot sweet stuff soaked into her cells and the ethereal stars of meanings left her farther and farther behind.
Without them there was a gulf between her and every other thing.
So she clung desperately to ‘soon’.
Obeyed the nurses' every request.
If she was good, maybe ‘soon’ would be sooner still and she could dance in the meanings….
She learnt to feed herself.
To walk.
To talk.
To face herself in a mirror without flinching: neat mid-brown hair that grew in orderly waves, a little longer than her father would have liked, almost to her shoulders, but not the shaggy bird's nest it had been on Mars.
Best of all, though, was her skin that was no longer puffy red mottles of failed Martian tan.
A pity , thought Chesarynth,that it still makes the same pathetic face with its weedy pointy chin .
But  nobody told her that her face was a pretty heart-shape.
They all thought she saw the same in the mirror as they saw every day.
As for the gold ring that sheathed the end of her left fore-finger, a tubular nail that ran smooth and hard all round her finger-tip, Chesarynth wasn't sure how she felt about it.
Some days it was a deformity, a stigma that proved she had sold her humanity.
Just to look at it was to do penance for her failures.
Then, on one wonderful day, it became the key to that magic box where infinity welcomed her to the crystal harmony of the spheres.
And, strangely, they taught her to draw, copying symbols in cross-section or front elevation, predicting three dimensions.
For each accomplishment they rewarded her: they put the jack-plug on the end of her forefinger into a socket on a box they wheeled to her bedside and when her eyes closed, the reward was a vision of her scintillating meanings.
But each time, too soon, they withdrew her finger from the socket.
Then she cried like a child in the dark for her loss.
‘Just one more minute.
Please.
Even a second?’
But they took no notice and jacked her out anyway, and the hospital was crammed with the odour of disinfectant and medicines and mechanical solidities that drove the pretty meanings away.
‘You hate me!’ she raged.
And always they replied, the nurse or the technician or the woman doctor, ‘No.
You hate yourself.’
Then tears would slide down her face into her hair as she lay crying all alone, remembering how horrible it was to be Chesarynth.
Because Chesarynth carried the weight of other people's expectations — pass this exam, wear this suit, mind your manners — oh, you've spilt your dinner, just look at my clean floor.
Don't mix with those boys.
Ignore them.
You have to be better than that.
Don't let me down.
What would your father say?
I won't tell him if it never happens again.
Make sure you're back by ten.
What will the neighbours think?
Then the — the garden-master?
She hadn't been good enough to keep her plants alive.
She'd killed them, almost all her little seedlings.
Thrown away what Jez had so lovingly grown for her in Nutristem back at home.
By her neglect and stupidity Chesarynth had stolen the food from starving Martian babies.
Anger was forgotten; the long habit of self-flagellation came roaring back as she remembered the —the puppet ?
(Horror: her mind stood on end, backing from the thought.
I'm wrong!
I didn't mean it, the garden-master was right to punish me I deserved it .)
And my tutors.
And Alex.
And poor, poor Loretta.
All my fault.
‘You hate me.’
‘No.
You hate yourself.’
But it's you who take the meanings away !
Only she never dared say it.
Because surely if ‘they’ knew how wonderful the spinning diamond meanings were, they'd know the box was far too good for the likes of her.
She walked as far as the cafeteria on her ward — they told her to — and walking was a strange bouncing glide.
But there was never anyone else there when they let her go that far.
It was always dark outside and the stars were vague and shifting.
Chesarynth began to wonder where it was.
For one thing, the gravity was wrong for Mars.
When she lay in her bed, weary with just being, there wasn't that painful drag of Mars weight.
Nevertheless, she still weighed more than when she had floated in Witwaterstrand.
She was  asleep — there was a little island of light over her bed in the side-room of the empty ward — and someone said in a professional whisper, ‘Do you think she's ready for the next stage?’
And another whisper.
(That's a voice I don't know.
Some man.
Should I turn over and see who it is?
No.
They'd think I was eavesdropping.
And I am.
They might punish me .
…)‘Oh, I think so.
What is it now — four weeks?
Five?’
Someone clicked the keys on a wrist-memo — it was the nurse with the lop-sided teeth, because one of her keys always squeaked a little—‘Yes.
Five weeks and two days.’
Soft footsteps padded away —Were there three sets?
Can't have been .
‘Right,’ said the deeper voice.
‘Start her on syntax tomorrow.’
Only nothing happened the next day and Chesarynth knew she was right not to trust herself because she couldn't tell waking from dreams of an endless corridor with people whispering about her behind locked doors.
Time for sleep.
A whole day without the meanings and it wasn't fair because she'd done everything they'd asked.
Why can't I have the next stage?
Why can't I hang in the night of infinity for ever with the meanings wheeling like stars?
Out there I don't have to see myself ….
On the borders of sleep she heard the sluff of the box being pushed to her bedside.
Forcing herself to stay still, not to complain because her mother had always said complaining was bad, she waited, trying to contain her impatience so it didn't spill out from her body and spoil everything.
At last!
The nurse took her hand — Chesarynth left it limp — and slid the contact in her finger into the socket of the machine.
The nurse's soft, slightly damp touch faded and darkness sprang into being inside Chesarynth's head.
It seemed that some of the constellations were less random than they had been.
Or maybe the meanings were a little brighter because where their radiance spilled out into the darkness, the rose and jonquil and lavender and jade washed into each other and each mote changed a fraction to accommodate the contiguities, and a perfumed necklace of logic darted away, jewelled shooting-stars too fast for her to catch.
But when she woke up she couldn't tell them because they might take the meanings away.
It was while she was reading one of the books they gave her — by a philosopher called Christ — the next day by the lamp-light that she suddenly realized what that gemmed  necklace had said.
It said, ‘Love thy neighbour as thyself.’
Only the beads were intertwined somehow.
It was as if it meant that you should love yourself as much as you should love other people.
Chesarynth thought about that for a very long time.
That night, in the starshot silken galaxy of the meanings, Friend came to her.
Far off, Friend was amber and musk, velvet and rose.
Of course, she didn't know it was Friend yet.
It was only a pattern of meanings that textured one whole meaning and it danced in her night, circling about her, near enough to see, far enough for her to be safe.
Chesarynth felt her own coarse fabric ripple with uncertainty but the bubbles, the prisms of meaning, twinkled cheerful and saffron, and she stopped vibrating.
Then, bit by bit, the shining, scented constellation sailed closer, promising — Chesarynth didn't know what.
All but poised for flight, she held herself steady.
The nuances of being irised through the strange pattern.
Its essence stayed the same but now there was something new in its texture, and it became clearer as it approached.
There was the emerald perfume of moss and the gold of oak that spread a sheltering canopy out to her.
Of a sudden Chesarynth recognized a hollow inside her.
It was a longing that had been in her for always.
Shyly, she crept under the invitation that was sunshine and leaf-jade.
And Friend made her whole.
She could taste him, round and warm and citrus, deep and cinnamon.
He felt strong as bronze, he encompassed her in a reach broad as a chestnut tree.
Yet the caress of his meaning was delicate as the first green fronds of spring.
His texture stroked hers, wove through it until he knew her and she knew herself as he discovered her.
Almost, the wreath of her meanings trembled apart.
Because in his shining colours he reflected her back in coral and violet, a shimmer of organdie, pearl and secure.
She was harmony in sandalwood, a citrine that sang.
She was beautiful.
She was Chesarynth and with Friend she was complete.
When they melted apart and the nurse pulled Chesarynth's finger-connection from the plug, Chesarynth felt tears skating down her face, looking for what she'd lost.
Quickly though she dried them on her wrist.
What's the point ? she thought, drinking the fragrant tea that the nurse held out to her.
She smiled at the nurse, or rather, her own smile beamed out to glide over the nurse, over the island of light that hung above her bed, the box with the socket that jacked her into magic.
She sank down into the smooth embrace of the sheets, at peace.
Even if I never know Friend again, I know him inside me.
He'll always be there.
Because he's given me the greatest gift of friendship.
He's given me myself.
And he's part of my fabric now….
Chesarynth slept and her dreams were peaceful, strong.
The rose of dawn breathed wakefulness over her.
Chesarynth tiptoed to the window, curious now as to what lay outside.
There was a garden hazed over by sunlight and held in by a dome.
What lay beyond the dome, though, she couldn't tell.
It had never mattered before, this world that was too big to hold the meanings.
Now it did.
Out there, somewhere, was Friend.
In her white hospital gown —I'm wearing a gown.
Where did that come from?
Where am I ?— she drifted soft-footed down the corridor to the breakfast room and the balcony she'd seen but never really looked at.
Now she found there was a window-catch; she slid it aside and her feet whispered out to the balustrade, scarcely touching the ground.
A freshness in the air spoke of dew.
Its moisture felt cool on her face.
Like a child she wanted to explore.
Cool stone steps were smooth beneath her bare feet.
She danced down them in almost weightless pirouettes to paths that wandered between the flower-beds.
Each one led her back inwards to the balcony.
Faster now, the tiles sharp-edged under her heels, Chesarynth turned outwards between the pomegranate trees, the larkspur.
There couldn't be much more time before someone found she was missing.
The arching symmetry of shrubs wasn't beautiful any more.
It was a barrier too tall to jump.
And maybe on the other side of the barrier there was Friend.
She abandoned the tricksy paths, forcing herself through a tunnel between purple rhododendrons, trying not to leave footprints on the soil.
Branches clawed at her hair and she felt like she had done years ago, waiting for Jezrael to catch up, knowing she was going to be late for school, but she couldn't leave her sister to struggle in on her own.
Only now she had lost Jezrael for ever.
She had contracted.
She wondered in horrified fascination what they were going to do to her.
Involuntarily, Chesarynth lifted a hand to her head but there was no disfiguring tower.
Yet.
At least the socket in the tip of her left forefinger hardly showed.
Only where was Friend?
Brushing aside looping clematis, she poised to run but her head smacked full-tilt on a wall of spiderglass.
She had reached the edge of the garden and it hurt.
For a moment she was dizzy.
Her forehead was sore; there'd be a lump there for sure.
She'd be caught out.
Peering past the leaf-dappled reflections that had fooled her, Chesarynth saw only white rocks and black shadows.
No life.
If there were stars above, they were hidden by the light that streamed from the dome.
No, wait — what was that?
Straining her eyes, Chesarynth squinted up into the sky outside the neat polished world of the dome.
A blue-green crescent hung there, cupping a light-gemmed blackness between its horns.
Earth.
So I must be somewhere on the edge of — of Steel City.
But it didn't feel right.
The dark, down-curved horizon which surrounded the bubble-garden was too far away for this to be some man-made asteroid like home.
Wondering, she whispered to herself, ‘Then this must be the Moon!’
Suddenly, beyond, in the black solidity she could make out the pattern in the sun-whitened rocks: the lips of craters.
‘I didn't even know they’—They who ?
It hit her again then, with force.
This beautiful dream-state couldn't last.
Couldn't be intentional.
Oh, God.
I'm in Spiderglass!
I shrank.
I'm — a thing.
Their thing.
Then the sound of her voice echoed back in memory to frighten her.
She pulled through the clutching shrubbery and skimmed back up the steps, realizing she was leaving footprints of damp earth.
She stole the time to brush them clear with the side of her hand then slipped back inside, hoping no-one would notice her.
But there wasn't anybody to notice.
Chesarynth washed, stuffed her torn and dirty hospital gown into the recycling chute and stole another, even brushed her hair (she checked again; no tower growing through her skull yet) and then had to find a place to hide the dead leaves and twigs that had cascaded from the tangles.
She peeped round the corner.
No-one there.
In a moment she had jumped into bed, dragging the thin covers up.
Under them, her breathing sounded very loud.
But no-one had caught her.
No-one said or did anything out of the ordinary, but still guilt made her jump when the nurse came in with lunch.
The day went on as normal: drawing lessons, reading — philosophy again, but no ideas that caught fire in her soul.
A whole day.
No torture.
No tower spiking down through her brain.
She began to hope that maybe she'd already been rescued and this wasn't Spiderglass at all.
And all of it waiting.
Just waiting, because she dared not hope.
For the meanings, and most of all, for Friend.
Because perhaps — just perhaps — he was the one who'd come to rescue her from the clutches of Spiderglass.
Friend never came while she was in the real world.
That's what they called it, the nurse, the woman doctor, the  technician: the real world.
Chesarynth felt sorry for them.
How could they know how much more real and beautiful was the infinity inside her with its constellations of meanings, and the comet-blaze of truth that was Friend, who taught her to arrange the meanings in patterns of logic?
But she didn't dare ask him about Spiderglass and what he was doing there.
He showed her how to weld the ideas she read into structures that were sculpted from beads of meaning.
This rainbow gleam — here.
Now put this shine of blue spirals here.
And the glistening ruby that means longing — set it in the crystal frame .
Friend stood back — or rather, his pattern spun off a little way so that she could see what it was that they had built inside the black of infinity.
It said, the stable spire that hung in the void said,We need just this quantity of silk to make perfection .
And intertwined was the pang of longing for that perfection, with the shimmer of signature that meant Chesarynth.
In the real world, Chesarynth didn't understand.
Dressed in flowing trousers and a tunic of billowing rose — they let her have clothes, now, providing she chose them herself by drawing what it was she wanted — she spent hours sitting at the table in the artificial sun over the balcony, the day's book-cube dangling forgotten from her fingers.
But the puzzle wouldn't come clear.
The palaces of meaning that she built with Friend in the endless night inside her — what were they for?
Why silk?
What perfection?
What had all this got to do with the cruel terrors of Spiderglass that kept Mars-U as a garden of torture (she couldn't even think of the garden-master; somehow he just kind of disappeared from her mind) so it could pluck poor students into its web of inhumanity?
And though she cherished the times when Friend soared in companionship beside her through forever, always — reluctantly, it seemed sometimes, but always — he would pluck new motes of light and weave them into new shapes for her to read, but the shapes only made sense in  their beauty, not in the real world where the coarseness of eating and cleaning and going to the toilet squashed the meanings out of the corners of her eyes.
It was all very puzzling.
But it was what Friend seemed to want.
Only — wasn't there a hint of impatience inside his patterns too?
The private parts she didn't know how to read?
What does he want?
Is it — is it something I'm supposed to do?
I would!
For Friend I would — if I only knew what it was that he wants me to do or be .
So one night, when she had jacked into the sudden heavenly night inside her, Chesarynth watched Friend appear with less than her usual eagerness.
She had been over all this a thousand times in the real world, the world she privately thought of as the world of things.
She desperately wanted to fill in the hollow of longing that pierced Friend — but she was afraid she would offend him.
What if he didn't want her to intrude on his being?
What if it was her feebleness that made him impatient?
If she asked, would it drive him away?
For once she didn't follow his building.
Instead, hesitantly, terribly afraid she was doing the wrong thing, she plucked meanings from the firmament.
In colours that were crude she wove a strand that said,I am sorry.
You have taught me to read the fires of meaning but I am inadequate.
I don't understand what it is you want, or what you have to do with Spiderglass, or even how you got me away from them.
You are Friend — she studied the symbols of Friend's identity with all that he meant to her of acceptance and caring, frightened that she was showing the nebulae of her longing for him too —but I cannot read you perfectly.
I am not as good a pupil as I should be .
Again he mirrored her meanings back, and he held up the distorted black lumps that were her errors of syntax.
Then he built another pattern beside it, one that shone through the darkness, the bright complement to hers:Here you can't lie, or only to yourself.
This is what you built, this forest of meanings, but you don't see it clearly because you don't see yourself as you are .
She constructed back:You know what I am, and so do I. There, the blackened wrecks of meanings, that's me, and you know it because you built it back for me .
No!
That was your perception of what you built.
This pattern — he indicated the gleaming iris of colours —this is your meaning as it is perceived by others than yourself.
And you have the right to ask .
Friend's triumph flared like a lightning flash.
I was incomplete and your asking brings completion.
I wanted you to wake up .
(His meanings were tinged with the sharp edges of anxieties that she couldn't comprehend, and joy laved them all away.)
To wonder about your worlds and what place you can make in them .
Then, she asked, you will tell me who you are?
And what will happen when Spiderglass (a dark, tentacled threat) finds out where I've gone?
Mirth, the laughter of the arcs of heaven.
But there was no mockery, and she shared the fun, the edges of her meanings meshing with his so that he must have felt her ecstasy but somehow there was no embarrassment.
I am Spiderglass , he signed, and this time the symbol was a sunburst reaching out to help the benighted.
But many more people are Spiderglass too, not all of them good, not all of them human .
He spun symbols bright as sugar-crystals: the poor, dim brothers who were not human yet who spun the glassy fibres ten times the tensile strength of steel along which optical messages could be sent, for surgeons, for miners; or incredibly strong strands to link the orbiting colonies.
Witwaterstrand ! she painted.
Childhood security, her longing to return to that simpler time when her mother cherished her as a bright-haired toddler.
But the edges of her symbol were darkened by the unholy fires of self-doubt.
Spiderglass , he said, and showed homes for the homeless.
And spaceships to bring others to their new-found lands — he showed the world beneath its triple suns — to bring wonder and mystery and knowledge to Earth.
Medicines.
Food.
Maybe one day, even, instantaneous travel that  we can actually control .
And his meanings were hazed in a golden future.
Fear quavered dark mists through her symbol:Towers ?
Yes, there are towers, and the mechanisms are built of spiderglass.
Such towers exist, cruel, enjoying pain.
They're not all like that, though .
His towers rejected the fear she had of the hideous, dehumanized sadists she had known at Mars-U.
They were not puppets like the garden-master.
Just the way he presented this, though, and the fact that he was Spiderglass, struck fear into her.
Her mind stumbled over the new/old certainly that the garden-master she had loved was indeed a puppet.
She had been made to forget that.
And the meanings that were Chesarynth collapsed inwards in a deathly vortex.
Her pattern shrank from Friend in terror.
Friend tried to get her to open up, but she would not.
Curled tightly, foetally, she turned inwards, focusing only on herself.
He pulled away from her then, and fearing rejection she shrank still farther.
So, from a safe distance, he plucked meanings from the cosmos and wove them together in reassurance.
I didn't know they had blocked that from you.
Yes, your garden-master was only a puppet, and yes, the mechanics of it were built by others in Spiderglass.
I can see him, your garden-master, though you try to hide how you felt about him.
But he was a trick, Chesarynth, and I am not .
You're doing the same!
How can I believe you?
Can't you believe me because I am Friend ?
And he resurrected the symbolic pattern she had found in him, the amber, the velvet, the musk and acceptance.
No answer.
Coiled in on herself, Chesarynth reeled dizzy across her endless night.
There was a wound in him now, ripping across the light, warmth and fabric of Friend.
A world of sorrow scattered the sharp scent of wet ash and brimstone from him and curved rejected from her closed, tortured pattern.
Even trying to shield herself from him, she could feel that void  in him that he wanted her to fill.
Chesarynth, wherever you go, believe in me.
Believe in yourself.
Believe my pain .
It was a dark, tearing scar across his constellation of meanings, and from its charred edges bled horror and self-disgust.
Because I created the garden-master .
2
Behind her the killing cold of night; in front of her, black silhouette limned with jade and ruby, stood Zuleika.
And before Jezrael started to react Zuleika lifted one hand to tear away her fountain of black shiny-rippled hair.
It was a wig.
With it came strings of skin, leaving Zulei's skull pitted with the strip-mines of her disease.
The wig flopped to the ground.
Now Jezrael saw that Zulei had taken a short blade from the coiffure.
The knife-blade was a cheerful out-of-place red.
Jezrael's heart beat faster but she forced herself to slow the shallow breathing of panic.
Some of Jezrael's confidence lingered around the edges of her mind: she was bigger, older, faster with the reactions of laser-dance.
It was frightening but the possibility of her own death was too remote to accept.
Death was something that only happened to other people — except there was the ragged hole that the shadow-voices had opened up in her and Zulei was tearing at it and there was death behind.
Zulei pointed the blade towards her and it sent lances of red and green light into Jezrael's eyes.
Jez, half-fainting, fell into a fighting crouch, as seen on holopics.
But Zulei made no move towards her.
Jezrael wrenched at her heater-cloak, bundling it protectively around her right arm.
Still Zulei didn't attack.
But there was no noise from behind, only the distant wail of music from the zigzag city, and Jezrael began to wonder if there was some threat she didn't know about.
‘She won't recognize you, you know,’ Zulei said, her teeth shining evenly in the dark.
‘She'll be some brain-dead clerk somewhere, just an interface that isn't even  human any more.
Or some proctor who can slice someone in two without caring.
I don't know what sort of tower they'll put in her.
‘But you beg me, Jez, and I'll tell you where she is.
And then I'll sell you down the galaxy, and you won't know her either.
But I'll have skin again all over, nice young skin and the mind to appreciate it.’
Jezrael said nothing.
She was sure this was some trick of Zuleika's to get her off-balance, slow down her reaction time.
Zuleika laughed, and the knife — Jezrael assumed it was a knife — wove hypnotic spells on the air.
‘Not even a pretty please with sugar on it?
You don't really care about your sister, do you?
It's all just part of some act to show the world how wonderful you are, how loving.
They can't see you like I do, wanting only your own safety.’
Still Jez didn't dare answer.
‘You think they'll miss you?
The Magyar will send out word that his precious prima donna is missing?
Fat chance.
He won't wanna stir up trouble.
Besides, enough people go AWOL on Mars that one more won't make any difference.
You're nothing, Jez.
Absolute zero.
You're just a piece of shit and if I stepped on you I'd scrape you off my shoe.
You're not worth bothering about.’
Echoes inside her: subconscious memories slashed Jezrael until her mind bled:Mother.
Father.
The shadow-voices trampling her self-worth .
But she didn't say a word.
Letting the words flow over her Jezrael waited, standing loose, as though this were some jam dance session.
Zuleika didn't like it.
‘She's in the Southern —’ and at the same time, she aimed the directional blade of her stunner.
Yet a tiny movement of her arm had telegraphed her intention to strike and though Jez hadn't understood how, still she had swayed and spun.
Her heel struck Zuleika on the thigh.
Zulei hopped backwards, trying to regain her balance, her mouth a rictus of hate.
But Jezrael launched herself, rolling, this time her feet slamming into Zuleika's middle just as  Zuleika wildly stabbed the button on her stunner.
An agony of numbness robbed Jezrael of one arm; it flopped heavily into her side, dangling from her shoulder, but Zuleika had dropped the stunner as she fell and Jezrael stomped it.
The broadcast blade split into mirroring fragments and she kicked the red tube of its handle at Zuleika's head.
‘You weren't going to tell me anyway!
It was just a trap for you to catch another body.
You don't know!’
She knew she should hit Zulei.
Knock her out if not kill her.
But so many people all her life had told her how wrong it was to hurt others, so Jezrael penned inside her the rage that crushed its poison outwards through the walls of her veins, not knowing the harm she would do herself, knowing only that if she killed Zulei she would be as bad as Zulei was.
Her left arm still dangled in painful paralysis.
So Jezrael left her enemy shivering with the nearness of death — for she had felt the fire of fury that radiated from Jezrael — and walked back into Hell.
Stepping over the jagged icy rocks towards the bowed walls of Hell, she heard Zulei laughing, but she wouldn't give the mind-catcher a second chance at her.
She should have done.
As Jezrael slipped warily into the waiting tapestry of neon, stone and shadow, Zuleika said, inaudibly, ‘In the Southern Cross ship on her way to Earth, dummy.’
And the rage in Jezrael was a pain that tightened under her ribs, squeezing upwards to wrench at her breathing, drag at her racing heart.
It was a force that she tried to hide away tidily, as her mother would have done, because it was a dark and hideous thing that shook her violently.
And in the last hours of night, Hell's streets teemed with the addicts, the muggers.
But Jezrael walked unevenly yet unharmed, because the watchers in the jet and neon ghetto saw her dangling arm but they also saw her face and the ire in it was barely leashed.
Her mind was still seething when she reached Maggie's; it took her two attempts to key the code into the computer-lock right-handed.
The dark in the bar was like the darkness inside her: terrifying.
Jezrael knew she wanted someone to attack her so she could tear them apart, glory in their blood, and she hated herself.
She was scared of what might be hiding in the shadows but she was terrified of her subconscious.
The urge to murder split her mind like an abyss luring her to jump into its raging depths.
She walked shakily to the bar through the coral and saffron reflections of light from the sign outside.
Reaching over the ink-black counter, she helped herself to a tumbler of Spanish coñac and drank it between shaking teeth.
Its stored sun-power fired through her, steadying her nerves; she poured another shot and stumbled towards the stairs to her room.
From a dim alcove came Maggie's voice.
She started violently.
‘Not sleeping with me tonight, then, Jez?’
She put one foot on the first step.
‘Just not sleeping.’
Jezrael couldn't keep her tone even.
‘Me neither.’
He waved a languid hand; the pale material of his sleeve caught the light and she turned her head fractionally toward it.
‘Let's keep each other awake, hey?’
‘I can't!’
But she wasn't sure what it was that she couldn't do.
‘Then don't.
But whatever it is, why don't you come and not do it here.’
No demand, just an invitation.
And she weighed Zuleika's words, and the shadow-voices, against her own uncertain judgement, and put her boot-toe on the next step up.
‘If you don't trust someone, Jez, it's better to keep an eye on them, wouldn't you say?
If it makes you feel better, you can even pay me for the drink.’
That sounded like Maggie.
She stepped down to the level.
‘Anybody ever call you mercenary, Maggie?’
‘Ah, a compliment.
I love compliments.
Come and sit down before you fall down.’
Swearing as her dead left hand crashed into a chair in  the dark, Jezrael made her way across the room, sat down facing him.
She took another drink.
The glass in her right hand still clashed against her teeth.
Her body absorbed the silence that swelled through the darkened room.
Slowly the stillness rose in a tide that lapped at the rage within her; her breathing steadied.
She felt her pulse ease its vast and painful thudding.
This time she could drink with scarcely a tremor.
All the same, she was glad she could hide from Maggie in the artificial night, though he waited patiently, non-oppressive.
He waited a very long time before saying, ‘Talk, talk, talk, a man can't get a word in edgeways.’
She burst out laughing at the absurdity of it, laughed until she cried, and when the tears came he groped across the table to touch her hand around the empty glass.
Jezrael gripped his fingers fiercely and he slid along the padded bench until he was beside her and she wept into the haven of his shoulder.
Eventually she pulled away a little, mopping her cheeks with her wrist.
Handing her a crumpled serviette, he said quietly, ‘Here, you dreadful urchin.
Use this.
‘So where's your sister?’
‘I don't know exactly — somewhere in the south.
Zuleika told me.
She — she sold her to Spiderglass.
And her face!’
When he had heard the rest of the tale, Maggie said, ‘Your arm'll come back to you soon.
Me, I think I'd better take an interest in this philosopher person.
Can't have her going around taking away my trade.’
‘Is that all you ever think of?— No, of course it isn't.
I'm sorry.
I'm just finding levity a bit hard to take at the moment.’
‘You have to laugh or you'd cry.
Try it sometime.
Now can we get some sleep?’ he added plaintively.
‘All this listening has worn me out.’
‘But aren't you going to do anything now?’
‘Of course I am.
My profit's at stake.
Ouch!’
Because she'd swiped him.
‘You use the bathroom first, Jez.
Unless you still want to go upstairs?’
In the dark she could forget the inhuman perfection of  his plastic face.
In the dark she could ignore how he repelled her in the light.
But she could not disregard the friendly warmth of his arms that held her safe from herself until, impossibly, she fell asleep.
Magyar skimmed the hired ground-car to a stop behind a ridge.
‘Are you sure this is a good idea, Jez?’ he asked.
‘Nope.
But I'm doing it anyway.’
Maggie peered through the frost that was already forming on the canopy.
‘Well, I don't like it.
You sure you got the right place, Antoine?’
The blind man nodded, spoke up against the weary roar of the airstream that broke like surf on this rocky spur deep in Antarctic Mars, and in his voice was a smile, the first emotional response he'd given them.
‘I'm sure, Maggie.
I can see the lights dancing bright as a river.’
‘Well, make sure you don't show yourself on the skyline up there.
Even Spiderglass isn't trusting enough to have no watch on its perimeters.’
Antoine Eyeless still smiled at what he saw; he hardly bothered to mumble an absent reply.
‘It's not up there, Maggie.
It's down here.’
Impatiently, Jezrael pushed the canopy back and an icy blast of wind snatched it from her grasp.
The car's hydraulics soughed as they tried to compensate for the sudden shift of the bubble but against that gale they were all but useless, and the bubble-canopy clanged on the car's shell.
All three of them ducked but there was no burst of fire from the ice-bound hills.
Magyar tipped the packs over the rim of the shell: tent, food, oxygen, a mound of technology that was wrapped in layer on layer of padding.
Still the hired spider in the back clucked and unwedged himself as fast as he could to go and check his beloved bits and pieces by touch.
There was a layer of insulation covering his skull; it looked like cotton wool beneath his crown of star-beads and wire.
His movements were stiff and angular.
Maggie claimed Jezrael's attention.
‘I still think this is a big mistake.’
She leaned on the side of the shell, trying to ignore the fact that already she was shivering.
Carbon-dioxide ice smoked all around, making a freezing fog that glowed eerily where the rising sun was trapped in its skeins.
Squinting against the gale, she looked unflinchingly into Maggie's face.
‘A woman's got to do, et cetera.’
‘Oh, preserve me from a woman's corn.
It's a good job I've got you away from a lifetime of crappy holopics.’
Jezrael wasn't sure what emotion he was hiding under his alleged repartee, only that she was going to miss it when it wasn't around.
‘That's not what they say when the heroine lands dirtside.’
‘Sorry, I must have lost my place in the script.
Well, see you tomorrow morning.
Look after yourself, will you?
This could have a drastic effect on my turnover.’
‘Oh sure, I love you too.’
And the words quivered uncertain between them until she straightened and waved him off.
The ground-car's whine died away in the distance, eaten up by the wind-ripped fog.
The jury-rigged tower, Antoine, hovered around, getting in her way as she cleared rocks from the most level part of the hillside.
Jezrael hated calling him a spider.
Ever since she'd seen a real arachnid close up she shuddered just at the word.
‘I'm sorry,’ he said in a voice that was more masculine than his flabby, characterless appearance.
But it didn't stop him bumping into her every five minutes as she set up the slithering plastic tent, the heaters.
Seeing his ineffectual bumbling, Jezrael wondered how much use he could be, and why he had been made.
Where Maggie had found him she didn't know, but once she had dragged the equipment inside the shelter she was very glad that he had.
Antoine might have been blind on all normal frequencies but he knew how to assemble his do-it-yourself rig by touch and she marvelled at his deftness.
It was the mechanical accuracy of an automaton.
The machines grew around him, balanced against the unevenness of the shiny plastic groundsheet, a blue-black  hemisphere of amps and circuitry.
When Antoine finished he looked like a floodlit gantry.
Wires upon wires wove around him, binding him to his amplifiers.
Jezrael could smell the ozone from his crackling crown over his scent of fresh male sweat.
He said hastily, ‘I'll be going away for a bit and I guess I'll be ravenous when I get back.
I usually am.
See you, Jez.’
She sat very still, washed with the absurd embarrassment of the able-bodied in the presence of the lame as he said, ‘See you.’
Then the feeling faded as the sun's light shifted round through the billowing walls of the tent.
The tent was all colours and none, odd flurries of snow snaking over it sibilantly; hardly exciting.
Gradually her muscles filled with the aches of motionlessness but she was loth to make the slightest sound which might break his concentration.
At first she tried not to stare at him, knowing how the feeling of someone looking over her own shoulder made her clumsy, but soon it became clear that he was no longer aware of her at all.
Antoine's brown eyes lost that blind unfocused look; she noticed a faint smile wander over his face as he began to see more clearly.
The nodules standing proud on his skull started to glitter in shifting patterns that she couldn't understand.
It was like watching a dance of colours that flowed with emotions faster than the light of her vision.
It made her want to cry, the way he suddenly seemed whole and human.
His red, lumpy features were transfigured and he stopped being a badly assembled mass of fleshy fragments and became instead a vital man.
She wondered who he had been before — and if Chesarynth might be the same inhuman thing.
Tears stung her eyes a moment at the thought of her sister losing her identity; Jezrael asked herself if the grief was for Ches or selfishly for her own loss.
Antoine focused on a faceted crystal that was the centre of his banks of equipment.
His blind-filmed eyes stared at it, all but unwinking.
It was as though he held his breath, his whole being concentrated on that chunk of gleaming piezo quartz centred, as he had told Jezrael, above one of  the underground cables laid between Spiderglass Southern and their base on the populated equator.
‘So why here?’
Jezrael asked, giving an artistic shiver that he missed, even as he had missed the sight of the ice-cliffs all around.
Antoine looked up from his crystal, not masking an expression of impatience.
‘The cold,’ he said, ‘obviously.
It has to do with superconductivity.’
Then his opaque eyes stared once more at his resonator, cutting her out of his attention, and Jezrael was obscurely jealous of the quartz which glowed with fleeting internal light.
For a while he seemed a shy figure hovering on the borders of a conversation, longing to take part in it, to belong.
Then it was as if his eyes were speaking and Jezrael was the one who couldn't fit in, a child among adults.
Memory: the kids in school whispering until I came poling up.
Were they talking about me — or was it some great secret that I wasn't allowed to hear?
A party they wouldn't invite me to?
And Ches would keep me company when nobody else would ….
A cloud blotched the plastic walls of the tent, drew her into the present and still she was excluded.
Glancing at the plump figure of Antoine balanced against the slope, she wondered just what was happening.
She saw the crystal in front of him flicker with pale lights, and guessed that to him it was no pallid, ice-sheathed glimmer.
So what was he seeing?
And what did it mean?
Did it actually hold some clue about Chesarynth — what she was doing, where she was — and if she were still…whole?
Or was all this just a wild stab into nothing?
Had Zulei lied even about this?
Jezrael sneaked a look at her watch.
One hour and fifty metric minutes.
Boredom suddenly unmasked itself and she started to look ahead.
If he's going to be hungry, maybe I ‘d better get a meal together .
Then she realized it was her own desire to be valued, noticed even, that made her want to do something that wouldn't take a minute once she'd started.
She eased to a more comfortable position against the angle of the ground and schooled herself to wait.
Four hours.
Five.
The short polar day died in bloody shadows.
Antoine sat, colours still fidgeting through his crown, that smile still lighting his face.
It's no good , she thought,I'm going to burst if I don't empty myself soon .
And though she recognized that some of it was rebellion at the hours of inactivity, she could not ignore her bladder.
Pins and needles hit her as she moved upslope to the entrance and her numb foot skated on the glossy groundsheet.
She saved her curses until she could shout them into the night — then swallowed them anyway out of paranoia.
It must have been seventy below zero outside; Jezrael wondered how much worse it would have been if Mars were at aphelion.
It seemed that the wind had dropped a little with the fall of night.
Now the carbon-dioxide snow gleamed white beneath the icy disdain of the stars.
Already frost was whitening every wrinkle of her sleeve.
Even through the contacts the cold dragged tears from her; they froze on her lashes.
Jezrael knew that without shelter she would die very soon and there'd be no cheating here.
She couldn't smash the freezing antarctic as she had beaten Zulei.
Rage swamped her briefly, sharp and red and black.
The crunch of Zulei's head pulping beneath her heel was an ugly lust
Jezrael fought to fold the anger away, tuck it down so deep inside her that she would never feel its corrosion again — she hoped.
She despised herself utterly for being the sort of person who could contemplate the slaughter of another woman with savage joy.
Turning away didn't take the burden from her.
Only a moment outside yet the tent's welcome seemed a homely, glowing thing.
Its warm radiance drove the shivers from her and she was glad to see that she hadn't disturbed Antoine.
The rapture of vision was still on his face as she hunkered over the heater, trying to get the chill out of her fingers.
The torture of not knowing what had happened to Chesarynth was sharpened by the realization  that maybe he already knew.
She wished she'd brought something to do that would take her mind off her anxiety if only for a moment.
Surely he won't be much longer?
I ‘ll get the food on.
If he didn't hear me go outside, he won't hear me open a can or two, will he ?
And she acknowledged that part of her longing to be bustling about was to try and snap him out of his trance so that he could tell her where her sister was.
So, soup to drink.
And bread that would also have to be thawed.
A  canister of stew and one of some sweet and sticky thing that Maggie had said she would love, trust me.
She wondered if she did.
While her hands were busy rooting the ingredients out of their packs, Jezrael tried to work out just how she did feel about the Magyar, but that was a niggling discomfort blunted by the stone weight of her worry about Chesarynth — and about Antoine.
Pulling the tabs on the thermal cans to heat up the food, she glanced over at him but he was exactly as he'd been all day, close yet remote, unreachable.
Maybe something's wrong?
Otherwise he'd be back out of it by now.
Maybe the Spiderglass network has got him?
Maybe they're closing in on us right now and all I can do is mess about playing cook ?
And all Antoine did was sit there like a Buddha with that irritating smirk on his face.
Annoyed, she picked up one of the cans — and dropped it again.
Obviously the inner layer was punctured because the outer skin was burning hot against her chill fingers.
The can rolled sideways down the hill and she scrabbled across the tent for it.
All she succeeded in doing was knocking it farther over the slithering groundsheet.
It rolled down into Antoine.
For a moment longer he sat frozen, then just as Jezrael cannoned into him he knocked the scalding can away.
He fell back into the amphitheatre of his machines, sparks writhing from his crown to his chest and arms.
‘I'm sorry, I'm sorry,’ she cried desperately, risking electrocution to yank him to his feet.
The fountain of sparks died; he staggered, swinging his head hack and forth as if to drive out the pain.
Jezrael held him, still trapped in her words.
‘I didn't mean to.
Oh no, what have I done?’
Antoine shook his head where the glass beads now were filled with smoke; a few of the ampoules glittered still like lightning through storm-clouds, but worst was the anguish on his face.
He had seen and now he was blinded.
Another of the ampoules shattered; glass spattered her.
‘Oh, Antoine, what have I done?’ she said again.
Now he held her, his plump hands with fingers like sausages trying to steady her.
Behind them rose plumes of steam lit from below by the crackling death of his amps.
Sliding their arms around each other they clung together, and it didn't matter that he was bloated, nor that his tired sweat made his clothes stick clammily to his bulges.
He said, ‘It was beautiful, Jezrael.
So pure, the crystal stars singing a paean of rainbows and each tiny prism was a world unto itself, rich with knowledge.’
Unbearable loss wrenched the words from him, biting into Jezrael with acid grief.
‘If only they'd taken me!
To be part of that melody of infinite chimes of light!
But I didn't know!
I didn't know and I hid from them in the semantics lab when they came to shrink me, and I sold myself to someone who didn't know how to do it.
My eyes — my eyes weren't supposed to burn out.
They said I'd never know pain again, or hunger.
Look at me, Jez!’
He averted his face.
‘No, don't.
I was young and strong.
People said I was good-looking.
My girlfriend — oh, yes, I'd had lots of girlfriends, but never one like her — she said she'd always love me.
Then I was blind, and fat, and ugly, and my hair sprouted into wires with cold, glittering dandruff.’
Antoine faltered, sagging against her so that she could barely sustain his weight.
But he had to tell someone of the joy dying inside him.
‘And I couldn't see, so we couldn't do any more the things we used to — just little things, like watching the sunset, or laughing at a holopic when we turned out the lights in bed, or me reading a poem to her.
And she didn't like going out with me any more because of the way they all stared at me anyhow, I couldn't go most places looking like this, could  I?
What the proctors would give — she was scared, and I couldn't blame her.
‘Then one day she was different, and the next day she was gone.
‘But at least I could come close to the song of electricity.
I could see the dance of electrons.
I could feel it, and they let me join in.
So pure, so beautiful — it didn't matter to them what I was.
It was a fire of wonder, and no-one else could see it.
I had no-one to share it.’
Antoine held her close so she couldn't see him weeping, but she felt it.
Somehow all his rolls of fat were invested with dignity as they shook to his sobs and his weight pulling at her was a part of it that would be a part of her life forever.
Outside, before his grief had time to clot, the wind yearned a different plaint, but it didn't matter.
Jezrael held him, her tears mingling with his.
‘It'll be all right, Antoine.
They'll fix you up again, you'll see.’
She heard her stupid phrase clunk but she hurried on, trying to plaster over his wound.
‘You'll be able to dance with the electrons again, you'll be better than ever.’
The endless roar of the ancient winds grew more acute.
He fell, and she rolled with him, cradling his fire-strung head across her lap.
‘You should see her symbol, Jez!
A matrix of colours that sing of tenderness and acceptance of everything except herself.
I'd like to meet her, your sister.
She could look at me and I wouldn't feel that horror, people recoiling from me — your Chesarynth wouldn't do that.
Only there's a wound in her that I want to plug.
Her beauty's aching and I want to make her whole.’
Jezrael leant lower over him, straining to hear the words that he was straining to tell.
‘Where is she?
What have they done to her?’
‘She's on Earth, close to the heart.
She's in Asia —’
And the long-dead wind of Mars erupted in a howl of powered transport.
It was too deep and ominous a sound to be Maggie's little hire-car.
Spiderglass.
Jezrael stiffened, her head cocked to distinguish what was happening.
Antoine said faintly, ‘I thought there'd be more time.
I'm sorry, Jez.
I was too long.
The song caught me — I shouldn't have stayed to watch it.
And then they heard me tearing out of the sound-web.
I didn't have time to fix it.
Run, Jez.’
‘You come too.’
‘Leave the people who could connect me up to that melody forever?’
Antoine smiled at such madness, winced at the fires in his brain.
‘Go on, Jez.
This is destiny — for me.
I'm coming home.’
A shudder passed through Antoine and he lay like one dead.
Jezrael called him shook him savagely, but he only flopped, a limp thing.
There was no will in his body any more.
She couldn't even feel a pulse when she laid two fingers beneath the angle of his jaw.
Footsteps began to crunch across the frozen rock towards the entrance.
Snatching up one of the heaters and her cloak, Jezrael slashed her knife horizontally through the tent-wall, low to the ground.
With a couple of tins in her arms she rolled through into the whirling darkness of the antarctic night and pegged the billowing plastic down with a handful of icy stones.
It wouldn't fool them for long but it would do for a moment.
Cursing herself, she snaked a hand back inside for an oxygen cylinder.
Then she ran, tears freezing like diamond on her lashes until the periphery of her vision was a refracted blur of irised light, out into the frozen night-desert of Mars.
Ran through the thin black air until she couldn't breathe.
Gravity stifled her, hammered her red blood cells.
Gasping, she tore off her mask to drag oxygen out of the cylinder.
And fell, comatose, in the deadly antarctic night.
3
In her dream, someone was stroking her cheek with a touch as delicate as a snowflake, only it was softer, more loving, totally sensuous.
Jezrael's body arched languorously; her dream-self believed she was nestling closer to the Magyar.
Only the caress stopped.
Almost she rose through the strata of realities to wakefulness, but then her lover glided his fingers gently over the curve of her jaw to mine pleasure from her throat.
Her momentary sulkiness fled as she relaxed into his embrace, an embrace too pervasive to be Maggie's.
Abruptly she jerked out of her dream, slime congealing on her skin.
Revulsion shook her.
Jezrael forced her eyes open.
When she woke, the world was blue.
The tall fluted walls were blue.
Their arched apex was blue.
Even the air was blue.
It came to her that she could tell where the walls stopped being her skin only because the blue shaded down a spectrum from azure to sapphire.
Jezrael felt the crusted stuff on her face and was frightened.
Yet there was no-one around that she could see.
Still she wondered who it was that she had been responding to.
Obviously some misshapen warped creation like Alex; shame flushed heat all through her that she had been willing to give herself to some disgusting pervert.
Revolted, picking the scabbing slime from her face, she strained all her senses.
She was on a couch of some silky padding that opened to her contours in a way that was obscurely obscene.
Nobody else was even audible in the blue boudoir all around.
When sound came to her, it was only the whispering of blood in her ears, the gentle huff of air in and out of her lungs.
Jezrael didn't even notice it.
Gases rumbled in her stomach and she was ashamed.
Dreading to think what the stuff on her face might be, she clawed at it with trembling fingers, trying to interpret the strong odour in the turquoise air around her.
Whatever it was, it smelt biological.
Hormonal.
Jezrael could feel her embarrassment gathering physical momentum inside her, turning into nausea.
But mostly she was confused.
One moment she was running and dodging through the striations of ice and carmine and sloe, with the fear that the walls of Spiderglass could see through the ancient cliffs of Mars to where she finally crouched, exhausted.
Her throat still stung with the rasp of knife-keen wind, her eyes were sore with the dry suck of the freezing night.
In her muscles was the memory of the oxygen her exertion had dragged from each cell despite her labouring mask.
She recalled ripping the mask off to breathe more freely of bottled air.
Then
Blue?
It's a blue tent , she thought.
Cutting off the rest of the light .
But then the columns of moulding moved in soundlessly and it wasn't a tent after all.
For the pulsing of the walls was slow and vegetal and the pillars soared and rose in a tracery of veins and she was in a hollow in some living thing with no way out above or below nor escape to the sides.
She screamed.
Her scream rang back to her in a thundering descant whose bass-line was so deep it vibrated each organ of her body and she was sick.
Heaving over to one elbow just in time not to drown in her own effluent, Jezrael was so involved with her physical self that it was only after a moment that she noticed the base of one wall oozing forward to cover her vomit.
A ripple of lapis lazuli and there was no sign of it.
And the  living rafters had closed to little more than head-height.
Indeed, they seemed to be leaning over her to catch her every breath, closest by her panting mouth, reaching to her eyes, and the air was thick with poison sap and sharp with vomit.
Jezrael shrank into herself, hiding from the blue.
But there was no escape.
On her face, beneath her nails, the skin stung blistering.
She kicked where the cornflower walls faded to a thin azure; maybe there would be thinnest.
But the stuff took her boot, swelling with a strange elasticity, and thrust it back.
And where for a moment a gap had shown between her boot-top and her heat-suit, a midnight vein swooped across the wall to form a bulge that thickened out towards the naked skin of her leg.
Jezrael screamed again; she couldn't help it.
Then she groped at her shoulder to where the oxygen tank was moulded around her  triceps .
Fumbling, fingers clumsy in her panic, she dragged at the plastic retaining clips.
Too long!
It's taking too long !
Feeling the whole blueness shutting in on her, walls running with cyan drops whose stench was acrid and bile, she wrenched and wrenched at the straps and at last the curving bottle came free.
In desperation she slammed the stop-cock open and precious oxygen knifed outwards in an icy cloud that she aimed at the farthest point.
And the plume of vapour was blue, but the blueness all around it bellied inwards to encyst it in peacock and midnight, and while it was busy she slashed at the palest of the azure walls with the tongue of her belt-buckle.
The blueness split with a sound like tearing wood.
Its breath fled outwards into snow-bright dawn and it spat Jezrael through when she would have stuck in the slit.
Whatever else it may have wanted, the blue tent wouldn't let its precious oxygen go willingly.
Jezrael inhaled freshness, trying to rid her nostrils of that cloying, heavy scent.
She scrabbled away unbalanced, going too fast to stand up.
Her face stung; she scrubbed  handfuls of wind-blown snow on to her skin, knuckling at her eyelids where the enzymes still clung in crunchy clusters.
Most of the snow vanished within seconds, going straight to its gaseous state, but some of the crystals were the hexagonal sweetness of honest-to-goodness iced water.
She only stopped when her fingers felt they would burst with the pain of freezing and, as the adrenalin of escape faded, a lethargy swooped over her.
Shrivelled Martian air brought weariness into her.
The spinning streamers of fog trawled for sunlight that wouldn't be here for a while, and the snow had piled the purest of pillows at the foot of an ice-cliff.
She could sleep here until — until Maggie — came — in the morning.
Anxiety speared her awake.
The last time I slept, the blueness swallowed me .
Then Jezrael shivered again with the memory of the sick lust its touch had awoken in her as she lay dreaming.
‘Guess again,’ she croaked.
‘No more sleep for this child until I'm safe back at Maggie's.’
The only thing was, she couldn't work out which way to go.
Half in panic, half in the laughter of release, she turned and turned on the same spot.
Where's Maggie going to meet us — me ?
But there was nothing in the shifting canyons of frozen carbon dioxide to tell her.
Avalanches shook powder into the air; it caught fire in the nascent sun and leaped into blushing fires above its opal roots.
Spires of crimson and carmine and blood were the rocks, changing colour even as she watched the new day burn off their sugar-frost coating.
The wind caught the spindrift and flung it as a jewelled and treacherous veil into the depths of the ragged sky that dizzied her when contrary winds ripped the clouds this way and that.
Lost.
And the hump-backed blueness behind her spread a flat sheet of flesh as the first sunbeam touched it in the valley of shadow.
Any direction was as good as another — so long as it was away from that thing.
Lost again.
Why don't I learn ! she thought savagely.
How many times do I have to tell myself not to get lost?
What am I, stupid or something ?
But she knew all the same that no-one had thought she might leave the tent which seemed warm now and dense with the presence of Antoine —Only he's dead now, isn't he?
And I killed him.
If he hadn't come out here to find Chesarynth for me.
If Ches hadn't shrunk without trace.
If I hadn't been too dumb I could have come to Mars-U as well, then I wouldn't have been alone .
If.
Hoarse breaths rasped in and out of her throat but none of them was satisfying.
The shifting mist was choking .
Without the mask, her eyes were dry and sore.
She became aware, dimly, that her distant body was freezing.
Maybe , she thought, her mind half-frozen slush that squeezed ideas apart,maybe I could find Spiderglass even in the fog.
Wouldn't it be better to be alive, maybe see things like Antoine — or maybe not see things like Antoine.
Not such a hot idea, after all .
Maybe I'll hear Maggie's ground-car swooshing over the hill to rescue me.
She heard only the wind conversing with the ice, the dawn thaw, the shush of tiny rocks dragged free by the first-light gale, each one a whisper but so many it was the shout of a breaker on the shore.
Then again, maybe I won't.
Jezrael dragged herself wearily up a nearby pinnacle, hoping to climb above the billowing mist so she could see something.
Cold bit into her.
Her fingers were numb, her palms aching with the sharp chill.
Still she pulled herself upwards, beset by thoughts of falling, of breaking a leg, of dying all alone in shadows of vermilion where Maggie would never see her.
The spire reached upwards into invisibility.
The curse of permanent gravity.
Tired, tired, lungs aching for oxygen.
But that was in the blueness.
For her mask — but that was in the blueness too.
And finally as she hauled herself on to the ice-slick rock where the sun pulsed fire into her eyes, she saw
No tent.
No Spiderglass walls.
No Maggie.
All there was around her was endless waves of ruby and ice with the fog crawling beneath her feet.
OK , she thought,You got me.
I give in .
But it wasn't a game.
Even if it had been, they never let her win.
I was the one in hide-and-seek that you never came looking for and I hid for hours from no-one ….
Still, there had been Maggie's arena (the tiny sun was like some red-gel spotlight blazing just to highlight her).
Only there's no audience.
But Jesus!
If I could dance this !
If I could live to dance this.
OK, you bastards, you haven't got me yet.
Down the pillar of rock, head afire and limbs like ice.
Too scared to look down.
Then her groping foot jarred on flatter ground.
Amazed, she looked around and saw the valley surrounding her, its garnet shadows scarfed by nacreous mist, but it was definitely lighter now.
She could see where she was going.
The oxy-bottle was clear in her mind, alluring.
She thirsted for it, imagining the cool wind of it cascading life into her lungs.
If I last long enough to get to the air ….
Purpose hard in her, she staggered back to the flat sheet of the blueness that was spread to catch the warmth of the sun and in her frozen hand was a knife sharpened by erosion from a rock.
It was so cold that it burnt her, so cold that it stuck to her fingers.
Her shadow marked her target.
She lifted her arm
‘I never seen anybody come back for a second dose of the blue,’ said a man behind her, for all the world as though he were safe reminiscing in some bar of his old age.
Jezrael spun, feeling as though she'd been caught out.
She squinted at his sunstarred silhouette.
‘Who're you?’
‘I'm deliverance,’ he said.
And shot her.
4
Eight years.
No.
Not even eight months.
It made Karel scared that he was going insane to think how the Gate had bent and folded his time inside his head.
Aurel couldn't trust himself.
His mind betrayed him.
It took him a long while before he could face Magrit again.
Sure, right after he'd made the captain of the vital supplies ship Antares promise never to talk about Heaven's Gate — he didn't like thinking about how he'd done that — he'd called Magrit over a scrambled beam.
He'd cut brusquely through her anxieties.
‘Of course you didn't know where I was.
I was in hiding, remember?
You weren't supposed to know.’
He saw the hurt on her face.
Abruptly he'd ended the transmission just as she was saying, ‘But you look so ill!
What —’
But now he was going to see her in the flesh.
Here, an anonymous Company shrink checking out the efficiency of Spiderglass Southern, he was going to see the woman he'd enslaved to him by playing God in her mind.
Meet the bundle of emotions he'd created with just one of his psych-tech tricks.
It was hard to face.
He wanted to see her, to enjoy her puppy-dog welcome, but he kept wondering how she would react to him if he de-programmed her affection.
He was glad of the plastiface disguise he was wearing.
It would help to hide the feelings that were too close to his skin.
Sooner than he wanted, the sensor at the door of his quarters chimed softly.
Magrit rushed in, the same soft-curled hair between brown and auburn glinting around her face, same soft green eyes misted with tears.
Her anonymous worker's suit didn't entirely spoil her figure.
‘Oh, I'm glad to see you, Karel!’ she said, holding her hands out to him.
He turned away, swallowed, but composure was far away.
The picture wall in his underground burrow seemed to absorb him; it was a holo of the South Seas, forested hillsides plunging down to warm waters and punctuated by the vivid exclamation marks of birds.
Still staring at the wall he asked, ‘Did you find her?’
Magrit became business-like.
‘Of course I did.
She was hanging around with a bunch of amateurs in Hell.
Some woman tried to poach her but she seems to have got clear of that on her own.
By the looks of it she has all the potential you foresaw.’
‘So where is she now?’
‘Um…
I don't know.’
Karel whirled on her, furious.
‘What do you mean, you don't know?’
‘I mean,’ Magrit said apologetically, ‘that we caught up with her at the ice-cliffs just beyond the perimeter.
Only before we could get a team out to intercept them she disappeared.’
‘What do you mean she disappeared?’
It was a measure of his upset that Karel didn't even notice he was repeating himself.
His grandmother's training seemed to have deserted him.
‘I'm sorry, but somebody else got there first.
We found a spider but there wasn't a trace of her.’
‘Well, don't just stand there!
Go find her!
Jezrael Brown is mine.
My personal adaptation.’
‘Of course.
At once.’
When her hand reached to palm the door-switch he said, ‘And don't forget.
The local workers aren't supposed to know about any of this.
Not even her alteration.
So we can't keep her here anyway.
Assuming you do find her.’
5
When Jezrael woke, the world was blue — and it hurt.
Frighteningly, the whole fabric of her being was distorted into shades of midnight and lightnings of pain sheathed every nerve in her body.
Even the weight of agony in her head was blue.
I'm back inside the bluetree.
Jezrael clutched at the panicky thought even though it was obvious she was not.
The low, primeval scent of living plant was absent.
No sharp notes of sappy odours textured the blue air.
There was no inhuman obscene caress, no acid caking on her flesh.
The clammy feel of slime on fabric was gone.
She was naked, and inanimate textiles lapped her skin.
She opened her eyes again, not remembering closing them to shut out the blueness, but it was still there and her mind was spiked with pain.
Air of azure, her hands sapphire; a thousand tiny nibblings of alien awareness pecked at her intellect like so many starving bluebirds.
Hiding inside her head, Jezrael refused to accept the world of blue.
She hunted for memories: the rose and umber reefs of Mars lapped with Antarctic snowfields.
But it was all hazed over in endless mists of blue.
There was her shadow, stone-chip held high to slash into the spread sheet of the bluetree to steal back her precious oxygen, with carmine and frostwhite hemming her vision.
Now all of it overlaid with azure and hyacinth, however hard she squeezed her eyelids shut.
Hadn't there been a man's voice: ‘I am deliverance’?
Then he shot me ….
A voice (realtime.
Sharp as sunlight on zircon was time-sense  that she had never known before.
Exactly seventeen point three hours had passed since he —) said, ‘How you doin'?’
Waves of data seethed in at her filtered through recognition systems that had never been hers.
In emotions that were not her own, waves had a liquid pounding substance to them culled from the beaches of Earth's Pacific Ocean.
The voice was sun-warm, rough smoothed down a notch with sympathy; the accent had a home: Santos Angeles.
He had been cooking because beef-flavoured steam droplets fell into the air around him in the fractional gravity of Mars, and mingled with the tiniest hint of sweat on his fingers were  odoriferous particles of fresh garlic.
He smelt clean, of soap and shampoo.
It wasn't the same voice.
And she hadn't even opened her eyes yet.
He let the seconds slide between them, freighted with gentle sounds.
Enmeshed with her jagged, nervous breathing was his own strong rhythm of peace that climbed inside her autonomic systems to calm her though the pain stayed.
He said, ‘I can hear you're awake.
I guess you're wondering why the blues have got you.’
(Did she hear the muscles of his face slip into a smile?)
‘Don't be scared.
I'm not gonna let anyone hurt you.’
Jezrael fluttered her eyelids to see him but the blue light still opaqued her vision.
All he was was a silhouette that was another density of blue.
She slammed her eyes shut again.
‘You're safe, honey.
And you know you're not in the bluetree.’
(Was that the noise of other people out on the fringes of unknown perceptions?)
His voice was a husky purr of reassurance and the shapes of it in her head deepened to an indigo rock of security that she knew, without knowing how, was going to guard her.
She heard the sluff of soft plastic clothing; she tensed but there was no threat.
Down by her feet the mattress tilted and steadied beneath his solid weight but he made no move to touch her.
‘I seen you dance one time.
Your body was like fire and you painted the freedom of Hell.
I seen the love you wanted and it renewed me.
I'd forgotten all that.
You lifted me up, Jezrael Brown, and I'm gonna do the same for you.
But I'll never touch you less'n you want it or you're hurt.
Because you gave me back to myself.
If I kilt you, I'd be killing me.’
She heard a smile reshape the resonance of his mouth.
‘And I guess your head feels so bad you think you're pretty close to dying right now anyway.
But you're not.
I promise you, you're not.
You'll be OK.
I won't let a one of them touch you again.’
He let his voice drift away and her mind wandered, roaming the cool empty spaces between the homes of Witwaterstrand.
Shining beads of silver and jet looped in the sunlight of space — but now they were blue diamonds on cobalt.
Her breathing quickstepped.
‘I'm going to hold your hand now, if that's all right with you.
But don't worry.
The blueness goes away in a day or two.
No.
I won't lie to you.
It takes more than a few days but it goes again, just about.
I promise you that.
Only maybe you'd like a little reassurance right about now.’
She felt the warmth of his hand over hers before he touched her.
She flinched but didn't move her arm away and the wash of colour behind her clenched eyelids shifted a tone or two down the fifth arc of the spectrum.
Fingers, warm and strong, skithered over the back of her left hand.
Sitting there, stroking her, the ball of his thumb soothing over and over but never so long in one place that he made her hand sore, he let his voice caress her into sleep whose dream-depths crushed her in peacock and navy.
Still the blueness when she groped back towards consciousness, but different now, as though the first time had just been her mind trying its new colours out.
This time when he came back in to see her, the air was darkest around his form, but when he grinned over the noise of the men in the room behind the door — a woman's laugh punctured the air beyond — and he sat down peaceably at  the foot of her bed, the blue paled to a translucence like a robin's egg.
Was it vision-ghosts or was there really a cascade of glass-clear strands around his head, rooted in a graceful sapphire stem?
‘Hi,’ he said.
‘How you doin'?’
Jezrael raised her eyebrows in a facial shrug, gave a faint nod:I think I might live .
Her self-inventory wavered through lapis lazuli.
‘I'd imagine you've got one or two questions.’
His irony invited her approval and despite herself, Jezrael's lips quirked.
‘First, though, I guess you'd like something to drink.
OK?’
She nodded again, her throat feeling rusty and inhibited.
In a moment or two he was back with a warm bulb.
He perched beside her and held the plastic container.
She didn't have to move far; she took it and sucked.
It was good.
Tea and herbs and lemon to sharpen it, not too sweet but sweet enough to put some energy into her.
She looked directly at him.
His hair was a lighter blue than his skin — but still blue.
Slavic cheekbones caught the gentle light; one eyebrow was incomplete but the other was angled like a circumflex.
It gave his features a curiously innocent air.
There were laugh-lines around his mouth and eyes, and he seemed indefinably weary.
The skin under his midnight eyes was shadowed but he seemed wholesome, somehow.
Fresh, though he couldn't have been less than thirty and Jezrael was still young enough to think that was old.
With his pointed chin, he might have been an elf out of story-land.
Mind-picture: her mother, towering from a toddler's perception, changing the story-cube for her daughters.
WHERE'S CHES ?
She husked, ‘Are you deliverance?’
He smiled.
‘Good one.
Makes a change from ‘Where am I?’
You want to sit up?’
Jezrael nodded.
He lifted her, tender-clumsy, keeping the shiny covers chastely up to her shoulders.
A mechanical whine and the  mattress inflated behind her back.
(Another memory: the mattress changing shape while she slept so she didn't need to move .
And panic:How can I remember what happened while I was asleep ?)
She sucked again from the tea-bulb, feeling its plastic smoothness dent as it emptied, knowing it came from a floating colony like she did but not knowing why it should be used on a steady-gravity planet like Mars.
On the point of framing the words ‘Am I on Mars?’ she stopped, because she knew (How?
God help me, how do I know ?) that he was just going to tell her.
‘You're still on Mars.
Less than a hundred klicks from Spiderglass Southern, out on the ice-desert.
You're underground, in a hunters’ burrow.
I guess you'd think of us more as wildcat miners, but we follow the bluetrees, among other things, to lead us to whatever we're prospecting.
And when you went back to the bluetree for your air-can, Rod prospected you.
I guess he's the one who told you he was deliverance?’
Jezrael nodded, then wished she hadn't.
‘Nothing I could do about it, Jezrael.
I wasn't even here when he brought you in.
They'd already started towering you.’
He slipped one hand forward to restrain hers even before she'd started to lift panicked fingers to her scalp.
‘Don't touch it — it'd hurt even worse.’
Jezrael looked at him groggily, comprehension bringing fear.
‘Yes, you're a tower.
But not like the ones at Mars-U, or in Spiderglass.
There's different sorts, see.
What you've got, you've got imminence.
You've got all your other senses, sharpened up nicely.
But you've got imminence as well.
So've I. See?’
He turned his head a little and she saw the blue glass flowering from his skull, its silken stamens drooping elegantly as he moved.
‘We know what people are gonna do before they do it, so maybe Rod was right and he has brought you deliverance, though he didn't mean it for you.
‘Anyways, I know that you still wanna ask 'bout a  thousand other questions — don't need imminence for that — but you need to use the facilities while I'm here, and then I got to go hunting to keep the guys off my case.’
She began to slide her feet off the bed, then stopped.
‘I —’
‘I know.
You come from a modesty culture.
Work ethic, and all that.
Here, lemme tuck that in for you.’
And he wrapped the end of the spun-metal blanket around her back like a sarong.
The gesture was both intimate and impersonal and it reminded her of Maggie's physical friendship that never grew into love.
The facilities were a tank in the corner, the top removed as a concession to feminine geometry.
He left her by it, that smile in his voice again inviting her to share his levity.
‘Back in a minute.
Don't go ‘way now.’
Because where could she go?
Emptied, washed — now she smelt the same soap on herself with her own feminine tang underneath — she hobbled back to the island of safe territory that her bed had come to represent.
And waited, tired out from the effort,(raised voices outside, muffled by the plastic curtains of the door), until he came back in with another bulb.
This time he didn't sit down.
From the precise speed of his movements she could tell he was in a hurry.
Spurs of deep blue light crowned his head, weaving in some restless pattern like speech that she had never learned to comprehend.
‘Better now?’ he asked.
‘Have some of this.
You'll be out swinging a tiger by the tail in no time.’
He was already by the door when she managed a belated  thank you .
Looking over his shoulder,(his tower gleamed, fronds dancing), he grinned.
‘No problem.
My name's Ember, by the way.
Was I you, I'd stay tucked up in bed.
See you around.’
Jezrael let her aching body melt back on the mattress.
Ants of knowledge were pick-pick-picking at her brain, fighting their way in, and she had no defences against  them, but the data they brought were swirled and fragmented pixels that frightened her with their strangeness.
One thing she did know, she was not going to attract the attention of the men out there beyond the panels of the door.
Whatever else he had left her, Ember (the name was oddly freighted with inferences of his mass, his power, the clean safe smell of him) had let her know indirectly that they were a threat.
Still the deluge, the patter, the trickle of endless blue facts in a world whose colours she didn't understand.
Over and over again she shifted restlessly, the long nerves along her spine protesting, but she couldn't drive the alien thoughts away whatever she did.
Finally, in a movement of panic that was her body's scream, she dragged up her leaden hands to smash the invaders from her head.
One hand collided with the glassy tower that spiked into her brain.
A storm of pain ripped through her like the indigo fingers of a tornado and carried her out on to a midnight sea.
First, she could walk to the facilities in the silence of her empty room.
When Ember was away, no-one came to see her, though sometimes she could hear them arguing outside.
She thought maybe they were arguing about her.
One time the memory of Antoine came to her, his heavy body lolling and dying in her arms.
But hadn't he thought that Spiderglass would save him somehow, plug him in to the endless dance of electrons?
All that day Jezrael was in a fever of impatience for Ember to come back.
Late that night, she greeted him with, ‘What happened to Antoine?’
‘Explain.’
When Ember had heard her out, blue fire gelled into sapphire around him.
‘I guess Spiderglass got him.
If I can get away, I'll go look for him, OK?
But I can't promise.
I'm not exactly flavour of the month right now.
Where was it anyhow?’
Old impotence rushed up in her.
‘I don't know!’
Then a sudden thought came to her.
‘Wait a minute.
Yes, I do.’
And, frighteningly, her night-run through the reef-cut snowfields replayed in blue inside her mind.
Where did that come from ?
Ember accepted it as normal.
‘If he's there, Jez, I'll find him.’
But three days later when he managed to get away without anyone suspecting his real purpose in skimming down south, and Jezrael lay weakly fretting until he got back, Ember could only whisper, ‘The Company must have got him.
They didn't leave anybody behind.’
‘Couldn't it have been Maggie?’
When he said too readily, ‘Yeah, could be,’ she knew the blue haze of his need to reassure her, and wished she could believe him.
Then she could dress herself — though Ember was right: the others laughed at her for wearing clothes in the burrow, even the other two or three towers, and their mockery made her retreat in teenage confusion when she walked shyly into the crowded common-room.
After that, she stayed isolated behind her plastic doors until the day-shift cleared the common-room outside.
Only Ember cared enough to come and talk to her; from what he told her of the others, both the towered and the plain, she was glad.
There came a time when he doubled back after the others had gone on the trail taking their cyan hardness with them.
Jezrael was pacing up and down her room in the emotional protection of her old innersuit.
There was nothing else to do; on her prowls through the empty burrow she'd already viewed the geology cubes and there was nothing else but tasteless pornography.
Sometimes she wondered if Ember watched those too, but she'd never ask.
It just wasn't something she could do.
Lecky, the cook, was singing off-key in the kitchen; he was lewd as an octopus but no trouble if she stayed out of sight.
He had no short-term memory, which made for some strange dishes but it kept her safe from him.
Mainly she was bored, but she knew she hadn't the strength to get away on her own.
Yet.
So she walked to limber her muscles.
Each step was a step closer to running away.
Ember wouldn't even tell her what from, but she could sense through the flux of data that came from her paling blue awareness that the others had something planned for her, something that she didn't want.
Some obscure threat needled her; Jezrael couldn't stop worrying at it but it never burst into knowledge.
So, oppressed by the sullen silence beyond her territory, Jezrael walked around the obstacles in her room: five paces along, four across, five along
She started when Ember slid through her rattling door-panels one empty forenoon.
‘What are you doing here?’ she gasped.
‘I thought you were out with the others.’
He hushed her.
‘Time we started training you,’ he whispered.
‘The teams are all out — got a big strike maybe.
I came back for you.
Nobody here but Khor and he's dead drunk.’
‘And Lecky.’
‘He don't count.
C'mon, will you?’ and he gave her a hand suiting up against the outside cold.
‘Are we escaping?’
Ember stopped fastening the seals on her utility-webbing.
Suppressed tensions were unreadable in his face; all around his head, a flickering crown that also veiled his eyes, blue lightnings wreathed and knotted.
‘Of course not,’ he told her.
‘I can't just let you go.’
Depressed, she finished adjusting her protective lenses and trailed after him, still smearing insulating oil over her face.
Above ground, walls of harsh bright air smacked into her, sending her off-balance.
She knew Ember's hand would steady her elbow before it did.
And the solid indigo of his intention shocked her.
Because, so gradually that she hadn't noticed it, the  blue had faded from her sight.
The frozen tide of rock was russet spumed with amber and sparkled with snow in the antarctic summer light.
So the sudden lightning-spark of indigo that jumped from him even as the thought crystallized in his head struck Jezrael with an intensity that shook her.
‘You OK?’ asked Ember, and his hair was a dark untidy blond whipping from under his pointed hood.
Jezrael said, ‘Yeah.
It was just —’ She turned to face him more fully, curious now to see him in technicolour.
The skin of his face was weathered to an even, ruddy tan, not dark.
And not blue.
His eyes were Celanese, almond-shaped, liquid brown with tiny thread-veins, and fringed by black lashes that were almost feminine in their length.
‘I know.
You saw my intention, right?
That's imminence.
That's why they planted the spiderglass in you, see.
That way you know where danger's coming from before it hits you.’
She tried to edge in a protest but Ember talked fast to forestall her.
‘See, Jez, there's not so many people even here on Mars who can do it right.
And the one they got to fix you, he did it real good.
No infection, no personality warp.
Khor, he said it was some guy they know in Spiderglass itself — you know, they pay him and he sneaks out and does it right here.
I only saw him when he was leaving.
Real tall guy he was, looked meaner'n a junk-yard dog.
He don't have no tower himself, but Khor said he had like some socket on his finger, just plugs it in to some surgery-box and the machine fixes you up real good.
And when he'd finished, he sticks them for another two hundred credits — danger money.’
Ember laughed.
‘He works for Spiderglass and asks for danger-money!’
‘What was his name?’
‘Karl, I think he said.
But I wouldn't go too much on that.
You think he's gonna advertise?’
Jezrael filed the information in her mind anyway: Karl, Spiderglass.
Maybe he was the one who'd fixed her sister.
She walked away a step or two into the frost-sharp wind, then spun back into the lee of the burrow-mouth to face  Ember.
She was heavily aware of the point on her own hood that matched his.
It was how their towers were protected.
‘Look, Ember, I don't like this.
I didn't ask for any of it.
You seem like a nice guy.
Can't you just take me back to the life your friends stole me from?’
Again she saw blue, paler, more transparent, stringing out from him and knew he meant to touch her in reassurance but didn't know if he should.
Hunched against the sub-zero air, she watched his hand begin its journey but she ducked backwards and his gesture died into azure.
His lips quirked but didn't quite achieve a grin.
Ember seemed almost embarrassed as he said, ‘One, you can never go back.
Even if you did, it wouldn't be the same.
And the only guys who might even attempt to take your tower out are the same kind of ones who fixed Alex.
Is that who you want walking around in your brain?’
She remembered Alex's petrified, ulcerating eyeball.
‘No!’ she shouted.
‘And I don't want this bloody thing in my head either.
What right have you got —’
‘I didn't do it, OK?
But you're stuck with it, and I'm stuck with it and there's nothing either of us can do about it.
Get used to it, Jez.
This is the shape of your world now.’
‘I don't want to get used to it!’
Ember just looked at her with his beautiful eyes; a dozen forget-me-not threads of intent died on the cold wind around him.
Embarrassment grew in her.
‘I know, I know.
I'm sorry.
I sound just like a kid.
It's just —’
He nodded in sympathy.
‘Yeah.
They bought me three years ago when I got dropped out of Mars-U before my geology finals.
I didn't like it much either, but it gets better.
Really.’
The walls of the tunnel-mouth were dark, restricting the pale rose madder of the sky.
Jezrael felt hemmed in; her snow-suit felt heavy, the air-bottle on her bicep dragging at her as she sucked on it.
‘Can't you at least let me go?’
Ember shook his head.
‘No, Jez.
You think the guys'd let me?
I'm no match for seventeen other people.
Face it, will you?
It wouldn't be safe for either of us.
And while we're at it, you can't just slip unobtrusively into mainstream.
That tower isn't just gonna go away.
You seen the way even the guys here like Khaur and Danjit and Mijnheer — hell, all of 'em — don't take to us towers.
‘And before you ask, no, you can't saw it off either.
Believe me, I've tried.
Acid, everything.
That's a Spiderglass special.
The only thing that'll touch it is an arc-welder — and it's pretty conductive stuff too.
With one of these, ‘Go boil your head’ isn't funny.
Believe me — in a while you'd miss it if it wasn't there.
Hey, come back!’
For Jezrael was striding out under the pink-brown dome of the sky, knuckling away the tears that spilled out from her protective lenses.
Ember caught up with her and matched his pace to hers.
She walked faster.
He paced her.
Again she speeded up until she was almost running, then laughed at Ember's wry expression as the whole thing developed into a silly race.
‘All right.
Fine.
I give in,’ she yelled over the wind-scour.
‘So where do I go from here?’
Their boots crunching over the skim of snow, Ember began to teach her imminence.
‘You know what a wolf is, right?
Or a dog?’
One corner of her mouth pulled down in acceptance of the irrelevant.
‘Well, say you saw a wolf running at you, winter-lean, snapping.’
Jezrael trudged on.
‘This wolf — he's a big old fella, right?
You only got one shot left.
He stops out of range, hangs around a while to check you out, then he starts kind of sneakin' in.’
‘What's his name?’
‘Arthur.
What do you care?’
‘I just wondered.’
‘Well, wonder quietly.
I'm serious about this, Jez.
I can imagine there'll be one or two unhappy people if they find  out I've even taken you walkies let alone tried to help you plug the blueness into reality.
So shut up, OK?’
He looked across at her through the frost and rose of dawn.
Jezrael grimaced but kept on striding over the ice-desert towards the shattered Antarctic horizon.
Ember nodded.
‘Good girl.
So there's Arthur, yards of red tongue drippin' out of his slaverin' jaws, teeth the size of —’
‘Of big teeth.’
Ember clicked his tongue and rolled his eyes in exasperation.
‘Will you cut that out?’
‘What with?
Wolf-teeth?’
But she subsided.
‘OK.
Well, anyway, you see old Arthur there crouch down, muscles quivering.
His eyes are fixed on you and you know, you just know that he's about to spring.
Got it?’
‘Ah-huh.’
‘So how do you know he's gonna spring?’
Surprised, it took her a moment to find something to say.
‘Because you told me.’
But underneath her smart-alec answer she could see a mental picture of the wolf.
Jezrael swung herself breathless over a bar of rock and down into the wind-shadow of a huge erratic that faced the sharp-cut sunrise.
‘Because he's all tensed up.
He just looks like he's going to spring.’
Ember squatted, patting the ground beside him.
The gleam of insulating oil shone bright on the prominences of his face, dimming and brightening again as she moved past him to hunker down at his side.
Ahead, the low morning sun kissed an ice-cliff and a spindrift of snow scarfed brilliantly in a slow-motion avalanche.
‘That's right.
You can tell what old Arthur's gonna do by his stance, the way he moves his muscles.
Trick is, to know just when and how he's gonna move so you can kill him before he kills you.
And that's why we got imminence.
That and a lot of other stuff.’
‘Wouldn't it be easier just to stay away from wolves?
I mean, there aren't actually that many out where I come from.’
Ember ignored her sarcasm.
Absently he squeezed  more insulating oil on to his fingers and passed the tube to Jezrael.
She watched the play of sinews and veins over the backs of his hands as he massaged the cream in.
Somehow, when she did the same, there seemed to be bits of grit scratching her uncomfortably.
‘Doesn't matter, Jez, whether it's a wolf or an animal that's a lot more dangerous.
A man.
A man, now, he can lay a trap with words, or press a button in his desk and shoot you where you stand.
And that's what we got imminence for — but you can use it for a lot more than that.
It's fun, Jez, once you get the hang of it.
You ever jam with your dancing?’
‘Sure.’
‘You ever get it totally screwed up so it comes out like shrieks and coloured vomit?’
‘You mean there's another way?’
Her flippancy helped her distance the odd reality of the blue that wove through her vision.
But under her assumed indifference she felt interest sparking into life.
‘Think of this, then.
You want to see imminents laser-dance.
Up to now you always done solos, at least that I seen.
And you didn't even notice me though I must have come five or six times.
But think what you could do with an imminent!
You paint a picture like that Mars now I saw you do one time, empty with loneliness.
But if you had an imminent on your side you could have had the ache of the wind and rain crying down from the clouds.’
‘I didn't want all that.
I just wanted the loneliness.’
‘Is that all dancing is to you?
A way of jerking off?
Don't you know how to be with someone else?
Don't you ever want to paint a different picture?’
‘I don't know how!’ she shouted and rose to her feet to get away from him but he twisted there before her, his hands on her shoulders and his brown-black eyes blazing down into hers.
‘Jez, you ever think what loneliness is if you go turning down offers of friendship?
I mean, is that loneliness or is it just some arty pose?’
Before she could pull away from him he jerked loose his  grip and started back the way they'd come.
Not knowing what else to do (though now, suddenly, there was an awareness in her of where the burrow lay, point nine of a klick to the south-south-east, and the trail unscrolled before her taking forty-seven metric minutes at the pace they'd come), Jezrael drifted along behind his back.
All the way to the burrow he didn't speak to her nor wait if she got snagged.
Ember moved with an ease that soon took him out of sight among the frost-clawed rocks and left her panting, furious with him but unable to catch up to say a single one of the angry remarks cartwheeling through her mind.
Her fury faded, leaving her bereft.
She kicked a spurt of gravel moodily.
Jezrael felt full of sorrow but soon it was eclipsed by the memory of dancing with Maggie, giggling like kids when their picture-harmonics clashed.
And that would never happen again.
Now even Eiker wouldn't say she couldn't keep up with him — having seen the speed of Ember's reactions, she knew that imminence was sharper than studs.
And it was another Jezrael that Eiker had left behind in Witwaterstrand in shreds.
Ahead, Ember turned into the tunnel-mouth, not even looking over his shoulder.
And the way he tells it, it's not even his fault !
He wouldn't talk to her now.
Lashing out at him that way she'd cut off all information about who and what she'd become, and why.
No.
Not all information.
Because the air around her crackled with it, temperature, oxy-content, the very flavour of the rocks.
Her own confused purposes shimmered in blue at the edge of her vision.
She had lost herself.
Even if I do get away from here, what the hell am I going to do ?
Loneliness of a different flavour bit into her.
6
For days Chesarynth closed herself inside her mind.
She would never commingle with Friend again.
Instead she lay listlessly on her bed, rejecting the box with its magic socket when the nurse wheeled it over.
Or at least, that was the tragi-romantic picture Chesarynth had fluffed up in her mind.
It didn't work that way at all.
For one thing, it was boring, just lying there doing nothing.
Behind her eyelids hung retinal afterfires of the meanings' beauty.
She couldn't ignore their entrancement.
When her mind's eye tired of the ghosts of memory, her gaze skipped above her bed to the ethereal mobiles whose charm was always changing.
And when the nurse slid a cube into the player on the wall, Ches couldn't help but be sucked into the story.
It bespoke action, not passivity; its companionship was better than solitary brooding.
When it finished, there was lunch and music: all her favourite foods calling her with their rich odours of spiced meats and pasta.
Handel's music showed her a silver trout gliding through a sun-splashed river in the mountains.
And a tall, slim glass of passion-fruit juice reminded her of Jez.
Then nostalgia for her sister was a warm memory flying across her mind.
She pictured Jezrael back home after a shift at Nutristem, laughing and ranting over some petty injustice, wry with self-mockery, a crusader with no shield but a vivacity she couldn't even see.
No doubt Spiderglass had sent her parents some message of reassuring platitudes.
None of them, not even Jez, would be worrying about her.
She wished she could  go back in time, to when she and Jezrael had shared a room and secrets after Mom put the lights out.
She wished she could tell Jezrael about
Friend ? she whispered to herself, and grieved that there was no answer.
Because the horror of the garden-master puppet belonged mostly to someone else now, to the person she had been before she saw that meanings were the most important thing in the worlds.
And somehow the regret in Friend's banner of meanings cancelled out the bitter mould-taste of failure that the garden-master had cultured inside her.
They wheeled the magic machine over by her bed and though she willed herself to keep up her pose and reject their plain black box, the astral song of meanings drew Chesarynth's finger to the socket.
She jacked in before the nurse had time to say a word.
The dark galaxy spiralled around her, each constellation pricked out in delicate shades of fragrance.
She melded into it, observing her own flight of colours.
Only a handful of her shades had deepened despite her urge to grieve.
And though she half hoped that Friend would wheel alongside her so that she could ignore him, he didn't appear.
But what he had left her was the key to untangling the harmony of dancing lights and that let her in to a place which like a child she had always stared at unknowing before.
The universe inside her mind exploded her out from its centre of I and other beings poured into her so that she knew their inner selves.
The history of Spiderglass began in flesh and blood, but even more in physical minds.
She saw the first researchers, long-dead now but their essence still lived, frozen in the flow of electrons.
She could not communicate with their static sky-fires but she watched/felt/learned of the realities of Spiderglass on the Earth of a century before, back when industry meant manufacture or service and didn't encompass its environments or political power.
For the tensile strength of monofilament spun by arachnids was the key.
Modify the arachnids , said the  researchers.
Change their bodies and conditions, and you could get fibres like glass, still monofilament, but with logarithmic progressions of possibilities of strength and flexibility, and the ability to resonate light-particles or sound-waves undistorted, scarcely weakened over thousands of miles.
Who said the arachnids had to be totally organic?
Who said their glassy strands should be wholly of what was called silk?
Alter gravity and you could lose the limitations of size.
A single thread that could tower to the silver eye of the moon — if you could convince the spider of its need to do it .
And Per Tjerssen, the founder, had impoverished his life, his family, until his Spiderglass Company put out the first shoots towards immortality.
Because spiderglass now webbed the Solar System and reached out to the stars.
Company colonies stretched and mewled and grew.
Spiderglass could not die: a chain of spiderglass hubs girdled the orbit of Earth.
After Steel City and Crystal City came the Metropolis of Glass.
Moon-colonies, a fountain of star-frost asteroids, cities and lands from the tundra of Mars to the blooming deserts of Earth: Spiderglass.
Per Tjerssen: there was awe of him in the flock of bubble-gleams that were the meanings of his name.
A scent like the roots of an oak in autumn, hard, but contaminated with the spores of fungi in the mouldering of ochre leaves that fell, layer upon layer, where branches of the Company still leached its old power to spread ever wider….
And underneath its weight (were the meanings tinged with suffocation not meant for anyone to see?) were the nepotistic directors back-stabbing for power.
Ole Tjerssen.
Theresien.
A score of names she couldn't afterwards recall.
Killing each other with the ruby of poisoned wine.
Discrediting their enemies, watching their friends.
Beneath them were the workers.
(A sound like the mindless drone of bees; the sound whispered to Chesarynth and she strained her perceptions to hear its subtext:like bees they'll sting unless you sate them with  security and dull the thoughts from their minds .)
Below even that, the gentle longing of the spiders to spin to the ends of the worlds, forever doomed to frustration.
Chesarynth wanted to comfort them.
Later, real-time, in the depths of her self-abnegation, she didn't connect that with the doctor's brisk statement on her round.
‘We've made excellent progress, haven't we?
You're fit for duties.
Be ready after lunch.’
Spiderglass treated her well on the trip to the spiders of Earth but that was no compensation for ripping her out of her own charmed cocoon.
Chesarynth asked, ‘Will I still be able to —’ and floundered.
How close she'd come to betraying the warm brilliance of the meanings!
Careful ! she warned herself while the nurse watched her curiously, trying to guess what she meant.
If I tell them, they'll take the meanings away .
Chesarynth gritted her teeth, her lips clamped on half-formed phrases that would give the game away, knowing she wasn't good enough to deserve the shining wonder the meanings sang inside her.
The nurse grew impatient.
Chesarynth couldn't help but be aware of it.
How long had she and Jezrael observed their parents to forestall their anger?
So even without intending to the nurse could not help but give out signals Chesarynth could read: the heavier exhalation, the pale tightness round the lips.
Hastily (so she didn't annoy the nurse more and drive the box of infinity quickly out of reach), Chesarynth stuttered, ‘Will I — will you be sending the black machine with me?’
The nurse raised her eyebrows in adult surprise at such a childish worry.
‘Of course not.
We'll be needing it here.
Now hurry up, will you?
We've got a lot to do if you're going to make the shuttle.’
The royal ‘we’ of the medical profession.
Chesarynth didn't miss the impersonal attentions of the technician and the nurse, but the magic box stayed firmly where it was in the suite in the house on the ‘dark’ side of  the moon.
However pleased she was to revel in the shimmersilk robes of garnet and lavender, their perfumed delight was as insubstantial as light through caramel compared with the security of the only place the fresh-born Chesarynth knew — and the gateway to the starscape of meanings called through the tides of her blood.
Mars was merely a sad story that somebody else had told her, but leaving the meanings was worse than unrequited love.
Not even her nervousness about travelling on her own could make that go away.
At least she could revel in the bright meanings in which Friend had painted her, had accepted her.
First there was the curving trip in a white car that rocked through the mag-lev tunnels to the spaceport.
All alone on the snowy contour-couch, she clung to the thought that she was going to comfort the spiders; to twine the jewelled rain of her meanings through the web of their unfulfilment.
So there has to be another black box, doesn't there?
Please?
Or how can I look after the poor things?
Chesarynth tried to swamp the thought that the box might be only a therapist's tool.
I'm supposed to be cured but now I'm an addict as well as a failure ….
And who is Friend anyway?
What if he's not real?
An idea she couldn't accept.
She veered from it, remembering the human warmth of him.
He — he wouldn't leave me in meaningless dark forever.
He's not that cruel .
Is he?
He said he made the — the garden-master.
Only I got angry with him and he didn't come back.
What have I done?
She tried to cling to her comforting belief that somewhere in the Company was Friend with all that his glow of meanings implied; the feel of him was still clear in her mind.
Out there I'll find him .
The desire for his total understanding was the bright song of a chanticleer to greet the longed-for dawn; she had no idea that the longing had been seeded amongst the far-flung auroras of the meanings he had programmed into her magic box.
It was a  hearth to comfort her, a homeland up ahead beyond the lonely journey in the tunnels of claustrophobia beneath the surface of the Moon.
The white carriage swayed, slowing.
Other cars shot out of side-tunnels, frightening her with their suddenness.
Abruptly, signs for the Earth-terminal glowed red.
The speed of her car was still so great that it took Chesarynth a while to realize the signs weren't complete.
In fact they were partial letters of rubescent neon repeated over and over again that blinked past too quickly to separate each one from the next fragment.
They blended together to form one flowing alert.
Never quite stationary, the mag-lev decanted her on a windy platform and whined away into the cavernous tunnel.
Above her, the vault seemed so high it should have had rag-clouds like Mars, but it was unearthly white.
Everything they had given her (except the finger-plug that jacked her into infinity) fitted into one bag that didn't seem to belong to her.
Chesarynth gripped it convulsively at the strange sight of people milling around.
It had been so long since she'd seen so many people all at once.
I mustn't miss my flight!
Feeling small and insignificant, Chesarynth summoned up the courage to move.
The skirt of her lavender robe flew trickwise round her legs, fielding her first step before she could quite make it.
She almost fell, almost flew.
She stood a moment, collecting herself, and a thought coalesced like the red signs had:I'm a baggy now !
Fringing this stunning awareness came the long-forgotten knowledge of status.
In the seconds when Chesarynth was coming to realize that she actually mattered, another white car distorted the draughts with its brake-force.
Someone else was blown out by the cool-warm gale, tottering into her as the car howled away.
Is it Friend ? thought Chesarynth, sure that something about him would give himself away.
But from the tall, hawk-faced man beside her came nothing of the subtle serenity she hoped for, only a sense of controlled power  that dispersed when he said prosaically, ‘I'm sorry, did I kick your ankle?
It's the wind in here.’
‘It's OK.
Excuse me, do you know which is the way for Earth?’
Already half a stride ahead of her, he threw the words over his shoulder.
‘Up the roll-ramp and keep left.
You can't miss it.’
She followed him, buffeted by the gale of other cars arriving, but she couldn't walk that fast in her new-won skirts.
The tall dark-faced man seemed to have no problem managing his robes, though his haste didn't do him much good.
He was still at the barriers that funnelled the mob into a line under the cynical eyes of a guard when she struggled up behind him.
Waiting her turn, trying not to feel overwhelmed by the noise in the bustling concourse, Chesarynth watched how long it took each person ahead of her.
For each one the clerk jacked in to his unit to check their ID and match it to their personalized ticket.
‘That's progress,’ said a fat man behind her to a child.
‘Everything takes twice as long now they got so much data on the computers.’
Chesarynth shuffled forward a place as the serpent line moved up.
She reckoned it must take all of eight or nine metric minutes per person.
That meant maybe point six-four of an hour.
Only the hawk-faced man ahead of her just sidestepped the line.
He waved his ID and smiled and the clerk didn't even jack in to check it.
The woman guard almost fell over herself dropping the barrier-field to let the guy through.
Chesarynth followed him visually until his white robes disappeared into the VIP lounge.
She wondered who he was to have so much power.
That still meant she had fifty-six metric minutes to wait until they scrutinized her ticket-chip.
But what would happen once she got to Earth she had no idea.
7
A pinwheel of impressions: the crowded shuttle with a curry-scented woman overflowing the seat beside her; the drag of acceleration and the ponderous fall to Earth, heart-stopping jolts as atmosphere tricked the craft.
The tedium of disembarkation while she booted her carry-sac in a full one-gee through the murmurous shuffle to Customs.
Something about the air smelt different.
Dense with non-mechanical smells.
Unknown.
And over all hummed and shimmered the warring coloured adverts for Spiderglass and Madreidetic and Usines du Rhône with a dozen others belting out music and olfacts that dizzied her to nausea.
Someone around her — she couldn't see who in the dark forest of heads and frame-bags — was talking a different language.
Unease stretched out in Chesarynth's body; a pulse beat in the side of her head.
‘Have a nice stay,’ said the customs official, but it wasn't to her.
What am I supposed to do now ? she panicked in the vast, echoing hall.
Where am I supposed to go ?
‘Ms Brown Chesarynth?’
She spun to find a little bald woman — Chesarynth's mind seized upon the woman's finger-socket as though it were the badge of some sisterhood — and said, ‘Yes.’
Satisfied but not human enough to be a sister, the woman held up a tiny version of the black box.
Chesarynth felt conspicuous; people around were staring at them, but it was the first time in her weary day's travel that she had seen a box and it called to the echoes of  firesong that the one on the Moon had left in her mind.
A vertical lust shivered through her, connecting mind and viscera.
She couldn't help it.
All the centres of pleasure flared with longing and Chesarynth jacked in.
The hall winked out.
Instead, from the spangled endless night that dimmed the hall, meanings shone.
They were not the musk-and-amber subtleties of Friend.
Hard-edged, smelling distastefully of banknotes on snow, they sketched for her, faster than light, a helix of numbers.
The symbols had a tinge of feminine superiority, an aura of vast power that was taken for granted.
A neat dollop of anxiety cored the figure and stoppered it with a ridiculously short time-limit.
Hidden among its sunburst symbols was an obscure, sadistic pleasure.
Chesarynth was sure she wasn't supposed to see that.
The message disappeared leaving only the galaxy of her own thoughts in the infinite night of meanings.
Time-limit.
Anxiety.
A message I've got to work out.
Time-limit.
It's a test , she realized.
If I make a mess of it that woman is going to be so glad.
She doesn't want Friend to be right about me.
(Amazement: she doesn't like Friend.
She wants to prove him wrong so she can slap me down.
She hates even using the meanings the way he helped design them.
She can't hear beauty singing through them like I can!
She doesn't even know I can read her sub-text !)
Chesarynth wasted precious moments on amazement that she could appreciate something the powerful woman could not.
Echoes of Friend's admiration came back to her, explained now.
So that was why I had all those art lessons!
To teach me to perceive the shades of beauty and the shades of meaning ….
And the shaven-headed messenger was just that, a messenger.
The symbols didn't originate from her.
Time dissipated.
I've got to solve it or she'll just re-route me to some tedious filing-clerk's job!
I can't let Friend down after all his faith in me .
Quickly Chesarynth re-hung a memory of the helix in front of her mental gaze.
It was imperfect.
Its slight irregularity  could be either intentional or an accident due to the hard-edged woman's discomfort with the beads of meaning.
But it was all so obvious.
From the taint of sadism, the hint of superiority, the woman evidently wanted her to fail.
And the cryptic little message offered Chesarynth just enough information to do something —if only I can decide what.
Where am I supposed to go ?
Triumph: that was it.
It was clearly some sort of code.
Co-ordinates.
An address whose doors would be forever shut unless she got there soon.
With an artist's skill Chesarynth conceptualized the hard-edged grey-green symbols in different arrangements, in different colours and shapes.
Only one arrangement looked as though it belonged together:those two lines of dots and blanks, they must be binary numbers.
And that, then, all that must be the name of the strand.
The street, or whatever they call it here.
So if it's a name, and not a visual identification — no, doesn't look like anything I've ever seen — then if it's letters, it must be …
Hating to, Chesarynth still jacked out, leaving the meanings aglimmer in the prison of the magic box.
Suddenly the spaceport hall crowded in at her with light and noise and shadow.
The box itself was only a small black weight in the bald woman's arms.
‘Take me to’— Chesarynth fumbled with saying the words whose symbols had been so clear-'Kärtnerstrasse seventeen.
Director speed.’
And, wordless, the woman did.
The Company jet-copter dropped them off two blocks from the ancient heart of Vienna.
Even Spiderglass wouldn't risk damaging Austria's heritage with powered transport: the steep-gabled buildings were a source of revenue for the Company.
The grandmother of the present Tjerssen had been fully alive to the possibilities of tourism.
Or at least that was what the smooth-skulled guide said when Chesarynth asked why they couldn't land closer.
Untempered sun-heat weighed Chesarynth down as she  jumped from the copter.
A sky vast and cloudless blue magnified the immensity of the sun, a mother to the tiny star she'd known from Mars.
The patterned cobbles reflected its heat and the buildings bounced it back and forth.
Tourists smelt of sun-screen and beer; their clothes were garish but the worst thing was the haphazard barrier they formed to Chesarynth as she raced heavily through the dusty street.
They sauntered and stopped without warning and she had to duck and weave through their chattering bunches.
Some twentieth-century vandal had ripped out the latticed windows of number seventeen.
Plate glass, thicker at the bottom with the weight of decades, glittered; a display of diamonds and spider-gems refracted the sunshine with painful intensity.
Above the door the name Spiderglass was painted in spiky gold-leaf.
More opulent was the holo-sign with its fantasy of opal on quartz; baroque music stroked arpeggios on the air.
Even its perfumed olfacts smelt expensive.
Chesarynth remembered her first awe at the township of Ecoville.
Dwarfed by Vienna and time, it now seemed crude and static.
But she had no time for resurrecting memories, not if she was going to fulfil the promise Friend had built in her.
A surge of longing for meanings nova'd inside her and ebbed as suddenly, leaving her shaken.
When it dropped her back inside the moment, the external realities of Kärtnerstrasse seemed a pastiche of the Middle Ages.
The guide led her into the air-conditioned jewellery shop and held out the box to a sales assistant.
Jealousy jagged through Chesarynth as the girl jacked in.
At that moment she hated the bald guide with her one lock of blond hair curled in the hollow of her nape.
That's my box !
Jacking out, the saleswoman slid her finger into a socket behind the counter.
Three doors sprang into view; the guide led Chesarynth behind the display of savage gold and through the right-hand door.
As she stepped into the humming elevator, Chesarynth realized that the other  doors were holograms for security.
The excellence of their design meant an interloper would be slowed for a moment to decide which was the real one.
At the top of the building Chesarynth stepped out under a vaulting skylight.
The receptionist's desk was empty; a beam of raw sunlight gleamed on the patina of its age, leaving the chair behind it in darkness.
There was no sound from the double doors beyond it.
An eerie feeling of isolation wafted through her as she heard the unspeaking hairless guide slide the lift back downstairs.
She was alone.
Waiting.
Chesarynth rested at first from the relentless heat and gravity of Earth.
Her breathing slowed.
She began to wonder if the woman who had sent the box-message had tricked her here into this dead-end room.
Or did I get the answer wrong?
Don't tell me — it's my fault.
I've spoiled it all.
I'm not supposed to be here at all.
What have I done to Friend?
And, as time melted the sunbeam and dripped it moment by moment from the desk to the floor, Chesarynth had only her dubious belief in Friend to sustain her.
Because he had faith in her — she had seen it in the colours he painted her.
But Friend had made the garden-master.
So how reliable was his judgement?
And why would he make such a hideous puppet-thing?
How will I know if I'm in the right place?
There's nobody to tell me.
There were no answers.
Waiting was all she could do.
Except suddenly she thought of the receptionist who would normally be at that desk.
Doing things.
Jacked in to do things.
There must be a socket.
Chesarynth was across the room before she'd even finished the thought.
For a heart-constricting moment she wondered if somebody would catch her out.
But there was nobody.
And surely I'll hear the lift if it brings my inquisitor up ?
She knew it was a lie.
The trouble was, caution didn't matter.
Because there was the socket.
Round, gold-hooped, delectable.
Chesarynth walked away from it, stopping only when the chill metal doors of the lift were a smoothness under her innocent fingers.
What, me?
The socket was a siren-song.
She drifted closer.
Resolved not to do anything but wait like a good worker.
Still, she moved closer.
Leaning her back in a façade of patience against an ancient painted wall.
Part of her trying to look merely idle.
From here she could see the socket.
In the shadows its gold rim funnelled darkness through from the black night of meanings.
It was a connection.
A tingling fire of lust coursed from its counterpoint in her forefinger.
It was a clear silver flame that hollowed her with its hunger.
A pulse of desire burnt in the cavities of her body, beating as she imagined orgasm must.
I could just…
And she did.
Smooth as rainbows in oil the socket embraced her finger.
Lips apart, she remembered-anticipated the cool sweet darkness of infinity, longing for the magic gems of meaning that swept ionizing tides of fulfilment through her every cell.
But it didn't happen.
Instead there was nothing but a pale mist-shadow pearling between the surfaces of reality.
One fragment of her mind reeled in shock but a rational response formed even as the connection spun its thread:Of course.
It would be no good having a receptionist blacking out every time they jacked in .
(Pictures spun fractally through her mind: the clerks at the spaceports, the saleswoman in the treasure trove below.
They could never know the fire-opal of her meanings.
Her reason coloured the images with pity.)
In the micro-seconds that had passed, the connection achieved itself.
Chesarynth discovered her senses.
In this anaemic echo of her own box on the Moon, her body still had substance.
Nervous trembles ached in her legs and the  floor was vibrating fractionally with the movement of some train deep underground.
She could hear something whir and stop inside the reception desk, but most of all she could hear voices from the room behind the double doors.
The oscilloscope graph of both voices was flattened in the lower register: tension was restricting the movement of their vocal chords.
But the woman sounded calmer than the man.
(Wild hope:It's Friend !
Instantly dispelled.
Age creaked this man's throat.
She knew without seeing him:There's none of the vigour that glows in Friend ‘s pattern .)
In her disappointment Chesarynth missed what he had been saying.
The woman answered, ‘And I tell you it is dangerous, Berndt.
We can't have Karel planting his creatures willy-nilly through the Company, let alone giving them who knows what orders through his little black boxes.’
‘No, it's not likely he'd dare —’
The woman ignored his interruption.
‘It's one thing to have brain-dead clerks amplified to efficiency.
They're no more than extensions of their machines, hands to do the computer's will.
You can tell them to fire the building and they'll do it and watch themselves burn.
I know.’
Horror quavered the old man's voice.
‘You mean it was you who…’
‘Don't be such an old woman.
He was getting too powerful.’
‘But all those people —’
‘Spineless, aren't you?
Where would you be now if it weren't for me?
I just clipped his wings a little, that's all.
He'll be a little less adventurous for a while, and that gives us an advantage.’
A sigh.
‘Ole should never have given him Security.’
‘Ole thought, we both thought, the boy wouldn't be able to do any harm there.
It's not like he can make command decisions —’
‘It's just like he can make command decisions!
Yes, he holds the least votes on committee in Security.
So far, we've been able to keep him in check.
But he's not going  to just sit there for long.
Ole should have thought of that but he's too feeble for executive commands.
Think about it, Berndt: who makes the final selection for management?’
In her nacreous haze, Chesarynth was trying to puzzle out who the speakers were and what the boy Karel whoever he was — had done to raise such spikes of hatred in the old woman's tone.
The old man, Berndt, laboured to a conclusion.
Chesarynth could practically hear the elephantine tread of his thought processes.
‘Security.’
For the first time he came to a horrified acceptance of the woman's view.
It dragged down the timbre of his voice to a gruff murmur.
‘The boy.’
‘Yes, Berndt.’
Her irony was icicle sharp.
‘The boy.
Ole's harmless pet, Karel.
Not so harmless, is he?
Now do you see what I've been saying all along?’
There was a feeling of wordless assent, tinged with Berndt's growing apprehension.
Chesarynth sensed it and realized for the first time that what she was hearing was nothing but verbally-trimmed ideas.
Even worse was the knowledge that the whole conversation fitted her so ill because it was wrapped in the distinct flavours of a different language.
A kind of mechanical telepathy.
It must be because I'm not reacting to the socket like the receptionist would .
Her own horror burst out of its chrysalis.
If that woman's the sort who'll incinerate a whole building, what will she do to me when she finds out I've heard all this?
Christ, she won't dare let me live.
I ought to jack out now !
But if I'm going to work for these people — and what choice do I have?— I need all the forewarning I can get .
Chesarynth didn't jack out.
‘Kill her now!’ said the old man vehemently.
Chesarynth's stomach leapt with a spasm of fear.
She tried to control it, telling herself,Don't be so egocentric!
Why would someone I've never met want to kill me?
He must mean 
The old woman said derisively, ‘What would that accomplish?
Karel knows she's here.
Whatever else he is, he's not stupid.
He probably reprogrammed the courier I sent for her, insisted on a hidden message-box to record her arrival, the whole works.
It could even have been disguised in that box I sent.
Now I know the things work.
I just don't know how well.
Who knows what's inside that girl's mind?
We've got to decide now, before she realizes something's going on.’
(A lightning bolt of fear convulsed Chesarynth this time:They do mean me !)
The murderous old woman went on, ‘I know I would if I had that much invested in her.
We kill her and Karel will know we're on to him.’
‘Perfect, no?
He won't dare do anything!’
A long, pendant sigh.
‘Berndt, do try and use the brains you were born with.
If the boy knows we're alive to his threat, he'll just keep his schemes out of sight until it's too late for us to do anything about him.’
Chesarynth's mind reeled with a sudden intuition.
The boy, Karel?
Do they mean Friend ?
As suddenly, she rejected the idea.
What would some dangerous member of the board want with me?
It can't be Friend.
He's not like that.
They probably don't mean me at all.
I'm just being paranoid .
Berndt said, as though it were his incisive wit alone which had arrived at the nub, ‘The question is, what do we do with her in the meantime?
If the message you sent her was as cryptic as you said it was and she's still managed to get here, she's smart enough to be a danger to us.’
‘Oh, well done, Berndt!
Do you have to state the obvious?
Why else did you think I sent for you — to discuss the weather?’
The old man was angry now at her cavalier attitude.
(Chesarynth wondered in frustration why he never used the woman's name.
How am I going to find out ?)
‘If it's so obvious to you, dear,’ he said, trowelling on his own measure of irony, ‘I'll leave you to deal with it, shall I ?’
‘Sit down, Berndt, and don't be so childish.
I need you here because training's your bailiwick.
I just wanted you to be sure that she's dangerous to us.
A little accident during  her training, hey?
That way we'll have no full-sentients spreading Karel's childish revolution through our systems.’
‘Won't he suspect —’
‘Not if you're careful.
Remember, we're playing for control of the Company here.
If I go down, I'll take you with me.
No more jollies with little girls in Brazil until this mess is sorted out.’
And the vicious indifference of her nemesis impaled Chesarynth: ‘Deal with it, will you?’
Chesarynth jerked her finger out of the socket as though it were burning.
Two half-run strides took her to the only way out: the lift.
It didn't come when she slapped the call-stud.
Behind her, the double doors slid noiselessly open.
8
In the dark wind-tunnel of the burrow-mouth Jezrael pulled up short.
Her breath was laboured, the oxy-bottle moulded round her shoulder all but exhausted, but it wasn't that that made her back-pedal, twisting her heel on a rock, smothering her shout of pain.
She backed up out of sight, stone rough on her shoulders.
Mijnheer and Danjit had their blades at Ember's throat.
Peacock lines of probabilities crowned their harsh faces.
Mijnheer switched off his knifeblade and sent the haft spinning before Ember's eyes.
‘— done with her?’
‘Nothing!’ said Ember, twisting his neck to avoid Danjit's blue-sparked knife.
‘I was just showing her imminence.
She's got to know —’
‘We decided, huh?’ interrupted Danjit, his greasy, crinkled hair hiding no tower.
‘Having her fixed up is enough for delivery-specification.
Why waste time on her when you could be out making money?
Let them train her.’
Ember's gaze slid out of the corners of his eyes.
It was the only way he could see Mijnheer with Danjit's knife angling his head against the rocks.
But Danjit was only the hand that held the vibroblade.
Mijnheer was the man who counted.
‘Tell him, Mijnheer.
This way she'll be more valuable.’
 Mijnheer wasn't a tower either.
He stared down at Ember's glass-crested head dispassionately.
‘She'll be worth nothing at all if she runs out on us.
That's why we agreed not to train her.
We don't want to give our golden goose a head-start.
Everybody gets a cut, not just you and  your emotional wallowings.
Weren't you listening?’
The Dutchman nodded fractionally; Danjit pressed the tip of his vibrating blade into the pad of flesh beneath Ember's jaw.
‘Now, Salembere, what have you done with her?
Where is she?’
Blood slid darkly over Ember's skin.
The muscles of his straining throat trembled with the aftershocks of the vibroblade.
Medusa-threads of blue shaded away around him, concreting to the dense midnight of one single possible action: Ember told the truth.
‘I told you, she'll be along in a minute.’
‘She'd better be.
If you've let her get away from us, the only cut you'll get is with this.’
Again Mijnheer spoke; again at his Olympian nod Danjit slithered the knife against Ember's naked throat.
Danjit's Mars-tanned features smoothed in a sensual grimace of pleasure.
His tongue flicked out as if snake-like he could taste the scent of Ember's blood
‘Don't worry, boys.
You'll get your cut.’
Night-blue intention flared from Ember's head; even Jezrael, hidden behind the flank of the burrow-mouth, could sense the threat in that midnight lightning.
Answering spires of black-blue force speared from his attackers.
It didn't take imminence for Jezrael to know that violence was only skin-deep in each of the three men, hidden like lava, waiting to erupt.
Neither Mijnheer nor Danjit was a tower.
If they kill Ember there'll be no-one to protect me.
I can't get away yet — I need supplies and they'll be watching for me.
And I'm not strong enough.
If Ember'll teach me how to sort this God-blasted bluelight out, I'll be in a better position.
He owes me.
The computation of probabilities took Jezrael only seconds.
Where once she had dithered over choosing a suit for a new day at school, now imminence brought her fast to action — at least in the short term.
Even as self-disgust welled up in her like pus for using Ember, even as the jellyfish threads of azure darkening around her made her want to mewl in repulsion, she was stepping forward.
She wondered if the sapphire strands of her pretence at unconcern were legible to the miners, then kicked herself for her stupidity.
Of course they weren't.
Wasn't that one of the things straights had against towers?
On the other hand, who knew what weird senses they might have instead?
‘What's going on?’ she said, and hoped her thoughts were transparent to the point of invisibility.
Danjit reluctantly pulled the knife away.
It was the sullen withdrawal of an unsatisfied lover; she could see the blood-lust engorging his half-lidded eyes.
Tendrils of blue fire writhed above his head, indecipherable to her, but one thing she knew: at the slightest provocation Danjit would let his knife-love drink.
Ember twisted his head to ease the strain in his neck.
A smile dropped on Mijnheer's face from the blueness she could see around him.
It looked out of place.
‘We just thought Ember here was ripping us off.
We don't like that.’
A sheen of cyan tattered to azure around him; he had decided to do something but dropped the idea for some reason.
Instead the tall, black-browed Dutchman flicked his vibro-blade on and off so that the rocks behind it seemed to tremble into and out of existence.
He said, ‘Remember that next time you want to go for a stroll.’
Mijnheer sketched a mocking courtesy, indicating that she should go inside first.
Her back felt unprotected when she stepped past him.
Danjit stumbled forward so that for a moment she felt his lubricious body-thrust.
He laughed silently when she recoiled.
Now she knew the safety of her room was illusory; it was just that they couldn't be bothered with her.
Yet.
If they wanted her, they'd come and there was nothing she could do to stop it.
Jezrael still went there, staring at the walls of her prison.
Where else can I go ?
In a fragment of mirrored plastic glued above her bed —Whose was it before mine?
And after me ?— she saw reflections of her milling thoughts: truncated spurs of alien blue.
Sickened, the memory of violence unnerving her, her mind a traitor, Jezrael twisted her face in an attempt not  to cry.
Or at least, not to be caught crying.
The panels of her door crackled open.
Smearing her eyes on her sleeve she turned to face down her enemies.
But it wasn't an enemy — if she was lucky.
It was Ember.
And blood he had paid to teach her how to cope with imminence was crusting on his collar.
‘I'm sorry —’ they both said at the same time.
And laughed.
Jezrael asked in surprise, ‘What have you got to be sorry for?’
He shrugged, embarrassed.
‘Getting you into more trouble.
You were in enough to start with.
I just…’
‘I know.
You just wanted to teach me how to cope with this horrible bastard blue stuff that's invading my head.’
She was crying again.
‘Hey, c'mere.
Don't cry — I don't know what to do about that.
Makes me feel helpless.’
His arms slid about her in a brotherly embrace that she wanted to trust.
From the muffled, plastic-scented hollow of his shoulder, she said, ‘You?
You're about as helpless as a hurricane.’
But he wasn't in the mood for jokes.
It fell flat on the floor.
‘Listen, Jez.
In a week or so we're due for recall.
It's —’
Her face was still pressed against the shimmering fabric on his chest.
Through it she could feel the steady rhythm of his heart-beat, only now it held a threat: the fragility of life.
Depression and uncertainty thickened inside her throat, tightened her breathing.
‘What's recall?’
‘It's when we get called in from this patrol back to base.
When we get paid.
You know, get our cut’— the word sliced through her mind like a blade of ice —‘from all the strikes we've made this season.
Party-time.’
He looked down at her; feeling the movement in his upper body, she lifted her chin to meet his gaze.
‘And you know, don't you, Jez, the best strike we've made this season is you.’
Wavering blue threads flamed around her head.
Trying to ignore what they might be saying about her, she held on to silence as her only control.
But Ember still understood the question.
‘See, we've found a few seeps of underground water that's close enough to the surface for things to grow.
Found a few new life-forms, too.
That's why we follow the blue-trees.
They home in on to anything damp, even the moisture in something's body.
Someone's body.
First assays showed that some of the plants are viable oxygen producers, edible, medicinal, that kind of thing.
We get a rake-off for anything Mars-U says will help the terraforming.
Or if we tell them about anything dangerous so they can get it before it gets their precious settlements.
With what-all they're doing to this planet down at the equator, there's some weird stuff happening up here.
Like the bluetrees, for a start.’
‘A-huh.’
It was the first sound of only partial acceptance; Jezrael was waiting for more.
‘And mineral deposits.
Got a fair bauxite strike and some low-grade iron ore, but it's standard.
Won't hardly cover the cost of the survey.’
Jezrael knew what was coming.
‘Don't look at me like that!’ he yelled.
‘We can't all be fancy dancers.
Some of us got debts.
You know what that's like?’
Ember was angry now, angry and desperate.
Broken spurs of blue light spat ugly in the air around.
‘The guys won't keep me on the team.
Out here they don't just send a polite cube over to your bank manager to cancel your pay.
This is my last season, Jez, and I just haven't made the grade.
This time, unless we sell you, they'll sell me.
Turn me into a drone.
Or maybe use me as the basis for tissue culture, body-bank, whatever.’
‘Is — is that what they'll use me for?
Why can't they just ransom me?
Maggie'd pay, I know he would.’
‘Don't talk wild, Jez.
They've invested a lot of money in your conversion.
Bribed some top-flight mind-tech from Spiderglass out here to put your tower in.
They don't wanna waste you for spare parts.
The people I'm workin' for, they're not a big operation.
They got a lot of overheads just keeping the big boys off their necks — kickbacks, blood-money, you name it.
If anybody finds out who shouldn't, they'd have to kill to keep them silent.’
Behind her diamond eyes, Jezrael was seeing the plants she'd maimed in the name of cultures.
What Nutristem had done to plants, these people could do to human beings.
To her.
‘Maggie wouldn't talk!
He could pay a lot of cash, too.’
‘Your friend would know they'd kill him.
Maybe —’
Jezrael shouted in desperation over Ember's continued catalogue of horror.
‘He could go somewhere else, run away!
Just ask him!
Ember —’
But Ember was saying with a quiet despair of his own, ‘Or maybe chop a little off his brain to grow some cortex material for a rich man whose head's on fire with cancer.
They're not gonna ask, Jez.
Forget it!’
‘You slime-ball.
You diseased mutation!’
Her whole being radiated revulsion.
Ember shook her fiercely.
‘You think I don't know that?
I told you, didn't I?
You think I can look at myself in the morning with a damn great blue glass spike in my skull yelling at me, ‘Hey, you're a freak’?
You think I chose to be here?’
Jezrael's tirade stumbled over itself and faded.
‘Didn't you?’
‘No!
I didn't want to wake up with blue lightning any more than you did.
Only there wasn't but one way I could survive Mars-U and that was by gambling.
I did pretty good at it too.
Beat my quota.
Even got myself a nice little vacation landward of Seattlefish on Earth — hills, rivers, air you could breathe, that sort of stuff, and the sky so clear you'd figure you could see forever.
Never saw nothing like that in Santos Angeles.’
He shrugged.
‘Sorry, Jez.
I think about it a couple of hundred times a day and kick myself for not staying right there.
But no.
Not me.
I had to go round planning to be some rich corpo.
Delusions of grandeur.
‘Anyway,’ he went on, trying to find excuses for himself, ‘I reckon I always had some sort of imminence because I'd feel a hunch rolling up inside me like a breaker on the ocean and I'd just know what was going to win.
Anything with people in it, or animals.
I never had no luck with  numbers, but real flesh-and-blood races…
‘Trouble is, my bookie figured I had it too.
Even when I played through proxies he must have still known it was me, because one day, 'bout the end of my second year on Mars, I woke up with the blues just like you did.
I figure the bastard sold me out.
‘And once you're a tower, nobody but nobody at Mars-U wants to know you.
You're gonna find out what that's like, Jez, when we get back to the civilized belt.
You think it's bad here in the burrow?
Down round the equator, nobody'll even accept that they're seeing you.
Not even the fine citizens of Ecoville who have to get their rake-off too, or they wouldn't turn a blind eye to it.
You ever figure that?
Did your sister?
Even the weirdos in Hell, they don't want you.
‘Hi,’ you say.
‘Nice day.
How you doin'?’ and they don't even look at you when they're taking your money.
It don't feel too good.’
Behind her the door-flaps clashed tiredly with the wind of someone's movement in the common-room outside.
Once the sound would have made her nervous, but not now.
Her conscious mind didn't even register it, nor the weeds of blue awareness that tangled at the edge of her mind.
She could tell he was close to some revelation that would explain what was going on.
Ember said more loudly, ‘So now it's either sell you or sell me.
And frankly, you're worth more.’
Jezrael lashed a hand out to punch him hard on the jaw.
Imminence: of course he saw it before the impulse had even taken the first step on its journey from her mind to her body.
In slow motion she saw the jagged indigo from his mind outpace the reciprocal movement he made.
His strong hand cupped her fist and held it.
Before she'd begun to swing up a knee into his groin he jerked her towards him.
Off-balance, there was nothing she could do.
Her mind clenched in terror before his alien violence.
But Ember clamped her limbs against his own and whispered, ‘So we've got to get away.
You need me, right?
And I need you.
Act terrified.’
Jezrael did nothing; for a moment she was too stunned.
Ember thrust his face at her as if in concupiscence.
His shaggy dark blond hair pivoted to tickle her cheek.
‘Go on,’ he hissed.
‘Hit me.’
And when she did, he stopped the stab of her free hand and twisted it up behind her shoulders.
His weight toppled her to the air-bed that shushed and bounced beneath them.
Her arm stuck into her spine; she wrenched it free.
A harsh laugh grated from Ember's throat.
‘There's nowhere you can run, Jez.
Five thousand airless klicks to the equator and winter comin' on.
The Company after you because of that stunt with the blind spider.
And believe me, even your friends from Hell are gonna fade out when they see you with a lightning rod through your brain.
There's no place to hide.’
Ember slithered more firmly on her body, his hands mashing hers helpless behind her head despite her attempts to free them from his grasp.
Jezrael was frightened.
She didn't know which side of his double game Ember was actually playing.
He reared his torso a little way above hers in a pose that connected their loins in frightening intimacy.
Jezrael thrashed to get free but it didn't work.
He shook his head a fraction and his gaze slid to the door and back — but even searching the hyacinth radiance around his head she could not guess what he really meant to do.
With all her fear-sharp energy she tried to pierce the secrets of his imminence — and failed.
A smile split Ember's face.
His position had torn Danjit's knife-cut again and blood spiralled through the labyrinthine folds of his collar.
‘But if you're nice to me, now, I can maybe help you get a cut of your own when we sell you.
What d'you say, honey?’
Outside the door, footsteps mimed drifting away.
9
Chesarynth turned round guiltily, so fast that she almost overbalanced, her toe catching in her hem.
A soft-faced old man was framed by the double doors that opened on to a room of unparalleled luxury.
The old woman was not in sight.
‘I'm — I'm sorry,’ Chesarynth said automatically, trying to look as though it were normal to stand on one leg with her skirt round her knees.
‘No, no, young lady, it is I who should apologize for startling you.’
His voice was soft too, a padded sound that cloyed in its assumed sympathy.
Wasn't he the man who had said he would kill her now?
Or rather, have her killed.
He didn't look like he could do anything more strenuous than spit out a grape-pip.
‘I'm happy to welcome you to Spiderglass Europa.
It's Fräulein Brown, isn't it?
I am Berndt Tjerssen, head of training.
I'm so glad to see you managed to pass our little initiative test.’
In his harmless blue eyes there was no sign of his murderous intent.
His cheeks were round and innocent as a choir-boy's.
‘If you'll step into my office, Fräulein Brown?
I'm so sorry to have kept you waiting.
For some reason I haven't got to the bottom of yet, I have only just been informed of your arrival.’
Chesarynth hung back, not wanting him behind her, but he ushered her in with little shooing motions of his manicured hands and she had no choice.
A frisson wriggled down her spine but the room held no other occupant and though she turned round as soon as she decently could, Berndt Tjerssen contrived to look like a sweet, chubby old  man.
Certainly he made no threatening moves.
In fact, he seemed quite taken with her.
Chesarynth wondered where the old woman had gone.
There was still a flower-and-citron fragrance in the air but as Tjerssen fussily set a chair for her, she realized the fragrance was coming from him.
So whom had he been talking to?
A telephone call?
No — surely they'd never commit something so dangerous even to a Company Spiderline.
And would I have got so much just from a voice?
So where's the old woman?
Berndt stopped talking.
Only then did Chesarynth realize that he'd started, so wrapped up in her anxiety was she.
He waved her to sit back more comfortably and took another of the gilt-and-velvet chairs, dragging it closer to hers.
Under other circumstances she might have found it avuncular but now it was oppressive.
Even as she replied, ‘I'm sorry, I didn't catch that.
It was such a long trip,’ she couldn't help craning her neck to see where the old witch was.
She could have been anywhere.
There were ancient, faded tapestries sprawling over the  pale-panelled walls.
Huge blue-and-white urns stood sentry in niches.
Vast and unidentifiable pieces of furniture cluttered the room, their curlicued carvings filmed with dust.
Over the parquet (Wow!
That's real tree-wood.
What a waste of natural resources ) were scattered ancient carpets made of pastel silks.
Any of them could have hidden a secret staircase.
Even the sunlight was blocked out by layers of muslin, and the air was thick with perfumed smoke.
Meantime Berndt gushed with the oil of social graces, pouring her a glass of wine she had no intention of drinking,(she remembered the Tjerssens as Friend had shown her them, smiling as they gave you ruby venom), pouting when she refused his macaroons.
Chesarynth perched on the edge of her seat, fearing a poisoned needle in the cushions.
Pull yourself together ! she thought.
He's not supposed to kill me now, the old witch said.
And the boy Karel knows I'm here .
Just knowing, though, that Berndt meant to arrange her murder was enough to rattle her wits.
She was glad of her long skirts at last, because they hid her shaking.
It was hard to stumble through polite replies as to her health and her first impressions of Earth.
‘But wait ‘til you see winter in Spiderglass Scand!’ he said, moist lips curving in an ecstatic smile.
‘The frozen waterfalls and the children skating on the fjords.’
Berndt's gaze hovered embarrassingly on a level with her bosom and Chesarynth felt again her lack of development.
That was one thing Jezrael had that she had never attained.
But Berndt didn't know any of the layers of discomfort he was pressing on his new trainee.
‘That's where our family home is, you know, and they say home is where the heart is.
Someone as beautiful as you, I suppose your heart is with some young man?’
The question hung delicately on the swirls of incense in the air and Chesarynth's mistrust deepened.
How can he lie like that?
I'm not beautiful and I never have been.
What more does he want of me?
She didn't know what to say.
If I tell him there's no-one my life's even more at risk, but surely he must know from my records?
And if he doesn't, the old witch will.
What can I say ?
Mind skittering, conscious of the seconds layering thicker on the antique dust of the room, Chesarynth finally settled for a half-smile.
‘Ah, that would be telling!’ she said coyly, and was instantly sure he knew the hint was a lie.
An uncomfortable pause followed.
Chesarynth almost drank the wine just to fill in the time, but the thought of poison halted the crystal-stemmed goblet half-way to her mouth.
The gesture died meaningless, awkward.
Berndt soothed the gap by laying another pitfall.
‘I'm so sorry, my dear, but your sweet face has entirely driven from my mind the details of your file.
In fact I can't say for certain that it ever arrived.
You haven't got it with you, by any chance?’
‘No.
Was I supposed to?’
‘Not to worry.
I expect it'll turn up eventually, if it hasn't  already.
Where exactly were you adapted for interface?’
Doesn't he know ?
Chesarynth looked at his sybaritic features and decided his laziness had made him prefer fleshly pleasures to work.
He might even have lost her filecube between the islands of venerable desks.
It fitted in with the way the old witch had treated him.
And as for all that rubbish about my sweet face….
Only if he doesn't know, and he and the old bat are hostile about the way Karel had me adapted 
Wow!
Karel's one of these murdering Tjerssens!
He can't have known how Friend slid in to change my adaptation!
Confused now at all the permutations of possibilities, Chesarynth decided on the safest course:I'd better not give too much away .
She wished there were someone here to support her and her soul cried out in longing:Friend !
‘I — I'm sorry, sir —’
‘Oh, please call me Berndt.’
The old man's round face hovered between a smile and a leer.
‘Much more friendly, don't you think, my dear?’
‘I'm sorry, Berndt.
It's all — well, hazy, all that part of my life.
I know I was contracted but I can't really remember.’
Tears weren't far away and she didn't discourage them.
It made her hate Berndt even more to have to descend to such a feeble-minded stratagem.
‘It must be what — what they did to my nerves.’
She realized she was fiddling with her finger-socket as she so often did, but it was a useful habit now and she didn't stop.
‘What do you remember?’
She paused to consider.
‘Well, I remember going to a holo-bar that I couldn't afford very often.
I get a sort of impression of black and bright colours but it was always different.
I'm sorry.
It just won't come.’
Watching her play with her handkerchief, plucking at it in distress that wasn't faked, Berndt smiled a little plastic smile.
‘No matter.’
‘Oh, but sir, I mean, Berndt, I'm sorry I can't be more helpful.
Only I was really upset at the time and when I think of them drilling into my head and peeling back my skull and —’
The white-haired cherub shuddered.
Chesarynth piled it on.
‘I wish I could remember, but I don't.
I do remember that I left a sort of note for my family telling them not to worry because I'd got a good job and I might not be in touch for a while, but then it all gets kind of overlaid with a memory of a headache like you wouldn't believe, and shock at being connected to all these horrible machines and —’
Berndt looked distinctly sick.
‘Yes, yes, that will do.’
He cleared his throat and tossed back the wine red as blood in his goblet.
‘I understand you've been recommended for business training at our school here.
I trust that's agreeable to you?
We can't, of course, settle your future exactly until we've had you tested out, aptitude and so on , you know.
Let's get down to details, shall we?’
She wasn't about to give away Friend's plans for her.
They were Friend's, weren't they?
Oh God, what if I've got it all wrong and Friend's just some trick of Karel's like the garden-master was ?
‘I'm sure I'd be happier just going back to one of the Company offices on Mars,’ she lied.
He wasn't having any.
‘No, no, my dear.
We have to make certain that we fit you in the proper niche.
I couldn't permit someone of your abilities to moulder away in a backwater.
You wouldn't like that, I'm sure.’
So much for trying to get away .
She made a last-ditch attempt.
‘You've been so kind to me that I don't want to put you to any trouble.’
He reached forward and touched her knee in a way that wasn't wholly reassuring.
Chesarynth remembered what the old witch had said about young girls.
‘My dear, it's no trouble at all.
If I can suit you to the Company needs, I know that will be best all round.
Job satisfaction is so important.’
Mmm — yours or mine ? she thought, and simpered a reply.
So for the next few months she used a variant of the tactics she had tried to perfect with her parents: do what you're told and keep your head down.
Only this time  Chesarynth did something she never had before.
She played down her abilities, fluffed tasks that should have been childishly simple.
Being important in Spiderglass could terminally damage her health and the best way to avoid that was to show she wasn't too bright.
And she had to live through this to justify Friend's faith in her.
The poor unhappy spiders were waiting for her help.
She clung to the belief that Friend had sneaked down the wires through Karel's network and one day he would come to rescue her….
Of course, it was a tightrope walk; they must have profiles of her from her school and Mars-U.
(If I ever find them, I ‘ll junk them .)
Using that as their base-line (or why would they have contracted her?) they would expect a high performance in her theoretical IQ.
Applied intelligence might get them a completely different result, she couldn't be sure.
Echoes of her multiple failure at the university shook her faith in her reasoning, but if she were as thick as they'd made out there, surely Spiderglass would never have shrunk her?
So her performance couldn't be too low either — especially with the risk of being relegated to the brain-dead clerk-level.
Chesarynth remembered her sister's stories of the lowest levels at Nutristem where subliminals ate away the whole shift from your mind.
Maybe a quick death would be better than that ?
Endless lessons jacked in to a computer without even the star-dance of meanings to cheer.
Bland little symbols were only mirrors of colour and shape that she had to push around into the order her teachers wanted.
None of it was real or important.
Even the cash-flow predictions they cared about so much were nothing to her but answers she wanted ticked.
Her health suffered; vagrant aches camped out in different parts of her body but she didn't dare go to a Spiderglass doctor.
That would be handing them her life on a plate.
Her flesh melted, leaving bone and tendon beneath her grey skin; she hated what she looked like in a mirror, but then, she always had.
Fear stalked her sleep, because however far she could drive her anxieties from  her mind by activity in the daytime, she had to relax control when she sought sleep.
And between the shores of waking and slumber lay sharp reefs of nightmare.
Even when she was too tired to read she sought escape in romance-cubes she spent all her wages on at the Madreidetic shop.
With the safety of evening fleeing behind her, she forced her burning eyes to watch cubes until the stars paled.
Crossing each night became an epic voyage.
And in all that time she'd never heard from Jez, nor even from her parents.
Arranging strings of symbols in the computer tanks at the school, Chesarynth could not ignore her hurt.
Even if they didn't know her exact address, they never answered the little notes she sent care of the Company.
Assuming they arrived….
Afraid to make friends with the other students (Is it him that's the spy?
Or that girl with the Esquimau nose ?) and not daring to spend the time she used to in study lest she be dangerously good, she now had hours and hours in which to brood and her old pains came back to life.
Growing burrs and hooks, reaming her snaggled, sleep-starved nerves, her fretting longed for the relaxation of talking to the one person who had always taken her part: her sister.
Only Jezrael doesn't care enough to find me, does she?
And that became the seed-crystal around which her tensions solidified.
Maybe three months into training, when the captive trees behind the hotel complex burned into autumn flame and the air smelt of bonfires that they told her didn't mean danger, Chesarynth shivered across to the school.
Crisp yellow leaves scrunched satisfyingly underfoot, giving off a sweet sad scent.
The very sky smelt of frost though a sun bigger than she had ever seen on Mars still shone remote between gold-fringed clouds.
Up from the river came the moist, dirty smell of its swollen waters.
Yesterday, after purple thunderheads had bled rain over the hills for the third day in succession, the air had dried up.
The tutors had led the business pupils on an organized ‘social’— a  walk to the Prater.
Silent, untouched by the presence of the others that she couldn't trust (that hurt ) she had crossed the Danube bridge.
It spanned the water-meadows but the grass was deep under water.
Opaque scummy floods lapped only a metre below her feet; a foul smell made her nauseous.
It was a dead sheep, caught on the buttress of the bridge, and its dark-swollen face was fish-nibbled.
Its yellow-black devil's eyes haunted her.
Now, back in school, Chesarynth hoped that jacking in would drive this dreadful melancholia away.
The other twenty students listened with Teutonic thoroughness but not Chesarynth.
She sat impatiently listening to the teacher's drivel about the fault in the program he was about to network.
Find the fault, he said.
We'll enter a merit on your records.
What do I care about your pointless merits?
Stop jawing and let me get on with it.
At least there are the ghosts of meanings in there and I can dream in the space between electrons.
Even if Friend never comes back to me, I can dream.
‘You can jack —’ said the tutor, but Chesarynth heard no more.
Faint dark mist was the background, with the symbols only crude and faded opal scars.
But, unlike the other students, she stayed fully sentient while her finger was in the socket thanks to her Friend-engineered connection.
It was a real program, she discovered, with a real fault.
Something to do with Company cash-flow, stuff they'd hardly touched on the course.
It wasn't the egotism she feared that told her none of the others would understand just what the program was, or its significance.
It must be something serious to turn the students loose on it.
Interfacing, she slipped the colours of her awareness into the non-space of symbology.
Like some antediluvian mouse Chesarynth roamed the corridors of files.
Or, more aptly, she flew between pinned butterflies of ideas.
None of it held the magic of her communication with Friend; even here, jacked into the shadows, she ached for him but reason told her she wouldn't find him, long before she  stopped looking.
With a mental sigh that dimmed her meanings, she turned her attention to what she should have been doing all along.
Assets — that clump of symbols, rich as distant gold.
Investments tempered with the vagaries of stock-markets.
Overheads.
Turnover.
Profit that glowed like beads in a smoked-glass display.
Cash channelled to each arm of Spiderglass —I never realized there were so many!
And why so much to that one stuck out deep in the hinterland of Asia?
I'll solve that one another day ….
No obvious fault.
I'd better check the figures .
Later, brain-fatigue smearing her concentration as she tried yet again to make the balance positive:I'm not wrong.
Something's eating the profits and it's not entered here .
It was better than an analgesic in her blood.
Chesarynth concentrated on the maths of it so hard that for a long time she ignored the awareness tugging at her subconscious.
Checking and rechecking her figures, she had no time to give in to the promptings of the irrational.
Only somewhere there was the bubbling upswell of a hunch.
But her bladder demanded attention.
With a grimace of irritation, Chesarynth jacked out.
Before she could fully withdraw her finger from the connection, a fire possessed her, bright as magnesium fireworks.
Just for a second, while part of her still jacked in, a sun imploded around her.
But she had begun the withdrawal and her synapses knew enough to carry it out even as thousands of her brain-cells died in the nova.
Her finger came out smoking.
Burn-blisters reddened, popped, raining juices from her hand.
She convulsed, collapsing to the floor with the pain that danced down the paths of her nervous system.
Chesarynth thought it was her own screaming and embarrassment boiled through her but when she looked round, bodies were twitching and smoking everywhere as the computer-banks sparked into flame.
Panic filled the classroom.
She dragged other students from their places, freeing them from the killing connection.
Groans and sobbing wove through the smoke-reeked air but the sprinklers were already pouring foam on to the consoles and the power cut abruptly.
The room dived into darkness, shrinking Chesarynth's world to the chairs and benches shining pale in the moonlight from the window.
She had no idea she'd been in there so long.
A torch spat light that splashed dazzling between the shadows.
The tutor holding it yelled, ‘Is there anybody else still jacked in?’
One or two shapes moved through the darkness but most people —There's not that many , Chesarynth realized.
Most of them had already gone home — were slumped in shock on the floor.
‘Everybody make your way to the door,’ the tutor called, his voice trembling.
‘Don't leave until I tell you.’
One by one he checked them off on his register, letting them stagger out into the corridor where the ghouls who liked disasters were already forming a pressing crowd.
Chesarynth leant back against the wall, holding her throbbing hand and waiting for the knives in her head to dissolve.
She had lost one of her shoes; broken glass had cut her bare toes.
The tutor's tired authoritarianism wavered to a stop.
Almost to himself he said, ‘Power-surge.
It could have been worse.
It could have happened this morning when all of you were in there.’
Chesarynth could hardly hear him above the questions of the throng.
Confusion peaked with the arrival of the rescue teams but they led or carried the survivors to the relative peace of the sick-bay.
Under fierce lights that did nothing for her head, a doctor and a technician examined them one at a time.
They gave Chesarynth two painkillers and told her she was lucky.
Some of the others would have to be rewired; some would never be rewired again, but all she had was a headache.
You'll be all right in a couple of days, they said, and in her disorientation Chesarynth thought,Days are geography not time .
But here she was the interloper.
The knowledge saddened her all over again.
Then, as she stumbled outside into the frost-gleamed blue of the night, an idea seized her.
For her life's sake Chesarynth turned reluctantly and made her way back to the tutorial room.
Back at the scene of the disaster the confusion worked to her advantage.
If anybody asked, she could say she'd come back for her shoe that had fallen off in the stumbling mess of wrecked furniture.
But nobody did ask.
The ghouls had all been sent away and under the fierce new glare of naked lights, caretakers were clearing up while someone pushed a trolley of glass-eyed computer-monitors that got into everybody's way.
Chesarynth felt as though there were a huge sign over her head saying she shouldn't be there.
Afraid that at any moment someone would shout ‘Grab her!’ and drag her off to some unspecified yet ineluctable torment, she forced herself at least to look calm while she sat at the console on the dais.
The memory of the towers' electro-sticks back at Mars-U made her fingers fumble at the keys.
Nobody noticed.
It wasn't hard to sneak a copy of the tutor's program and take it back to her room.
Even if anyone saw it under the charred fringes of her robe, she could say it was homework.
They wanted her to be keen, didn't they?
Well, maybe.
Because there were two answers to that.
The possibility of a real power-surge she discounted.
Surely a place as organized as Spiderglass Europa would have resistances built in to protect against just that?
So either Berndt had begun to kill her, and to hell with anybody else who got in the way.
Or the program itself didn't like being investigated.
10
Ember transferred his grip on Jezrael's wrists to one powerful hand.
Pinned as she was beneath his weight she hadn't even the leverage to free her arms or buck him off — though she tried desperately.
The air-mattress soughed and sucked to their frenzied movements.
Out of one eye, through the curtain of his rough blond hair, she could see their bodies in the mirror on the wall.
It seemed sick, perverted.
Already she hated herself, and he hadn't even begun.
A muffled voice faded in the common room outside.
The dense blue fire of solid intention arced from Ember's mirrored head and collided with the lightning that sparked around his face only inches from her own.
Its dark meaning terrified her.
Jezrael strove, whimpering.
It was inconceivable that she shouldn't be able to throw him off, but she couldn't.
Her limbs were wracked with the aches of her first trip outside since the bluelight had punctured her brain, and he was whole and strong.
Not Ember!
Surely he wouldn't
He arched his body, pressing down on her with his hips.
He swung his free arm sideways, parallel to the ground.
Down and round to the level of her breast.
Tension rived through Jezrael.
Her imagination jagged with tumbling violent images of what he might do to her.
She tried to kick him, but he only grinned more widely.
More wildly.
And his hand picked up a dropped boot to hurl it against the crackling plastic doors.
They bulged out, connected hard with something  outside in the common room.
A man exclaimed, ‘Shit!’ and went away for real.
And Ember said softly in her ear, ‘I'm not really gonna do it but it's gotta look good, OK?
Can you reach the light-switch from there?’
Jezrael nodded, uncertain —What am I doing placating a rapist, for Chrissake ?— and when he slackened his hold on her upwrenched arms, groped fractionally for the remote.
Ember seized and aimed it at the control panel beside the door and the room went as dark as it could with the little amber safety-lights glimmering in case of accident.
Biolight.
Banned on Mars , realized Jezrael in hysterical irrelevance.
Ember mouthed, ‘Could you just shuck off your outer suit, Jez?
At least the top?’
‘How real —’
‘Just do it, OK?
Then we'll skinny down under the covers.
It's gotta look convincing.’
Then slow relief flooded her as in the giggling, whispering darkness they mimed the act of making love.
The hem of a distant Marsquake shivered through the walls of the burrow, and Jezrael had to stuff the back of her hand in her mouth to stifle her laughter as Ember cried out in artistic mock-orgasm.
She just knew he was thinking,Did the earth move for you ?
Faint noises from outside dwindled into the peaceful black chasm of sleep.
She heard his words floating out to her, pale clouds in the darkness: ‘So now we can get time alone to plan.’
She had to chow down with the others in the common-room now she was mobile.
Jezrael hated being the only one there who wore a bodysuit but she would have hated more the embarrassment of displaying herself with all her imperfections to the crude and lumpen miners.
Like Lecky, the cook, many wore no clothes at all in the warmth of the burrow; others wore a cache-sexe.
Just looking around at acres of tired, naked flesh made Jezrael  squirm; she stayed in her room as much as possible.
Mealtimes were hell.
Danjit liked to get in pointed little jibes like, ‘Hey, bow everybody, her ladyship's actually gracing us with her presence!’
Around the table or squatting on whatever box they could along the burrow walls, the others reacted in their different fashions.
Some, like Khaur, were indifferent.
All he cared about was booze, but he still got the job done before he got soaked.
He'd carry on eating, one elbow on the table, through all the racket.
Erin, though, the other woman, wouldn't let any dig lie.
Lolling on the bench beside the monitor, one foot on someone else's chairback, she said, ‘Maybe she'll grace you with a little more than that, Danny.
What do you charge for renting her out, Ember?’
Jezrael's face burned.
She stared down at her plate, wishing she knew what to answer, wishing she were somewhere else but they never let her out of their sight.
Someone was always watching her.
Some pimpled boy whose name she didn't know put one finger coyly beneath his chin and snickered, ‘Oh, look, she's blushing.’
Jezrael felt her heart swell with her smothered rage.
It felt like it would strangle her from inside.
Déjà vu .
Yet she was just as impotent as all the other times.
It didn't help when Lecky the cook said, ‘Gimme the cube rights-’
Before he could finish Erin sneered, ‘Forgotten what it goes like, Lecky?’
Fat Trask choked with laughter, spattering half-chewed pasta over another man who slapped him upside the head.
Ember grinned knowingly.
‘If she ever gets tired of me, Erin, I'm sure she'll put you high on her list — right after blue-trees.’
More laughter.
Jezrael could feel stupid tears forcing their way through her control.
It was worse than school.
Mijnheer yelled, ‘Hey, Salembere, does that make you a bluetree?’
Ember stood up, striking a parody of a muscle-man  pose.
‘Nope.
It makes me dessert.’
He reached down to take Jezrael's hand.
‘C'mon, you.
Let's leave these guys — all they're good for is talking about it.’
The chorus of catcalls faded as Jezrael's door-panels flapped shut.
Ember ducked his head to whisper in the warm, secret tinge of biolight, ‘Don't pay no mind to them, Jez.
It's only six more days to pay-off at Placerco and you're nowhere near up to strength.
We've got to get this sorted right or we're iced.’
The lights of the equator sprang up, spangling the sun's race from the night-side.
Jezrael didn't want the flight to end.
Not that the freighter's jumbled hold was pleasant, crowded with the noisy, dark shapes of the mining team who thought of her as cargo to sell.
She eased her legs sideways in the tiny space between rattling crates, shouting, ‘Cramp,’ to Ember, but it wasn't true.
All she wanted to achieve was an excuse to feel the human warmth of his arm against hers.
There was no other emotional support she dared to ask for.
Either the rest of the gang would hear her and sneer, or Ember might turn away.
After all, how grateful could he be for her dancing weeks — no, months now — before?
He'd barely begun to teach her to interpret the wreaths of imminence, the meanings of nictation and stance.
She still couldn't tell what made him tick just by looking at him.
Jezrael wished she could.
Imminence didn't seem to have helped her at all.
All her life she'd thought,If only I knew what so-and-so was thinking I'd know what to do ….
Now she did.
But if anything, it had made her even more indecisive.
Even if we do get away from these guys, where am I going to go?
I can't take trouble back to Maggie.
Besides, he'd just tell me that having a tower around was bad for business.
What can I do ?
Cocooned in noise, the hostile presence of the rest of the miners oppressing her, she felt fear thrusting in at her with the decibels of the freighter's flight.
If I could be certain of Ember, it wouldn't be so bad .
She glanced at his half-seen profile with the sunset flashing over his  cheekbones as the ship banked for landing.
He shot her a grin and she thought of what he'd been to her in the last week and a half.
Everything good about this whole horrific mess, he's given me.
To the others I'm just meat on the hoof .
Yet Jezrael knew he'd been one of them for longer than she'd been on Mars.
She thought of the jokes they'd shared, bundled up chastely in her bed, and she wondered what it would have been like if they had made love.
He never even kissed me ….
A smear of red sunlight bounced across her eyes as the ship completed its landing approach.
The moment Danjit, jostling the pilot, shouted back, ‘We're home free, guys!’ the hold erupted with ravelling cheers.
A stampede broke out, people pushing past Jezrael to the cockpit to see the first signs of other human beings through the canopy.
Even Jezrael hauled herself up by the strappings on a crate: silver lights shone through the mists of twilight.
The ship's nose dived; bodies fell, laughing insanely.
Jezrael hung on only because her hands were twined through the strapping.
Gravity sucked her feet forward and across to the doors.
Panic slammed around in the cavity of her body.
She could just about hear the pilot yelling for silence.
Then he slapped the speakers on and a solid weight of noise crashed against her head: the pilot's amped-up voice thundered, ‘Back to your positions!
This is a cargo-ship, not a frigging Gateliner.’
Gateliner ? wondered Jezrael, but whatever it meant, it worked, either that or the ship's erratic plunge.
The miners scrambled back up the hill of the slanting deck and the ship steadied.
Erin kicked Khaur over to where he'd been told to sit when the pilot first landed at the burrow to ferry them back to headquarters.
‘Civilization!’ somebody shouted.
It looked very small.
Jezrael could still see the lights of sunflowers strung out like mercury on rose satin.
The land around was crumpled  with shadow valleys, a corduroy of fields.
Greenhouse roofs rippled from salmon to garnet with the cold winds of sunset.
She could almost smell the rich fermentation of silage like there'd been around parts of Ecoville, or the green alkali of the air-plants.
A faint haze of heat-differential shimmered the lights of town but the thin mist meant visibility was quite good.
A wedge of frosty light clove a farmyard as someone stepped out to look at the stars in the russet sky.
Freedom.
Jezrael shivered in anticipation.
But the rumbling hulk of the ship was dense with the sounds and smells of men on pay-day — and she was part of their pay.
It was a lot to get through.
The pilot jounced the ship through turbulence — Jezrael felt the gravity drag at her limbs, making them a dead-weight that her feeble stamina couldn't shift.
Terror hit with the enormity of pitting herself and Ember against the seventeen members of the patrol — no, eighteen if you counted the pilot.
And what about all the ground-crew when we touch down at Placerco?
Oh, shit !
But Ember contrived to nudge her reassuringly and a gravity-shift bounced her high and maybe it was all possible after all.
The ship's braking-jets roared, vibrating the hold into  cacophony and falling objects.
Then they were gliding in to a crown of diamond lights and it was time.
Jezrael couldn't work up any spit.
What was it Ember said?
Pretend it's just another show ?
What if I bomb out?
We won't get an encore….
The deck lurched and steadied, creaking, to a chorus of jeers.
What if we crash ?
Then the door clanged open and she thought in surprise,We're down !
A river of cold air fountained into the hold, drenching everybody in sudden condensation.
Dazzling lights knifed at her vision from the docking bay.
Ember dragged her to her feet and she limped stiff-legged through the hatch and on to the landing-ramp.
Only a couple of guys had got there first; Ember had picked their position well.
A couple of silhouettes emerged from the glare of light.
Jezrael stopped on the top step, yawning and stretching, one hand flung up to shield her face against the cold hard radiance.
Someone jostled into her, cursing.
Exactly as Ember had said.
Now the other two were almost at the bottom of the ramp.
Half-way along it, Ember whipped round to yell, ‘Go, Jez!’ and vaulted over the hand-rail.
Before he hit ground Jezrael spun to slam the hatch-door shut.
Ember shoved the wheeled ramp sideways but it was all right because he'd told her to hang on and she had.
The two guys near the bottom fell tumbling and Ember hit the first one hard on the neck.
Behind her the miners had wrenched the door open angrily.
One pitched out, hitting the ground with a sickening thud; Erin yelled, trying to hold on, but she fell too, attempting to roll, but she couldn't make it to her feet with one shin-bone staring whitely at her through her pant-leg.
Blood began to splurge out and her screams pounded Jezrael with a different rhythm.
She was paralysed, staring at Erin.
‘Jez!
Quit that and get moving!’
Ember yelled.
Guiltily she ran down the bouncing shallow steps, jarring them as hard as she could to off-balance the last man on his feet.
Somewhere out in the sheet of light black shapes began to react.
Jezrael leaped at the man in a balletic kick, somersaulting as the back of his neck snagged her foot for a second.
Fast as laser-dance she rolled and recovered.
Shots spiked the air and night plunged down on them as Ember shot the lights out.
In the vacant dark Jezrael aimed another kick, blindly.
Her boot collided with something high, she didn't know what.
Afraid she'd left her victim mobile, Jezrael hesitated, waiting for a clue.
This time he didn't get up.
‘Hit it, kid!’ shouted Ember.
His footsteps were hard to pick out in the roaring darkness.
Other men were running now, and yelling; she heard the unmistakable sound of the ramp being rolled back and felt its nearness before it could actually hit her.
She ducked under the belly of the ship, scuttling low to the ground, but she still managed to slam her head into some unseen landing gear.
Lightning flashed across her vision and she thought it was concussion but it was the pilot putting on his cabin-lights.
Vague shapes were running in counter-directions.
Ember whistled, thin and high.
She sped into the half-light, aiming well to the left of the sound.
The sound of her boots changed as she left the edge of the fireproof field.
Sparks spat through the gathering night ahead of her; she slowed unconsciously as friction rubbed bright answering wires of electricity from her boots.
Here the ground was uneven limonite and she stumbled.
Her new sense of time told her that a scant three minutes had passed since landing.
Hope flamed in her.
Maybe we'll make it !
Wordless images of a new life expanded her, making her feel an incandescent love for life.
Her feet kept on blundering along through the darkness and a stitch stabbed at her side but she blinded herself to exhaustion and ran.
Me and Ember, we'll go to Maggie's and he'll help us and we'll find Ches and everything ‘ll be fine
Four minutes.
A minute sooner than Ember had said, emergency lights blazed on.
She saw him ahead of her, hopping up and down in his anxiety.
Multiple shadows of him fell on the perimeter wall, leaping like pale giants.
Jezrael could hear the wires that crowned it humming with power.
She forced herself to go faster, her hand reaching out to him.
He took it, saying, ‘Well done, Jez!
I knew you could do it.
Let's split.’
Not even a proper force-wall above the barrier of regurgitated rock.
Ember had said Placerco couldn't afford one yet.
He blasted the wire with his third shot and the ends writhed sparking.
Their pursuers were close now.
He boosted her over the wall and scrambled up behind her, dropping to safety as bolts of power spanged past them.
Breath wrenching in their lungs, Ember pulled Jezrael along hand in hand.
The last glow had gone from the sunflowers now and they hung their heads on their spindly supports.
Jezrael let go and dodged weakly beneath the first one.
Frost was beginning to whiten the ground beyond the rustling greenhouses outside Placerco, but the underground thermal grids laid a net of darker squares across the fields.
She stole a glance from her future and turned her head.
Behind them torches were bobbing through the night.
Ember pivoted, gun well out from his side.
One shot brought a barrage of answering cross-fire that burned angrily around them but just like he'd planned, Ember and Jezrael had separated.
At least the torches went out.
None of the miners wanted to be a target.
But there were still the heat-sensitive beams and she couldn't see them.
Ember angled towards her, dragging at his oxy-bottle as he ran.
A sunflower belled upwards not fifty metres away; the one they'd passed was twice as far behind them.
From what Jezrael could tell as she snatched rags of glances backwards, their pursuers hadn't reached it yet.
So far, so good .
She hated to consider the alternatives.
Almost level with the last sunflower and she didn't think she could make it.
Ember was still ahead, waiting.
Pains like hot iron poured molten through her legs and her throat was raw with the icy emptiness of the air she was gulping.
Under the sepia of the sky only starlight shone on the frost around her.
She didn't think she could make it.
Back there somewhere she could hear the miners' grim shouts; they were closer in the mahogany night.
Stumbling with weariness, she forced herself to stagger towards Ember.
Each lurching stride printed I can't, I can't on her mind.
Ember gave up waiting for her and signalled frantically.
Jezrael dropped where she stood, on the cold wet soil above a thermal.
Ember ran to her, scooping dark mud over her to blind the heat-sensors to her.
Not a perfect job  but enough to fool the miners — she hoped.
Face in the damp mars, she could hear their pounding footbeats.
‘Go!’ she hissed at Ember, but he stopped for an agonizing moment to cover her better.
Jezrael's fingers crisped into the grit beneath her; even her face worked with the adrenalin that surged up, so much did she want to shove him away and make him save himself.
Only if she did that, all his effort would be wasted.
So she lay still, prone, trying to catch the sound of her breathing before it escaped and gave the game away.
Eons passed and suns died; at last she felt the ground tremble as Ember sprinted —Too far!
He'll never get there !— towards the sunflower.
Like interlocking ripples came the shock-waves of the miners' steps.
Jezrael couldn't even lift her head to look because he'd told her that eyes shine in the darkness; as well light a beacon.
Grit clung damply to her eyelashes as she shuddered closer into the ground.
She made herself breathe through her mouth as slowly as she could to hush her own sounds, and inhaled the odours of the earth with her own warm respiration.
Cramp spasmed through her calf.
She didn't give in to it.
She hung on to the ground, waiting.
Where's Ember?
Oh God , she prayed, beseeching a deity that was only something her father swore by, never something believed,let him get away.
It's my fault he's in this mess .
The footsteps thundered closer.
Gobbets of soil shook down into the cavity where she hid her face.
She stopped breathing but her heart kept on thudding its own wild race.
A scatter of miners ran past her, one even stepping on her hand with a pain that burned sharply on her half-frozen fingers.
Jezrael clenched her teeth so hard against the torment that her jaws shuddered, but she didn't cry out.
I'm not going to give him away.
Oh, fuck, it hurts .
The knot of footsteps spread thinner into distance.
Into silence.
Jezrael waited.
Surely overhead the stars wheeled through the chocolate sky?
The cold seeped into her muscles and she couldn't stop shaking but she wouldn't look up too soon and betray Ember who was good to her.
Pictures:I'll take him to Maggie's after closing-time (the river of lights over the bar, and warmth, and coñac in coffee, and Maggie admiring and relieved).
It'll be all right.
(Dad, this is Ember.
Salembere.)
We've found Ches.
(Mom saying ‘Thank you’ over and over again, and her tears of gratitude hot on Jezrael's neck .)
And Mars travelled a million miles through space around the distant hub of the sun.
Except that in the treachery of silence Jezrael finally lifted her head.
Maybe seven minutes had passed but she dared not wait any longer because who knew when the miners might give up and come back?
So she lifted her head and a voice behind her yelled hoarsely, ‘I've got her!’
Jezrael lurched stiffly to her feet and lumbered off at a run.
From behind her came a spear of light that struck steam from the ground at her feet.
She dodged sideways but her frozen muscles wouldn't respond and she half fell, clawing upwards again like an athlete on the starting-block but another shot scorched through the mud in her hair and she slumped to her knees in despair.
The iron smell of Danjit's sweat solidified in her nostrils as he straddled her from behind, one hand wrenching her jaw up, his vibro-blade cherishing the soft skin of her throat.
Up on the neck of the sunflower (peacock flames of imminence blazed his position) Ember shouted, ‘Jez!’
And they shot him.
His body flopped brokenly from one strut to the next, cartwheeling ungainly to crump on the earth.
She ran to him.
They could have shot her there and then and it wouldn't have made any difference.
She still would have gone to him if she had to crawl.
His forehead was ripped dark in the starlight but his  cheekbones still gleamed (an image superimposed: the sunset slanting over him as he grinned at her in the freighter) the way she remembered.
His shoulder was crooked, the arm limp.
Jezrael threw herself to her knees beside him, not daring to touch his rag-doll body.
It didn't matter that they were coming to stare down at her and Ember with the ugly blueness of ghoulish satisfaction on their heads.
Her hand hovered above his neck that looked so defenceless.
She didn't know what to say, and then words welled up unstoppable.
‘I'm sorry, I'm sorry, Ember, I didn't mean to —’
‘Ssh, don't cry, honey.
You any good at jigsaws.’
Jezrael didn't even smile at his joke.
‘You'll be OK, Ember.
They'll patch you up good as new, see if they don't.
You'll be fine.
Don't worry, it's going to be OK.’
His soft, strained voice stopped her babble.
‘One thing, at least it doesn't hurt.
Don't blame yourself.
It was a dumb plan anyways.’
She reached out and dared to feather her fingertips over his neck in a hopeless caress.
His pulse was a distant polka retreating into the unknown.
A mandala of electric fires reached out from around his head, stretching, thinning, weaving into the invisibility of the air.
Jezrael hugged him tighter as if to hold the life in him but it trickled out around her.
She sobbed, ‘It was a great plan only I'm stupid.
Oh, Christ, I wish I'd just done what you told me.
We could've gone to Maggie's….’
And in the mist-wraithed frosty field, she told his corpse about the good times ahead while Trask and Khaur closed her future in their night.
11
‘My tutor's not coming in, did you say?
Oh, never mind.
I'll catch him tomorrow.
Thanks.’
Chesarynth jacked out of the communications network.
Her glance slid over the cube she held, seeing it as an object, a thing she met with every day.
It shone; its fine veins sparkled where the tiny gold wires crossed but she didn't see wonder in it.
Slipping it under a broad embroidered bracelet, she left her room and sauntered over to the business school.
Bitter thoughts tangled with her headache.
What did Friend put in my head that they don't put in everyone else's?
And if he is a Friend (she remembered the shadow-horror of her garden-master)why did he do it to me anyway ?
It was easy enough to hang around in the courtyard enjoying the soft splash of sunlight on her bare arms.
Late afternoon gilded the granite of the Spiderglass complex.
Tiny feathers of cloud drifted over the horizon like a flock of fire-birds.
Beyond the railings, a squirrel whisked among the bronzy oak trees and sparrows quarrelled on the hum of distant traffic.
Earth was more beautiful than she could have imagined; it didn't seem fair when everyone was out to kill her.
Inside the business school chimed the melody that meant the change of lessons.
Students began to spill out of the building, others to stream in.
Chesarynth sucked in another breath of the sweet, tangy air and melted into the crowd, shuffling inside with the rest.
Along the corridors, up the tubes, hidden in the  polyglot mass of students.
No-one cared that she jacked in to the lock on the tutor's door, feeling around mentally to jig it open.
It was easy.
In real-time only seconds had passed, not much more time than it would have taken to see if he was in and ask him for a few minutes of his time.
It was only part of the communications system anyway, nothing advanced.
After all, what strategic importance could an ordinary tutor hide in his ordinary office?
All the same it was a relief to discover that he really wasn't in.
Somehow she hadn't quite believed it before.
Tension prodded a tic under her eye.
From somewhere she could hear a lecturer droning; maybe it needed speeding up a little.
No threatening footsteps tapped up the corridor to discover her.
Chesarynth hoped all the secretaries were happily jacked in to some routine part of the system, or getting their jollies from the nerve-stimulators some of them were addicted to.
Dithering nervously with the colour-coded translucent cube-sleeves watching her intrusion, it took her longer than she would have liked to calm down enough to start.
After all, just being in the tutor's office couldn't be that much of a crime, could it?
But what she was about to do, that was a real, honest-to-goodness gold-wired sin she might not live long enough to regret.
Chesarynth sighed.
Even now, scared of losing her innocence and terrified of being caught, she could still see no other way of finding who was after her this time.
Taking a deep whispered breath, she slotted the cube into the console's access.
The tutor's personal machine switched on to the cube.
His code was no problem; hadn't she seen it enough times anyway when he powered up the network?
Tempted to back out while there was still time, Chesarynth knew she had to find out and quickly if she wanted to stay alive.
She jacked in with an anticipation she hadn't felt since Friend had left her so far away on the Moon.
Chesarynth booted in the program, making her own little file with an octopus of dark hollow symbols: a worm that would eat up any trace of her prying, provided she  did the whole thing quickly enough that no-one noticed while she was in.
And right where she didn't expect it in the black universe was another dark space, solid with hidden meanings, difficult to see, alien to her comprehension.
Now that she knew they were there, they stuck out because they were obviously some different language.
A whiff of dirt and mildew stung her awareness with its rank unfamiliarity.
If she'd had only the clerical level of interface that she was supposed to have, she'd never have found it.
And maybe the rest of the gang wouldn't have got burned out if she hadn't come close before.
She whistled soundlessly.
I wasn't expecting that.
What in the worlds is it ?
But there was a sombre shadow of familiarity to it and after subjective eons of frustration, intuition struck her.
Madreidetic.
It had the same feel to it that she knew from the long hours she'd spent experiencing the mass-market romantic slush that Madreidetic packed into their holos.
Her flag of meanings dimmed in puzzlement.
Why me?
Why couldn't somebody else find it ?
The answer was obvious — though there was a lot else that wasn't.
Friend.
Somehow this is an awareness he's built into me or I wouldn't be able to spot it where nobody else can .
Does that mean he's from Madreidetic?
Automatically dissecting the problem into the code of coloured balls and prismatic chains that was the symbology of her interface, Chesarynth looked at it from all angles.
It seemed very unlikely that Friend was from Madreidetic.
Studying their strange, dark language, she found it largely incomprehensible.
Certainly it had none of the verve or joyous beauty that she associated with him.
And surely he wouldn't have omitted to teach it to her if he had planted her as another spy for them.
Madreidetic.
Madreidetic who made cubes.
Madreidetic who then also sold data-cubes and stored their own hidden programs within the crystalline lattice.
Programs that hived off fortunes into their own coffers.
Now what do I do?
Dam the leaks?
If I do that, the Company doesn't have to know I've been interfacing data when I shouldn't.
I could tell the tutor I got scent of it before the system went down yesterday….
Then everyone will think I'm some kind of spy anyway because it's hardly going to fit in with my cover of being a moron.
So then Berndt and the old witch will know I'm as smart as they don't want me to be, AND that I've been poking around in high-security files.
But what if I say nothing?
If Madreidetic's anything like as unpleasant as their language, why should I let them get away with piracy?
And who knows what else they've got in here?
In any of the Company networks ?
Vicarious terror gripped her.
Jesus, what might they be doing to our star-shipping?
To the colonies?
To all the worlds dependent on our supplies?
And if anybody came close to finding out, curtains ….
Her meanings all but drowned in the immensity of it all.
The seas of black space around her took on an aura of dread.
Anything might be out there.
Even a worm that would kill any interface stupid enough to blunder into it, but fear stoked up a hot red glow of anger inside her.
Before she could investigate further, her own dim worm fired a warning shot.
Somehow she had triggered her discovery but she didn't know who was out there hunting her, Berndt's killers or Madreidetic.
At the speed of thought Chesarynth fled through the towering ranks of symbols that obstructed her now with their colour-coded lattices, their confusion of cold money scents.
Was it paranoia or could she really feel someone closing in on her?
A lethal charge that lurked around the next junction?
She jacked out so quickly the tutor's office swam around her before she knew what it was.
Fear shuddered her breath, fragmented her vision of his pale walls, the spectra of his neatly-stacked cubes.
Berndt or Madreidetic.
I still don't know.
I've got to get out before one of them switches me off .
Outside, the silver-frosted blue of nightfall wrapped her secret.
Her first instinct had been to creep back to the familiar haven of her room, but now Chesarynth couldn't face its bright emptiness.
Only there was nowhere else she could go.
Or was there?
An odour of dank river air swam up from the river.
It decided her; instantly she followed it to the broad Danube.
The ghosts of stars were netted in its ripples and she let their feyness layer a skin of calm on her thoughts.
Hardly aware of the chill she paced restlessly along the bank, seeing for the first time the way the dew crisped to frost along each blade of grass until the parkland veered from dark to grey to an ephemeral diamond enchantment.
A high wind frayed the sails of clouds until a crescent moon limned each shred with white gold.
Leaves skirled across the paths, rattling like the click of a dog's paws, but she saw no-one else and the dark trees of the Wienerwald were left alone to sieve their ancient harmonies from the gale.
The chill air cooled her face and seemed to sweep her problems into the distance.
They were still there, attached to her by unbreakable strings, but at least they retreated enough for her to have a breathing-space in which to resolve them.
Suddenly she laughed, face turned up to the platinum moon.
‘It's easy!’ she shouted into the rushing wind.
‘I'll go where none of them will ever suspect.
I'll go where I should be — with my spiders in Asia.’
12
It wasn't like she'd imagined a slave-auction.
No stripping off and being stood on blocks for the world-weary rich to stare at in lust or mockery.
Khaur and Danjit simply propelled her — Jezrael could hardly walk, so massive was her state of shock — out of the wintry night fields and back to their depot, leaving Ember's body lonely in the cold.
Some female handed them a hypo-bulb and they sprayed it into Jezrael's face, and there was a physical paralysis leadening her without physical pain.
Yet even that was cruel because it left her thoughts an active prisoner.
Frustration fastened Jezrael, a solid wall that cramped itself around her body.
Shock distanced her horror at what she had done to Ember.
Danjit's hand unsealed the front of her suit in the shadow-hung warehouse in front of everybody and she could do nothing about it, but his lascivious toying with her breast and the perverted obscenities he whispered in his garlic-and-beer breath couldn't make her feel terror now.
I deserve it, thought Jezrael bitterly.
Danjit's hand slid lower, skithered spider-like across her belly.
Jezrael couldn't so much as shudder.
Even breathing took attention.
She wondered what Spiderglass would do to Chesarynth when they found out that Jezrael had been trying to free her.
She saw baggies, their heads clouded in violent imminence, shooting Chesarynth, who fell with the same gut-twisting thud that Ember's flesh had made.
She saw  Chesarynth cast out, begging in the gutter Hells of Earth where she could feel no home as Jezrael had on Mars.
She saw Maggie, scooped in and carved up, the proud plastiskin peeled leprous from his face.
Because of Jezrael who thought she was strong enough to meddle and get away with it.
Danjit was licking her now, his tongue slavering lower down her neck.
It didn't matter.
The laughter, the irritation, of the rest of the team who were unloading while he wasted time — none of it mattered.
I deserve it .
All she could hope for was that Spiderglass would never find out who she really was.
It was the only thing she could do to safeguard her sister.
Jezrael's unblinking eyes grew hot and itchy with tears for Chesarynth, for all that her sister had meant to her of protection and sharing — none of which Jezrael had ever said.
I thought she would always be there.
I thought I could do anything.
Now look at me.
I can't hide myself from them .
Eventually, someone called through the echoing warehouse, ‘Quick!
Company squad-car's just rolled up.’
Mijnheer hissed, ‘Danjit, leave her alone.
How many men they got?’
The voice at the huge door whispered back, ‘One woman.
And two towers.
Big bastards.’
Danjit hastily resealed the suit to cover the love-bites he'd left where he'd slobbered over his prisoner.
Mijnheer said, ‘Remember — we're just delivering her.
Don't tell anybody anything.’
Then he sifted over to receive the Spiderglass buyers.
He soon came back, trying not to look intimidated.
Colonel Magrit Welland peered at the immobilized Jezrael.
Above the Company uniform her waves of lustrous brown hair were pinned back from her face but it didn't hide the fact that she was also some kind of tower.
Her green eyes hard, she inspected Jezrael, peered at the spiderglass tower with its fronds that swayed to her breathing.
‘Where did you get her?’
Mijnheer said quickly, ‘We're only delivering her.
COD.’
Nobody believed him.
‘It doesn't matter,’ the woman said.
‘I'll take her.
Two thousand credits.’
Mijnheer said angrily, ‘You promised five.’
‘You got another market, buddy-boy?’
The woman was hard with menace.
Both towers had their hands on what looked to be weapons.
‘Because if you have, the Company might want to ask you a few questions.’
‘Four thousand.’
Mijnheer was sullen.
‘Two-fifty.
And your life.’
Angrily Mijnheer held out his hand.
The woman dropped the credits where he couldn't catch them; the thin plastic chips feathered down through the air and Mijnheer scrabbled after them, his dignity in shreds.
Jezrael felt the Company's muscle-men pick her up and cart her away.
Her body bounced between them in the light gravity.
Closed in on herself, Jezrael felt only apathy during the flight to Spiderglass guard-school, hidden out in the asteroid belt.
Put in isolation, she washed when they told her to, ate what they gave her.
Then they gave her a battery of psych-tests that plugged straight into her nervous system; though she fought against it, they strapped her down and there was nothing she could hide, no way to stop the relentless tide of data and attitudes they programmed into her, or the probing of her mental set.
And after another sleepless night, the green-eyed woman took her to the commanding officer.
Captain Kandinskaya said, ‘Brown, right?’
For the first time in days, something sparked in Jezrael's eyes.
‘No.
You've got the wrong name.’
‘Oh, no we haven't.
Jezrael Brown, born Witwaterstrand, 2178 —’
‘It's not me!’
Jezrael protested desperately.
‘That's not —’
‘Look, you shipped into Mars on Aust 26 last year.
We got your ID, your voice-print, your retina-scan, fingerprints, brain-resonance….
But it makes no difference to  Spiderglass what you call yourself.
As far as we're concerned, you became a new identity the moment you were hit by blue lightning.
You can call yourself anything you want.’
A little snub nose and short, naturally curly hair complemented Kandinskaya's subtle make-up.
She could have been anywhere between twenty-five and forty, but Jezrael didn't care that her boss wasn't wearing plastiface or that her hazel eyes looked like they might brim with mirth.
Around the captain's head was the bland curtailed blue aura that meant a controlled openness to anything that might occur but though it was obvious, Jezrael didn't care about that, either.
She didn't know what to say.
Kandinskaya raised her eyebrows a little and scrolled through the data cube on her desk-tank.
It was angled so that only the captain could see it and Jezrael had no knowledge of what it showed, only her own innate fear of what damage it might cause.
Wires of blue light pencilled patterns on the air as Kandinskaya absorbed Jezrael's history and psych-profiles.
Jezrael could see that her personal data was offering the captain a wide range of possibilities but it had no personal significance for Chesarynth's little sister.
Once it might have done, but not now.
All that mattered was keeping her secret.
Kandinskaya stopped playing by the rules.
‘Up to now, Brown, you have been only a cypher.
A purchase.
But your training's just about to start and your scores are exceptional — perception, reflexes, empathy….
A few little personality defects like indecision but we'll get those sorted out over the next few months.
You could fit in in a number of ways.
Executive.
Quartermaster's clerk.’
No reaction.
‘Lavatory attendant.’
Still no sign from Jezrael.
‘In other words, Brown, you'll do whatever we tell you.
And I could call you Meat-head and you'd still answer.
Is that all you want to be — a broom in someone's hands?
A weapon for someone else to fire?’
Jezrael shrugged.
Her erratic gaze paused briefly on the broken nail she was picking with her other hand.
Nothing mattered except protecting her sister's identity, and she couldn't even do that.
‘So you won't mind if I run you into the main data-net as Jezrael Brown, hey?
See if Spiderglass Central can correlate you with any —’
‘Ayesha Marron.’
Kandinskaya smiled faintly.
‘I don't mind entering you into our records as Ayesha Marron if that's what it takes to wake you up.
And remember, Spiderglass has invested heavily in you from purchase through transport.
We're going to train you to be an executive, not some zombie-clerk in Stores.
We expect a return on our investment.
Now, Marron, let's hear your career decision.’
Jezrael went back to saying nothing, but Kandinskaya had the key now.
‘So, Brown, what —’
‘Executive.’
Kandinskaya nodded.
‘Executive.’
She switched off the data-analysis and scratched her snub nose.
‘Any comment?’
Jezrael barely shook her head, her clean but tangled hair falling in a mop that half hid her face.
‘Don't forget, Marron,’ the captain said harshly, ‘the bluelight is supposed to increase your ability to select appropriate options — you know, make you more decisive.
I want you to work on that one because if you don't, maybe we will.’
It was a naked threat.
‘You'll get your posting at the end of eight months.
And remember the executive's first duty.’
The words were there inside Jezrael, programmed by the cold machines of the night before.
‘Loyalty to the Company means get the job done but don't waste your squad.’
‘It may come as a surprise to you, Marron, but that includes you.
You're Company property now.
So don't waste yourself, either.’
13
Eight months later in the lull after the end of training, Jezrael-Ayesha was summoned to Captain Kandinskaya's office.
Under the clear astrodome she walked to the admin building, the sensors at Kandinskaya's door showing red.
She waited.
High above, in the bleak night of space, jagged boulders turned, flashing in the sunlight.
Overhead one vast angular monolith spun, its apex seeming about to crash down to shatter the dome.
Instinctively Jezrael ducked — and felt foolish.
It was probably a hundred klicks away.
The door sensors shone green.
Jezrael went in.
Kandinskaya put out a hand to switch off the visiphone but the speaker at the other end said hastily, ‘Oh, and another thing.’
Kandinskaya raised her brows.
‘Yes, Karel?’
‘Make sure nothing goes wrong.
I want one of my teams on it.
There's too much at stake to fool around.
I never did trust Berndt's planning.’
There wasn't a lot the captain could say without jeopardizing her standing so she just nodded once and switched off.
The neat cap of imminence around her head changed from its suppression to three positive lines of hyacinth signifying actions about to be taken.
She turned to Jezrael.
‘I presume you heard that, Marron?
Yes, well, that's your first mission.
To prepare to destroy a target.’
Jezrael was aware of Kandinskaya's scrutiny, and also aware that her own imminence — registered by Kandinskaya's desktop monitors — scarcely flickered.
The captain's eyes narrowed a little; a flare of blue fire shot out like lightning from the back of her skull down  towards her left hand.
It took only a micro-second, but it told Jezrael to prepare for some movement from Kandinskaya's left hand.
The captain slapped her palm on the desk with a sound like a breaking plate.
Jezrael tilted her head fractionally to indicate mild surprise and indifference.
The solid blue of Kandinskaya's imminence spiked darker and thinner with frustration and Jezrael responded with an overt — if insincere — display of attention.
What she said, though, robbed Jezrael of any desire to mock.
‘Your target, Marron, is Steel City.’
Jezrael felt her own imminence flare wildly and fought to control it.
Kandinskaya watched her as if she were some lab specimen but eight months of training had taught Jezrael techniques that smoothed her responses to a minimum.
Still it was hard when she'd just been asked to blow up an orbiting city with almost a million inhabitants.
I must've misheard.
‘It appears, Marron, that Madreidetic are infiltrating our transport security with rigged data-cubes.
And yes, it should concern you because what is happening is that our transports are disappearing.
Anywhere you go in space, your ship's autopilot could divert to an unknown rendezvous.
You could be attacked and killed, and the whole ship along with you, so try and look as if you care, for other people's sakes if not your own.
This is not some dumb Gate story, it's real.’
Kandinskaya licked her lips as if stalling for time; Jezrael could see her imminence paling as she strove for greater calm.
Kandinskaya stared hard at her and said, ‘The first one was apparently plucked out of its route between Mars and Andronicus and whisked away to a place in the asteroid belt some seventy-nine degrees away from here.
How it happened we don't know but the flight-recorder said it only took a couple of minutes and the navigator confirmed this.
Absolute rot, of course.
It would take days at ship speeds.
Several minutes even supposing we had faster-than-light propulsion.
The navigator claims it was like some sort of gateway through time but his  captain died and he's obviously space-happy.
As it happens we got that shipment delivered eventually though some of the perishables had gone off.
‘Whatever, we've also had three ships in the last five months taken permanently.
Gone without a trace.
And two weeks ago, one of our colony supply ships managed to broadcast a more reliable report — until transmission was cut off by a boarding party.
Our colonies out in Alpha Centauri are in enough trouble without vital food and medicines being hijacked.
Madreidetic, of course.
They've sold us rigged cubes before.
Given their nature we presume they were actually after the drugs, but that is mere supposition.
It could have been an attack on Spiderglass itself.’
Jezrael allowed her head to droop fractionally in a nod.
She could see that the captain believed all this — there was certainty in the peacock imminence around the woman's curly hair — but whether she herself could accept it she wasn't so sure.
It might be some devious take-over bid especially if the board's strong-arm boy Karel was going along with Berndt Tjerssen.
‘You are to report direct to your strike-team leader, Nils Borden, in the Spiderglass Hotel in Vienna, Earth.
He'll give you a full briefing.’
Kandinskaya turned her attention to her console, pretending to blank Jezrael's existence out of her mind.
Via her bluelight, though, Jezrael could see that it was only a minor game of tit-for-tat.
As soon as she stood up to leave, Kandinskaya, as expected, said, ‘Oh, Brown.’
Jezrael-Ayesha flinched just like she knew the captain had expected.
‘My name's Marron.’
Kandinskaya smiled tightly.
‘So it is.
If you don't screw up.’
Nils was an arrogant bastard.
Though he was shorter than Jezrael, he had a tendency to put back his bullet head and sneer down his nose at her.
All the way up on the ferry from Vienna, Earth, Jezrael kept remembering how he had treated her at the briefing.
‘Yes, Asheya or whatever your damn name is, I did say Steel City.
You know, big thing up in the sky, whirling around the Earth.’
She had stared down at him, feeling the hard disdain radiating from his muscular body and trying not to give way to the sheer physical power of the man.
‘The name's Ayesha.
Ash, if you can't manage that.
And I heard what you said.
I just thought —’
His hand lashed out to grip her arm so tightly it hurt, as he meant it to.
‘You're not paid to think!
It says right here on your records that you might be thinking of wimping out on us.
Lacks decisiveness, if you want the exact words.’
Nils jerked her off-balance, his two cohorts rising to their feet in case he needed back-up.
The deep sapphire of violence speared from all their heads.
More, there was something Nils wasn't telling her.
Not liking the odds Jezrael clamped down her anger.
‘I know the —’
Nils shoved her hard and she fell into the deep satin embrace of a sofa.
‘You don't know shit!
And in case you are thinking of reneging let me tell you that we're gonna watch you.
All the time.
Everywhere.
You can't even take a crap without one of us knowing all about it.’
‘Lucky you!’ she retorted.
‘Yeah, I'm lucky and I wanna stay that way.
So if you so much as look like you're going soft on us I'm gonna take you apart with my bare hands.
One step out of line and you'll be dead.’
Then his cohorts had forced her head back, back, until she could not breathe.
On the verge of passing out, she felt them connect her bluetower to the memorizer and Jezrael drowned in someone else's memories, the battle-plans and layouts bulling their way in to trample her personality beneath them.
Now, with the hull of the ferry drumming a different note as the thrusters tuned up for docking, Jezrael-Ayesha felt her hatred for Nils give way to the fear in her.
Steel City.
Madreidetic's most vulnerable possession, and  Spiderglass was about to blow it and its eight hundred thousand inhabitants to incandescent death that would rain destruction on the Earth below.
Not Spiderglass.
Me .
And the thought was a terror in her mind.
It was ancient, a nest of shining metal that had been the first cis-lunar colony, the first man-made world that orbited around mankind's ancestral home.
Its lights sparkled in the shadow of Earth but even as Jezrael watched its approach, Steel City was wheeling its impressive silver network into the full light of the sun and it became a diamond filigree that flashed like a new-born star.
Despite her fear she caught her breath at such beauty.
Even when she closed her eyes they were still daggered by its scintillations.
The ferry closed on its starfire, Jez let its luminous wonder account for the flashes of terrified imminence she could see crowning her reflection in the viewports.
And even this close, with the knurled extensions showing painted co-ordinates and crystallized dents, Steel City was worthy of wonder.
Because, unlike Jezrael's old home, this whole orbital was inorganic.
All of its metals had been freighted at colossal expense from Earth; there wasn't a natural curve to be seen, just endless arches and spires designed like a vast piece of jewellery.
Jezrael could hardly believe such extravagance.
That one organization could own this jewel, that was something else.
Spiderglass owned far, far more, but Jezrael couldn't imagine them owning anything so incredibly beautiful.
She began to see small craft darting like dragonflies between the soaring galleries.
Inside her a thought was crystallizing, painting her treachery in bluelight on the shining glass of the viewport:I can't do this.
I can't kill all these people.
Whatever Spiderglass says they're doing, these people can ‘t all be responsible for stealing freighters.
What if it is the Gate anyway ?
And what about reprisals?
Won't Madreidetic hit Crystal City in revenge?
I can't do it !
And however hard she tried to hide her intentions from Nils they were emblazoned around her in the electric blue of panic over the iridium crown of Steel City in the night.
That was when Nils swaggered over to her.
So scared she felt her limbs turning to water, Jezrael tried to cap her imminence into bland indifference.
Watching her reflection in the viewport she knew she'd failed.
At any moment he would slide a spike between her ribs.
She could feel it…
‘Of course,’ he whispered close as a lover into her ear, ‘we're just gonna plant the bombs.
We're not actually gonna trigger them unless Madreidetic refuse to give in.’
She turned.
He was smiling.
Mocking her gullibility.
Jezrael-Ayesha opened her mouth to say something but her brain gave her nothing to say.
She could feel her mouth trembling with reaction.
Nils smiled more widely and sauntered casually away.
As he left she caught a brief flash of sapphire from his head.
It meant violence.
He turned a brief cold stare on her.
She still could not escape him.
The queue shuffled into a blind spot between two viewports.
Jezrael looked obliquely for the rest of her squad.
Over and behind, in a different line, Ramu's head was feathered with electric-blue that he was trying unsuccessfully to tame into urbanity.
Nils, just wafting up the passenger-tube past the customs check, of course just looked high, excited, fulfilled even, like so many of the passengers now that the strange air of Steel City was wafting between the decks.
Of Thea there was no sign.
Jezrael stepped forward into nothing, allowing the tube to loft her into Steel City.
It was just like the tube back at work in Witwaterstrand, vertical strings of graffiti dripping unsuccessfully in multi-coloured smears.
Only here the guards were obtrusive.
Jezrael-Ayesha saw one woman, laser-rifle half-cocked in her arms, staring at her.
She swallowed but no spit came into her mouth.
Next time she dared look back, the guard in her niche was below and out of sight but there was another just above.
Steel City: from inside it was nothing but an overcrowded nexus of radials smelling of close-pressed bodies and metal and chemicals.
In her head Jezrael saw her route unscrolling through the throng with the sweep of passing seconds.
Making herself lean back into her walk as though she had all the time in the world, she paused to rubberneck at the clash of signs and scents and jingles.
An old man, flab hoisted by plastiskin into the semblance of youthful buttocks and belly, strolled past in a scanty g-string but the game was given away by the static pads of fake muscle that didn't even twitch as he walked.
Nevertheless he exuded pheromones and she saw two elderly ladies from the ferry clutch each other 's arms and whisper.
He pretended to bump into them; Jezrael wanted to turn and watch but her cultural modesty wouldn't let her.
Reluctantly she stepped on to a moving walkway that carried her through a mishmash of exotic atmospheres.
Madreidetic had nothing against franchising: there were tawdry oriental souks; Andronican holos where every passer-by became a hero or a young beauty; jungles full of bird-song.
In each she could happily have hopped off into the side-streets with their displays of over-priced gauds but Nils had insisted on timing things right.
The whole job had to be finished so they could catch the same ferry back.
They had to be well clear before Karel informed Steel City of the takeover option.
And overhead, where the borrowed memories said they would be, scanners searched her.
Nils had told her Madreidetic hadn't yet stolen the secret of imminence-awareness from the Company but that was no reassurance.
Nils would tell her anything.
Jezrael wondered whose memory was being replayed inside her mind to guide her through this metal rat-run.
Was it male or female ?
Female, she decided, then wondered how much editing had been done.
She could feel no personal flavour but a dirty undertow of fear.
Maybe it was someone who had no personality ?
The implications were frightening.
What'll they do to me if I screw up?
Scrub my brain clean ?
Only there was a  vertiginous attraction in that.
To forget the weight of Chesarynth, of Antoine, of Maggie….
Of Ember.
Turning, walking, lofting up or down tubes on her predetermined course, she tried to keep her mind on the job.
Jezrael shied from probing deeper, thinking,Who am I to question orders?
I can't do anything right .
Vertiginous horror swirled up around her, the riptides of chaos that lay out where decisions spun.
Enough death and suffering already laid blood-guilt on her over the old guilts from home.
Her fragile sanity crept away from the edge to cower inside the fortress of her orders.
But the damage was done.
From the breakers beyond, nightmare thoughts chipped away at her security.
What if it's just a cheap take-over shot and Madreidetic aren't the guilty ones?
Maybe this is just some pre-packed Spiderglass motivation?
What if Madreidetic won't give in and we really have to blow Steel City ?
The concept reared up fully formed: the sparkling snowflake of Steel City fragmenting from the hub of fire, spilling bodies into vacuum, the debris plunging flaming spears of fall-out on to the dense towns of Earth.
Dangerous ideas.
And as it was her first run, a chip inserted into the bluetower in her skull was recording her own performance.
Jezrael tried only to skim the surface of her thoughts.
Apprehension was something she tried not to acknowledge.
The closer she came to the centre of Steel City the more guards there were.
A tall man with an exoskeleton frightened her by demanding a retina-scan but the contacts in her eyes apparently passed muster because he let her through.
Just thinking about passing his metal-boned body again made her feel sick.
What if that happens to me?
What if he captures me ?
She could feel his light-weapon burning off her skin, charring her bones, slinging her on to some meat-heap to be reassembled from scrap.
Jezrael almost fell over a gee-node that hadn't been here when her memories had taped the place.
Her weight tripled, fell again.
What else has changed?
God, if this is all for nothing and we're going to die anyway !
The inhuman guard glared at her.
What else could she do but go on, fearing that at any moment he would realize she'd tricked him?
Here, gravity was variable.
Apparently it wasn't thought essential, but odd leaks from the room-nodes around spilled weight intermittently over her.
The few people walked swiftly, or tried to steal time from their employers, hurrying with assumed purpose when they caught sight of her or some other guard.
She felt the tall pile of her hair spiring to hide the bluetower, checked to feel that it was still in place.
Jezrael felt conspicuous.
Surely they must suspect something ?
But no.
They carried on with their plans, excluding her, and a weird loneliness hollowed her stomach with longing.
Unless it's a trap?
Madreidetic know what the Company's up to.
They're waiting for us.
We're all gonna die ….
But there was no sharp knife of imminence from them.
She was almost disappointed.
She didn't belong here, but they were too self-involved to see it.
A solid ghost, she drifted past their lives.
None of them cared about her.
The walls, curved or octagonal, gleamed into brilliance as Jezrael passed, dying behind her until the next person switched them on by body-heat.
Stray winds brought changes of temperature and smell and her ears popped with shifting pressures.
Guards checked on her; machines scanned her.
She tried to look as though all this were normal.
Then, to the second, the memories cross-hatched over the entrance to her target.
Jezrael's contact-lenses gleamed with somebody else's retina-pattern and someone's plastic palm-print in her hand keyed an old-fashioned door.
An oscillator moulded under plastiskin to her throat vibrated her larynx to some official's voice-pattern.
The door shushed open.
Surprise hammered her heart, sending it slugging through her chest.
Jezrael walked inside, scarcely believing it had all worked.
A young girl briefly glanced up from the action-cube  she was playing.
She hardly looked old enough to be security.
Around her head were fantasms of imminence, the way she'd win if she were the heroine.
She could imagine no actual threat here in the steel heart of Madreidetic; Jezrael hated to do this to her.
But Jezrael had lived more than the 3-D heroine and her admirer.
She slapped a bubble-syringe into the hair at the base of the girl's neck where the mark wouldn't show.
The heroine's image faced fearful odds in the cube but she'd make it and the girl would think she'd just fallen asleep.
Until four hours from now when Karel called Madreidetic.
Either they gave in to Spiderglass demands — or they'd lose Steel City and all credibility.
The power-room's rigged to blow, he'd say.
Jezrael didn't know if Karel would really explode so many people into space if Madreidetic called his bluff.
Maybe on Berndt's orders he would.
If Nils was anything to go by, he might.
Jezrael felt sorry for the girl.
Nothing else to do now but watch in the security-scanner, make sure it didn't record anything it shouldn't.
Twenty seconds and it began to do its own action replay.
A speck of grit danced over the time-segment at the lower right-hand corner, smearing the rolling figures.
Jezrael couldn't even see the rest of her squad at work in the power-room, but they were.
The monitor's déjà vu meant Thea was on the job.
Guiltily realizing that she hadn't finished yet, Jezrael leaped just in time to rewind the cuber.
She hated having to scan it in reverse rather than just rewind to go back to the same sequence the girl had been watching when she came in but Jezrael hadn't thought to check the counter.
Nervous, she overshot, almost knocking the illicit cuber from the girl's senseless fingers.
Get it right !
Jezrael told herself savagely.
The girl was stirring.
Jezrael's new inbuilt senses told her it was time to fade.
She backed gently towards the door.
At the last moment she shimmered forward to snatch the tell-tale bubble from the girl's pleat of blond  hair.
The girl yawned and rubbed the back of her head just as the wind of Jezrael's exit ruffled the yellow curls.
Eye to the crack in the door, Jezrael saw the girl's own guilt palm the cuber as though she'd been watching the security scanner all along.
‘Is that it?’ she mouthed at Nils, ‘accidentally’bumping into him as they fell, slower than gravity, down into the ferry.
‘What do you expect — a medal?
You're not proved yet.
Now shut up and leave me alone or I'll report you.’
There was nothing to say one way or the other whether Madreidetic's piratical policies would go on.
Nothing to show that thousands of people might go nova in three point one five hours.
Nothing but a memory that could be someone else's to tell Jezrael that any of this had ever happened.
She left the ferry after the brief trip back to Earth.
Nils' team stuck close by her.
Overhead, in the amethyst dusk above the Viennese Altstadt, Steel City was an evening star.
Back in the Company's suite after debriefing —‘You've proved,’ said Nils without praise — Jezrael was free to go out on the town.
The others didn't invite her along to their own revels.
It hurt, but Jezrael told herself bitterly,Why should they?
You've done nothing to make them like you.
You're a non-person, remember ?
She headed for the door.
‘Oh, and Ash?’
‘Yes, Nils?’
‘There's a tracer in you.
There's no place you can go that I can't follow.’
So she drifted through the diamond-decked tourists who chattered and laughed in the street-lights.
Alone, she smelled other people's coffee, other people's cakes.
A couple passed her, arm in arm.
They smiled into each other 's faces, pointing to the same things at the same time, sharing.
They must be seventy if they're a day , Jezrael realized, and wondered who she'd be with when she was that  old.
Assuming, of course, that I'm still alive .
And then,I wonder if Chesarynth ever thinks of me?
I wonder if she can …
At the next tourist-trap, she bought an old-fashioned post-card and paid a small fortune from her new salary to send it to Witwaterstrand.
The trouble was, she didn't know what to put.
Discontent and guilt settled into a sour mood.
She used her eye-muscles to flick her time-sense on; even if Karel was going to blow Steel City, it wouldn't have happened yet.
Jezrael needed someone, but the only people she knew in Vienna were killers.
Like herself.
Finally she nerved herself to go and have a drink.
At least she could be near other people, even if she daren't get close.
It was on the news in an olde-worlde bierkeller where the volume couldn't compete with groups of arm-linked drunken singers.
Steel City, a dark, starred lace black against the silvery moon, and a voice Chesarynth would have recognized: an old woman, Theresien Tjerssen, smiling plastic teeth in her old-and-modern face.
The singers' chant frayed as they began pointing at the Spiderglass Europa logo, and in amongst the strangeness of a foreign tongue Jezrael heard the triumphant old woman say, ‘Spiderglass’ and ‘Steel City’.
Jezrael laughed, a little drunk herself.
The cuber on the shelf in the corner showed Spiderglass ships on a rescue mission; a star-map cut to the Madreidetic colony out Alpha Proxima way, with shots of swollen-bellied children.
And gallant Spiderglass was taking them food and medicine.
The shot cut again to Joint-President Hans Tjerssen, looking stern and fatherly, saying something about a Gate.
The ball-game resumed its monopoly of the cuber but the singers competed with its spectators' roar.
They sang something noble and uplifting about Spiderglass and the atmosphere of pride swelled Jezrael's emotions until she was swallowed up by the crowd's euphoria.
A man had his arm around her, rocking her from side to side as the singers swayed with their patriotic song.
She belonged.
For now.
Her arm tightened around him, her other hand resting loosely on the shoulders of another singer.
People were buying her drinks; she was lifting her glass in time with the others, banging on the tables like they did.
What did it matter that she couldn't understand what they were saying?
Their imminence was a furry outreach of robin's-egg blue embracing her in their number.
Jezrael-Ayesha laughed when they did, their feelings carrying her above herself on clouds of alcoholic freedom.
I did that , she wanted to say.
Planting a bomb means saving the children that Madreidetic was leaving to starve.
That was me.
I did something right .
But she couldn't say it.
It was a secret.
And the thought of her doing something right dropped her with the suddenness of beer-induced mood.
Chesarynth.
Ember.
Antoine.
Mom and Dad.
Dael and Eiker and Maggie and Ember.
All the things I didn't do right.
All the people I've let down .
Violent fractal pictures broke in her mind — what would have happened if Madreidetic hadn't given in: the bomb exploding, the light-starred gem of Steel City bursting charred with the flames of burning bodies.
Ember, thumping down from the sunflower against the bitter chocolate of the Martian sky.
Any good at jigsaws?
And she knew now why Nils had let her leave the hotel this evening.
They had the testimony of her own brain showing what she had done; she could never deny it.
She was an outlaw.
Only Spiderglass could protect her — if she were one of them.
Company property.
That's me.
I could've killed someone else.
Ember was only my admission price.
Strangely, a comber of exhilaration lifted her, spilled acid bright in and over her, tangy and lethal as the vastness of ocean.
Jezrael felt immense, immortal, swelled by the rage at herself that grew when she realized the deaths she had diverted from herself to her friends, to Company enemies.
The sensation augmented in roaring octaves of  bitter power until she hung at the edge of being where something — some eternal truth — hung clear and untouchable as the luscious stars.
‘I'm a spider,’ she told the man beside her, and her smile glittered reckless like a knife.
He didn't understand but he heard the word ‘spider’ and laughed, and she laughed too, until she saw how the light slid over his cheekbones and dropped luminous on his hair like Ember's, then she was crying into the warmth of his shoulder and he took her through a linden-scented night to a place where her tangled feelings speared through tawdry lust into oblivion where she wasn't alone.
That was her first job.
Her second was to protect Chesarynth — if she still lived.
If she were still a person.
Three months after the Steel City affair, the training-school in the asteroid-belt blew.
Not all of it — just the administration block.
Jezrael had learned a lot in her training.
She knew how to rig ‘accidents’ that couldn't be traced back to her.
A power-duct gone crystalline where some fault in the rock had let in the awful cold of space.
Couldn't be helped.
No lives lost.
And surely they'd be able to replace all the training programs stored in the computer, all the memory-recordings….
As for the files on past students — well, they weren't that important in the cosmic scheme of things.
Spiderglass could live without them.
Jezrael felt her glands pour rivers of adrenalin into her blood as the emptiness of space swallowed the flames, smothered the roaring lungs of the explosion.
The adrenalin hurt: her shallow, panicked respiration frizzed in her brain and her heart beat so fast she felt sure it would burst.
It wouldn't have mattered if they'd caught her.
If the fire had been the hot womb of her death that called siren-like.
Not to Jezrael, it wouldn't.
But even when the shuttle she was on turned back to answer the mayday, she made sure her disguise — patterns  of others' skin and hair, eyes and voice and figure — yes, she had to make sure her disguise held, and deny her longing to be cleansed in the fire.
Otherwise they might connect her with Chesarynth, and Chesarynth would suffer.
She didn't even dare look for her, let alone make contact, but at least Chesarynth was as safe as Jezrael could make her.
What else had all this been about?
The injustice of it all, the knowledge that Spiderglass possessed her and there was nowhere she could hide from them with their tracer in her head, the certainty that Karel could blackmail her with her string of crimes pushing her ever deeper into the mire — it all added up to just one thing.
The bluelight was supposed to give her foreknowledge so she could act decisively.
But foreknowledge meant more choices for Spiderglass to take away.
She hated herself.
But she knew she could do the next job.
And the next.
Forever.
On a beach in Bangkok-Ivoire, feeling the sun's heat pushing light through the grottoes of her muscles and bones, with the sky a great raft of blue, Jezrael watched two girls build a sand-elephant beyond the sun-danced lapping blue of the Indian Ocean.
The girls chattered briefly in Thai and the scent of coconut oil blurred past Jezrael as the younger ran down to catch the sea in her bucket.
Then the elephant and its shell-jewelled howdah were an island, and the father and two mothers cuddled the children in pride and laughter.
Jezrael cried.
Faces and flames.
Heavy breathing in shadows.
Trivial enjoyments that never quite roofed over the abyss of guilt and indecision and fear for Chesarynth.
That was all there was.
That and Nils, to keep her on her guard.