

THE FIRST CAST
What could he say to Newton's note?
The man always disturbed him.
‘I sit in Lancaster,’ Newton wrote in that heavy copper-plate hand which seemed to plant sarcasm and doubt on the page by the very nature of its forceful, butting lettering, ‘like a hen on eggs gone cold.
Nothing happens on the property in Kent — from which I conclude that our plans have either misfired or we have been seen through (now there's a possibility to douse even your ever-optimistic spirit) and from you I hear nothing at all.
You could have vanished into a Scotch mist and taken a boat to one of the Western Isles — with all the plate and linen, etc., etc. — for all I am aware.
This is my second letter and it serves notice that should it provoke no reply it will be followed to Keswick by its author, bent on meeting his old and gallant friend Colonel Hope, who he had heard was passing through those parts for a short while to expedite some business before moving on to another country .’
This was followed by a lurch back to civility and a fast-knotted signature, hard to unravel.
If he were to tell the truth it would provoke Newton into the next carriage across the Sands.
Over the past few days he had fished a little with Burkett, been to Crosthwaite Church, laid a light siege to the maid Christine, cast out a few nightlines about the town and done a calculated amount of promenading.
Nor would Nevton any better understand that on a deeper level he had tried to force Hope into himself or force himself in Hope and, despite initial success, discovered a fierce resistance.
There was a stubbornness in him which would not let this Honourable Colonel in; and he failed to understand it.
He sensed that this not being able to assume the new character was allied to surprising and governing bouts of ease in his own old self.
It was as if he were playing ducks and drakes with himself.
The stone flew in the air across the surface of the water, skimming as free as a bird but only because it bounced on that surface every now and then and refused to sink at the first contact.
He wanted to be free — of all constraints, all material imperatives, of all the forces hunting him and the opportunities drawing him on.
For reasons which he could not reason —(perhaps the place had seized his spirit)— an undeniable cheeky lilt of carelessness, the rapture — long thought lost — of being the man he truly was, threatened to break through the ranks of plot, to disrupt the strategy for survival.
Try as he might, the man could not cast out this devil of himself.
He discovered that he liked the unwanted insurgent…
But it was a sort of madness.
He also knew that.
The madness of enjoying the fruits before they were grown; the madness of believing the dream to be the fact; the madness of not seizing the best chance he had ever had which would also be his last chance in England.
‘My dear Nevton,’ he wrote, ‘you are right to chide me.
I have been remiss, but not about our prospects.’
Always flatter the terror, or crawl a little, or be pompous.
Anything to keep him away.
‘I have fished Keswick like the most ancient angler, but I am about to take my leave of it.
There's not a young trout in the place, no perch for our palate, no beautiful freshwater salmon which we agreed was best of all — except for char, of course, the speciality of the neighbourhood, but, as we knew, unlikely to be so lucky.
get I will have char if I can.)
No pike either, which is a blessing.
Plenty of minnows, but I throw them back in.
Send me letters here still and I shall ask my new friend Mr (wall-eyed) Wood (prop.) to sit on them or speed them to another valley by pigeon post.
I have heard there's good sport to be had in Buttermere and Grasmere and I intend to make my  way to one or the other for a few days.
Never fear, my friend, I am in this as anxiously and earnestly as you.
But we must land the right catch.
I will be lucky and soon: I smell it.
Meanwhile I keep myself sober, chaste and fully fit: I am a credit to the service, Nevton, a credit to the sweet harsh disciplines of our beloved country.
Write soon.
Your letters are my guarantors.’
After his signature, he added: ‘P.S. Do not think I stole the plate, linen, etc. from you.
They earned their keep here.
Mr Wood reported to me that his servants had never seen such splendour and, as they carried it up to my rooms — where it sits safely!— they felt like pirates from the Spanish main, he said, hauling off the booty!’
He read it through, a touch uneasy that its jocularity might displease Newton but knowing that it told Newton what he wanted to know.
Besides, he could not be bothered to re-write it.
He opened his window and hollered down into the courtyard for the scraggy Monkey-boy who had become his slave.
He enjoyed it as the boy watched him sign his initials on the letter and then sprinkle sand on it.
He did the same with two of Mr Wood's letters, in this way doing the landlord a considerable favour.
Postage was very expensive — a shilling a sheet — but Hope, being an M. P., could sign or frank his envelopes and have them delivered free of charge.
It was an envied privilege but a hanging offence to forge or frank falsely.
He did a double stint of exercise until he was clammy with globules of sweat and then sluiced himself over from the two cold jugs of water Christine had brought him up after breakfast.
He dressed, carefully as usual.
When he looked for his money, he found that he was down to his last few shillings.
This had been anticipated.
‘If it is no trouble, Mr Wood, to set it against my account…
I shall be drawing a considerable sum in a few days but you must know how it is, travelling the country as we old soldiers do…thank you…ten pounds will be quite sufficient…and you must let me spend some more of it in your excellent company…that evening's entertainment we enjoyed together, Mr Wood,’ his voice rose in the small hallway and the other guests and servants indoors and out strained noticeably to catch what would surely be the eloquent testimonial of a compliment, ‘was one of the, shall we say, most boisterous and wise, a rare combination, Mr Landlord, I have spent, whether in London, in Europe or in and out of ships and foreign postings in a long lifetime.
I thank you, sir…and good day to you, Mr Wood.
And your letters, Mr Wood, franked…no thanks…none…my pleasure, sir.’
He made for the Druid's Well, a mile or so to the east of the town.
He had saved up the site for the right feeling.
It was a profitable hunch.
The party he had sought up and down the streets of Keswick, around the lake and in the gardens, was here in the mysterious circle of fifty upright stones at Castlerigg.
A young lady stood near the very centre of the circle, still on the arm of a much older gentleman whose attentive pose betokened a parental or protective association with his eager, fashionable young companion, who behaved as if she were very conscious of being watched and admired.
As indeed she was.
Hope flicked to alert and took in the scene: five other parties, all yielding the centre to the couple who occupied it with proprietorial ease; several guides being consulted, some read from aloud, everywhere the men pointing, the indies dipping their heads to listen or lifting them to question, with seeming humility, the words of the scholars and their translators.
Hope categorised the social substance on view as exactly as a geologist would have named the crystals in a wound of rock.
Not for a moment did his eyes sweep around the mountain heights which everywhere peered down on this upturned basin of ancient civilisation.
He had read his Hutchinson and felt well enough armed for any country conversation.
He opened it at the relevant page.
Most meditatively — remember Drury Lane, he murmured, and, his favourite whip and spur, ‘Attack, boy, attack!’— so meditatively that no one could fail to be impressed by the inner preoccupation of the handsome gentleman in Hessian boots who ruminated across the turf, he paced a slow, measured entrance to the very central point of the circle without once raising his  gaze from the earth or his head from the cusp of a hand which supported its pensive load.
He all but bumped into the couple, but, just in time, he arrested his progress, drew back, seemed, for an instant, to seek for oxygen as if he had emerged from some physical deep of ocean, looked about him at the mundane world he had re-entered and then, with rapid dignity, collected himself.
‘I do beg your pardon, sir, ma'am.’
And the ‘a’ lingered caressingly on the practised tongue.
The tone, the address, the costume, the slight bow, the gold fob, the silver tassels: the older man read the passport signs immediately.
‘Not at all, sir, not at all .
It is a place that promotes deep thought.’
Hope looked keenly at the man, held his gaze a moment — a glance which could have ruled a line straight from eye to eye — and then snapped to attention.
‘Colonel Hope, sir.’
The older man smiled widely, showing off his few but sound teeth.
‘Colonel Moore, sir.
And my ward, Miss D'Arcy.’
Hope bowed more elegantly, muttered the line about being her servant but concentrated all his will on the first look direct.
As he swivelled up he planted his most unabashed and flattering look on her, smiled slightly to animate the dimple in the scar, let his right hand trail towards his heart and, with a minute motion of his head (his hat, of course, having been flourished off) shook his long thick hair rather, he imagined, like a mane, breathing perceptibly heavily at the time so that with any sensitivity in her at all she would be in no doubt that her beauty had scored a palpable hit.
She flinched to a smile, half-turned away, sparkled.
And she was, he saw, quite pretty in the too-dainty taste of the day.
Worried that the Colonel might leap into army talk for which he had neither the preparation nor the inclination, Hope let flow a hand and beckoned in all about them.
‘Mystery, sir,’ he said, ‘in the lap of beauty.’
And, cheekily  — he was much bucked by the success of his simple stratagem — he managed to throw the gear of his comment towards Miss D'Arcy on the word ‘beauty’.
This time she blushed.
He relaxed into it.
‘Mr Hutchinson,’ said Colonel Moore, holding up his flat leatherbound volume, ‘gives us a sufficient account of both, I think.’
‘Mr Hutchinson is indeed an authority, sir.’
So Hutchinson was in: he would trump him.
‘But even he may not tell the whole story.’
He hesitated.
‘Of course I am no scholar though,’ a risk, ‘we soldiers must at times have a scholar's curiosity.’
Colonel Moore nodded happily — compliments here, Hope could see, would be manna.
‘And indeed we might say that the very greatest soldiers — Joshua, David, Alexander — who lent me one of my Christian names — Caesar, of course, our own great Alfred — the only king we call Great — Edward — and we could extend the list into the present — all have been scholars in some manner .
I myself would claim no more than the natural store of a questioning mind.’
Must remember that phrase: he could see it had struck and it struck him too: he paused to give it the silent applause of a mute punctuation.
‘But when I see those stones here, and ponder — as I was doing when I so nearly precipitated myself upon you —’ he laughed, gently, at his own folly and again rapiered a look to Miss D'Arcy who, in control now, returned to him the dreamy interest of the truly hooked —‘it was Egypt I thought on.
Egypt!’
He paused — thought of doing the dramatic half-circle — thought better of it.
Colonel Moore was benevolent but no pushover: and melodrama too early introduced, though it could be a short cut, was always a risk.
‘All of us who fear God and seek salvation through His Son must be drawn to previous explanations of the genesis of life and the meaning of death.’
The switch worked: on the faces of both of them came down that twilight of solemnity, a most vulnerable condition, he had found, if rightly played upon.
‘And these stones — so unexpected in this magnificent country — because I confess it is not for the pleasures of civilisation that I came to this district but for the informing breadth and spectacles  of Nature — reminded me of somewhere I knew not where and that was my over-selfish study which all but ended in a brute collision with yourselves!’
He sensed their relief: the twinkling ‘brute’ promised that it would not be unremittingly solemn; the man could still see a light side.
‘And then it dawned — Egypt!
I confess it might seem a little far off — not as a country but as a comparison — and yet that was what I thought.
Egypt!
When I was there — force majeure, Colonel — but still time to contemplate — the Great Pyramids, the Sphinx, the tombs, the monuments of strange beasts standing in the desert — a pomp and detail, I know, quite missing from these bare monoliths but nevertheless, in some dark undercurrent of history, connected.’
He paused, approached a half-step closer and added quietly, with an apologetic reference to Miss D'Arcy.
‘If by nothing other than the stone, the mystery and,’ confidentially, ‘the human sacrifice.’
‘A bestial religion,’ agreed the Colonel.
‘The slaughter of an innocent…virgin,’ the word was half-swallowed, ‘to satisfy a vengeful society…hereditary caste of priests…’
‘A god.’
Colonel Moore climbed into the conversation through the chance of a correction.
‘They had gods for everything, as I understand it.
A god for the rain, a god for the wind, a god for the moon…’
He turned to Miss D'Arcy.
‘See how much simpler we have made it: as well as being the true faith we are the simplest.’
‘Perhaps there you have it!’
Hope exclaimed.
‘What wisdom!
We are true, as you say,because we are simple.’
The older Colonel beamed about him and Hope tried to execute yet another manoeuvre with Miss D'Arcy — to get her to conspire (silently of course and with the finest subtlety) with him against her guardian so that the two of them could be saying ‘what a dear old gentleman he is’ and use this to draw closer together.
He thought he had succeeded but he could not be sure: her loyalty to Colonel Moore was bedrocked: so he had not scored a direct hit but then neither had she resented his attempt.
He had learnt a little more about her.
‘But I intrude,’ he said, abruptly.
‘Please: forgive me.’
He began to back away, waking away any attempt there might  be — there was none; Moore knew his manners — to detain him.
‘Are you staying in the district?’
That was both civil and friendly.
‘In Keswick itself,’ Hope returned, still, though very slowly, on his royal retreat.
‘At the Queen's Head.’
‘I will leave my card,’ said Moore, pleased enough that the propriety of a first encounter had run its sufficient course.
‘Honoured — sir, ma'am…’
Ah: that superlative ‘a-a-a’.
Hope walked across to one of the biggest stones and examined its blank surface close up with the most scrupulous attention until the Colonel and his ward had quit the field.
Now he needed patience.
He dined at three and fished with Burkett and his daughter until the evening light finally wilted, not to darkness, it was too northerly for that, but to that active dusk in which motes of light seemed pleased to elude the half-hearted grapplings of black night.
In his rooms by ten, he summoned a cold platter and a pint of beer and wrote an optimistic, almost boastful letter to Newton.
‘Not less than ten thousand pounds a year I'd guess…canny old fool in command…would not surprise me if…but convinced can succeed…patience and patience is all…please keep up your letters to Colonel the Honourable A. A. Hope, M.P.’
He franked it immediately and sent it off with the monkey.
But when all was done he was still in a rash of perturbation.
He burst his boil.
It was a day or two premature.
He had nursed it assiduously, vain of his good health, thing that, mishandled, one boil could seed others, like a sycamore rampant.
It had shifted from its deep root and was loosened so that all the ‘bad’— as his mother had called it — was now gathered into the volcanic pimple.
But as he tapped it, expertly, for he had suffered an onslaught of boils over a suppurating, pus-stinking twelvemonth, he knew that the hardness meat it was not quite ripe.
To burst it now would be to risk the messiness of it re-grouping, possibly cloning itself across the infected area and returning in a small battalion.
Nevertheless, having called for boiling water and cleansed his best knife over a candle flame, he took the risk.
The immediate ease was a great reward; the dabbing and doctoring preoccupied him further.
It was a contented half hour.
Christine came to collect the jug and steaming bowl.
He made no attempt to flirt with her nor she with him.
In another mood he might have been goaded to further efforts by her extremely obvious, even insulting, indifference, but now, if anything, he was inclined to give her credit for it.
He was even capable of finding some credit in it for himself: for after all, it proved that he did not have to take every apparently unprotected woman who came into his sights.
There was a rough equality between them which pleased him since it ignored and slipped through the magical armour of those clothes, the possessions, the name, the title, the carriage and four, the weight of deference and the history of servility.
He was amused to observe that she forced herself to be a blank when she picked up the bowl of pus and blood.
‘Will you be wanting anything else, sir?’
How disgusting he looked, she thought, sprawled in his open shirt like an ostler in drink…
‘No, thank you, Christine.
I need my sleep after all your mountain air.’
‘Good night, then…sir.’
The pause before the polite title was most satisfying to both of them.
But he was still untired.
Another evening with Wood was not to be contemplated.
That first act of over-familiarity had secured him all the credit he would ever need and besides he felt wild, restless, a mood in which he knew himself all too prone to indiscretion.
It was still hot from the dry July day: no-one could recall such a warm summer.
There were fires in the heather.
He forced open his windows and looked out over the courtyard, over the town to where what he now knew as Skiddaw stood in dusky largeness, a prehistoric beast couchant.
The air was full of sounds — the jangle of reins or goat bells, noises — could they travel so far?— of parties making for, perhaps already on, the lake ready to take advantage of the promised full moon, dog barkings, cow lowings, sheep, horses: the town and its fjords of fields was as restless as he with the hidden cries of the  night.
But the man sensed — he wanted to sense — even deeper, a disorder in the night; he longed for it.
He opened his door and called for the maid, but this time it was not Christine.
A new girl answered the call for more water.
She made three trips, each time carrying a pair of heavy jugs which she emptied into a small copper hip bath: and each time increasingly aware of and responding to the gauntlet of Hope's lust.
‘Will you come back with a little rum in about ten minutes…?’
‘Joanna.’
‘A name to roll around the tongue,’ he let his tongue roll around his lips in a mock-disgusting way which made her laugh ‘…when I've had my evening bath…’
‘Mr Wood says he's never known nobody like you for bein' clean.’
‘It is a godly failing, Joanna…
You're not local, are you?’
‘Not likely.
London.
Extra help for summer.’
‘And why do you find yourself in Keswick?’
She shook her head.
It brought to his notice the heap of auburn hair and, taking his time, he let his eyes stroll down a pinched but puckish face, breasts which looked firm though on the small side and the rest, as he would guess, in regular working order.
‘And how old are you, Joanna?’
‘Seventeen.’
‘Rum then.
In ten minutes.’
He scrubbed himself as clean as a Viking before a battle and pulled his large white linen robe around his undried nakedness, relishing the lap of texture on wet skin.
The candles were all lit.
The room would be like Aladdin's cave to such a girl as Joanna — fine clothes, the glint of plate, the stack of linen, the magnificent dressing-case, the several pairs of boots, the hats, the books, fobs, silks, glow of guineas on the writing table; he went to the window and did not turn around when she entered.
‘Put it on the writing table, Joanna.’
Beside the guineas — oh, unfair temptation to the poor!
Beside the heap of guineas so recently the property of your new employer, Mr Wood.
‘And  take out the tub if you please.’
Her lean strength swivelled the hip bath out onto the small landing.
She re-entered and shut the door behind her.
He turned, having closed the window.
‘Take a guinea from the table, Joanna.
And bring me the rum.
The guinea is for you.’
She checked herself so as not to rush and then advanced over-slowly, first took up the bottle of rum, poured a glass, then picked up a guinea, seemed, he thought (and smiled) to test it, pocketed it, brought him the rum.
‘Do you like rum, Joanna?’
She nodded and sipped: he leaned his head forward and she brought the glass to his mouth: he finished it and she let it fall on a bush of discarded clothing as he swooped down with his hand, lifted her dress clear over her waist and then, as she struggled to help him, tugged it over her head.
He stood her back and looked: she stripped off his gown and, as he was there standing, he hoisted her up and held her easily as she straddled herself around him.
Still holding her he moved to the bed.
Her thin lips clasped tight together, fearing any sound might betray her, she hooked her legs about him and pulled him further and further into her.
He wanted to say her name but he could not remember it; he wanted to engage in the physical endearments and gentleness he so much prided himself on bestowing and was received so gratefully for so doing, but this lean, hard-bodied girl would have none of it.
She writhed and twisted under him in spasms of an unfulfilled need which swallowed his own spent desire in her caverns of longing.
Even knowing he was finished she would not stop but pulled herself against him, levered and bucked with a grunting intensity which made him look down on her with pity.
He sought her out with his hands but she pushed him away as if he would hurt her and no reassurance satisfied her.
She expected and gave no kindness, no tenderness at all.
She flung herself away from him for a moment, and then returned to attack his sex but he held her off, had to use some force to hold her blind-eyed, gaunt-faced, now grasping body away from his.
This was not what he had wanted at all.
Yet, he counselled himself, he would not behave badly to her.
She had whored him as he had whored so many.
But there could be some, just a little, sentiment in it.
He lay with her for a little while as if all had been for the best and when, with a sudden, slithering movement, she was off the bed and into her dress, he thanked her, wished her good night.
She did not say a word.
She left him desolate.
In the candlelit solitude of the Queen's Head in Keswick, he lay on a rack.
He knew it was of his own making but that was not useful knowledge because he could not unmake it.
Nor, as he fully intended to sin more, could he with any penitential fidelity see the consolation of confession or even of prayer.
His soul — if indeed that scarred and insulted figment still existed — was lost to his sight, abandoned long ago and now most likely marked for delivery to the Devil.
He had reason to be in that camp…
At times he would claim that his father had been lashed in front of the town and put in the stocks for poaching a salmon, and told to pray for the soul of Lord I — whose goodness had saved him from the hanging he deserved.
His mother, he would say, had left home after such a humiliation, taking the three children on what had proved a pilgrimage of terror; he thanked God he had been nine years old and able to run off and fend for himself.
He got up and opened the window even wider for more air.
There was less noise now in the town.
He would have welcomed noise, company, a digression.
For a moment he thought of going out and joining the moon-walkers.
The sky was now brighter than it had been earlier in the evening.
The moon squatted above the mountains hugely, as if it had descended in majestic importance to pay a visit to this district, these mountains, this town only.
The houses were shaded clear against the ground: on the hills he could see the white lines of the new walls they were building like netting all over the high ground; from the direction of the lake he heard an occasional voice, as sharp as the crack of a pistol.
It was this ‘Hope’ that disturbed him.
He found a mirror, stuck candles at either side of it and sat, naked, before it, the  sweat drying on him as the warm undulation of night air moved into the room.
Alexander Augustus!
What father would anoint his child with such a leaden armour of expectations?
The Honourable!
To whom, by whom, for whom?
And yet that Honourable was such a herald.
With that Honourable he could approach a ready Miss D'Arcy who would not look at a tradesman, a craftsman, let alone a common man whatever his industry or honesty.
With ‘Colonel’ and ‘M.P.’
topping and tailing his rig he was unstoppable.
All titles, all baubles to be inherited, purchased or corruptly obtained, none needing the effort of virtue or the talent of merit, all the gift of a grateful country to a ruling body which ground its larger numbers into the dust.
And he wanted to be part of that ruling, governing, corrupting, self-enriching, self-perpetuating, invincible body which had even managed to escape revolution — he wanted to be high on its highest heap.
No doubt of that…
And yet, on this fevered night…he stared at the heavy, handsome head, looked at it until it became a strange thing to him, a feeling of stone, a sight he saw from another part of the room, this unbodied head reflected more truly in the mirror than in the live skull itself…
Why was there no consolation in slaking his memory with the bodies of women?
Or saucing his ambition with fantasies of wealth, success, escape?
It was this Hope that interfered with it all.
He could not abide the spoilt and pampered younger son of the Earl of Hopetoun.
He despised the ease with which he could now engage in a life beyond the mightiest exertions of the man he had been born to be.
Yet he was stuck with Hope and he must stick by him.
To lose him would be worse than losing himself: it would be losing the only chance left to him for the life he had always and violently lusted after.
‘But to myself I'll call myself John,’ he whispered to the mirror.
‘To myself, by myself, I'll be John, just John, plain John, the John I was christened.
Good, English, John…’
Colonel Moore had left his card and the next morning, at a careful eleven o'clock, Colonel Hope called at the rented villa on  the lakeside.
He was informed that Colonel and Mrs Moore had left with Miss D'Arcy on some unexpected business and would not be returning for at least a fortnight: and even that was by no means certain.
The stump of the boil throbbed: he had not cleared it.
He decided on a brutal vinegar poultice.
THE FISH
Buttermere was nine miles from Keswick by the horse road, fourteen by the carriage road — both steep and difficult passes.
The Fish Inn, now fully recovered from the wedding of Tom and Alice, sat between Crommock Water and the adjacent lake, also called Buttermere.
The inn was a small cluster of a place, stables, byres, outhouses.
Sometimes it was known as the Char because of its sign — a crude but unmistakable painting of that fish found only in the deepest lakes — Buttermere being one — and already considered a fashionable delicacy in London.
It was the site where such a building had to be, if buildings there were at all.
If you rolled a god-like pebble across the valley floor, it would come to rest on the site of the Fish, for the location commanded every aspect and enjoyed every advantage — surrounded by lush flood meadows, watered by nearby falls and tumultuously clear fell becks, sweet in its grasslands and serene in its views.
Joseph Robinson had blessed his luck to marry a woman who had a certain expectation of such a fine spot and his vigorous commerce had turned a pothouse into a stopover for some of the best in the county, in the land even.
He had not been so happy with the farmland which went with the Fish; his town talents (he was from Cockermouth, about ten miles away) had given him neither the patience nor the experience for such niggling country work and — as he was a man who took advice badly — his neighbours had soon left him alone to rot alone.
Without the thriving Fish he would have been in debt.
And it  was Mary, they all said, who made the business sing.
Without her…
On Friday morning she always went to take some food to Kitty Dawson.
She was glad of the chance to get away.
These days she sought out excuses to be on her own.
Her father disapproved.
‘It is not that he minds,’ her mother said, wearily, as always, explaining and defending her husband to their daughter.
‘I know.’
‘It's just that he worries if you aren't here.
He always has.’
‘I know.’
And he had.
For better and for worse reasons as she had divined as a girl.
But she knew also that his better self would struggle to serve her best interests and in its better moments was quite selflessly caring; and so she had long ago ignored the pettiness, the commerce and the insult of the worse self.
‘Don't worry, Mary,’ her mother said, as she said so often these days, her own face a portrait of Anxiety, ‘everything will turn out for the best.’
The ‘girl’, twenty-four — unwed and such a ‘catch’.
‘It hasn't been any good for you,’ her mother looked about to be certain Joseph was not with earshot even thought he had just gone off to fish in the lake, ‘all this…’she added, unnecessarily, casting an accusing look in the direction of the inn parlour.
‘All that…’
‘I won't be long.’
‘A girl like you…’
‘You married late, mother: much older than I am.’
‘But I wasn't thought of as a Beauty.’
This was only partly true: but for her pock-marked skin she would have been much sought after: as it was she had been pursued more through calculation than desire.
‘And besides, my father was a Tyrant.
He wanted one daughter for a servant.’
She seemed oblivious of the echo this might find in her own daughter's life.
‘I always go to see Kitty on Fridays.’
‘But it was only yesterday you were out and…oh dear.’
She held her left side: there was a pain which kept recurring whatever she did to relieve it.
Dr Lazenby at Lorton had said  that she should take more rest: as if that were possible with a farm, an inn, a husband and a daughter to work and worry about.
Mary helped her to a chair: brought her the smelling salts, then a glass of ginger wine and called in Annie who helped to fuss over her until Mrs Robinson felt first petted, then relieved and finally embarrassed.
‘Away with you.
It's nothing but a pain.
It's gone now.
Isn't it, Damson?
Yes — Damson — yes?’
Damson, the cat, had been taught to ‘talk’ certain words and, at the command, managed a very passable ‘Yeees’.
Mary gave her a saucer of milk.
She felt guilty at how much she enjoyed being out of the house, even out of the village.
She had rarely felt like this before but too much was now oppressing her.
It was a day of swift clouds but they were light grey, thinly spread, unthreatening, and when the sun speared through, it dazzled the lake and the foamy fell streams.
Mary paused, some distance from the little settlement of Buttermere, and steadied herself inside this deeply protected, world's end valley, the home as might be of the hidden enchantments of fairy tales as Mr Fenton had said.
But that was no help.
The memory of his last visit would not leave her; there was a jagged edge to it — for had she not tried to force him against his will and had he not been aware of that and too kind to give her the direct reaction she deserved for her over-boldness?
That was how she saw it and it added to her perturbation just as the sight of Tom leading hay over under the far wood gave her a quite unnecessary pang for she had never really loved him.
Yet a devil was loose somewhere, a restless imp had slipped into her and would not be harried or prayed out.
She who had so many reasons to be content was now besieged by envies, regrets, shameful, all of them, and she burned, on that hot July day, to admit to such inflammatory meanness.
She could not understand it.
Marriage would come or it would not and if it did not come sooner it would come later or she would be unmarried and what stigma was there in that?
When had she ever cared and why did she care so sharply now?
The pause had steadied her for a while but then it enabled  the gnawing to chew on her once more.
She hurried on into the high woods to see Kitty, her basket Wed with even more goodies than usual, a stock, indeed, which her father would (rightly) have called wasteful, far beyond alms.
Woods were soothing: the noises diverted her.
Not only the birds, the streams, the flicker of a hare, a fox, but the vaulting noises of the woodsmen, the steady dunk of an axe, the feeling of invisible beings inhabiting the same spread city of trees.
She tacked up the fell like a sailboat before the wind.
As she moved, she took note of the world close to her — the green woodpecker, its flash of holly red, mustard yellow, the great soar of a spruce, the wind whispering differently through different consistencies of leaf, hare track, badger hole, unripened blackberry, fir cones big enough for kindling, and the incessant weave of thrush, linnet, chaffinch.
Had Mary been told that her knowledge of the countryside was indeed ‘knowledge’, she would have dismissed the tribute as, at best, a taunting flattery.
Yet all around her, in their revolutionary impulse, men and women not of the greatness of Coleridge but certainty of a similar ambition were beginning to log and classify, to catalogue and proudly identify what, until quite recently, had been the terrain of a very few — the variety of nature as known by Mary.
Otley at Keswick with his geology was tracing the origins of life in rock rather than parchment, in crystals, graptolites and trilobites from the millions-of-years-old fells in the Lake District rather than in scrolls kept dry in the deserts of the Middle East for a mere couple of thousands of years.
The genius of English painting was turning to the grandeur and the detail of Nature — Turner, Constable, Wright of Derby, Gainsborough — all coming here, sometimes no more than a few yards from the wood in which Mary was now making her way, also driven by the strange, indefinable current of change, as powerful and mysterious as the turn of a tide, which now decreed that the study of man should be through Nature.
It had its Arcadian examples — like all revolutions it dug into antiquity for help and respectability and dynamic metaphors — and Mary could be seen, that morning, in woods as sun-speckled as a thrush's throat, as a shepherdess from the Hellenic world, a Grace from their pagan earth-suckled legends, but above all a spirit of the place.
Her beauty, too, was natural — fed on plain bread, milk, eggs, fish — often char from Buttermere, but trout, pike, salmon too — and game — woodcock, wood-pigeon, cockerel and the novel intrusion of fruit.
This was her father's invention and he was very proud of it.
Her father, a Cockermouth townee, had known several nautical men and took an obsessive interest in Our Fleet, Our Nan, Our Sailors: naval patriotism was his sport, the talk of his tap room.
Nelson, by now, was his nonpareil.
But Joseph had always been very devoted to any local news and for a long time the talk of the town had been the Cockermouth man — Fletcher Christian's — Mutiny.
Joseph had followed the case with a fascination he could not explain.
He became an expert on breadfruit.
He attempted to envisage and explain the incredible feat of navigation undertaken by Captain Bligh after the Mutiny.
He reached into any dip of information for enlightenment on the customs and manners of the people of Oceania.
For hours he would brood over the significance of the case brought against Captain Bligh.
He became an encyclopaedia, a bore, a touchstone and a perennially reliable spring on the subject — most of all he brooded over what Fletcher Christian might have done — had he headed for Australia?
America?
Back to England?
There had been sightings, his family was powerful enough to keep him hidden and safe from the inevitable hanging ‘should he show his face on the shores of Albion again' — a favourite phrase of Joseph's, picked up from a knife-grinder whose preoccupation with Bligh, the Bounty and the Mutiny had almost equalled Joseph's as witnessed in a fierce contest of informational prowess contested in the snug of the Bull in Lorton where the knife-grinder had eventually conceded defeat and been given several unexpected commissions (including one from the vicar of Cockermouth who disliked Joseph intensely and produced a cluster of blunt knives and dullest scissors to prove it) as compensation.
And in all this, Joseph had learnt that Bligh's proven and later much copied method of keeping off sickness, especially the scurvy, was to force fruit on his crew: fruit and exercise, for which purpose he  carried a fiddler to make them dance every day.
Exercise, on a farm, was not hard to find and Mary's daily round included flitting up and down slopes sheer enough to grip an unaccustomed calf with solid pain for a week.
Fruit, though, had been the filler for pigs, the mash for cattle nursed past Christmas, at best the occasional absent-minded addition to a bare table.
Joseph made it obligatory and made his wife and daughter crunch their way through apples and pears as devoutly as he would grind through grace.
Mary's loveliness, then, as she lifted her heavy skirts to seem to skim up the steep wood by the cunning of lightly indented sheep paths, was supported on a diet, a regime of exercise and a purity of mountain air ionised by the nearness to the sea; it was also — according to Wordsworth — nourished on the place itself and the people and life lived simply there — a life he placed at the heart of the Romantic Movement.
‘You always look so well,’ said Kitty, as she so often said.
Mary took no notice: she was largely — though not wholly — inured against compliments.
‘Your cheeks are wild roses, Mary: the pink ones that blow away at once.’
The walk up through the harmony of the sunny woodlands, the lightness of sensation which a testing walk always gave her, coupled with her natural health, did bring out every pleasing feature she had.
And she could at least smile at Kitty's compliments because no-one was in earshot and anyway Kitty was mad.
The hut she now lived in had been well built by a woodman more than three years ago.
Since that time the trees which had once enthicketed the hut had been lopped down and now the pyramidal vernal tent stood isolated among a company of stumps, like stepping-stones from the forest to Kitty's lair.
Mary sat on one of the stumps, Kitty on another.
Mary handed over her parcel of food and treats which Kitty took with a happy nod, grateful for the saving kindness.
She foraged in it immediately to see if her young supporter had been able to smuggle through a twist of tobacco.
‘Oh good Mary, blessed Mary, Mary Virgin Mary, good you girl.’
Mary winced at the incontinent ignition of thanks activated  by the discovery of a modest twist of Joseph's tobacco.
Kitty got out her clay pipe and packed it frugally and very skilfully.
‘We'll put up a statue to you, Mary.’
‘Please, Kitty.
Smoke your pipe and enjoy it.
Then we'll talk.’
Kitty took about a dozen tender puffs and then pressed the pad of her index finger most gently on the glowing weed.
‘Save it,’ she announced.
‘When it's cold.
Good girl, Mary.
Good girl.’
Kitty moved from hut to hut every few years.
The woodmen never broke up those temporary dwellings which they built to see them through the weekdays of the felling season.
This reluctance expressed an unusual lack of thrift on the part of men to whom it was a necessity, but the bond with the past was strong and there was some ill-defined superstition clinging about the woods which forbade the useful dismantling of these huts built, often, to accommodate up to half a dozen men through all the taxations of a northern spring, summer and early autumn.
They became the refuge of the vagabond and beggars sought them out as natural almshouses.
Kitty had lived in huts such as these and around these woods for more than fifty years.
Mary had been brought up with her story which, for many in the valley — except her own generation, increasingly unable to visit her on the heights she chose for her seclusion — had gone cold long ago.
But Mary had been touched by it as a girl and, as her goat herds had taken her high in the woods, she had often come across Kitty in the course of things.
Eventually, she overcame her fear — with other schoolchildren she had sometimes ganged up to cry ‘witch’ at Kitty, delighted when she ran after them, gleefully scudding away like infant demons scattered by Beelzebub.
Then Mary had seen the old woman for what she was — a pauper, trapped in her sadness, her madness, now frightened, now lost; and her story — not only for the tale itself but because it concerned someone she knew, before her, now covering the pipe's small bowl with protecting beech leaves — wrung her heart.
Kitty's father had been a woodman, born more than ninety years ago, in the reign of Queen Anne, just out of the valley in  Lamplugh, a village named after one of the Conqueror's more savage barons and ever since his brutal arrival sunk in the spellbound gloom of ossified superstition.
There were still — at the end of the enlightened eighteenth century, that Age of Reason which matched itself against Athens — old women in Lamplugh who were convinced that you could be led to your death by a will-o'-the-wisp or terrified out of life by the fairies.
Kitty's mother had been such a black-clothed incantator, full of rhyming recipes for ills and puddings, for scalds and weather and animal magic.
Her father had been glad to get out to the woods where he led a gang, made a living and found, in his daughter Kitty, all he wanted for softer pleasures.
She became the elfin presence, the luck charm, the sweet pet of the forest: and when she was sixteen, she met William, four years her senior, a carpenter just out of his apprenticeship in Lorton — the next village on from Buttermere — who came every week to make the first selection of wood from her father's stock.
They fell in love, all four parents were happy at the match.
They were asked to wait until Kitty was eighteen and they agreed.
He was killed in a most extraordinary way.
After a long morning's work in midsummer, he had eaten and then leaned back to take a short sleep.
His head had been propped against a rock which had attracted the lightning of a sudden thunderstorm: the bolt had hit the rock straight on and rolled down the rock — so they all swore — to stab him fatally in the neck.
From that day, Kitty would not leave the woods.
At first her father had tried persuasion, but she was intransigent: brute force, but she ran back to the woods the moment she could: custodial restraint, but he could not bear the sight and sound of her pining.
Finally they let her go — the mother convinced that a boggle had possessed her daughter and only too glad to see the last of her, the father, heartbroken, soon to submit to an illness which his former self would have beaten off quite easily.
Kitty had stayed in the woods above Buttermere and Lorton ever since — rarely more than a quarter-mile from the rock on which her suitor had been killed.
Mary had begun to visit her regularly on Friday mornings — with Mr Fenton's express approval and the Christian support of  her mother — when she was about fourteen — at about the time her father had begun to use her in the Fish and Budworth had turned up to sketch his mischief.
About ten years; over five hundred visits: and such was the silver-plated delicacy of her politeness, she had not once asked the questions she longed to ask.
What had.
he been like?
How much had they loved each other?
What had she felt when she saw him dead?
Did she not think that such grieving as she had showed was somehow too much for any memory to bear?
The old woman was gypsy brown, the tan so shiny on the mild skin that it was like a fresh varnish.
She sat in front of her turfed teepee like a re-located squaw — the mass of brown hair loosely braided and heaped on her head like a parcel carelessly tied with twine, her forget-me-not blue eyes looking at Mary only when she thought she was unobserved, at all other times intent on the middle distance, her small, slight, quick body quivering as she enjoyed the rare comfort of proper sat-down company and felt the physical, close interest of another human being.
Now and then she smiled directly at Mary, revealing a poor few blackened teeth which did not, however, impair the sweetness of her girlish shyness.
It was a smile which Mary never could resist.
Indeed, here with Kitty at the edge of the woods, she felt such a relief into unselfconsciousness that she bathed in it as she bathed in her pool.
They talked about the woods.
Kitty knew them as well as any animal, as intimately as the dogs who worked the sheep and hunted the foxes and badgers and otters.
Kitty spoke of a new lair, a vixen biting the ear of a cub, an owl on a rat, the sound of a wolf although everyone knew the last wolf in England had been killed some years before about forty miles to the south, near the Bay.
From Mary she required nothing but her presence and she was not at all interested in any talk of village gavottes.
Mary had once mentioned Tom to her but his marriage to Alice would, she knew, be of no significance in the intensely inward life of the old woman whom unsympathetic observers would have categorised as a mad old crone.
Mary knew better.
Listening to Kitty was like listening to a stream, to the wind, to the sounds across the valley floor at night: except that Kitty was a woman, had once been young as she was, had been loved, lost tragically, but lived to be a testament to single-minded passion.
The ragged old woman brought out some vibrant corresponding note in her loyal young friend.
‘You took her some tobacco, didn't you?’ was her father's return, surly greeting.
Mary confessed instantly.
Joseph, who paid her no wages and feared increasingly (Alice had been a most unexpected reprieve) that his goldmine was sure to be removed from his use, could ape his former threats but do nothing.
‘She's been nothing but a nuisance all her life.’
Mary declined to reply.
Her silences infuriated and mortified him.
‘There's a fine young gentleman and his lady come in a chaise in the parlour now taking some tea.’
He paused, sore enough to want to jab.
‘You can go and see if they'll be wanting anything more.
I've a fair idea,’ and here he smiled a benign leer which long ago Mary had learned to repulse but still — unawares — could cause her to coil up in herself in shame, ‘they've come here express to see the Beauty.’
She went through as her father bid her: hating, every day more and more hating the show she was, the part she had to take up, the curio she had become, beached on the suffocating shore of the Fish.
JOURNEY'S END
His melancholy was a fierce and active thing.
There were those at that time who cultivated melancholy to give themselves the appearance of profundity.
John-Augustus tried to josh himself into accepting that his own bout was no more than that.
But this was a real vertigo of despair.
He had mixed laudanum with his wine, but even that had not helped.
He tried to trace the cause of this present onset — which, like all the attacks, seemed much the worst and quite irredeemable.
It could happen that nailing and uncovering the cause would begin the progress of the cure.
This time he traced it back to the servant in the bedroom — he blocked out or refused to remember her name — a cold witch, he decided, a witch who would find no satiation in this world, maybe even a spirit brought back to test and ruin those who had intercourse with her.
He could not forget her thrashing coldness, her silent chasm of demand, his own inadequate coin of futile charity.
There are few rejections as telling as a sexual rejection.
She had touched on the deadness in himself and this spasm of melancholy had come to torment the impacted sin of a lifetime.
He had just enough energy to plan an escape.
Burkett's daughter would saddle up a horse and ride down the east shore of Derwent Water to the Lodore landing stage.
He would let her father row him down the lake and dangle out a few lines to see if a tickle of fish would tickle his mood.
John-Augustus knew what he was shutting out.
In his drugged  dreams he saw the silent faces crying; he saw the loving mouth distorted with grief; he knew about the humiliation and the want — all his fault, his fault, his responsibility, his wickedness, his weakness, his sin, his sacrificial past, the victim to what end — who was murdered at that powerful stone circle near Keswick?
When human life was so short and had been so cheap, what was there but the living, the greed of the moment?
But down came melancholy like a guillotine and he had to wake up before the steel cut the quivering cold sweaty flesh.
Burkett's daughter sat on the stallion like a lady in a tapestry and he felt his body move out to join hers; he ought to marry someone like her — handsome, workaday, submissive, as sensual as a sunny woodland; perhaps he would ask her.
He could fish with Mr Burkett — they had caught a fine pike and two trout on the lazy trawl up-lake — he could let go all those minaretted plans, those fantastical ambitions, and be what he was born to be, a jovial, lazy, loved and loving man, getting by.
He helped the girl down very deliberately — well aware of Burkett's calculating and approving regard — and as his fingers pressed on that tensile waist, as her free breasts brushed his over-layered chest, as her thighs carelessly kissed his own, he saw a break in the tight-capped cloud of his misery: but he could not reach out to it.
His course was set otherwise.
He took the horse from her and went on alone.
He rode into the valley of Borrowdale which opened up about two miles south of Keswick.
Though he had been in the district for no more than a week, he felt he knew it well.
But Borrowdale astounded him.
He had decided to take this, the most spectacular, way round to Buttermere principally because of what he had heard of the rich wadd mines in Borrowdale valley — opened up only once in seven years, so he had heard, in order to control the market in this unique mineral which was useful over a remarkable range, from gunpowder to dyes.
George Wood had hinted, and not too darkly, about the ‘lads’ who knew how to get past the guards and into the mines at night: he had intimated that there was a prosperous smugglers' route through the highest mountain passes to the coast where the ore would be taken over to Ireland or down to Liverpool and Swansea.
John  had been alerted to the possibility of profit and so he sentenced the Honourable Alexander Augustus to a stiff course of Lake Tourism into the Jaws of Borrowdale.
He trotted past the celebrated twisting and churning of the Lodore Falls without the slightest inclination to stop and wonder: there was no-one around to impress and the sudden skin of grey which had drawn tightly over the summer sky like a blind hurried him on.
He wanted to be through this valley.
From his window at the Queen's Head, and as he had sauntered around Keswick, he had become affectionately disposed to the amiably brackened rumps of the Skiddaw range: here in Borrowdale were the volcanic rocks.
In fact, unknown to the traveller, who was no more a geologist than a naturalist, he was about to step over the geological phenomenon of two prehistoric ages crunching into each other as noticeably as jagged waves hitting a large smooth stone.
The flames from hundreds of eruptions had once furnace-fashioned this valley and left it with rocks precariously dangling on steep hills, scattered warningly across the path, uncertainly wedged, it seemed, against the few huts which passed for homes over an ill-repaired double span of bridge which crossed the stream feeding the lake.
As Alexander Augustus he was tempted to go into the village for some refreshment: it looked charmingly picturesque, even under the dull skin of grey; smoke from chimneys curling, thatch, goats, geese, the homely clutter of rustic glamour: but as John he knew only too well the new picturesque was the comfortable conscience for the old poverty.
To John such a charming scene signalled want, bitter winters, spare victuals, goitres, rheumatism, at best the forgivable disgrace of pauperism.
He clicked his teeth and trotted past.
Past the Bowder Stone too.
Everyone had said he must stop and examine this Dreadful rock poised on a fingerpad of ground high above the valley like a Damoclean judgement.
But sights or sites equally engaged him only when there was a purpose.
He would pretend — for he always had his excuses well marshalled in preparation for any surprise attack of questioning — that he had been disinclined to stop because of the stone's unnaturalness resulting from Mr Pocklington's enthusiastic enterprise in  housing an old woman there whose hand — for a fee — you could shake under the stone.
The Honourable Alexander Augustus had already made a favourable impression by raising an eyebrow at the antics and constructions of Mr Pocklington on the islands of Derwent Water.
Snobbery was always an acceptable proof of quality: accent could defeat learning.
Augustus and John both knew that.
The reflection only increased the grip of his misery.
This blackness had always affected him.
Even as a boy.
Like the being able to slip out of his own head and stand in a corner, hang on the ceiling, terrifyingly, silent-screamingly BE SOMEWHERE ELSE, looking back at the body left behind.
So too this gnawing of himself like a fox caught in a trap forced to bite off its leg and for pain, every few moments raising its face to howl at the sky.
If he shouted aloud then — as in the high alpine passes — the rocks would crash down on him.
He opened his mouth as wide as he could and yelled and yelled again.
So hard that his head felt struck.
And again he yelled aloud.
The sound echoed longer than a cuckoo's call.
If challenged he would say that he was testing the echo — a favourite pastime for Lake Tourists whether inside the fells or on the Lakes themselves.
Indeed, Mr Pocklington and his ilk would take small cannon onto a suitable lake and fire them off for the edification of the plumber partridges who came to nest in the district.
But no stone budged from John's mad yelling: nor did it make him feel much better.
The plan was not working out at all well.
He feared Newton and Newton would have every justification for reproach.
John-Augustus was excessively vulnerable to reproach.
He could deal with anger and steel himself against pity: but justified reproach slid through his armour like a poisoned dart.
Into the Jaws of Borrowdale he rode on this fine horse, handsomely saddled by the benevolent Mr Wood, his new friend.
Though his yelling had not moved the stones it had set off the dogs and one against the other they barked and bayed, an unusual salute as he entered the bounds of the sheer-sided, heavy-wooded, spectacular wilderness.
At Rosthwaite he spotted what he knew in this district could pass for an inn.
It was mid-afternoon and the ham and beer of breakfast had lost its sustaining energy.
He went from the light grey day into the gloom of a kitchen and immediately found his feet colliding with what appeared to be an armada of saucepans placed on every foot of the flagged floor.
The noise alerted a woman who came in from a side door and challenged him quite sharply.
‘I merely wondered, ma'am,’ said all of Augustus with a touch on his heart and a bob of his unwigged head, ‘if a traveller could find a little food and drink.’
‘We hev nae drink but oor own beer,’ the woman said, discouragingly.
She was in no mood for visitors.
Apart from everything else she had spent the morning standing in a stone-cold pool hoping to gather leeches which would suck into her bare legs.
But four hours had yielded only two small leeches.
‘Your own beer will be very welcome.’
‘There are them that divvn't like it,’ she said, dogged, as he was to discover, by honesty.
‘But we can afford nowt else, sorry.
Maest travellers don't get up here forby they're beggars.’
This was by way of explanation.
She shifted her weight, he noticed, restlessly, from one foot to the other.
‘And food?’
‘You've come at a gay bad time.
Aa was scouring out these pans for stewing some fruit, sithee.’
‘Ah!
All these are your pans.’
‘Aa lend a few frae roundabout.
My own wouldn't be enough.
Can't waste fruit.
Mind you,’ she admitted, ‘it's far frae ripe just yit.’
‘I'm particularly fond of fruit.’
‘Aa oors is to be bottled.
If we don't need it, the pigs thrive on it after t’ back end.’
‘I see.
So there's beer…which,’ he held up his hand, ‘I'll risk and…?’
She let his pause hang like an insult.
‘You could have a bite o’ breed.’
‘Bread.
Excellent.’
‘Aa made it nobbut two days sen.
You'll have to soften it in milk.
And we could just hev a lock o’ goat's cheese.’
‘The food of the gods.’
‘Nut heer.
Oor goats hev hed that green sickness lately but whativver they all say oor cheese isn't that much affected.’
He discovered that this talk and barter over food had brought on an almighty appetite.
Where he had felt a little pang — outside, horse-held, self-wrapt — now, delighted by the truculence of her conversation, he was ravenous.
‘Beer, bread and goat's cheese — with pleasure.’
He put a little command in that request.
She hesitated for a moment, a dim figure in the dark kitchen, distinguished by a brown balloon of a mob-cap and a coarse sacking apron which fell from her neck to her feet like a monstrous bib: it was hard for her to accept defeat.
‘You'll have to sit amongst pans.
I've them aa set out, sorry.’
‘I will eat outside,’ he said, faintly but firmly.
‘The air —’ he paused, ‘it is after all the nectar of the district, the essence of the mountains — to eat simple food in such air with such wonders of nature to look on — who could ask for more?’
‘I'll send me husband, then,’ she said, huffily, and went out vanquished, pausing only to give a good hard scratch to her left calf.
The spat had cheered him up.
Provided he could use the motion, he might be able to rock away at the melancholy and eventually shift it off its fierce sticking point.
Surprisingly soon the landlord came with the order and stayed, being offered a beer for himself.
The beer was passable, the soaked bread excellent and the goat's cheese most tasty if rather powerful.
John had spent months on a diet which would have counted this country meal as a feast fit for any Honourable Member of Parliament in the land.
The landlord, in the brightening daylight — the grey was peeling to white and the white here and there pervious to a faint yellow flash of sunlight — sat on the mounting-steps below, purposefully.
He saw that the man was one who would expect privilege.
His resolution to punish his wife for letting a stranger in at such a time would have to wait.
‘Women are outside creation when they're busy on a thing,’ he said, staring across the small, scruffy farmyard — like the Fish, the inn doubled up — at a broken stable door.
‘There's no dealing with them.’
His rich guest merely made a sound, unable clearly to articulate a word with his mouth as wadded as a feather pillow.
The landlord, who felt that the explanation — indeed, to all intents and purposes, the apology — he had made for his wife was more than enough to compensate for any gentlemanly inconvenience, was about to get back to his work in the fields when his visitor's too casually direct questions about the mines charged him to stay.
He parried the stories of wealth and of smuggling: all town talk, he said, and besides, people in Borrowdale just would not be up to the scheming and deception involved, not the people he knew in Borrowdale and he had been born there — as had his wife — born there — as had their parents
‘Do you know about the Borrowdale cuckoo?’ he asked, turning an amused expression on the man who might — from these questions — be from the government — they had had government people before and he would not be surprised at them sending a senior man.
After all, the illegal trade, as he knew to his immediate, though expertly hidden, advantage, was very profitable indeed.
No, the man said, sighing as he downed the last spread of goat's cheese, he had not heard of the Borrowdale cuckoo.
He was new to the area.
‘Well, it'll just show you what simple folk we are roundabout here,’ the landlord said.
‘Not long ago, a cuckoo made the most almighty noise ever heard in Borrowdale.
It must have had the throat of a raven because it cuckooed its way up and down the valley for weeks on end.
Nobody could sleep at night.
The dogs were set off by it and the dogs set off the sheep and the goats and the cows.
Borrowdale was in an uproar from Lodore to Seatoller and back again.
Of course they all went out chasing it: but it was a clever bird; it would let us get near but never near enough.
Until one day it went away.
They saw it go out of the valley down towards Keswick.
So they had a meeting and decided they would put a big net over the entrance to the valley  so that it would never be able to get in again.
Day and night they worked on it, never letting up until they'd got it finished and slung up down at Castle Crags — you must have passed it coming up — fit to be a fortress on its own, and the net went across the crags and across again to the other side.
Well…’
The landlord stopped.
Clearly it was time for a vital intervention.
John obliged.
‘And…?’
‘It worked.’
He paused.
‘It kept it out,’ the landlord said, solemnly.
‘Never heard a sound from that cuckoo from that day to this.
They took the net down after a few weeks but kept it handy, you know.
Hasn't been needed since.’
He stood up and bent his knees slightly to take out the stiffness.
Not a smile had threatened his expression.
‘That's Borrowdale folk,’ he said.
‘We know nothing of what happens outside our valley.
And those mines,’ he gazed across at the fells but, true to his wits, in the wrong direction, ‘they open them up every six or seven years, they take what they want and then they close them down.
We know nothing else.’
John knew when he was being lied to but knew also when he was wasting his time.
He registered that George Wood's information had been correct, paid his bill and — to the relief of the landlord — went on his way over the pass and not back to Keswick, which would have been more likely for a government man.
He had to lead his horse over Honister Pass but its barrenness pleased him greatly.
There was, as far as he could see, nothing that need be identified or admired or paused over: just bare grey rock sheering down to a narrow track which was used for the most part by packhorses and even then not often.
He felt mercifully isolated and stopped for a while to lean back on the lower bank of fell.
His horse, the reins loosely looped over an upright arm of rock, noisily nuzzled into the cropped turf.
The man felt his melancholy enlarge as if — oddly — to take on the shape and texture of what was before him.
In some fantastic way, he could see his mind like these barren screes — a frozen cascade of broken rock face lying on the more solid rock waiting only for an impulse to charge it into dangerous motion.
Mistakenly, he thought that the figures he saw high up on the furthest rocks were working the rich secrets of the plumbago or wadd mine.
They were, in fact, hacking slate in the Honister quarries.
Each man, John was to learn, would cut out up to half a ton of slate and load it onto a sledge which he would drag out of the open shaft and along a perilous track slotted narrowly into the fellside.
He would then turn down the fell and begin to race, faster as it grew steeper, more furiously as the half-ton of slate threatened to catch him up and (as happened regularly) crush against him, until, blown with exhaustion, he reached the unloading bays at the foot of the fell.
After which, his empty sledge on his back, he would walk and clamber slowly back up the steepness to enter once more into the dripping slate shaft and repeat the exhausting process.
All about Keswick he had noticed gangs of men building the giant reaches of drystone walls enclosing even the highest fell-land, the better to take advantage of grain prices in the war; gangs of men working the woods, as charcoal-burners, swill-makers, coppice-workers, plain woodmen; and, as here, men in the high mines — men spread all over the landscape, bondmen of industry, all living out near their workplace, turf huts and teepees scattered abroad, excluded from society throughout the week of their work and let into its comforts and pleasure only for a brief Saturday night escape.
It was this working landscape which he recognised far more immediately than the picturesque cataracts, the prescribed ‘stations’ for the Claude glass, the thrills of nature.
Just as, below him, on the valley bottom, there would be vagrants, beggars, a sixth of the total population, the abandoned and the despairing, moving in strict complementary counterpoint to those over-bound on the tops.
He saw himself as the only point of free will in the landscape before him, and if he could move his body with a purpose, then his mind would shake off the slough of misery and clear for action.
He mounted the horse he had led for the last hour or so and walked it cautiously down into Buttermere which he entered with the utter conviction that he had been there before.
Its pleasing shape — like an almond-stone sliced open — the cliffs of  wall to the south, the serenity of the lake, the promise of richness in the meadows beyond the lake, moved him with a mysterious sense of homecoming based on an unmistakable sensation of security.
I am safe here, he thought: and the thought was so rare, so violent in its unexpectedness, that he looked around like a villain in a melodrama to see if anyone had overheard this God-tempting thought.
I am safe here, he repeated to himself.
And again he looked around, this time for the devil who was tempting him with the prospect he most profoundly desired.
Only the men on the tops, only the sheep and goats on the fells, only the bare rocks.
‘I am safe here,’ he said, for the third time, and this time aloud.
Although he would have denied it, the landscape had gripped him: as an image and now as an emphatic fact of the real world, presenting him finally with a place to rest in.
To the Fish.
The sky had now stripped back to blue as he entered slowly and with a surge of pleasure into the cut of Buttermere.
At this time, for a short while, he was purged, he was himself as his best self should be, he was all that his great promise had held out — untainted, unbrutalised — like the Floating Island on Derwent Water, submerged for years on end, only to rise up intact now and then.
He saw Mary, standing by the doorway, looking at him directly as he rode towards her, unflinching in her look at this stranger whose jingling tackle whinnied against the soft crush of the accustomed evening sounds of the valley, the sun behind him and he, as he drew near, as intent on her.
He saw her and felt — as only once before he had felt — the dizzy vertigo of a fathomless falling-away.
She, too.
He stopped, dismounted, put his hand to his heart and said ‘Alexander Augustus Hope’— he paused —‘your servant.’
Two wholly unnecessary words which skimmed her cheeks to a blush.
‘Good evening.’
She neither bowed nor smiled and the words were grave but her eyes, he thought, seemed to gather all that was left of the best of the sun.
HAUSE POINT
The rain began just before dawn, striking the roof so hard that he woke, startled, from a fast sleep which had been hard won.
The drumming disoriented him, the darkness frightened him; he shouted out.
Mary heard the calls and knew it was him but she waited.
Again he called, almost a sob: she got out of bed, put on her dress and went down from her attic.
He was their only guest and of course her father had given him the ‘big room’— used by the landlord himself in the winter.
Mary's bare feet made no sound he could have picked up and she came right to his door.
She heard murmuring and, surprised, deciphered that he was praying.
The muffled words were given a seductive rhythm by the drumming of the rain.
She stood there until he went quiet, stayed a few minutes longer to be certain and only then returned to her cupboard bedroom next to the servants' loft.
It had the advantage of a window which was open.
She leaned out of it, welcoming the cool rain on her face and neck and shoulders: she twisted up her hair to prevent the inconvenience of its getting soaked, but soon it fell loose and she let the rain stroke it.
She looked out over the northern part of the lake to Burtness Wood, where the rain on the leaves made a sound she loved.
Even the farmers would be glad of this downpour — provided it was short and sharp.
To Mary it was a peculiar relief.
The evening had been so tremulous, the physical attraction so compelling yet forced to be ignored and hidden.
What had begun  as a bolt of recognition and longing had been diverted into strain.
The rain both expressed and unknotted her feelings.
The coldness pleased her, like the chill of the water in her pool.
Awakened in alarm, Hope eventually turned to richly recollected pleasure.
The rain became a murmur, comforting, like the plainsong chant of the choir at the far end of a cathedral in the city in which he had spent some of his childhood.
Mary had provoked sensations of his childhood; one of them was this womb-echoing self-conscious snugness indoors, safe from outside turbulence.
He had played so extraordinarily fair with her the night before, he reflected, contentedly, that it was as if he had not played at all.
No calculated glances, no abrupt addresses, no stratagems, just the easy politeness, he thought, of the worldly gentleman and not even a sly request for a hot stone or a late candle to his room.
Instead, he had appeared happy to let her come and go unpestered, although, like Mary, but not yet so acutely, he had been aware of a deeper affinity.
He had spent the latter part of the evening in the rather pleasant sitting room with her father, whose wish to please his handsomely connected and honourable guest had taken the form of a little boasting.
The guest had been interested.
With no more than the occasional nudge on the tiller, Hope had steered Joseph Robinson to an inventory of his property, his cattle, his inn-sales, his fields, his sheep, goats, fowl and fishing rights.
It was odd, Hope thought, as he lay deeply sunk in the great feather mattress, how perfect and desirable such a dowry would so recently have been to John — for Mary was the only child and it was apparent that the landlord would give her everything.
A good life!
An inn, mine host, stories in the winter evenings, fishing in the summer, introducing some of the scientific ideas of farming which he himself had heard of but was sure had not penetrated the ancient little world of this valley…
He lay on the goose feathers, looking at the beams, feeling the soft pelting rain massage away the binding layers of ambition, lust, wickedness, pain, revenge…
This was where he could belong…
And Mary as he had first seen her appeared before him again like an apparition as he slid slowly into a long sleep.
It was Mrs Robinson who served him his late breakfast and  it took no more than the tapping of an eggshell to discover from that guileless woman that her husband had gone down to Lorton with goats' cheese and potted char for the market men who called there on a Thursday.
Mary was up on the fells with her flock of sheep and goats, she said, perhaps over Buttermere way or maybe towards Robinson.
‘Robinson?’
Hope caught the name and saw the chance to turn an early compliment.
To be fair on the woman, he thought, had her daughter not been in the house then the mother…despite her rather theatrical tendency to clasp at her side…
‘You have a mountain in your name?’
‘Oh, it was here long before us, sir, although there's plenty asks if it's called after our Mary.’
‘Indeed?
Is Mary so famous?’
‘Oh yes!’
Although Mrs Robinson was genuine in her sympathy for the anonymity her daughter strove for, she was Mary's proudest admirer.
With scarcely another tug of encouragement from the Honourable Member of Parliament, she listed Mary's battle honours in print and in public praise.
He was brought a copy of Budworth's (first) book; he was shown flattering notices in the newspapers; he was led to the bar and shown the compliments in Latin, Greek, French and one or two new ones in English, written — all very neatly — on the walls.
Just as her husband had felt obliged to match up to the might of his guest by throwing his wealth into the balance, so she counteracted his fame with the successes of her only daughter; and yet it was done so innocently, it was modestly done.
Hope expressed himself enchanted: John was gripped by a dream of certainty.
Her exceptional eminence, his own; her singularity, his own…
‘After all of that, I simply cannot believe that the fell was not named after you — if not in tribute then in anticipation.’
He liked that phrase and observed that it had hoisted his reputation for conversation to the top of the pole.
‘I had no idea that I was entering such a Hall of Fame,’ he went on, and was about to enjoy a ride on an air bubble of loquacity when Mrs Robinson addressed a cat and the cat said ‘No!’
Distinctly.
Mrs Robinson gathered it up and buried her face in its fur.
‘Remarkable cat,’ said Hope, squashed.
‘Damson,’ Mrs Robinson replied, as if introducing them.
Annie came in; her clogs clattered irritably on the stone flags.
‘Isn't it time we were cleared up in here?’
Annie's determination was catalytic.
‘I was just finishing.’
He took a final pull of his beer: by the time he had finished it, Annie was hovering above him, her large red hands already noisily piling up the dishes.
‘I think I'll follow Mr Robinson's example and make for —‘
‘Lorton,’ Annie said, curtly.
‘You'll meet him coming back at this time of day.’
He was capable of living with Annie's moral disapproval: her physical presence, however, was too threatening and he left rather more smartly than he had intended.
It was mid-morning and the rain had long since cleared, leaving the hills freshened, the whole aspect glittering raindrops under the sun, the track drying rapidly underfoot.
There seemed nothing but crags along the border of Crummock Water and Hope, who had imagined it to be a short walk, soon regretted that he had not saddled up.
This fashion for walking was tiring as well as tedious and his leg troubled him.
Eventually he met a boy almost distressed with diffidence who told him enough for him to conclude that Lorton was much too far away for comfort.
He turned west, down to the hotel at Loweswater where, as he was to report to Newton, ‘I might have landed a fine salmon trout.’
A most respectable party had taken the dining room but the landlord was either too flustered or too gauche to respect the privacy which, judging from their first expressions on seeing Hope, they felt they had ordered and even paid for.
The new arrival's haughty politeness suppressed their irritation; his dress and studied self-sufficiency (he had taken out a devotional book to read while sipping his brandy and water) teased out their curiosity; his amiability, when accosted, won their sympathy; introductions followed at which his card commanded their instant respect and attention.
John-Augustus noted all this with a perverse pleasure.
He further let it be known — in the most careless way imaginable, like a good gun bringing down a bird without breaking a conversational flow — that he was a bachelor, a man of wealth, a friend of the Prime Minister and, in an amiable manner, on the lookout for a secure investment in matrimony.
Although the latter point was delivered as a subtext it was as plain as all the rest and Miss Skelton knew herself to be in the ring.
She was not as pretty nor quite as fashionable as Miss D'Arcy, but the similarities outweighed variations of plumage.
As the discussion followed between the now cosseted intruder and the male members of the small walking party which had found its grail at the lakeside Hotel, Miss Skelton was deferred to by her father, complimented by her mother, patted and plumped by her friends and avoided only by the chaplain, the Reverend Nicholson, who, Hope judged, was in love with her but too poor to press, too honourable to hotly pursue any claim.
There was an aspect of John-Augustus' character which he would suppress whenever — and it was not especially frequently — it was aroused: sympathy for the victim.
But here — since he had not the slightest intention of addressing anything but common courtesy towards Miss Skelton — he could allow that sympathy to exercise itself.
The girl, he thought, like all her kind, was now forced into this public auction.
Put another way, she had been plucked and prepared for meetings like this as carefully as a goose is dressed for the oven.
Should she not please sooner or later, she would be taboo, a mocked and patronised spinster.
She was, at this moment, like a slave on a podium waiting for the bid.
Or to take a comparison from fishing, she was bait: soft, swirling gracefully, juicy, to be gobbled in a mouthful, sucked in and with her the impaling point of the hard property deal also known as marriage.
Miss Skelton was good bait, but this fish, thought Hope, had other food in mind.
Though his contact with Mary had been brief, formal and in no public way at all suggestive, disgust at the thought of Miss Skelton and her world suddenly and urgently spilled into his mind and he excused himself rather roughly — so abruptly, in fact, that a careful inquest was held among the company to uncover what possible offence he might have taken.
He came out of the Hotel suddenly and violently, unable  to endure the privilege which had so cruelly and so recently oppressed him.
‘Where would they be without…’
‘Pauper…rip off the clothes…starve them…whip the flesh…see on them the scars they've given…’
‘Public prostitution…‘take tea’…how many sad wretches have been murdered by toil and neglect for their tea…scald them with it…’
‘Paine is right…the French are right…long live the French!…use their heads instead of pigs’ bladders…put her in the Marshalsea and don't feed her for a week…see her prettiness then…’
And around him had arisen the sight — seen so often on his travels — of the hundreds of thousands of vagrants, beggar men, women and children, now roving over the richest island in the world like tormented souls in irredeemable exile…
As he turned Hause Point and caught a clear sight of Mary's Buttermere, the lonely valley, he experienced what seemed a physical soaring of his spirits, a giddy uplift of heart.
He was overcome.
It was a true revelation.
He held his breath.
It was such an unanticipated shock that he froze, to cling onto this unique moment.
He could not remember when he had felt as purely happy.
He ‘saw’ himself, ludicrously ill-dressed for the narrow and rock-tumbled track, gaping like a foppish caricature of the Lake Tourist: but that did not unsettle him.
His feelings were cleansed of the poisons of revenge, contempt, self-hatred, envy and avarice which had worked him into a hellish turbulence of vicious thoughts.
Was it Mary who allowed him access to this source of joy?
Not only her —‘God is here,’ he said, aloud, ‘God and Death.’
A true revelation: he was humbled by it.
He had been chosen, like Paul, and like Paul he would now serve.
He felt as if he were in a trance, speaking the words of someone else; the pressure of this rare ocean heave of happiness had re-baptised him, and the words came from out of the air.
‘God and Death,’ he repeated, ‘and there is nothing else to know.’
He breathed the air deeply, hauling it into his broad chest as if this particular air on this exact spot could be stored up and carried around as a reserve and reminder: for minutes on end  he stood there, resisting any move which would lift the spell, gazing into the hidden valley as if in there lay the treasure he wanted.
Merlin had been in these parts, Joseph Robinson had told him.
Perhaps he was Merlin come again, invisible in his magic cloak, looking for the woman who would trap and hold him secure and for ever.
It was wonderful, this feeling, it was magical!
Mary?
What was his feeling for her?
He was so used to the extremes of lust and commerce, of immediate gratification and protracted commercial dealing that the ground between had been long forgotten.
But perhaps it was still there — a quick, unselfish affection, friendship, even a continuing passion…
He was capable of anything!
‘Have you the time?’
In one way he was glad to be interrupted — superstitiously afraid that if of his own volition he decided to leave the miraculous spot then the unique mood would not follow him and he would be like a man without a shadow.
But still it was an intrusion.
The question was repeated, though with more servility.
‘Have you the time, sir?’
Would that he had, he thought — how shamelessly it had flashed away, that spot of his time —‘What will you do with it when you get it?’
The jaunty answer came out like a rebuff.
Harrison drew back his jaw as if riding the blow.
Damn these clothes, Hope thought; dressed as he was, an irritable retort became a threatening social punishment.
Both of them knew what damage these Hessian boots and the expensive felt hat could do to those scabbed wooden clogs and the coarse neckerchief.
A word in the wrong place, a petty curse pursued into an even pettier vendetta and Hessian could crush clog for a lifetime.
Both of them knew that very well, but now Hope was unusually distressed by the realisation.
He took out his gold hunter watch and delivered its message almost tenderly.
‘Five-and-twenty minutes after two.’
The young man nodded and made as if to move on but John wanted to expunge that mean unspoken and unmeant threat.
‘Is it hard work in the quarries?’
‘How did you know I worked there?’
‘The dust on your clothes: it would be mud if you were on a farm.’
‘I soon will be back on a farm, thank the Lord.’
‘I was going to have a smoke,’ Hope lied.
‘Would you like to try some?’
He held out his leather tobacco pouch: the young man looked at it as if it would bite him who touched.
‘I was thinking of a smoke myself,’ he said, his eyes fixed on the pouch, as if staring it down, ‘if I had a few minutes in hand.’
‘And do you?’
The young man nodded and took the pouch.
He dipped his clay pipe into it — after wiping the stubby object vigorously on his breeches — and took a polite — meagre — measure.
‘Fill it up,’ said Hope.
‘I've more than enough for my needs.
And there's nothing like a conversation when you smoke.
You're doing me a favour.’
The benevolence was infectious: the young man dug in.
‘We could sit on this rock,’ Hope pointed to a jutting flat stone, ‘and look out at the lake.’
‘I'm not much of one for looking at things,’ Harrison said and Hope's heart went out to him.
‘But what about the Beauty of Nature?’ he cried, at once aping and mocking his Lake Tourist's role.
‘I've more time for other beauties,’ the young man responded and squatted comfortably, his back against the turf bank.
‘Is that why you're making this journey?’
‘You could say.’
‘Women are the spring of most of our actions,’ Hope offered, puffing over-anxiously at his faltering pipe, envying the steady draw the young man had already achieved.
‘I don't know about that,’ was the reply.
Hope once again went through the elaborate mechanism of lighting the pipe, looking about him for wind, but the day was utterly calm.
Harrison kept intent on the gentleman but still he noted the two boats on the lake — one had caught what must be a pike from the struggle — heard the chiming axes of the woodmen, noted the flocks on the Scale Force bank of Crummock and, more particularly, a pair of swallows playing beside the water — these and a score of other impressions gave him a richness of context denied Hope who, after struggling with his  pipe, battled on, oblivious of all that was about him, to confirm and exercise his new and gloriously liberated Christianity.
‘So where are you bound?’
‘Home.’
‘And where is that?’
‘Over there— place called Caldbeck.’
He paused and then, generously, contributed another sentence.
‘Beyond Keswick, this side of Carlisle.’
‘Carlisle…’
Hope's pipe went out again and he decided to abandon it.
‘Best smoke I've had since my teeth were pulled,’ the young man said, more animatedly.
‘Couldn't smoke when they were bad for fear of breaking them up.
My mouth's had a new life since that day.
They were two terrors — down at the back.’
He yawned open his mouth.
Clearly he was eager to talk about his dentistry but Hope was after more philosophical matter.
‘Do you enjoy your work in the mines?’
‘Quarries.
Nobody can.
Negroes on plantations do better.’
The pipe went back in: still steadily alight, Hope observed.
‘Is that why you are on your way?’
‘You could say.’
‘I agree with you about the slavery in this country of ours today.
Many others would too.
My friend Tom Paine — I got this wound,’ he held up his afflicted hand, ‘fighting by his side for the freedom of our American Brothers — he has written and fought for freedom in America, in France and here in his native land.
And where has he yet to plant it?
Here!
Here in his own country.
Who can be free in this country after the Treason Trials which set behind bars and left to rot…’
The young man watched him very warily indeed, waiting only for the chance to be off.
It was all very well for a gentleman to talk about Treason and France and Tom Paine — and he was taking care to do it where nobody was around — but one nod of agreement from him and the world could crash down on his head.
His wariness turned to unease — he ought to have suspected something; no richly dressed gentleman handed you a fill of tobacco on the open road — his unease began to scramble to panic: he let his pipe go dead.
The man was now attacking Mr  Pitt, calling him worse than the devil, cursing Parliament for being too feeble against him, raging — though it had to be admitted as a fine rage, a rage which at least convinced the speaker — against the law, the constitution, the King —;
‘God Save the King!’ the young man muttered as if uttering an exonerating and protective formula: and he was on his feet.
‘That's all I say.’
And he repeated, for the benefit of the sheep, the goats, the swallows, the boats, the clouds, ‘God Save the King,’ adding, ‘I'll be on my way now, sir: and thank you, much obliged.’
‘Will you be back this way again?’
‘Never,’ Harrison said, lying, for his whole purpose was to get back to his father's farm to work out when he could return and what he could offer Mary.
John — Augustus cast a sentimental eye on his retreat, convinced in his euphoria of pristine well-being that he had encountered one of nature's radicals, someone to whom he could reveal his new true feelings.
As for his own talk — that, once begun, had, as usual, spun itself out as thoughtlessly as the wind: he believed it and quite often it was true or partly true — and if others believed it — a bargain had been struck.
A few hundred yards along the road, however, and the walking pace jolted him back to a more careful reckoning of the conversation.
He picked up on the young man's unease, he recalled his own unlicensed ranting, he sensed the quarryman's fear of him.
He wanted to turn back to reassure him in a more plausible way.
But nothing would be plausible if he had hounded after him.
It would not be credible.
Once again, he concluded, a reasonable course of action was blocked by the tyranny of appearances.
The truth was, however, that he cast off the conversation as lightly as he would throw back a small fish.
This precious new phial of innocence, his new self after the revelation, had to be offered to Mary.
She was not at the inn, not in the meadows, and when he finally found a sufficiently oblique way to ask where she might be, his misreading of the directions sent him along the wrong path past the wrong waterfall and up the surprisingly taxing  slope of the wrong fell.
From his new station he could see the three lakes — Loweswater, Crummock Water and Buttermere — lined up in the valley like three barges ready to be towed down to the shore; he could see the bivouac huts of some woodmen and he spotted more than one flock coming down from the high pastures — but Mary chided him.
She continued to do so throughout the evening, serving him — he was still the only guest — with promptness and civility, being neither short nor teasingly indifferent, preoccupied, it seemed to Hope, and puzzlingly outside his grasp.
The puzzle lay in his certainty that his feeling for her found an echo in her own feelings.
But even her elusiveness did not subdue the novelty and promise of the experience he had undergone earlier that day at Hause Point.
A new spaciousness had entered into his considerations.
No longer would he pound around the obstacle course set out by Newton and himself: there was a life he could live which took its time, strolled through weeks as if they were single mornings, allowed the world to come to him instead of himself for ever launching himself on it as if in unarmed combat.
He even had the amplitude to take a glass of port with Mr Joseph Robinson and talk as well as listen to him about the Battle of the Nile.
Mary had long ago disappeared but he knew — and was comforted in knowing — that she was not far off: he knew he would have the time to approach her: and on this occasion, he wanted to be sure to get her.
He knew it would take great care and he knew also — inadmissible, subversive thought — that what he really wanted was to live with her here, securely, for the rest of his life: that was the earthly promise of the revelation at Hause Point.
BURTNESS WOOD
Over the next two days she continued to evade him.
When he was in the dining room she would be in the dairy; when he wandered out to look at the home fields she would be over the lake by Burtness Wood; when he made his way to the wood she would retreat up the fell and it was pointless, he rightly guessed, as well as being too open to comment, to pursue her onto the tops.
She tried telling herself that he was just another idle aristocratic adventurer; she had been looked over by several of the type and others of lesser breeding during her ten years in the public eye at the Fish.
Usually she could cope well enough.
Recently, though, her resilience seemed to have given out.
On the third evening of his stay, for instance, a couple of the wilder sons of the local gentry had turned up half tipsy from their celebrations following a squirrel hunt.
They had been to the Fish a few times before and Mary had little difficulty in sousing the coarse splutterings of the pair of spoilt whelps who were nonetheless, she thought, by no means bad or wicked young men.
That evening, though, their ragging had distressed her and but for Colonel Hope's intervention, she would have been in tears.
He had asked the young men if they had been to Germany — knowing they had not.
Then most vividly he had described his own studies there at the ancient university of Heidelberg, capturing the attention of the two lordling drunkards by directing his talk not to his studies of the classics, philosophy, German language and metaphysics, but to the duelling societies, their codes and practices, feuds and meetings at misty dawn — sword fights to the death…
His own scar, he said…in a particularly violent duel…the last in a succession of three…the first two of which he had been fortunate enough to win…and would the young lady of the house be kind enough to bring him and his friends a bottle of her father's excellent port?…
(Mary went out but lingered by the door)…remarkable creature, he proposed, after she had left…(lowered voice so that she could not hear)…perfect example of a natural lady, did they not agree?
Modest beyond understanding, was she not?
And he, Alexander Augustus Hope, Colonel, at your service, gentlemen, would not stand for another coarse word in her presence, DID THEY HEAR?
They had seen the knuckles come out of the silken wrapping and the force of it scared their wits back into good manners.
On her return she knew that it was he who had plucked the sting but she was afraid that too demonstrative a show of gratitude might be misinterpreted.
So, exercising some skill, she kept out of his way.
He confused her.
For he was not at all in the usual pattern of adventurers.
He neither leered nor lunged, he did not pinch her neither did he make a sudden and late demand for hot water and a brandy to his bedroom.
He did not loiter to catch her although his apparently wayward path could seem designed to cross hers every now and then.
Although he was clearly a grand gentleman — and she could sense the larger houses up and down the valley waking up to his presence like hunting dogs suddenly scenting a stag on the wind — his consideration for her — in one or two trivial matters — was nearer to the sort of decent, friendly understandings she herself had grown up with in the village.
And he seemed to have no purpose.
He walked to Hause Point twice a day and apart from that…he wrote one or two letters and delighted her father by franking one of his; he waited for him to get a full free day so that they could go char fishing; he declined all invitations and although he was irreproachably  welcoming when Mr Skelton and his daughter made a surprise detour on one of their visits up the valley from Lorton to call in at the Fish, Mary thought that she could tell that he was happier to see them depart than he had been to see them arrive.
And yet he had promised Skelton he would look at some land around Loweswater, and announced that he was so taken with the district he had a mind to settle in it — a statement which brought Miss Skelton to a blush-brink of applause.
Indeed, the only person whose company seemed to detain the worldly, elegant Colonel was the Reverend Nicholson, with whom he had contracted a conversational friendship based, it appeared, on a mutual zeal for the discussion of the profoundest spiritual matters — the power of prayer, the meaning of the Three Days in the Tomb, the date of the origin of the world, the precise division of responsibilities between the Holy Trinity.
This, too, confused Mary, who — privately — sensed the Colonel to be quite other than this enthusiasm for theology indicated.
But the enthusiasm, she had the Reverend Nicholson's word for it, was ‘as honest, as questing and as pious as m- any man I have ever met’.
There were other confusions — he was vain, she could smile at that, and yet many times he seemed unaware of the effect his strong presence could have on others.
He avoided other Lake Tourists and yet, if caught, he would be as warm as an old friend.
He was fluent, learned, a man of books, and yet, she had heard him with her father on small points, as sharp as a tinker…too many false trails, too many different scents…as if he, too, were puzzling over his path…
She kept out of his way, too experienced in public disappointment to stray into what could still be a snare.
Moreover, Mary had a matter of her own to digest which at any other time would have been sufficient preoccupation.
The young man with the terrible toothache — Harrison — had sought her out and, clumsily but resolutely, he had told her that he intended to leave the quarries, go back to his father's farm, assess what his prospects were there and then come back and…his resolution had run out at that point but the aim was clear.
He knew, he said, that he was just an ordinary farmer's  son and she was a famous Beauty, known the county over, never a word spoken against her even by the men who bivouacked up in the fells — but he would have no-one else and would wait just as long as she told him to.
The earnest open strategy appealed to her.
He was a good-looking, honest young man.
Now that his face had regained its shape she saw a seriousness in it which implied a steadiness she liked.
When he had begun she had been inclined to send him off or run away herself; but his determination had kept her listening and she had watched him walk away with his plan — it was more of a plan than a proposal — well lodged in her mind and unexpectedly endearing.
She visited Kitty, wishing the old woman really had been a witch and then she could have solved the riddles which would not leave her in peace.
But Kitty — who sensed her young friend's perturbation — only talked as always about the woods, the animals, the nights.
She went to her pool but, for reasons she couldn't comprehend, felt powerfully disinclined to idle sensually in the water.
She would wash herself, hurriedly, and then sit in the cave, looking out across the valley, hoping that time would shift itself on soon and resolve the tangles which seemed to bind her.
On the third day of his visit, Hope and Joseph Robinson went char fishing.
Mary hung around outside the stables, curious to hear her father in his element as the two men sorted out the rods.
There had been a thunderstorm the night before but it had swept over and the lake was calm.
She smiled as her father began: he would have been happy being a teacher; he had often told her that and at one stage — in the nature of parents' bequeathing unfulfilled ambitions to their children — he had hoped that Mr Fenton might consider her as a pupil teacher (just for the mornings, of course, he needed her the rest of the day).
‘The char is something like a salmon,’ Mr Robinson said, but you find it in fresh water only.
Generally speaking — to my knowledge — only in deep water: they have them up in Coniston, we have them here, but it's down in Windermere where they make the most of them.’
‘That could be changed,’ Hope interjected.
‘Why should the char of Buttermere not outsell the char of Windermere?’
‘I've thought of that often,’ said Mr Robinson, ‘but one man alone, Colonel Hope?
A man needs a partner for this business.
I have all this to keep me going.’
Mary could see her father's hand spread out before him as if he were sweeping a cloak: her father was now the man of property.
‘Does it always keep to the deep water?’
‘It does.
We think it's because that's where it finds the water fleas.
It's not an easy fish to track down.
You see, you can never be sure when it will spawn.
This here is the type of net they use down in Windermere — same as for everything else, really, pike, perch, trout — but this , here, is the tackle we use in Buttermere for fishing the char.’
There was a pause and Mary imagined the men fingering the fishing tackle.
‘How big is it?’
‘I've seen them ten, twelve inches long, up to three quarters of a pound: but you don't want them too big — the bigger they are the older they are — to have them on your plate — eight inches at the most.
Here we are.
There's your plumb-line.’
‘An ash rod.’
‘The best.
See the four rings…and that bell?
The line's about seventy feet long and the lead plumb has to be this size — over a pound.
Hold onto it.
We have six side lines come off it — different lengths, you see — with these spinners on them — they're the bait — all with hooks.
I made these particular spinners myself out of bits of copper.’
‘Very effective.’
‘So you travel over deep water and pull up the plumb-line when the bell rings.
If you're lucky, you have a char on one of the side lines.’
‘I think I have it all now, Mr Robinson.’
Mary almost laughed aloud at Hope's tolerant gravity.
If her father had told him that he had also to hold the rod in his hand and drop the line into the water she would not have been surprised.
‘It used to be salted char that was popular — I'm told that Henry VIII ordered it in barrelfuls — and then there were char  pies — some of them three or four stone in weight: now they seem to want it potted in little jars.
Mary does it.
It's surprising what they'll pay for it this time of year.’
‘Perhaps you should let your daughter do more.
‘Buttermere Char’.
You could get it to Keswick and send it all over England from there.’
‘I would need an agent.’
‘Agents can always be whistled up,’ Hope said.
‘Lake Tourism could not be more fashionable.
Everywhere you go there are paintings of the Lakes and prints of the Lakes and stories about Visits to the Lakes, people building villas here now: there's great interest, Mr Robinson, and that always opens up a space for trade.’
‘We've had more than one or two famous writers here at the Fish,’ Robinson confirmed.
‘You'll have heard of Captain Budworth —‘A Rambler’?'
Hope nodded but it was the business scheme that had caught his imagination.
‘You could have special pots made — delicate pots for the nobility, hand-painted with a lake scene to give them an extra value — and on the larger pots you could paint ‘The Fish’— no, ‘The Char’, Buttermere, the Hidden Heart of the Famous Lakelands'.
I can see the coffee houses ordering enormous quantities — if what I tasted at supper yesterday is any guide —‘
‘And it is, take my word for it —‘
‘Then in a few months you could have a thriving business here, Mr Robinson.
You could have an industry.
One or two of the local lads could help you fish the char, Mary could cook it and pot it — you'd have to put the pots out to commission but the district is full of men who would work for you.
Or for your daughter.’
‘I consider,’ Joseph Robinson said, rather stiffly, wanting to rein in this galloping fantasy, ‘that my daughter is doing good enough work already.’
‘But for how long, Mr Robinson?’
Hope could not prevent himself blurting out.
‘For how long?’
Mary moved away.
From above Burtness Wood she looked down on the lake and watched the two men fishing throughout most of the morning…
What attracted a man such as that to such a lonely spot?
Perhaps he was reclusive — his manner denied that and yet he was very reluctant to be sought out by local society, some of which, Mary judged, was quite worthy of him.
Perhaps he was recovering from the loss of some great love — that at least made sense of the aimlessness that seemed to characterise him.
Most important of all, she thought, as she picked over the problems of his character, as the days went on he seemed to be so much steadier, so much easier in his own skin.
Everywhere he went in the valley now, John-Augustus sensed that he was being watched by Mary and he took that into account whatever he did.
Yet, in truth, he did not have to play-act.
For he had stumbled across — or it had been revealed to him — that if you act as you deeply want to act and if that, sublimely, coincides with what you aim for, then nothing is simpler, nothing is more dynamic, nothing is happier.
Indeed, he had to restrain himself.
For a dam had been breached; the dam which had sealed off his childhood, his best self, all his early aspirations.
Since the building of that dam his terrain had been harsh, brutal and bad.
But now the water flowed, water as from a spring whose source he had forgotten, the lost energy of young and wasted years ran into his limbs and mind and spirit so that he looked everywhere with honesty, with a sensation of being right in the world.
As he pulled on the oars — he could not bear simply to sit and wait for the bell to ring — John was again the boy who had set out to be the man he never became.
He had to stop himself from shouting aloud with pleasure.
And her distance, even her suspicion, that too was part of it, part of the innocence regained.
There was this final chance — he heaved strongly, slowly, on the oars — hammocked in this valley, nursed by the safety, and with Mary…the world could again be as once seemed possible.
He would try in his journal that night to express this extreme contentment.
On the day Colonel Hope announced himself in the yard of the Queen's Head in Keswick, Coleridge, a few hundred yards away, was writing a letter which included the sentence ‘I have always found a stretched and anxious frame of mind favourable to depths of pleasurable impression.’
On the day John-Augustus went char fishing on Buttermere with Mr Robinson and Mary went above the woods to look down on them, Coleridge passed between them.
According to De Quincey, Coleridge had ‘the largest and most spacious intellect, the subtlest and most comprehensive that has existed among men’.
He was also, at this time, at the end of his twenties, exhausted from a tormented marriage, addicted to opium, an insomniac, plagued by boils, nightmares and desperate, even murderous thoughts directed against his wife and children: thoughts which his passion for Christian goodness made intolerable.
But in this spell of summer, 1802, he gained an unexpected, extraordinary access of energy and happiness which coincided almost precisely with the presence of Hope.
Perhaps this came about in part because his idol and friend, Wordsworth — to whom he was in some way in thrall — had left the district to go to France and make a settlement with his French mistress and daughter as a prelude to marrying his childhood sweetheart back in England.
Perhaps because after an almost fatal spasm, Coleridge thought his marriage was now bearable — although on this eight-day storming and often precipitous walk around the mountains and lakes he was to write a passionate letter to the woman he desired as his mistress while perched on the highest mountain in England.
Or perhaps, like Hope, he found an inexplicable access of joy: ‘I must be alone,’ he wrote, ‘if either my imagination or my heart are to be enriched.’
For whatever reason he did not stop at the Fish — which he had visited on several occasions; nor did he seek out or meet Mary whom he knew and greatly admired.
Yet it is intriguing that on that day, he cut between Mary in the redoubt of her fells, puzzling over this ominous invasion of her feelings, and John-Augustus on the lake, drawing up char from the deep and cold lake, re-experiencing the failed innocence of his life.
The three of them soon to be part of one fusion, still at this time  isolated from each other: three figures representing and summarising between them so much that was central to the complex notion of the Romantic Age.
It was as if , in some unfathomable way, out of an inscrutable symmetry, these three called each other up, between the lake and the fells, and were determined to bring about one of the essential public scandals of Romantic times.
So Coleridge passed through, and his journal of the day brims over with wild joy.
As soon as they came in from the fishing, John — Augustus left Robinson and his potboy to take the tackle and the satisfactory number of dead char back to the inn while he went over to Hause Point.
He was restless for another visit, another reassurance.
Having gone out onto the lake as calm as the surface itself, he had caught, as it might be, some of the immovable unsettling darkness and chill which lay for ever imprisoned deep below, like his own too-recent self.
Hause Point would settle and clarify all that.
Since its first revolutionary impact, he had become more used to the experience.
Now he strode out not apprehensive that he might have lost contact with that gift of powerful calm which had so effectively stilled the thresh of his emotions, but confident that as soon as he reached the Point and stood as and where he had first stopped — the experience would be renewed and reinforced, the key would fit the lock.
And so it was.
The fears which had crawled back over the stockade of his new self were banished: he was unassailable on the rock of Hause Point — what could harm him but Death which here would be no great enemy?
And God would surely receive him in this mood which was so open to Him.
He looked around and, seeing himself alone, got on his knees: his eyes closed, his head tight with exhilaration.
‘O Lord,’ he prayed earnestly, ‘I know how wicked, how unworthy, how evil and wanting I have been and am and will be for ever.
But I thank You for giving me this sight of a life of Truth.
Let me keep to it.
Please help me to keep to it.
Please, O Lord, knowing my weaknesses, help me to be faithful to this.’
His earnestness became pleading.
‘I've never known myself like this.
I almost believe that I could be like this.
Please, Lord, if it is Thy will, let me —‘
The sound of a horse and chaise brought him to his feet.
He moved away from the spot on which he had prayed and gazed over Crummock Water.
The conveyance came around the corner, quite recklessly, and pulled up at the sight of him.
An old and old-fashioned gentleman — full heavy wig, long waistcoat, antique buckled shoes — was in the chaise with a girl who could have been his granddaughter.
With a dexterity that did his age credit, the old man stopped the sweating horse and accosted John-Augustus, who was much relieved to discover that the stranger's own preoccupation blocked out any interest in his own.
‘I need help, sir,’ the old man said, ‘and I have no alternative but to throw myself quite on your mercy.’
As he spoke, the alarmed young woman — only quite attractive, Hope assessed, a little too thin in the face for his taste — glanced behind and then beyond and back again as if expecting to be set on by bandits.
Hope waited.
The old man's surprisingly bright grey eyes held him and Hope knew that he was facing an honest man and felt bucked that his own present character was worthy of it.
‘I have not time to tell you of our adventures or of the danger we are in.
You must believe that we are innocent!’
The force of this demand impressed both men.
There was a pause.
‘But we need to stop — only a few hours — and we need to — to hide this chaise.
Would you…?’
Here the old man's energy ran out, partly because the girl's sobbing distracted him.
He took her most affectionately in his arms and the tender sight of April finding comfort in December — as Hope was to phrase it later — immediately prompted him to become an accomplice.
He directed them to the Fish, took over the chaise from them before they entered the village, drove it across the meadow to the edge of Burtness Wood, calling, on his way, to the potboy to bring some oats.
When he returned he was offered tea — without which, the  old gentleman said, he never travelled.
The dramatic incident at Hause Point was never referred to.
Mary came in to see that they were well enough served and, yielding to a hint from Hope, stayed a while to watch, with him, the strange behaviour of this incongruous pair.
It was not so much his attentiveness to her — the infatuation of old men was common enough — but her petting and cooing with him which provoked what became a quietly savoured complicity between Hope and Mary.
In fact, the glances they managed to exchange, glances which played on a wide keyboard of reactions, served both to spin them together and to show each other off.
It was the best time John-Augustus had spent with Mary and he saw it as the reward for his charitable act.
The dominating clatter of a four-in-hand broke the web.
From outside a very loud and bullying voice demanded the landlord.
The old man went white — noticeable even under the absurd splodges of rouge — and the girl cried ‘It is over!’
‘Please,’ said the man, ‘that shawl.’
He pointed to a large plaid shawl which Mrs Robinson had used to decorate and disguise the back of a char.
Mary switched it off and handed it to him.
He placed it around the shoulders of the young woman, now almost fainting.
‘Take her to the window, please,’ he urged Mary, whispering as he heard someone striding into the hall which was adjacent.
‘And do not let her turn around.
‘And you, sir,’ the old man said loudly to Hope, ‘would you care for another cup of tea?’
The pot was poised as a bald-headed bullock of a middle-aged man — face as bright as a carrot from the exertion of the journey — long green cloak askew — fingers coarsely jewelled — came in like the blow of a fist and demanded in dungeon-vowelled Lancashire:
‘Has anybody seen a chaise?
With a young couple aboard it?
Well?’
The old man looked up, vaguely waving his teapot, an expression of simpering apprehension on his face.
Hope rose to his feet and his full height with no little menace, which was clearly recognised by the intruder.
‘We were enjoying tea, sir.’
The final word was almost spat  out, a mean and snobbish cut.
‘And the ladies were peacefully enjoying the view across the lake.’
The bullock stared but, having absorbed the garb, the poise, the certainty of Hope, let himself be stared down.
‘I beg your pardon.
I have been badly deceived and robbed.
Please forgive me, ladies.’
Mary turned and solemnly nodded her forgiveness.
‘Are you sure, though,’ the man continued, desperately, ‘a fine young woman, rather on the thin side but a lady, no doubting it, and a terrible young scoundrel, a thief of a man who looked as if he should be hanged.’
‘Not I,’ said the old gentleman and poured himself some tea.
Hope shook his head and sat down carefully as if to concentrate on his tea leaves.
‘Then they have given me the slip again.
But I met a man on the road to the other village — I've pursued them over the mountain from Keswick and you know the road divides two ways — and he swore they had come this way.’
‘Perhaps,’ said Hope, without looking up, ‘he lied.
Or perhaps your young scoundrel paid him to lie.’
‘That's it!
By the devil, that will be it!
If I see him again — good day, sir, sir, ma'am, apologies, terrible crimes, days of ruin for all of us — your servant!’
When the last sound of the coach and four had died away, Mary and the young girl turned from the window and Hope took out his pipe.
‘I can never thank you enough,’ said the old gentleman.
‘But at least you deserve an explanation.’
He looked at the girl and held out his hand, which she took and kept while he told his story.
‘I came out of my apprenticeship a week ago,’ he began.
Hope and Mary looked at each other in astonishment but, determined to humour the old gentleman, they said nothing.
‘My father — who was a gentleman but unable to resist gambling — left me and my mother penniless when I was thirteen.
She had no family to help her; his wanted none of us.
So although I had expected a life of some leisure, I found myself lucky to be apprenticed to a carpenter in Kendal.
A year or so ago, I went  into Cartmel to do some work on the house of that oaf you have just seen.
He has several businesses in the district — a bobbin mill, a gunpowder factory, a cotton mill, and more — and what they have in common is that the people — usually women and children — who are unfortunate enough to be employed in them are driven as cruelly as possible and paid as little as possible.
He has a son who is a booby and who was loafing around his father's yards waiting only for this young lady to come of age so that he could marry her.
She was the oafs ward, an orphan and an heiress.
She favoured me with her love.’
Here he took off the pendulous wig, wiped his face on the yellowing lace handkerchief dripping out of the over-ornate and antique jacket and revealed himself as a young man.
‘George Shelborne, sir, ma'am — and Catherine Hodge.’
The introductions were reciprocated by Hope who gathered Mary into his corner as proprietorially as Shelborne had spoken for Catherine.
‘We decided that the only course was to run away to marry at Gretna Green, because her guardian, as soon as he knew of my interest, first tried to get my apprenticeship broken and then announced that his son would marry Catherine on the day of her twenty-first birthday — two weeks from now.
I had to take what action I could.
These clothes were got from a pawnshop in Kendal; the rouge came from an acquaintance of Mrs Charlotte Deans, the actress; the chaise was loaned us by a young friend of mine whose father owns the chief coaching firm in the town.
I knew I needed the disguise because I would be able to surprise him by two hours at the most.
And we would never be able to surprise him by two hours at the most.
And we would never be able to outrun his coach and four.
I thought the plan had failed when, looking back on the hill there, I saw him in the valley.
But thanks to you, sir,’ he leaned out and took Hope's right hand between his palms and pressed it, ‘thanks to you, I believe we are safe.’
The force of the story threw the four of them into a babble of communion.
Hope felt almost dizzy with the innocence and sweetness of it all.
Watching the old gentleman turn himself into a stripling and seeing the irrepressible signs of affection between  George and Catherine, he envied them deeply.
Catching Mary's eye, he thought he caught her mind too: was she thinking the same thought?
‘Let me invite you to dinner in an hour,’ said George, ‘and’— this was addressed to Mrs Robinson, who had crept in to stand in the doorway and hear the end of the story, and now stepped forward to play a part —‘please, let us borrow your daughter for the evening so that we four can be a company.
Her help was crucial.’
The candelabra were brought out and, with her tongue jutting anxiously out from between her teeth, Annie carried the good plate into the dining room.
Mary found tiger lilies and Hope, discovering Mr Robinson's prize of six bottles of good claret, bought two of them for the evening.
A small fire was lit to make the dining room even more cheerful — although it was warm enough to do without one — and when the four of them reassembled, the small room in the Fish would have been ‘a credit,’ Hope said, in his most pleasingly generous mood, ‘to any inn the length, and breadth of the country.’
George was now dressed in the decent clothes of a tradesman with one or two additions which suggested both his independence and another inheritance.
Catherine, made less thin by candlelight, had put on a blue dress which made her look even younger than her age.
Hope had changed his cravat and put on his best black coat, excellently cut.
But it was Mary whose bold appearance drew the breath and the admiration of all of them.
She wore a russet gown, the white lace beautifully worked, her hair flowed down her shoulders and her back like a cascade, glistening softly in the flickering light, and her expression was resolved in a contentment, more, a sheer happiness that affected all of them.
The meal was organised around the char which had been caught that afternoon, and Hope was touched at the extravagant praise lobbed his way for the provision of the excellent fish.
There were veal cutlets, cabbage, pease and potatoes, parsley and plain butter, oatcakes, cups of preserved gooseberries with rich cream and cheeses to accompany the claret.
The talk was even between all four of them — neither man  wanting the women to leave for a moment and both women, though diffident to start with, more than capable of taking a full part in the ‘manly’ subjects of politics and warfare and the economy of the country which George and John-Augustus batted about, rather sweepingly.
Catherine, Mary noted, was especially quick to challenge George's generalisations by reference to a local situation: Mary herself kept not so much a watch as a guard over Hope's words.
George was unafraid to be republican in his views and Hope sought to emulate him.
And yet, as the evening went on and the moon rose and the wine went down, new candles, another log for the fire, shadows swaying on the walls, she seemed to become to him what Catherine was to George.
The man who called himself John looked at her increasingly steadily, lengthily, certainly, and she began to hold his glances and eventually to return them.
‘You say we have no liberties,’ Hope replied to a rather over-eloquent statement of George's, ‘but I can think of no time when we have had a greater chance to take what freedom we want.
There are men who have been in prison for ten years and more for claiming their liberty; men who have slipped away to struggle overseas; men who have escaped to Europe to carry on the fight there — they are hounded and they are imprisoned, but their views are heard.
And when the great and radical Charles James Fox becomes Prime Minister of this country — a day which I look forward to with all my heart — they will be liberated and with them, their ideas.’
Just as there was a deep well of refreshment from re-encountering his older finer feelings, so this safe release of his real sentiments was also sweet.
George Shelborne was not quite as sure about drinking to the Whig who, he pointed out, was even then in Paris fawning over Napoleon — but politely he mumbled a neutral assent.
Hope directed the rest of his carefully unslurred speech to Mary, who looked at him half-warily, half-dreamily.
‘Liberty is all for any free and true being,’ he said.
‘We must live our earthly lives in obedience to Him but also in the service of the great possibilities He gives us.
Not to be bound by manmade laws of rank or fortune or education but to show His true glory in reaching out for everything we feel will reveal His  variety and greatness.
I tell you, after a long life of many escapes, many dramas which might have been tragedies, what I want and would value most is to be free to choose as much of my life as is given to me — to live it by my own lights, Mary, to do, insofar as God wills it, what I want to do to the very hilt and limit.’
The passion infusing his remarks had the effect of subduing all four of them.
George turned to Catherine, kissed her hands and seemed content to stare at her for the rest of the night if not for the rest of his life: Mary bowed her head a little and Hope looked away, sipped at his claret, could do no more.
The silence held for two or three minutes and disturbed Mrs Robinson, who came in with fresh candles and the welcome offer of port.
‘A song!’
George cried, who did not want so marvellous an evening to end.
‘Who will give us a song?’
Hope welcomed the chance to break the spell he had cast, seeing now that his best course lay in apparent spontaneity, and he volunteered.
‘The Bachelor's Complaint’,'he announced.
Mrs Robinson summoned Annie: Joseph had gone over to Cockermouth with his larger share of the char and would be staying the night at his sister's.
Had he been home, Mary's adventurous equality might not have been encouraged.
Hope had a reliable baritone and kept time well: the words came out with an Irish twang to them.
Applause and mock commiseration followed: George then followed with: The conceit carried through several verses which varied in pitch and volume as George fought for air against the unaccustomed alcohol.
Catherine and Mary together sang ‘The Lover's Complaint’; Mrs Robinson gave them a moving ballad about a double death on Scafell; Annie began a song, burst into embarrassment and ran out with Damson mewing ‘No-oo-oo, No-oo-oo’, behind her.
George concluded the evening — and successfully reclaimed his right to be seen as a sober enough man — by reciting ‘The Bashful Wooer’ from the works of one he announced as ‘the greatest poet of Cumberland and Westmorland, a man living among us today, our own Robbie Burns — Robert Anderson of Carlisle…’
More than an hour later, John-Augustus was on the shore between Burtness Wood and the lake.
He had gone out for air while Mary reverted to her servant role, but an impulse had taken him much further than he anticipated and now that he was on the shoreline he knew that he had followed an instinct which was directing him to resolve this business with Mary.
There was no doubt that — if he had ever truly, unselfishly and, if he could use the word,purely loved anyone — then that was Mary.
It was she who was the essential element in the alchemy which had absolved him and promised him such a refreshment of security and calm here.
It was she, too, alone, he sensed, who could satisfy him and he who could satisfy her.
For he was aware of the violent frustration of her unused sensuality, aware too of her longing to be out of that place, that role, that trap of a life.
In the life he himself might well have had, she would have been an obvious and natural choice.
Why, then, did he delay?
He was not bound to the life he seemed to lead.
He could go where he wanted.
He could escape Newton.
He stopped every now and then to listen to the patient lapping of the water, the light breeze in the leaves, scurries and sounds in the wood which he could not identify but which helped to reinforce the solitude he needed.
He would never have guessed that Kitty was rarely more than a dozen yards away from him, knowing he was the one who troubled Mary, shadowing him like a conscience.
Gradually the impulse which had taken him over to the wood, the instinct which had urged him to a resolution, worked its way to the surface.
When he saw it plain he did not like it.
‘You must leave her alone,’ he said to himself.
‘You can bring her nothing but trouble and misery.
You must get out of this place and do the one good thinking you'll ever have done for any woman.
You must be away tomorrow — not back to Newton and the old schemes — off to something else — off to America without a penny, what does it matter?
Others have done it.
But you must leave this woman alone.,
For at least another hour he walked on as if to test the conclusion against all the temptations and changes he could  uncover.
But he knew that he was right and, much more, he felt that he was good, that he had been given this chance to act well, that he must take it and to take it would get him off on a new and better path; while to succumb would be the broad and easy road to hell.
He walked back over the warm, moonlit meadows and paused before the inn, but held on to this resolution, the righteousness firing through him like brandy.
He could not know that Mary, equally, had sensed the possibility of a real liaison and rejected it.
He was too far out of her reach, she thought, she would never be comfortable with him; she would always think of herself as somehow his ward, his adopted orphan, his property; there would be no real place in it for her.
As she heard him come back she refrained from looking out of her window, nor did she go down to the corridor outside his room when, a little later, she heard him groaning as he always did in the grip of a nightmare.
She would be up at dawn and away before he woke.
She had forced on her mother the excuse of a visit to a cousin in Whitehaven.
She could not refuse; Mary so rarely took a holiday.
By the time she returned he would be gone.
The dinner, the talk, the songs, the enviable lovingness of George and Catherine would be a memory, happy, but cut off from her own life as clearly as the fell top was separated from the lake.
INTO THE VALLEY
Exuberantly believing that he alone was responsible for the separation and still moved by a powerfully purifying sense of goodness and rightness, Hope paid his modest bill the next morning, left a parting note for George, checked himself from asking to see Mary, promised — though he lied — to return and set off at a tremendous pace for Hause Point.
Here he dismounted and prayed that whatever spirit had been working within him would continue to work, that this furious feeling of benevolence to all mind — if only a beggar would pass by and he could give him a shilling!— would not abate, that he ‘could truly and today start a new life, O Lord, for Thy sake and in Thy name’.
His own name, though, as he said that word, tolled like a warning bell somewhere behind the new screen of holiness.
By the time he had climbed out of the valley and over the pass on a day which was fretting for a thunderstorm, he was boiling with the need to act.
George Wood had kept his rooms.
Again the Monkey-boy together with a rather fragile-looking, unusually pretty and even smaller friend, ‘'Artley’, proudly led away the horse.
Dan the groom was again absent, reported to be ‘brekken in a hobstinate new nag’.
Wood preceded him to his rooms bearing the precious dressing-case, which had been entrusted to his care, like a royal mace before him.
Compliments and civilities were exchanged briefly — though at far too great a length for the impatient Hope — but finally the landlord left him alone.
With light-fingered  nimbleness he checked all the contents, drawers and secret hiding places in the dressing-case, finding everything intact.
There was a letter from Newton but he was not in the mood to read it.
He beat about his room like a bat in a panic.
It was Christine who came when he rang.
‘Ah.
Christine.’
He looked intently at her but there was no change and besides she no longer moved him.
‘I would like some beer, Christine, and bread perhaps with cheese.’
She bobbed and turned to go, but wheeled back when he added, ‘Is that other maid — Joanna?
I — she — there was something she wanted to know which I can now tell her.’
‘Joanna, sir,’ Christine reported with pleasure, smiling at his feeble deceit, ‘was asked to leave by Mr Wood, because certain things started to disappear.
We couldn't catch her and she wouldn't admit anything but Mr Wood knew — we all of us knew — and she's left.’
Hope's disappointment was undisguised.
Christine let him stew in it for a few moments.
‘And she had a guinea, this Joanna — if that was her name — which we doubt…’
Christine paused most meaningfully…‘she said as you had given it to her, sir.
I believe Mr Wood'll be asking you about that.
She swore you had.
But if it isn't true, then of course she's for a flogging and prison: or worse.’
The question hung like a hawk.
Hope regained his character.
‘I may indeed have given her a guinea or two in a moment of late night extravagance.
After all, the sights about here can make one dizzy.’
He had taken quite enough from Christine.
He fired.
‘Whatever her failings may or may not be, I found her a most agreeable and willing chambermaid — very attractive for that occupation — far more attractive than the common run of girls, didn't you find?’
Christine flushed angrily but checked her tongue: she could not risk the job.
‘She waits on in the Twa Dogs now,’ she said, ‘a pothouse on the road out to Ireby.’
Mutely he blessed her for the information and, after quickly slaking his appetite, he was drawn — as if he had no will of his own — to the pothouse, where he picked up Joanna, went out  with her into the fields, and made love with a sweating savagery which seemed to satisfy even her and delivered him of a madness which had gathered like an abscess.
On his way back he made a diversion and called in at Crosthwaite Church to let the cool sanctuary complete his cure.
Mary, he thought, was now banished and forgotten.
To Miss D'Arcy he was Colonel Hope; to Mary he had for a moment been Augustus; to his new self, John alone; with Joanna he had no name and experienced the inscrutable animal comfort of brief blank joy.
He arrived back just in time to avoid an overdue thunderstorm.
Newton's letter contained two urgent messages:
We cannot sell the property in Kent to Mr Cooper as we had hoped and I fear that unless I go down there myself the business will languish.
I am very reluctant to go so far when we — or rather you — could be so near a better resolution.
What is your opinion?
I have something which may help you.
A Mr Crump stayed here last night, a Liverpool merchant.
He and his wife are on their way to Grasmere.
The main inn there — the Swan, I believe.
I introduced your name in the conversation, said I was your Factor, told him that you were in the Lakes for pleasure but also with an eye to acquiring property, etc., etc.
In short I have laid an excellent foundation.
Mr Crump is very wealthy and his wife is susceptible.
If you go immediately to Grasmere — unless other fish are being fried, but your letters are too vague for me to judge —(what are you doing?)— then I think you could do well.
I will not go to Kent until I hear from you.
I confess I am reluctant to go.
I have an increasingly urgent desire to move altogether elsewhere.
I am becoming impatient.
Hope tore up the letter.
Newton would never let him go.
Was this the only life he could lead?
Did he have to act like this…?
He chewed his way through a large and over-greasy midday meal, drank more beer than he ought to have done, took some laudanum with his brandy and water to give him sleep and felt his brain ripped open by a nightmare which wolfed down his mind in the open bleeding mouths of women.
He got off his bed at five and decided to ride over into Grasmere that afternoon.
‘I'll take my coach, Mr Wood,’ he announced, ‘but if I could leave the plate and linen here I shall be obliged to you.
For I shall certainly come back to the Queen's Head.
But I shall take my dressing-case and, of course, my clothes, if you would send…’
They were in the hallway which also served as a reception area for the hotel and Hope raised his voice to include as many eavesdroppers as possible in his private conversation with the landlord.
The decision had cheered him up; the bustle created by his demands reaffirmed the show of his importance; and he could still feel a breeze from the pure air which had wreathed him at Hause Point.
George Wood returned the compliments at full volume.
‘We shall be very sorry, sir, very sorry — Christine!— up to the gentleman's room immediately!— but of course— where is Dan?
Go to the paddock and get him away from those horses —; bought at Rosley Fair, sir and terrible wild — account?
No — won't hear of it, sir — when you leave finally, which we trust will be long delayed — then we can have a discussion on the matter of the account.’
Mr Wood's magnanimity was entirely invented from the manner in which he supposed great landlords in great cities behaved to their great guests.
In the same spirit he supervised the harnessing of the horses, the carrying down of the dressing-case and boots and clothes and papers, the safe depositing of the plate and linen and two locked trunks — it was the hour for promenading in Keswick and Mr Wood's conducting of this orchestra was not to go unremarked.
Hope had sent for Burkett: when the man and his daughter arrived, he took them to a quiet corner of the yard.
‘I have a proposition for you,’ he said to Burkett and as he said it he weighed up his man as if he had met him for the first time.
Burkett was rather small, rather bow-legged, a low centre of gravity.
His eyes were narrow and he was disinclined to meet a look, but his face was not unfriendly, though strangely white-skinned considering his largely outdoor existence.
The  skin was one of the few aspects of himself he had passed on to Sylvia, his bonny young daughter.
Hope concluded that he could trust him insofar as the man was certain of payment, but saw also that such payment need not only be in cash.
‘You could bring along your daughter,’ he added, scenting out the conspiracy of affection and design between father and daughter and sensing Burkett's reluctance to do strictly servant work.
‘I had a servant,’ he went on, ‘Peters, who had to be sent back to London.
I will not insult you by asking you to be my servant, Burkett, but nevertheless I could use a good man to drive this coach down to Grasmere, get me some fishing over a few days, be prepared to go the odd errand — about a week in all I would guess.
I'm sure we would not quarrel about payment.’
Burkett took his time.
He was already owed money by Hope for the times he had taken him fishing.
On the other hand, it was no great sum and Hope's custom had given him publicity.
And he had his regular job which his son was keeping warm for him.
As for Sylvia, there was something which could be working itself out between his only daughter and this Honourable: whether it would work out well or ill or at all, he wanted to be there to see it develop.
He stated his terms and agreed.
And so a couple of hours later, it was Burkett who drove the coach and four to the top of Dunmail Raise while Hope and Sylvia walked behind to spare the horses the effort, even though, as Burkett had pointed out, two passengers were light work for four horses.
The thunderstorm had washed the hills and the sky itself, it seemed, and the freshness of the evening was most amiable for a slightly strenuous stroll during which the gentleman had every right to take the woman's arm and even, over a rough patch, help her by the waist.
Sylvia yielded to help with a willingness which a man less vain than John-Augustus would have suspected.
They stopped beside the resting horses and looked down on the vale of Grasmere, a prospect described by great poets as an unsuspected paradise, depicted by painters as a jewel set in nature, sought out by the fashionable, protected by the sensible, evoker of sublime epithets, a small, ovaloid dream lake ringed by mountains proportioned in a measure which touched the  intelligence as much as the eye; if any one place deserves the description, then Grasmere Vale could claim to be in the very eye of the Romantic storm, in its beauty, its seclusion, its inhabitants and its capacity to draw in and draw out some of the greatest artists of the era.
Said Hope:
‘It looks like a soup bowl with a little puddle leftover in the bottom.’
And down they went into the village.
Hope sat alone in the coach.
Sylvia would be acknowledged to be Burkett's daughter, she would perform some small chores, but chiefly be explained away as evidence of Hope's goodness of heart in giving his ‘man's’ daughter the chance of a change of air.
Though the Swan was more sophisticated than the Queen's Head, it was only a matter of minutes before servants, ostlers and maids were scampering all over the large and comfortable hotel to see to the minutest needs of the ‘Honourable Member of Parliament’, ‘brother to an Earl’, who had landed on them at an unexpectedly late hour and naturally —‘a Colonel as well’— demanded the best of everything both for himself and for his (temporary —‘from Keswick’) servant and his (‘pale-looking’) daughter.
Mr and Mrs Crump, who until that moment had reigned serene in their social supremacy at the Swan, moved swiftly from slight disgruntlement to genuine delight as details of the new arrival's pedigree, accoutrements, speech and manner were relayed to them by one or other of the scampering servants.
Try as Mrs Crump did — a sidle into the hallway, an uncharacteristic visit to the stables, even a late saunter down the road towards the village and the lake — she could not engineer an early encounter with the glamorous newcomer and so had to keep her patience until the morning.
The men exchanged greetings just after ten thirty a.m.
Mr Crump had just set his watch by the Winster long case clock when ‘Your servant, sir,’ and Alexander Augustus Hope, Colonel, M.P.
for Linlithgowshire and younger brother to the Earl of Hopetoun, made his attack: Crump surrendered instantly, taking up Hope's opening words by explaining how  he had met Mr Newton, or was it Wilson?— the honourable gentleman's Factor in Preston, was it, my dear?
Or Lancaster?
Which was it, my dear?— uncertain not so much as to the identity of the town as to the quickest way to introduce his small and attendant wife.
Crump was a kindly man and his kindness to his wife had resulted in his being made to appear in thrall to her from time to time.
But one twitch of his temper and she obeyed him.
Now, however, the prospect of distinguished relief from what had soon become the limited social round of a small country village — however famous — made her impatient.
‘Mrs Crump, I presume,’ said Hope, gallantly slicing through the knot, and then he stood back as if struck by a startling thought.
‘Mrs Crump,’ he repeated as he, reluctantly it seemed, let her hand withdraw from his gentle grasp.
‘Forgive me — such a ridiculously slight acquaintance — absurd — but so extraordinary a coincidence — really — quite, quite…’ he was lost for words.
Mr Crump was alarmed; Mrs Crump leaned forward on her toes to increase her disappointing height and to reach forward to this man whose every title and reference made him more and more desirable.
‘I must say it,’ he went on, ‘now that I have begun.
Don't you think so?’
Oh yes, said the Crumps in a not unusual demonstration of faithful and spontaneous unison.
‘Perhaps not,’ said Hope.
‘Too soon to presume.’
‘No, no!’ cried Mrs Crump and ‘No,’once only and more thoughtfully, echoed Mr Crump.
‘It is just,’ said Hope, looking at Mrs Crump as if she were a particularly testing landscape — perhaps a copse whose colours were for ever changing under sun and scudding clouds —‘it is just,’he said, ‘and I am sure, certain, that someone must have told you this —‘
This — what?
Mrs Crump cried to herself, leaning forward now on a Pisan scale.
Hope stretched out the hesitation almost beyond endurance.
‘That you bear a remarkable resemblance to my very good friend Mathilda, younger sister of the Princess of Hohenzollern.’
Mrs Crump rocked back and blushed with embarrassed joy.
Mr Crump made a note to get the Honourable Colonel to repeat  the full name of the resembled figure later so that he could copy it out and memorise it.
He had no head for titles but he was sure his wife's friends at home would be interested.
Hope saw that he had penetrated the female's sympathy in one thrust: Newton deserved some credit for preparing the ground but the doing, the acting, was all his own.
The great Kemble would have been proud of him: he was more than a little proud of himself.
‘My card, sir,’ said Crump, and Hope read:
John Gregory Crump, Esquire Attorney-at-Law & Merchant Liverpool
‘And how is she?’
Mrs Crump asked, as Hope glanced at the card.
He looked up, puzzled.
‘Mathilda, younger sister of the Princess of Hohenzollern,’ Mrs Crump prompted him.
‘Is she — well?’
‘When I left the palace,’ Hope replied, gravely, and using the speech to transact the casual reciprocation of his own card, ‘both princesses — for of course Mathilda too is secure in that entitlement —‘
‘Of course,’ murmured Mrs Crump, and looked around the hall to root out anyone who dared challenge her on this matter.
‘— both were exceptionally well.’
‘Exceptionally?’ echoed Mrs Crump, almost a touch enviously.
‘With the same natural effusion of good colour,’ Hope continued, deciding that excess was more apt than enough in this instance, ‘that I find in your own complexion, ma'am.’
He put his hand on his heart and bowed.
Mrs Crump made the very tiniest curtsy and then switched her lace to utterly solemn.
‘Your hand, sir,’ she said, tragically.
Hope looked at the two clenched fingers.
‘The cut of a blade, ma'am, the severing of a tendon, the folly of war.’
He stroked his scar, knowingly, and Mrs Crump uttered the very smallest cry.
Indeed, all of Mrs Crump's not inconsiderable bulk seemed determined to contract itself before the Honourable and her movements, her voice, her gestures  declined in decent proportion to her increased sense of intimacy.
Mr Crump read Hope's card several times and knew that he ought to be impressed.
‘I hope, sir,’ he said, not noticing the pun, ‘that we may be of some assistance to you in your stay in the region.
It is a region my wife and myself know very well.’
‘The people are so natural,’ Mrs Crump whispered, ‘so simple.’
She looked around, but no-one was eavesdropping.
‘Innocents,’ she said loudly.
‘We are, in fact,’ continued her husband, who took no offence at her interruptions, indeed, in these foreign circumstances, counted on them as if his sentences were much improved for being broken into, ‘building a property here —‘
‘A substantial house,’ said Mrs Crump, to prevent all error.
‘Quite a substantial house,’ corrected Mr Crump modestly, ‘as we intend to live hereabouts.’
‘Our daughter,’ Mrs Crump, by way of explanation.
Hope smiled.
‘Perhaps you might meet our daughter tomorrow?’
Crump suggested.
‘Perhaps indeed,’ he dared, checking his sound with Mrs Crump every syllable of the way, ‘we may throw the two of you together?’
Mrs Crump laughed.
Trust Newton, Hope thought, to miss out the most vital piece of information.
So there was a daughter.
‘I was about to go for a turn around the village,’ said Hope, switching the subject, as he thought, adroitly.
‘Why,’ said Mrs Crump, ‘so were we.’
Clearly the coincidence struck her as near proof of divine intervention.
‘Let us, then…’ said Hope.
‘With pleasure,’ said Crump.
‘I will just have my maid’— the emphasis was delicate —‘bring my shawl,’ said Mrs Crump.
Hope was quite content to saunter around the pretty little village.
In the course of what appeared inconsequent, even trivial, conversation, he discovered that Mr John Gregory Crump of Liverpool was a very wealthy man indeed.
And that this wealth was not locked in land or designated for heirs: it was fine  fresh wealth coming into the great port of Liverpool by the month, by the week even, in the form of Ceylon tea, Indian jute, Irish coal — Mr Crump had an encyclopaedia of imports which he rattled off in diffident haste.
The haste, perhaps, and the diffidence both, were encouraged by his wife, who did not like him to talk of Trade, considering it to be vulgar, and yet she was pleased to note that this casual reference to wealth met with a satisfactory, if silent, response.
Mr Crump was, in fact, an extremely able, shrewd, exploitative and successful businessman and lawyer whose weaknesses were an over-fondness for his wife and an utter doting on their daughter.
At the sight of a title he felt that he must bend the knee for her sake, as he knew that his wife yearned to enter what she saw to be the utterly perfect circle of society, conversation, fashion and taste described by the British aristocracy.
The ‘Honourable’ had not impressed Mr Crump; the younger brother of an Earl had not daunted him — he was aware, though, that the man talked to him easily and, equally, made him comfortable.
He was rather disapproving of Hope's being a Member of Parliament: he knew several politicians and trusted none.
For Mr Crump, Trust, he would say and firmly believe, was the foundation of his business and his life.
He trusted the captains of his ships, he trusted his trading partners in the East, in the Indian Ocean, over the Atlantic, around the African coast; his clerks, his associates in Liverpool, his bank, his builders, his carpenters, those who supplied him with his furniture and his clothes — Mr Crump moved in a world of total trust.
If he had been told that the prime sources of his immense and, mathematically, infinitely expanding wealth were invariably polluted with the deceits and bad faith of exploitation, cruelty, oppression, barbarism, murder and vicious wrongdoing, he would have been at first amazed, then outraged and finally contemptuous, disbelieving the information.
He was an honest merchant whose skills, and those of others, including thank God the British Nan, had made him rich enough to slake any whim to satiety.
Mrs Crump had fixed on the Lake District for reasons of convenience as well as sentiment.
For she, too, had her practical  streak though now she tried to bury it.
She had urged her husband out into the large society in and about Liverpool but the forays had not been happy.
Mr Crump was too shy or too direct; Mrs Crump was too pushy or too arch.
Nor had the return invitations been much more successful: often, indeed, to Mrs Crump's shame, the invitations simply had not been taken up and those for whom the very considerable expense had been laid out did not attend the ball.
The Lake District, which she had visited a few times before her marriage and toured with friends, seemed a golden and available corner of gentility.
And besides, as she discovered, it was becoming so fashionable!
The books, the prints, the articles, the parodies, the paintings, the poetry — everyone wanted to go to the Lakes and of course the war with the French had made it all but impossible for most people to travel abroad.
To Grasmere, then, they had come in their own kind of innocence and plunged straight into a storm.
For nobody wanted them to build their house in the paradisial village.
It was extremely upsetting and the generously exposed support of the Honourable the Colonel Alexander Augustus Hope, M. P., when they went to the site of Allan Bank was very warmly appreciated.
The Colonel Hope would never know, said Mr Crump, as he reached out to take and shake his acquaintance's hand, what a boon such sensitive and untarnished support represented.
The merchant's emotion was perfectly genuine and valid.
He had been shocked by the resentment he had aroused — especially from a group of poets who themselves had only lately moved into the Vale: but he had dug in and dug on, he was no coward and he would not budge, he was determined to see it built, to live in it in the season and to be happy there with his wife and daughter.
The support of Colonel Hope was a transfusion.
Mrs Crump expressed her gratitude with the eloquence of total silence but with a little look which, as Hope noted and saw that it was noted, signalled that she was pierced to the heart.
On this pinnacle of enthusiasm, with promises to meet later for dinner, or tea, or supper, and do not forget our daughter and our boat of course you must use it for your fishing and good day, Colonel Hope, good day — the hills are called fells by the natives…
Hope had to leave.
Less than an hour in their company had brought them to the boil.
He had not worked out tactics to deal with what was not so much a surrender as a bid to form an immediate alliance.
His success impressed him and he wanted to celebrate.
But though he trawled the lower slopes around the lake most carefully, he came upon no-one.
He sought out Burkett and Sylvia and went on the lake to fish.
The Crumps' boat was a splendid, new affair, more fitted for a picnic than a fishing expedition, unusually comfortable and a pleasure to handle.
Burkett observed that money could even buy speed as they swung the precisely crafted oars through the beautifully modelled oarlocks.
Sylvia tied the bait.
Burkett rowed.
Hope steered.
They caught four trout.
Hope dreamed of great wealth.
What he would like would be someone like Burkett to row, someone like Sylvia to fix the bait and himself to steer.
What he would like even more would be to own the fine boat, the means to support the boat; and the further means to enjoy a style of life which could so easily include a fine boat, because that would surely embrace fine horses, fine coaches, fine clothes: Wealth.
If at times Hope needed women to a point of desperate madness, so, at other times, he ached for wealth so badly that he heard his inner voice crooning for it, like the ululation of a gin-addicted street beggar, the sound suddenly there but as if never absent, an ancient and ineradicable longing.
With Mr Crump's wealth…his dreams of money diverted his energy from the sexual lust which had gripped him after that effervescent meeting with the Crumps.
Without the smallest impoliteness, he managed to exchange no more than a few greetings for the rest of the day, preferring the potency of elusiveness.
And he wanted to prepare himself for the daughter.
His unsettling nightmares continued, and the John-Augustus struggle which he thought had been resolved in Buttermere began to re-emerge.
Perhaps the re-adoption of Augustus had triggered more perturbation and he feared to sleep.
He put laudanum in his brandy which helped.
Everything, he sometimes believed, could be resolved in sex: perhaps only briefly and never more than temporarily, but often the brief and temporary were key to any future possibility at all.
Sylvia, he felt, he could sense through the creaking, sleeping inn, was available, perhaps even awake.
He put the thought out of his head: a last beam of virtue from Hause Point.
More importantly, he was a little wary of her father and not at all sure that Burkett was not using Sylvia as bait for a cast of his own.
Moreover, the Crumps' daughter would arrive in the morning.
Three counts against, then, and all urged him to resist this daemonic demand for sex.
He would punish it: he would strangle and wither it: he would beat it down…
But later he awoke to his own cry as creatures from under large old moss-green rocks crawled up his legs, leeching on the white skin, wetly sucking the blood, and above him, ropes, rigging, nets, a gigantic sagging cobweb of strung and re-strung hemp lines, swayed down to trap him (children crying), and wherever he looked the wide mouths of women, no other feature but the mouth, tongues thick and purple as damsons, teeth white as the flecks on fall water and hands, nails curled and black, clawing at him, at his clothes, at his chest, at his face (children wailing), ripping it away, tearing the skin from the skull…
He went to the dressing-table and threw cold water over his face and chest which streamed with cold sweat.
He put his head out of the window and tried to clam himself by attempting to identify the night sounds.
Save for the owl, he knew nothing, and his ignorance dismayed him further.
He wanted to be out of this place, this vale, this county, this country, these clothes, these accents, this whole binding suffocating poisonous England…
‘Our daughter,’ said Mr Crump, shyly.
Mrs Crump stood in the background and moved her head a little.
Hope smiled and smiled again.
‘How do you do?’ he said, and held out his hand.
‘Very well thank you, sir,’ she said, and dropped a well-rehearsed curtsy.
He guessed that she was about six.
Later that day he drew a note of credit on an obliging Mr Crump for fifty pounds, explaining that his brother, ‘The Earl’, and himself were re-organising their banking arrangements, he would understand about these matters, certain they did these things better in Liverpool, great embarrassment.
‘But the essence of my difficulty, Mr Crump, is the very soul of yours.
It is this lovely place’— he gazed blankly but intently all around him:.
they were strolling up towards Elterwater —‘it is an addiction, Mr Crump, worse than tobacco, worse even than alcohol — perhaps the government should do something about it, perhaps my friend Mr Pitt should put a tax on nature as his father put a tax on gin.’
Mr Crump concentrated in order to remember that remark in order to repeat it to his wife.
And perhaps elsewhere.
He would acknowledge the source — he was not a plagiarist — but his polite conversation was, he knew, poor.
Figures, facts, tonnage, storage, shipping, selling, commerce which connected continents, all the romance and daring of his trade, deeply besotted him and had been his lifelong pleasure.
But it was considered out of the conversational court.
Mr Crump was back at school.
He took note, though: and he took pains.
‘I came, I saw, I was conquered, to mistranslate the mighty Caesar,’ Hope went on, puffing a little uphill — curious that his heavy exercises did not make country walking more comfortable — and hoping that Mr Crump had not heard that hackneyed quip too often —‘and who could resist the lake, the hills, the trees, the flowers, the birds.’
He thought he had got in just about everything and moved on.
‘It moves for me by contrasts,’ he said, and now he began to take an interest in, even to listen to, what he himself was saying.
‘When I was in Egypt I thought at first that the sun and the desert, the empty sky and the empty sand — that there was nowhere more grand.
I understood why the pyramids were so enormous and splendid, of course.
There was nothing there — men had to make their own markers or monuments, and eventually they had to build an entire landscape of monuments.
But here, nature itself provides the landscape and the monuments and so much more than that.
As the poets say —’ he could not bring to mind a single line and so he  stopped, and looked down on the lake as if in mourning, intuiting, correctly, that this would have the same effect as a couplet.
Mr Crump nodded his agreement as he too gazed down.
Hope held the position for a few moments more to rest his leg and get his breath back.
‘It is the people hereabouts that I like,’ said Mr Crump, feeling the silence as censure and well aware that he ought to play a proper part in the conversation.
‘In the towns now they are so busy or so tired, poor souls, or so wretched and idle that there is no time for that calm contemplation of one's existence which is the best part of our lives and which continues at all levels in a place such as this, among the peasantry as much as among those they call the Statesmen.
And I am convinced — or rather, I have been convinced — that this felicity is due to the influence of the place in which they were born and in which they have lived all their lives…’
As Mr Crump meandered away on a line his wife had drawn for him and in which he half-believed, John-Augustus recalled vividly a discussion he had overheard in the stable-yard earlier that morning.
It seemed that recently there had been a rather upsetting event in this heavenly vale.
A local man, known throughout his youth to be a steady worker, apprenticed to a mason, had married as soon as he came out of his apprenticeship, a girl from Rydal, nearby, and they had five children.
The war made severe inroads into his livelihood and at times he would be forced onto the hills to join the gangs doing the walling, but he hated being away from his family and they too suffered from the separation and besides the wages were not enough for all seven of them.
Still he managed, with great economies, to live frugal but sufficient life.
Then he fell ill and for several months was unfit for any work: the cost of medicines, the increase in debts, his feebleness when, too early, he returned to work, combined to make him look, a man in the stable-yard had said, ‘like a living skeletal’.
Everybody in the vale knew him; everybody in Grasmere admired the independence which rejected the pittance and charity of parish relief; the better-off folk spoke with tenderness of the rather thin but bonny children, so quietly obedient, and the man and his wife struggling…
The previous week the man and his wife had been found in bed, dead.
It seemed that to feed the children they had denied themselves all food and eaten grass.
There was a collection under way for the orphans.
‘Tell me’— Hope was made irritable by the recollection and interrupted with the acceptable rudeness of the confident social superior, ‘how do you administer your business?’
Crump could not believe his luck.
He began hesitantly, to be certain he was not boring his acquaintance, but seeing the same expression on the Colonel's face as had been there before, he flew on like one of his mighty clippers before the wind.
Hope had set him off because he wanted to think something over.
If he were to look at his life rationally — as in his most philosophical moments he liked to think he did — then there was no questioning the profile.
He was in danger from his past.
In Newton he was teamed up with someone he feared and could never finally trust.
He had a reprieve which was of indefinite length but better to be pessimistic than otherwise.
He needed money, above all else, money and much and soon.
And he was walking with a man of Levantine wealth whose demise would permit him, Hope, almost certain access to his fortune through marriage to its heir.
In short, why not murder Mr Crump and marry Mrs Crump?
After a decent interval.
It bore thinking about.
Hope looked about him.
It could not be done on this day and at this spot but he had heard and seen enough of the bouldery, rocky, unstable earth treachery of the district to know that it was possible.
And Crump was no athlete nor, Hope judged, had he any real strength in that soft-skinned, cossetedly clothed body.
What would be the loss?
Would Mrs Crump be less happy with him in a year or two than she was with Crump now?
Would the daughter even remember her father with the perpetual presence of Hope to blot him out?
Were there parents of Crump or brothers and sisters of Crump?
Well — what if there were, they had had a lot of him and would find through loss, perhaps, all  sorts of qualities in themselves and others they would otherwise have missed.
Even Crump himself might be better meeting his Judgement now, after a life of useful business, than later when the disturbances of retirement — already foreshadowed — would most likely have made him less of a man than he was now, less happy, less useful, perhaps even diminished, by turbulent pettiness, in the very qualities which might now ensure his redemption.
There was a place — he recalled it now — Burkett had pointed it out to him when they were fishing on Derwent Water — a sheer cliff coming suddenly out of woods and fronting the valley.
Just a walk in those woods, a move closer to the edge to peer down and enjoy the full Lake Tourist sensation of Beauty in Horror, a lost footing, a clutching at Mr Crump for help, a swinging of Mr Crump around, a letting of Mr Crump go down, down, down into one of the most favoured of the Lake Tourists' sites.
Hope smiled to himself: the smile broadened, and to disguise his true feelings he turned the smile on Mr Crump; who was greatly encouraged as he had been talking about the slave trade on which much of his father's great founding fortune had been based.
He knew that these were sensitive matters and he was relieved, though not altogether surprised, that this scion of the aristocracy and military England should appear so benign about the matter.
There was a man who lived nearby — Clarkson — a bane of his existence on the subject.
He had feared that Hope might turn out to be one of those weary and self-righteous young men who thought it witty to mock the great old institutions.
He took advantage of Hope's encouragement to risk an essay on the benefits which flowed — especially to the Negroes themselves — from the slave trade even though, alas, it was now becoming uneconomical.
Hope could see Crump's artistically twisted body draped over a volcanic rock, dead but unbruised, unbleeding, ready for a sort of sanctification as the Artist — Merchant who had been determined to throw over the chains of trade and discover the zephyrs of beauty, freedom, romance and nature.
Hope could picture himself comforting Mrs Crump, shoring up the memory  of her husband, praising him, assessing him, recalling ‘mots ’, reporting favourable comments, and then in would come the daughter, dressed entirely in black, and he would say, would be forced to say no matter what the consequences were, that the child was like the man.
Crump — this would provide an opportunity for a salving weep — Crump would live on for this child herself one day would bear children…
Hope was so dug into his happy daydream that he failed to notice that Crump had stopped to gaze at something: he himself walked several yards on before the absence of his companion impinged on him.
‘Your reflections,’ Hope cried out to the apparently enraptured merchant, ‘set off my own — as do all the most acute thoughts, scattering from the hand like seeds, each of which can take on a life of its own, and I confess that I became absorbed in those great matters of morality and commerce raised by your eloquent conversation.’
Mr Crump could not have wished for better and yet he was not as responsive as Hope had expected: indeed he only barely acknowledged the compliment.
Hope retraced his steps and came up alongside a Mr Crump whose mind had been cleared and relaxed by the stimulating freedom given to his prejudices: his expression was no longer that of the tentative, diffident social and artistic explorer: he was a hard man in his office dealing with a captain whose cargo did not comply with his list of instructions.
‘Look at that.’
Hope looked at a flower — mauve?, he thought, groping for the colour.
‘That butterfly,’ Crump said, savagely.
The butterfly.
Hope gazed intently on its red wings, black spots, a large butterfly, he thought, and a very easy life too, bumping gently along from one of those mauve flowers to another.
‘There is a man who lives in this vale,’ Crump said bitterly, turning a hard face to Hope, whose notion about the murder underwent a radical revision: Crump would be no willing accomplice in his own end.
‘He writes about butterflies and flowers and birds and in praise of the common people.’
Crump  paused, looked at Hope for a moment as a purely formal seeking of support, and then grabbed the butterfly and crushed it.
‘My wife loves the man's poems,’ said Crump, dusting the dead creature onto the ground.
‘Although the man is the curse of my existence.
He and his friends would have me scoffed and hounded out of the county rather than see my house completed.
But I will defeat them!
Poems or not.’
Hope walked back into Grasmere even more thoughtfully than he had left it.
After another afternoon's fishing, he found a way to arrange a meeting with Sylvia later that night, behind the stables.
He would take supper with the Crumps.
He had more than an hour to fill in before the meal: he had a maid bring him beer.
He gave her the chance to enter into a light dalliance but she appeared totally unaware of his subtle overtures, wholly preoccupied in not spilling the beer over the gentleman.
For a few minutes, Hope thought of saddling up a horse and riding the eight miles up to Keswick.
The exercise would tire him — that always helped: he would seek out Joanna once more and that, too, would do something to unlock this pain of want which would rise up in him from nowhere, and beat against the walls of his mind until he thought he would never be able to bear it.
Perhaps he should marry Joanna, then he would be certain that whatever lust he felt would be leeched harmless by her sex.
He ordered more beer: but the maid was just as absorbed in her task and besides, though Hope always boasted to himself that no woman was unattractive to a man who knew how to look, he had to admit that this particular maid of the Swan was not immediately seductive: she was excessively talk, awkwardly balanced, lank and thin-haired and a wart took away most of the attraction from her nose.
How far had he come from Hause Point!
As he sipped his beer and sat with his back to the window brooding on the bare wall and the bedhead, he contemplated how far he had fallen and how quickly.
Had Hause Point been a dream?
Or was he dreaming now?
His life seemed worthless — he was used to that — but there seemed to be nothing at all to contain it.
Although he had  merely played with the idea, he had thought about murder this morning and who was to say that given propitious circumstances and the required degree of desperation, he might not indeed…murder?
For even as he recognised its horror he still retained the possibility that it might be available, as a way out.
For he was lost, in no one mind, in nothing but urgent, insistent needs — lusts lashing him into lunacy.
He dressed for dinner reluctantly.
He should go back to Buttermere, go to Mary, tell her as much of the truth as she could bear and marry her.
Only then, he knew insofar as he was certain of anything, could he lead a life free from these ceaseless responses to envy, desire and pain…
But Sylvia would be waiting for him, later, and there was Crump to be re-engaged.
He went down the stairs and was stopped at the sound of voices.
‘Allow me to present myself — Colonel Moore, Mrs Moore and Miss Amaryllis D'Arcy, our ward.’
‘Honoured, sir,’ the diffident voice of Mr Crump returned the introductions.
Hope eavesdropped through the formalities, re-grouped and entered with an air of weariness which lifted instantly at the sight of Miss D'Arcy.
A second bite!
Explanations, laughter, invitations to be Mr Crump's guests for supper, accepted, pleasure — further coincidence.
Mrs Crump, it appeared — to her intense delight — had known poor Miss D'Arcy's mother — a most delicate, sensitive lady.
‘And your father — if I may speak of him too — was a man all of us admired…’
‘All of us,’ said Mr Crump, risking an interruption of his own, shaking his head a little over-vigorously for sorrow but the idea was right.
‘I'm sure my husband won't mind me saying that it was not his wealth which made us all respect him — although I've heard my husband say many a time that the wealth of Mr D'Arcy of Moss Side by Manchester was of an enormity to make the sultans and pashas of the East take note — but it was not for that, not at all, that we, all of us who knew of him…’
‘My wife never met him,’ Mr Crump interrupted, helpfully.
The look his aid received from his wife guaranteed that he would hesitate — on this social occasion — to interrupt again.
‘It was his reputation, his name, his…’
Mrs Crump was sinking, after such a thoughtlessly cruel puncture, ‘his reputation,’ she repeated, ‘for being such a good man, such a very good man — oh my dear!’
Miss D'Arcy was in tears.
They were not, Hope observed, as Mrs Crump and Mrs Moore surrounded her with attention, the welled-up tears of spontaneous emotion — not if he was anything of a judge: there was something spare, almost dry, if the word could be excused, about the tears; he noted their dryness carefully while, in mime show, semaphoring to Colonel Moore and Mr Crump ‘the female of the species’ and ‘over-sensibility’and ‘poor child’and ‘let the ladies resolve it but although we are men of the world we too are not unmoved by the finer shades of feeling, especially for those fallen on life's remorseless battlefield.’
The miming drew the men together just as Miss D'Arcy's tears drew the women into a quick companionship.
Indeed the little incident could not have been better judged to give them, as a group, a history and a common recognition of similar social sympathy, of good manners under stress, even of kinship that they alone in the Swan, in Grasmere and perhaps for many miles around, should have shared in Miss D'Arcy's private grief and dealt with it so skilfully and properly.
Supper was a triumph of the sort Mrs Crump very rarely experienced and she would have been hurt had anyone pointed out that Mr Crump's fine and very expensive claret which flowed like spring water was something to do with that success.
It was, as she was to say time and again, ‘a true congregation of hearts and minds’.
On entering the dining room, Hope had manoeuvred himself next to Miss D'Arcy and given her to understand that he was overwhelmed at the self-control of her behaviour in the face of such insensitivity as that displayed by the over-enthusiastic Mrs Crump who, nevertheless and for the sake of harmony, had to be tolerated — if not forgiven.
Miss D'Arcy took the compliment, appreciated the censure and the mocking of Mrs Crump, and smiled the smile of the dumbly adoring at Hope, who was alerted  by such a perfect response but nevertheless willing at this stage to receive it at face value.
He scored a further success with Colonel Nathaniel Montgomery Moore who, on the visit which he, his wife and Miss D'Arcy had just taken to Dumfries, had encountered none other than Major General Gerard Lake, ‘who told me about your great gallantry at Guelder — Gueld —‘
‘Gueldermasen,’ Hope pronounced carefully.
‘— with the 14th Foot,’ Colonel Moore continued: he acknowledged no correction.
‘Said you commanded it like a true Englishman, sir, and fought like a Roman.
He had nothing but the highest praise for you, sir.
I said I was proud to have your acquaintance — and so I am.
And the wounds, sir — you bear them very well: the leg, Major General Lake told me, was very badly crushed.’
‘Oh sir!’ said Mrs Crump faintly and for a moment she threatened to be the second act to Miss D'Arcy's opener.
‘Windows!’ said Colonel Moore and he rushed past his hostess to try to open the windows, which stuck.
The loud tugging and pulling that followed — the instructions from the Colonel, instructions from the landlord, banging of levers, banging of latches — eclipsed any small performance Mrs Crump might have been inclined to give and when the company was finally re-seated she was wise enough to let it pass.
But it had given Hope an opening.
He had rarely felt better.
A huge gust of energy blew him back on course.
Miss D'Arcy was back in the game, he could see that.
She would not be easy — then so much the more fun, the greater test for his skills.
Mrs Crump's talk of the girl's father's immense wealth — which surely she had inherited — had abolished all that fruitless toying with marriage to the innkeeper's daughter in Buttermere.
That had been the weakness of the self-defeated.
What Hope needed was a stage, a part and an audience.
He had all three and felt that at last the play was under way: this was why he had struck north; this was why he had learned his part (and God bless Major General Lake of Dumfries and God keep him there); this was his great opportunity and ‘O Lord,’ he prayed to himself, ‘if it is true that You have love even for the worst of Your sinners and  let Your Son welcome into Paradise the thief on the cross who by a single act redeemed a life of evil, then remember me at Hause Point, remember how I tried to obey Your will and how I saved that innocent young girl and help me here because I swear, if I succeed in my intention here, I will lead a life of charity and Christian duty to the end.
But for that I need Wealth, O Lord, I confess it: without it I am worthless; just let me get my hands on it and I will be an ornament to Your name.’
He looked up, as Kemble had looked up, and then picked off each of the attendant five with a dimpled smile which impelled them to treasure his grand simplicity and unaffected openness.
‘Pain,’ he began, ‘is one of the strangest phenomena on earth.
I have been where men have suffered pains which would have murdered any of us here’— he nodded to Mr Crump —‘but those same have not only endured it but seemed to ignore it’— here he nodded to Colonel Moore, who straightened his back — one old soldier understood by another.
The Colonel breathed in a -sentimental sigh of agreement.
‘I speak not only of the Army — although as Colonel Moore knows probably better than I, the acts of heroism you see there in the face of pain — wounds, cuts, torn limbs’— he looked at Mrs Crump; she swayed slightly —‘severed arteries, gashed heads’— Mrs Moore was unaffected —‘and all the terrible lacerations and disfigurements received on the human body in modern warfare’— Miss D'Arcy nodded; she was intrigued —‘but I speak of the self-inflicted torments of the Indian, the Negro and the Mussulman.’
He took up his claret, drank, and moved to an anecdote which he had found scarcely ever failed and would surely, he was convinced, see him through this supper party as the man of wide travel, wide curiosity, the aristocratic rover who had finally come back home to live by the more profound, more refined things of life.
‘There is a sect in India which eats broken glass,’ he began, abruptly.
‘I have seen them with my own eyes.
It is part of their religion, a religion I do not scoff at as it holds many elements which match our own even though it lacks the truth of ours.
At one of their great festivals they have the ritual of driving out the  devils from their bodies.
First the drummers come on — I may say that no women are allowed to take part in this ritual and the ladies here will perhaps agree with me that they are fortunate in that omission.
These drums are quite extraordinary — from the colossal to the size of a cup, they make sounds and rhythms which are undoubtedly barbarous but are nevertheless compelling.
Indeed, the more they play the more I may say drugged you become with the sound and the beating of it until you have to prevent yourself swaying around with the natives.
They are chewing a drug plant and drinking their quite disgusting beer or spirit — I had only one sip and did not stay to analyse the taste but rejected it instantly — the dancers — wearing headdresses feathered like exotic birds and daubed all over with signs and scribbles — messages to their gods, I assumed — then begin to pound the earth in a movement which matches the drumming perfectly and, like the drumming, is powerfully affecting.’
He found a matching rhythm.
‘Faster go the drums, faster spin the dancers, rush torches show off the paint and the sweat on them — they begin to smash small bottles of some holy liquid and first stab themselves with the broken glass — with no apparent injury, they do not even bleed — and then they eat the glass itself.
I swear it.
The glass is put into their mouths as they whirl around in the shadows and lights of the torches and they chew and swallow it down — showing it in their mouths — putting out their tongues afterwards to prove either that the tongue is not cut or that the mouth is empty.
I asked, afterwards, how many of the young men — they are mostly young men — died as a consequence and was told none.
The broken glass kills the devils inside them and makes them stronger.
I asked…’
Later, in his room, he remembered Sylvia.
But it would be too risky: even more certainly he felt, bright and keen as he was now, that she was part of a trap best avoided.
Or left until later.
Sylvia would wait.
He took out a pipe and poured a little brandy.
Outside his window the moon had risen over the fells and it was reflected exactly in the round lake.
Hope nodded his appreciation as at the perfect execution of an ambitious manoeuvre: it was indeed a favoured spot.
THE PROPOSAL
‘Harrison o' Caldbeck?’
‘Reet.’
The younger man stood his ground.
‘I knew some Harrisons at Wythop.’
‘Cousins.’
‘And there's one or two in Cockermouth.’
‘I've heerd Mother say we'd kin theer.’
‘None of them was up to much,’ the older man said, unkindly.
There was a pause.
‘We can't pick who we have for relatives,’ was the eventual reply.
‘So you're off farming stock?’
The older man sought another opening.
‘There can't be much to farm around Caldbeck, can there?
There isn't an acre of flat land for miles.’
‘We manage,’ was the reply.
They were in a little porch at the back of the inn: Richard Harrison looked at Joseph Robinson's untidy meadows.
It was a critical look and Robinson was stung.
‘It's low land brings out the real farmer,’ he said.
‘Or not,’ the younger man concluded, swiftly, still staring into the middle distance.
The reply brought Joseph Robinson an unease he could have done without: after all, he ought to be in the commanding position.
But this young stranger from the bleak Northern Fells seemed very capable.
‘Is there something you've seen you don't care for?’
Joseph asked, a little weakly.
‘I'd need to think on that,’ Richard replied, still without turning his gaze to the older man.
At that time there was a growing interest in Cumberland and Westmorland wrestling, partly because of the growing interest in everything in those two fashionable and enchanted counties.
Fine wrestlers such as George Wood of the Queen's Head in Keswick could now earn twenty-five guineas on one of the great lakeland wrestling days: more, of course, if they put money on themselves.
Some said the sport came from the Norsemen, others muttered about the Romans who after all had been in the area for several centuries and left little else but stone, and one literary aficionado had just written a treatise tracing it back in direct line to Jacob's wrestling with the angel.
It was a peculiar sight.
Two men dressed in long underwear would shake hands and then bend forward as if making a deep bow to each other.
This position would be retained and they proceeded each to rest his chin on the other's shoulder — heads nuzzled close together like horses lodged in affection — and then swing their arms in order to take a grip on the flattened back of their opponent.
Once the grips were taken, the wrenching and twisting, the buttocking and tripping and hyking, the turning and thrashing and throwing began until one man was floored, his grip broken.
The event would conclude as it began with a handshake.
The two grappling at a conversation on the porch — one a capable wrestler in his time (famous local wrestlers like George Wood and himself often ended up as innkeepers), the other, Harrison, a contender for honours and prize money on that very day — were like the wrestlers when seeking for a grip.
This is when it can look most puzzling and most comical to the ignorant.
Two men crouched against each other, bums stuck out, arms swinging up from the grass to the grip in salmon-like curves.
But the cognoscenti know that the grip can be everything: in itself it can decide the entire bout.
And so Harrison of Caldbeck and Robinson of Buttermere — wrestlers were always known by name and village both — were circling about each other 's conversation trying for a grip.
Every time Robinson seemed to get a hold, Harrison wriggled away.
The older man was eager to engage him, keen to get the trial of strength over with, aware, perhaps, of limited strength.
But Harrison was a long-headed young man.
Whenever Robinson struck for a grip he moved quickly and broke it, never allowing the older man to settle.
But he had to watch very keenly: Robinson had won notable bouts.
‘D'you fancy your chances today, then?’
Robinson said, deciding that talk about his farming, not unlike the farming itself, alas, would give him no advantage.
‘There's some awkward fellas down here,’ Harrison replied.
‘They take a bit o’ weighing up.’
‘Would I put money on you?’
‘I nivver bet,’ said Harrison, ‘save on certainties.’
Robinson nodded.
He had used the same reply himself on occasion.
Harrison had arrived for the Sports on the previous evening, taken a couple of glasses of beer in the Fish — complimented the landlord on his brew — and then gone to sleep out the night in a barn.
To the crowd in the tap bar he had seemed no different from any other young contender down for the Sports.
But Robinson, eternally vigilant over his love and his interest, had seen and noted the direct force of the man's design on Mary.
More worryingly, he appeared to be welcomed.
Mary had spent a little time in close conversation with him and even stroked his cheek at one stage.
Robinson was surprised and a little alarmed at such an untypical gesture.
He had taken the trouble to seek out the young man in the morning and tease him into conversation — as he thought subtly, but Harrison was immediately aware that he was being sized up.
So far, Harrison had enjoyed the advantage.
‘Will you be headed back home after the wrestlin'?’
Robinson asked.
‘I might stop on a day or two.’
‘Have you business roundabout?’
‘Summat might crop up.’
Robinson had learnt all that he wanted to know and more than he cared to hear.
‘I'll be seeing you then,’ he said.
‘But we all get very busy  around here this time in the season.
None of us has time for much else but the work in hand.’
‘I won't keep you then,’ Harrison said, nodded cheerfully and walked away.
A lot of swagger in him, Robinson thought, a lot too much.
He made a click of disapproval loud enough for the young man to hear.
Once Harrison rounded a corner he took a very deep breath and leaned against a wall.
He had been on his mettle throughout.
He feared that Robinson had seen through him and played with him.
He gave no credit to his own moves and answers because he had all but forgotten them.
Robinson knew his game and would do all he could to spoil it: that was what mattered.
He had not caught a glimpse of Mary but she would be at the Sports.
she had said so when they had discussed his teeth.
her questions had been more curious than tender and even when she had touched his cheek it was to prove for herself that no bruising remained.
There had been a steady diminution — since the operation — in his own interest in dentistry but she had tapped his experience out of him and collected it with care.
Harrison had come back to propose marriage.
He could not afford too many jaunts like this — especially as his father had been less than joyful at his return.
They did not need an extra hand until harvest, he had said, or even later when they could lay off the casual help and Richard and his father would be more than sufficient labour to see the small hill farm through the winter.
This expedition was sanctioned on the understanding that there was good money to be won at wrestling.
Guineas were nowhere else so easily available.
The wrestling was to be the prize event of the day and several carriage loads had come across from Keswick and Cockermouth and even further to the small but picturesque meeting in the much lauded Buttermere.
One or two of the local gentry would be entering the wrestling; several were in the horse races, although events such as the long leap and the high leap attracted less fashionable clients.
Harrison knew many of the wrestlers and the rest of the morning passed pleasantly enough as he moved around the quacks and the pedlars, tinkers and gypsies and show people  who were an enjoyable contrast to the farmers' wives selling their freshly imprinted butter, with their buckets of eggs, the vegetables and poultry, rabbits, game pies, potted char, rum butter.
A few of the men had taken a rare day off from the quarries and the recognitions were more generous than Harrison had anticipated.
He suspected that they might think he had used the incident of the bad teeth and the convenience of a farming father to bolt from that tough and dirty job.
That, in part, was the truth.
But he wanted to assure them of a more overpowering reason: he needed to re-establish himself on his home ground as firmly and quickly as possible in order to launch himself on Mary.
Of course he never mentioned that.
The Fish was crowded from mid-morning, with tables in the yard and extra help in every room.
Mary loved days like this.
She liked the sensation of so much enjoyment around.
She liked the people — many of whom she knew well, and at least as importantly — many of whom knew her well and had known her since early childhood, before the mark of fame had set her apart.
In the mass her singularity dissolved.
She was reduced to the landlord's daughter who served at table: it was the sort of anonymous commingling in which she found a great relief.
She liked working with her father too on such days because she could be commanded by him without being suspicious of him.
Joseph saw the wrestling day as one of his great sea battles.
The inn was his vessel, the valley was the ocean, out there before him were a horde of small boats and pirates, flare ships and decoys, occasionally an enemy frigate or two hoving over the crest of a hill, sometimes a rich galleon sighted nearby which had to be pursued and boarded.
Mrs Robinson was banished below decks and confined to the kitchens from which emerged a steady issue of victuals from forenoon to midnight.
Mary was his lieutenant and they worked together wonderfully well.
All his talents were called on on such a day — his powers of calculation, of decision-making, of patience, of amiability, of firmness and above all of steering his excellently stocked, freshly painted and cleaned up vessel of an inn through the increasingly unpredictable currents of the day.
Hot sport, heavy drink, the aphrodisiac of leisure and the compulsion to press into the very  gut of pleasure combined now and then to threaten choppy waters, even a storm.
Joseph knew his allies.
Like Nelson he was thoroughly familiar with those on whom he would need most to rely.
Every Buttermere neighbour and old wrestling foe would be given a free mug of beer as his first drink and throughout the day Joseph would ask a little— often useless — favour here, another there in order to keep them within his ken: so that they kept their eyes, he would say to himself, on the signals coming from the flagship.
Mary would be sent out like a rowing boat among the waiting fleet — a word here, a suggestion there, showing again the presence of the command vessel.
Not that he anticipated great trouble — most of the fell people were there to entertain themselves in ways which might appear rough and sound loud but came from characters largely tolerant, polite, gentle, qualities widely commented on, coming from the ease of great and graceful physical strength, the pacific, solitudinous nature of the daily lives, and a long experience of continuing community.
Yet Joseph knew that he was right to have his armaments in place: you could never trust the gypsies or the tinkers — against each other, let alone anyone else: quacks, drunks and ranters would drift from their positions in the line and cause trouble just by bumping into the orderly armada of hill folk who knew how to hold steady but had never been fond of strangers.
While the vagrants and beggars shifted around like floating fireships of guilt, capable of their own frustrations.
Mary knew his commands well.
Sometimes she would anticipate them.
She kept a tight grip on the new hands and was particularly good at swabbing down the decks after a boisterous boarding party had come and gone.
There were several times when Joseph could stand outside the front of his inn, or on the for'ard deck of his ship, and have the time to contemplate his next manoeuvre, calm amid the storm as all the great commanders always were.
And for once he knew he was fully appreciated by his Buttermere neighbours and even by his wife.
The day was bright enough, a quick breeze sending a fleet of light clouds across to the east, the sun warm but not hot, dry underfoot.
On an outcrop of rock, Kitty Dawson looked down on the valley for a few minutes.
From where she stood, the business of the Fish, the activity around the field, the movement of the crowd at the country meeting — dressed in a range from the metropolitan fashionable to a package of rags — made scarcely a blemish on the landscape.
The lake was undisturbed, the steep fells even more silent and bare than usual, the small movement spilling out of Buttermere village no more distracting than any cloud shadow across the crags and turf.
She smoked a peck of tobacco and decided, as she decided every year, not to go down.
She would hear any news that mattered.
The longer she gazed down, through the tendril of tobacco smoke, the more the meeting merged into the older, stronger established patterns and colours of the valley floor until, eyes half-closed, she saw it disappear into the ancient landscape…
Joseph Robinson was aware of what was good for business but he was also a man who prided himself on his love of sport: this meant that he had a responsibility to knowledge and experience.
He had to judge the wrestling which would be the chew in the conversation of the valley for weeks.
In mid-afternoon, he hove to, dropped anchor and took Mary the few hundred yards to the sports field, basking a little in their ceremonious passage — the work and self-forgetfulness of the day brought out every best quality in her and yet, paradoxically, although at the pitch of her beauty, she herself was more unaware of it than at any other time.
But others saw it and the crowd shuffled free a space to let them through.
Joseph went into the ring to confer with the other deep judges of the sport.
Mary took the opportunity to look around the small country fair.
Richard Harrison came up to her as she was standing in front of a pedlar whose display included a cluster of ribbons: red, blue, yellow, green.
Tell us your favourite colour, he asked.
Mary smiled but shook her head: she wanted to be under no obligation.
The young man gauged her reaction and bought an emerald green ribbon which he handed to her.
She could not refuse and indeed found it quite easy to accept.
Cured of his bulging toothache, refreshed by some days in the open air on  his father's farm and steeled by his resolution, he appeared as a handsome, personable man — about the same height as Tom but from a different local stock — blond hair flecked with auburn, skin pale, lean-shanked, eyes duck-egg blue.
Joseph saw that Mary had escorted the Caldbeck man to the wrestling ring and an instinct of apprehension unnerved him.
She would not, could not leave him for this boy!
When he took a green ribbon from her and tied it loosely round his waist, Joseph was even more disturbed.
As Richard took the ribbon from her he had said, ‘I'll borrow it for luck.’
She had not the heart to embarrass him by refusing a request so diffidently expressed.
The contest got under way— a series of knockout bouts inexorably leading to the final pair and, after seeing Richard — and Tom — win their opening bouts without much difficulty, she wandered away, suddenly keen to be on her own.
There was no-one by the lakeside: the wind cuffed the water lightly and took the murmurs of the crowd behind her yet further away.
Where was the man called Hope, she wondered.
What would he be doing at this moment?
On her return from Whitehaven she had surprised herself by feeling compelled to go to the room where the four of them had enjoyed the dinner.
So much .
She had felt flattered, nervous, tentative, bold to be acting the companion to the even bolder Colonel: but she had also felt locked into that happiness; of right.
And then she had run away from it.
But he had not asked after her; unsuspected questioning of her mother had told her that.
Now she had to let that night, her feelings, her certainties about his feelings, her inflamed stirrings of the senses — all be lapped away.
A louder shout than usual took her back to the ring.
She was in time to see the recovery of one of the young gentlemen who had begun to torment her on that night until Colonel Hope had silenced him.
Harrison of Caldbeck, she was told, had upended him savagely after the young gentleman had sought an advantage by what would, in a common man, have been punished as an inadmissible move.
So Harrison had lost  the first fall unfairly: in the second he had twisted his man feet up and then let him crash to the ground.
There was no third fall: the gentleman had withdrawn.
The final was between Harrison and Tom with all the sympathy on the local man.
Alice sought out Mary and they watched appreciatively as the two strong, tall, graceful, beautifully built young men whirled each other about, endured two dog falls — draws — and only after several lengthy spasms of athletic tussling arrived at the deciding fall.
Which Tom finally won.
Harrison leapt up instantly to hold out his hand and immediately looked about for Mary and shook his head.
Noting the gesture, Joseph moved smartly over to his daughter and escorted her back aboard.
The rest of the afternoon and evening would be far too busy to allow them any helpful solitude.
Harrison was still there in the morning.
He followed Mary as she took the flocks out of the village.
From his porch, Joseph watched with a sullen and rather bleary eye: the night had been long on reminiscence and several barrels had been tapped to celebrate old victories.
After the fair, the village had regained the wholeness which, Mary perceived at times such as this, was vitally precious to her: perhaps this was her love.
The place itself, the arrangement of those low, recently rebuilt stone farms and the few mud and wattle cottages, the eternal comfort of the lake's shape and colours which seemed not to mirror but to temper her mood, the rise of fells which gave her sensibility its reach.
The valley was her, she moved in it as through the natural expression of her mind and feelings.
The keen blustery morning summoned up exactly the braced mood she sought to capture.
She made a mild attempt to evade him but he cut across and landed in front of her, sitting, as she had first seen him, with the sheep and goats dithering and teetering before and around him.
He held up the green ribbon.
‘I forgot to give you this back.’
‘So you did.’
Both of them smiled at the device.
And she took the ribbon, without a promise.
But paused.
‘You know why I really came here,’ he said, and the words might well have been memorised because he stared up at her  in rather an abstracted manner as if his mind were on something else.
She did not reply.
It was as if a light blow, say on her cheek, had suddenly distracted her from the braced confidence of her early mood to an unwelcome uncertainty.
She wished he would stop.
She liked him.
Over some months…a year or two…
‘You know what I'm trying to say…’
Now he did look at her and the look was almost forlorn.
In that look she saw her life with him and it was a decent life: the small farm in high northern fell-land, the farm coming in part or in whole to him, several children, heavy days, quiet times, a life she often yearned for — a plain and ordinary life away from this coddled valley, a place in which she could start again.
But at this moment the thought of leaving the valley — her home, her existence — and not being here if, by some chance,he should return…yet this expectation confused her.
She had not experienced it before.
The man was an aristocrat, inconceivably wealthy, brother to an Earl, a Member of Parliament, a Colonel — that he had been amiable for a couple of passing days was surely something she could accept, absorb and forget.
But the expectation would not be driven out…and yet Harrison was a fine man and there was something about his miserably presented directness which made her want to scoop him up.
A wave of tiredness came upon her, this time the full tidal memory of the strains of her life at the inn, her age, her vulnerability, her need to stand alone…
‘So…?’
He wanted her to agree to walk out with him: to accept his first and formal step on the path to marriage.
It was his honesty she could love, she thought.
And he would be a man who would not try to trample on her.
He would listen: there would be an equal life there: he smiled and tapped his healed face.
‘And I'll let you pull the next bad tooth,’ he said and stood up, reached out for her.
CREDENTIALS
‘I accept,’ she said.
He hissed her hand, delicately, a mere whisper of the lips, stood back, looked intently at her until she was forced to smile back at him, and pressing her left hand in his unclawed fingers, swept his blemished hand across the landscape beyond them: Bassenthwaite Lake, the valley, Keswick, Derwent Water, Catbells, Newlands, an Arcadia which his gesture seemed to offer her as his gift.
‘Only time,’ he said, carefully, remembering the very intonation of these precisely rehearsed words, ‘will enable me to show you how much your acceptance means to me.
Only time and,’ he paused and once more kissed her hand, ‘our greater love.’
Miss D'Arcy smiled again: she stood above him on the rise of Latrigg Fell and was impressed more than she had anticipated by the gallant and handsome figure he struck, posed so elegantly against the mountains.
‘I should like to marry soon,’ he said, abruptly, as if the thought had ambushed his feelings, ‘and here — here where we met.’
‘I too would like that,’ she replied, steadily.
‘I can think of no better place to be married.
The steadiness was a torment.
at last she would be free.
‘There —’ Hope pointed towards Crosthwaite Church modestly huddled below ‘— where saints have visited and so many have worshipped quietly for over a thousand years.’
She nodded and then, as steadily as she had accepted everything he had so far said, ‘Colonel Moore will want to write his letters, of course.
But when we have the answers…’
Hope asked his question silently, merely an abstract, puzzled look, leaving her to wade through the potential embarrassment.
Miss D'Arcy — Amaryllis — held to the silence as resolutely as he.
She was not cowed.
Any feelings Hope had for her — and though they had included a certain measure of respect and the possibility of desire, they had not been strong — now alchemised into a quite violent dislike.
‘I do beg your pardon,’ he was forced to say.
She composed herself at some leisure before answering.
‘We discussed — the Colonel, Mrs Moore and myself — the probability of this —’ she left a coy blank for the word ‘proposal’to etch itself on the wind, ‘and of course,’she giggled just a little , ‘we made our plans.’
‘Was it so transparent then?’
Hope asked, gaily, and smiled and smiled…
‘I was always certain,’ Amaryllis confessed with such resolute frankness that he totally disbelieved her.
‘And during those two weeks in Grasmere, Mrs Moore became convinced that you would —’ again the blank and again the word was conjured up between them like a spirit conjured from the mountain.
‘Colonel Moore, of course, was always a doubter.’
This time Hope's quizzical look did prove a sufficient prompt.
‘He thought you would be too Grand,’ she said, rather gleefully.
‘Of course, he did not say that and he would deny it if I accused him of it, but…my father…your brother the Earl.’
Miss D'Arcy looked very thoughtful.
‘Even though my father was convinced that, with our name — it is French — we must have come over, like all the best families, at the Conquest…and Colonel Moore had heard…’
Here she hesitated.
Her shyness, he judged, was entirely genuine.
‘Yes?’
‘From his talks in Dumfries…that you…in Vienna…had been, were, engaged to — I believe you mentioned the name to Mrs Crump.’
Hope was instantly alerted, which enabled him to respond gently and convincingly.
Privately he condemned the benign Mrs Crump to a slow spit.
He could see her uncontainable familiarity turning his whimsical early compliment into an item of confidential gossip which might well — had Miss D'Arcy been less resolute — have harmed his chances.
He paused — a marked pause — turned away, took a couple of paces laterally — so as not to be too ridiculously far beneath her — and managed a reasonably sincere sigh — given the short notice.
‘There was an arrangement, I freely admit it,’ he said, bravely breaking it to her and gazing out across the valley as to a disappearing dream.
‘Indeed, it was one of the many subjects…time, Amaryllis…but you have driven so much out of my thoughts.
These few days with you have been like this country before me here — a new paradise, an enchanted place so rich in itself that it needed nothing else.
Any thoughts of others, any memory, any meetings or encounters have simply disappeared — as dark places are driven away by the sun.
Yes, in Vienna, a lady, I will not say her name but assure you that any conversation I had with poor little Mrs Crump was most decidedly not on this subject and not about this lady — she has clearly clutched at a reference and taken it for a confidence — in Vienna, this lady of, I may admit it, royal connection, formed an attachment for me which was not reciprocated but proved most difficult to disengage.
In Vienna, of course…my only conclusive recourse was to leave the city, which could not be arranged as quickly as I would have liked since I had army business there which demanded my attendance.
The rumour, therefore, was given time to breed and, for my own honour's sake and for hers, I could do nothing, nothing, but endure it…’
Miss D'Arcy came across to him and put a hand on his shoulder with proprietorial affection.
He left her hand unattended and the non-gesture had the force of a faint rebuff.
Secure in his dislike of her, he was in control.
‘…
Letters?…’
He murmured, eventually, vaguely, his eyes resolutely on the landscape, her hand rather guiltily withdrawn from his shoulder.
‘Please — let Colonel Moore talk to you about it.’
Hope looked down the fell where Colonel and Mrs Moore were strolling with unskilful aimlessness, taking care never to look up towards the two figures on the rump of mountain.
Hope smiled to himself.
Just when the game appeared to be won, the odds had lengthened.
He turned to Amaryllis and delivered his most accomplished smile.
‘I take it I am to be investigated?
I will try to find it entertaining,’ he said.
‘To be spied on!’
His smile was relentless and Miss D'Arcy who, until then, had felt none of the virulent force m. the man, was pushed into embarrassment.
He made her feel cheap, disloyal, childish and socially inferior.
Mrs Moore tapped her husband's arm complacently.
‘She's done it!’ she said.
‘He's taken her arm.
Don't look.’
How had his wife managed to spot it when she, too, he could have sworn, had kept her eyes off them was a puzzle to the Colonel who tended to the view of Woman as Eternal Enigma.
He had not a quiver of anxiety over the business of the letters.
‘It was in her father's will,’ he said, evenly.
The two men were in the small back parlour which George Wood kept for discreet purposes, ‘and although it is…’
Stuck for the precise word, the Colonel made a small gesture with his right hand which then efficiently used the momentum to pick up his claret.
‘Amaryllis talked to me earlier.
She wanted me to overlook the letters.
I think she is afraid that you might be embarrassed.
But of course I must carry out her late father's wishes.
You will understand there can be no question of that.
Her fortune, you see, is very large.’
He nodded almost sadly, as if the weight of the wealth were altogether too much for him.
‘Very large,’ he repeated dolefully.
Hope understood his reluctance to be parted from it.
The problem was to prise him away.
In Miss D'Arcy he had implanted a slight sense that she might have offended the Earl's younger brother and could be denied entry into the world for which her father had cultivated her.
Would that take?
‘You have not enquired as to the size of the fortune,’ Colonel  Moore said, in a tone which suggested that Hope was somehow in the wrong for this negligence.
Hope smiled and mimicked the Colonel's previous gesture including the picking up of his claret.
He only sipped: tense, waiting for the right opening.
After going to the door and reassuring himself that they were entirely alone, Colonel Moore recited the wealth of his ward.
Mr D'Arcy had been very, very rich and very shrewd.
Hope smiled and smiled.
‘Those letters…?’
‘It is quite clearly laid down.
You give me a note and three or four names and addresses.
I write to them and include your note.
Once they have replied, well then!
You and Amaryllis can be married in a trice!’
The heartiness of the latter part of his sentence was in response to a sudden visible stiffening on Hope's part.
‘I could never agree to that,’ he said: he smiled no more and let a silence grow uncomfortable.
Colonel Moore was confused.
Part of the confusion came from the unworthy pleasure given him by the prospect of holding onto his ward a little longer.
Firmly, however, he regrouped and readdressed himself to the task.
‘I am afraid, sir, that it is a stipulation.
One which, in your case, is, I realise, unnecessary, tiresome, perhaps worse — but I will explain all that, I will tell your referees of the peculiarity of this circumstance, the onus will be on me and trust me, Colonel Hope, I shall not let Amaryllis or yourself down.
My wile and I consider this to be a most fortunate match.
It is in Amaryllis's best interests and she has told us that she is certain of happiness with you…’,
Her face flashed up in Hope's mind's eye and he abhorred its prettiness which he saw as entirely calculating, unaware of her lust to be free — through marriage.
‘But we must…’
The Colonel repeated the gesture which led his hand to the glass.
‘I understand,’ Hope assured him.
‘It is the delicacy in myself which I find insuperable.
This is no criticism of your position.
You have your duty and as one soldier to another…but I have this damned reluctance.’
He smiled, quickly, warmly, and in  that dart of charm Colonel Moore saw the pressing attraction of Amaryllis for this man.
‘Perhaps I can overcome it in time…but it is too much of…forgive me…of a market, an auction, a commercial venture…
And of course I am not an unworldly man — the Earl, my brother, whom I'm sure you will meet, will assure you that I am, by his standards, too interested in confirming and enlarging the wealth of the estates — and indeed on my visits to Egypt and Turkey and the New World I have, I may say, made a purchase here, an investment there…’
He narrowed his eyes and saw Hope the Merchant Prince, the aristocrat at large on the Rialtos of the world, feared, admired, dipping silkenly between caskets of treasure, tranches of land, ships, silver mines, paintings, furniture, the collector, the connoisseur, and sending all back to the lonely Scottish estate which burgeoned with those foreign infusions of antique wealth, material goods…
‘No,’ he concluded, pulling himself reluctantly out of his Croesian day-dream, ‘I am not an unworldly man.
But,’ he went on, deliberately hitting a harder tone, ‘as you will entirely appreciate, sir, there is a man's own sense of his own honour.
A sense which can work against his best interests — for I need not repeat how much I respect Amaryllis, how entirely delightful and suitable I find her and how wonderfully rare she is for me who has — as man to man I can tell you what you must guess — several times been urged to marry.
Amaryllis is the first woman to whom I have proposed and I trust she will be the last.
But I am afraid…letters…’
Colonel Moore was on the rack.
The man was so plausible, so persuasive; he himself — in his better self — would surely also have felt opposition to the posthumous demand of a tradesman, however rich, however Norman his name.
It was as clear an indication as he could ever have wished for that Hope was not primarily interested in the immense dowry.
‘If it were my sole decision, then of course,of course I would never press it.’
‘I understand.’
Impulsively, Hope stood up, reached out and took Moore's right hand in both his.
‘Please believe me, this is my obstinacy — you are behaving honourably, honourably — I realise that I am jeopardising my chance of great happiness — but we know — both of us — there are times when the greatest danger has to be faced, the greatest risk taken because that small persistent voice will not allow us to escape our duty to ourselves.
I am very much afraid, sir, that…’
Hope stopped abruptly, before he was overcome.
Colonel Moore, moved and perturbed, would have stood up to encounter the man squarely on but the pressure of Hope's grip kept him down in his seat.
‘Perhaps we can talk again tomorrow,’ Hope concluded and left a rather fuddled and flattened Colonel Moore to his own company.
Hope had talked himself into a state of indignation.
How dare this man demand his credentials as if he were some arriviste from the Colonies whose background had to be sniffed out and tracked down because his foreground was presumed to be so suspect!
His rank was way above that of Moore: the Hopes of Hopetoun were far better stock than the Moores of wherever they sprouted up!
Miss D'Arcy might be a young woman with a remarkable inheritance, but there were others, and money was not the sole factor at moments such as this.
He imagined, with pleasure, the unusual difficulty Colonel Moore would have in presenting his defeat to Miss D'Arcy.
For surely he ought to have been able to explain to Colonel Hope, to persuade Colonel Hope, to arrive at a gentlemanly agreement — and what precisely had Colonel Hope said?
And when would he be back?
And what was to be done?
The man who called himself Hope went down the sleepy cow-crossed and vagrant-strewn main street of Keswick with the speed and determination of the utterly resolved.
It was late afternoon.
The Colonel and himself had entered negotiations after a celebratory two thirty dinner for which Mrs Wood had polished all her arts and cutlery.
He was well fed, well soused, bursting in strength and eagerness for life, King of the mountaintown making for the pot-house and Joanna.
He was careless of any consequences there.
She would never be believed and he was discreet enough for all normal purposes.
In the end he would simply deny it and accuse her of false witness.
His dress, title, manner and reputation protected him from her range of accusations.
He would never be the luckless, dirty, shrivelled-looking man in the stocks — put there likely enough for stealing no more than an egg.
Hope tossed the woeful prisoner a small piece of silver.
Joanna, he was told, by a rather uppity landlord who rejoiced to see privilege spiked, was out in the fields.
Doing what?
The leer was the answer.
A flare of anger scorched Hope's mind.
He took it for granted she would be there to service him whenever he wanted it.
He knew that, essentially, he had not yet utterly satisfied her and that was unbearable.
The lust he had was to slake her own unmistakable lust.
It only worked if she could be brought to the surrendering pitch of exhausted or ecstatic release.
He went behind the pot house along the path he usually took with her, knowing, in a way which twisted him savagely, that she would not bother to keep their secret places private.
They were ambling back, Joanna and her late hot lover, a tinker by the look of him, sodden with sex, Hope thought, she too carelessly satiated to fasten her dress properly, he altogether swaggering in the success of his rut.
Hope could have slit their throats.
He let them pass, acknowledged them barely, made the faint pretence that he had chosen this path by chance for a late afternoon walk, even gazed up at Skiddaw, and their gurgled laughter mixed in with his own longing for the gurgling of their necks to gape blood.
He strolled and forced himself to stroll.
He had the faintest intimation that Joanna despised him.
‘But what have I become?’ he cried out, suddenly aware of the ridiculous, ineffective, by-passed figure he was, trailing aimlessly into woods whose trees he could neither distinguish nor enjoy.
He remembered Hause Point, he remembered the abyss he had so often fallen into.
He sought out St Kentigern's church nearby at Crosthwaite.
It was a place he had visited three times — once to be seen; the second time to appreciate the sermon which he had afterwards discussed outside the small West Door with the vicar who had been impressed by his distinguished visitor's passionate piety.
And once, before as now, for solace and solitude.
He entered into it as if for sanctuary.
The clean loud latch  clicked behind him.
The smell of flowers and beeswax.
The peaceful dust motes by the sun-struck windows.
The scabby, festering evil went out of him at the touch of this holy place.
He took a seat near the back of the short nave and was disappointed to see, a few pews before him, a knelt figure, praying intensely.
Before he could go out so as to wait until he could have the place to himself, the figure levered himself up, bowed to the altar, and turned and saw him.
It was Nicholson, the young clergyman he had met in the Lorton Valley, shy, the unsuccessful wooer of Miss Skelton, poorly paid, but on several occasions a most useful conversational refuge for the restless Colonel.
‘I always call in here when I am in Keswick.’
The chaplain, keen to make amends for what he perceived was an intrusion, took the flustered course of staying on and saying more.
‘And I believe it is a church favoured by yourself?’
‘It is.’
‘Do you know about our St Kentigern?’
Nicholson wanted to loiter with the man who — in his eyes — could pluck with ease a flower he could only look on at a distance.
He was fascinated by the power he saw inside the rich clothes, the allure of the title, the estates, the enrapturing confidence of the Army, the experiences…
In an attempt partly to offer a tribute and perhaps in some way to attempt a readjustment of the balance against him, he recited what he knew of the church's founding saint.
‘He had a remarkable life,’ the chaplain began, rather wistfully, and Hope saw in return an over-thin, rather knobble-nosed, receding, flat black-haired though still youngish man hypnotised by Fame and Glory.
‘Don't you think all really great men are extraordinary from the very beginning?
And evil men too?
Look at what they say about Napoleon.’
Nicholson glanced around the church, warily, afraid that the invocation of the name of this secular devil might disturb the Christian bones.
‘Kentigern's mother was a northern princess called Thanew whose great love was for the Virgin Mother on whom she modelled herself.
This was a century or more after the Romans had left — not that they influenced these parts very much — they built their walls and garrisons and roads and left the wild fell folk alone.
But it was  a time of several kingdoms and Princess Thanew was proposed to by a neighbouring king.
As she wished to remain a virgin, she refused.
Her spurned suitor laid a trap for her.
He drugged her and then violated her.
When her father saw the evidence of this sin he condemned her to death.
She was tied to the wheel of a chariot and sent down the steep sides of one of the great hills.
But she prayed to heaven and promised that, should she be spared, she would devote the first fruit of her womb to Christ's service.
The chariot turned about; its lead pole stuck deeply into the earth and she was saved.’
There was an innocence about Nicholson's story-telling — practised for the valley children whose company he most enjoyed — so remote from the recent thoughts and experiences of Hope that he was immediately beguiled by it.
He could have applauded the saving of the Princess and his obvious appreciation gave Nicholson confidence.
‘But her father was still determined to do away with her.
He put her in an open boat, with no oars, at the mouth of the River Aberlessie which, the chronicle says, was called ‘The Mouth of Stench’ because of the thousands of rotting fish cast on the sands.
Again she prays and for three days and three nights she is swept through cold northern seas until she is cast ashore on the sands of Culleross on the north side of our Solway Firth.
She is weak and ill but her first prayer is not for herself but for her unborn child who is dedicated to Christ's service.
‘She wanders about the shore, which is bitterly cold, but then the north wind blows a heap of ashes some fishermen had left on the strand into a flame.
She adds to the fire with driftwood.
And it is by that fire that Kentigern is born — about 518 — and to that fire, just as in the Gospels, that shepherds came and cared for the boy whose mother, her work done, is dead.’
Hope felt a heave of sentimental sorrow threaten his eyes at the vision of this brave young girl, on the bleak shore, dead in delivering her child.
Nicholson himself was always moved by this story and felt affection that a man such as Hope could be so touched.
‘Nearby there was an old hermit — Servanus, who became St Servanus — and he took in the child and over the years the child  became his dearest friend, his Myn Ghu or Mungo.
You'll find a lot of churches dedicated to St Mungo — it was Kentigern's pet name.
We know the boy was pious and tender and determined.
He went into the monastery.
Like little Samuel it was his duty to trim the lamps of the monastery and keep them burning.
We know he was envied and bullied by his fellow pupils and that even at that age he had the gift of healing — restoring a robin which had been cruelly killed by his fellow students.’
‘The gift of healing,’ Hope repeated, ‘and the gift of miracles?’
‘Yes…and although he himself wanted the contemplative life, he was drawn out into the world and given the episcopate of Strathclyde, at Glasgow, when he was twenty-five years old.
He fought Christ's battles there for ten years — it must have been like our brave missionaries now going into the wildest and most uncivilised parts of Africa — because the pagan King Morken was his enemy and envied the fame of Kentigern.
Still, he let him alone.
Kentigern's own example was powerful: he went always on foot, lived temperately, went into cold water each morning even in winter, lay at night in a stone coffin with ashes for a mattress, and yet he was a man of business, his parishes grew, churches were established the country over, and always in one hand he held a plain pontifical staff, in the other a psalter.’
As Nicholson went on, telling him how King Morken died and his children swore to kill Kentigern who came south to Carlisle and then — learning of the paganism of the fell people — into the heartland of the lakes where he founded many churches, established missions, stood up to his neck in Derwent Water to read the Psalms and then went down into Wales…
Hope saw himself, the ascetic, the missionary, the preacher, the proud foe of great kings, the saint of God, the healer, the miracle worker, the chastiser of his own flesh: and in some way he felt himself shriven.
‘O my Lord,’ he murmured inside his mind as the young chaplain unrolled more and more miracles and spiritual honours of St Kentigern, ‘make me free of evil thoughts, evil deeds, this wicked life…’and the murmurings of his internal prayers gradually absorbed more of his attention so that when Nicholson eventually stopped, he found his listener remote, unaware, it seemed, that the history was over.
Then like a gunshot in the lichen-silent church, Hope asked:
‘How do you become like that?
How do you do it?’
Nicholson smiled, opened his hands hopelessly: the gestures were a futile response.
Hope's intent look was of a man who wanted to know, who wanted a true, rapid and helpful answer.
Nicholson looked away as he replied:
‘It is God's grace.’
‘And how do you earn that?’
‘That is in God's hands.’
‘But there must be something you can do.’
‘Hold the faith and believe in Him.’
‘You could do that and get nothing,’ Hope replied.
‘If someone wanted to be certain : what would he do?’
‘There is nothing certain in this life except our death.’
‘Everything is certain,’ Hope said.
‘Everything you do is certain.
He knows what you are.
Why does He let you do it?’
‘He sent us His only begotten Son so that we could be free.’
‘How are we free?
How are we free unless we fight for freedom and like as not break one or more of the Commandments?’
‘God works in mysterious ways,’ said Nicholson, daunted by the increasing vehemence of the man.
‘Why?
Why does He have to be so mysterious?
What about those of us who are not saints or healers or holy men or men like you or in any way find it easy to do His service — why is He so mysteriously absent from us?
What did we do?’
‘There is original sin…’
Nicholson began.
‘Before I was born?
Is that it?
And if I have no chance before I am born, what chance do I have when I live my life?
No.
He is not mysterious.
He is very clear.
Those who are with Him, those who are not, and those who know neither way and have to spend their lives in the torment of doubt.’
‘Is not that the condition of us all?’
‘No.
Most doubters either think they have grace or care for nothing but the day itself.
I understand that.
I too, at times…’
Hope reined himself in, pulled back from the edge of his desperation, ‘…at times have been led to think that way.’
‘But you have come through,’ Nicholson affirmed.
‘You have sought Him again.’
Hope was trembling and afraid that he might give too much away.
He found it difficult to breathe.
The dislocation happened and he saw this stout, handsomely dressed man, almost gasping m front of a pale-eyed, pale-faced clergyman, the two of them in the consecrated atmosphere of a church which could trace back its foundation on that spot through about thirteen hundred years.
He saw the place claiming him — this was where he ought to be, to root himself and be rid of those burrs and thorns of fortune, the corruption in his mind and flesh, the evil impulses of his behaviour.
He saw himself stripped bare, lashed, hair-shirted, meek before injustice, stoic in the face of punishment, as pure as a sanctified wafer at the altar.
‘I am staying at the Queen's Head,’ he managed to say.
‘Please come and see me there later in the evening: we can talk further then.’
He practically ran out of the church, confirming, to Nicholson, the burning urgency of the remorse which had smitten him.
I was in the presence, Nicholson thought and was to repeat, of a most religious man.
Hope walked rapidly from the outlying church towards Keswick which now seemed like a net, dropped on him when he was unaware, leaving him pinioned…
Miss D'Arcy was with Mrs Moore in the parlour in which he had so recently talked with the Colonel.
That now seemed long ago: and before even that the far past of his proposal — like a holiday which disappears from all feelings in a mere day or so.
George Wood conducted him to the parlour with reverence: high class was meeting great riches with talk of splicing these two irresistible institutions and it was happening in George Wood's back parlour.
Mrs Moore soon abandoned her pretence as chaperon — encouraged by the unexpected surliness of Colonel Hope who seemed, to her and her ward, in a mood unlike any other they had found him in and unlike any they could previously have invented for him.
Amaryllis had put on a dress which had arrived only that noon  from London.
The ironing, altering, re-tailoring had all been done against the clock and pushed through only because of the tyranny of Miss D'Arcy.
She had felt a shadow in the morning after her acceptance which, she wanted to tell Augustus, had been far too long delayed.
He had pursued her — politely but unmistakably and through two weeks — at Grasmere.
She had been playful.
He had travelled back to Keswick with her even though it had not been his previous intention to do so.
She had been flirtatious.
He had taken her to most of the local beauty spots; arranged for cannon to be fired over the lake for their echoes and the quaint museum to be selectively open when they visited the place.
She had dawdled.
Luxuriating in the public attentions of such a suitor, she had drawn it out too much, perhaps, so that the final acceptance had come after the optimum moment.
The news brought back by Colonel Moore after what they had all supposed was no more than the formal punctuation had almost panicked her.
Her new dress was the very latest fashion, vastly expensive, unmistakable plumage.
It was a walking dress.
There was a straw gypsy hat, tied down with a rich half-lace handkerchief.
The muslin gown was ornamented with knitted work crossing the shoulder.
This was echoed at the bottom of the dress.
The body was drawn around her rather large breasts, shawled with a light yellow sarsenet scarf.
Lilac gloves, half-boots made of kid — she looked, as she sat rather apprehensively in the country inn parlour, as if she were waiting for Mr Gainsborough.
Once again the gust of dislike unnerved him.
He was taken over by it as he had been by the piety which had moved him so completely in St Kentigern's.
‘Would you like some tea?’ she asked, timidly.
He shook his head.
Even her timidity seemed to him a sham.
Here were goods: enter a bidder: auction begins.
He had no ability to sympathise with her.
But he must be careful.
He needed her to play her game.
‘Please,’ she asked, genuinely fearful now, it seemed to Hope, who relished the fact, ‘will you sit down and let me talk to you?’
‘Of course.’
His reply was as light and harmless as a butterfly.
She was unnerved again.
‘My father,’ she began and paused, and Hope hardened his feelings even more.
She was using the man's death to work at his sympathy.
But he nodded sympathetically and, as he was about to sit down, he pressed his clawed hand sincerely on her shoulder.
‘My poor father would have been so proud of me today.’
Her eyes sought out his to divine what the real mood was: Hope jammed her gaze with a glazed and bland smile.
‘He would have admired you — greatly.
As I do.
He would have been so happy that his daughter — his only child —’ the pause-calculating arrived once more and pushed up Hope's resistance another notch ‘— had accepted and had been so proud to accept the proposal of a man as distinguished as you, sir.’
She stressed ‘accept ’ and yet, as she went on, her sentences drifted over his head as the phrase ‘as distinguished as you, sir’looped now pleasingly, now mockingly around his mind.
Who was someone like him?
Was he someone like himself?
Was there someone like him?‘…and of course he had to take the greatest possible care.
I'm sure that — your name — everything about you — but the will says and quite emphatically and Colonel Moore —’ an element of anger there ‘— is a man who will see it through to the letter.’
Hope was charming.
He glowed with a rich and handsome flush of compassion.
He sighed her sighs and, in his gentlemanly manner, raised his eyes against the mocking Fates.
But he would not budge.
She dare not ask him whether his proposal was thereby withdrawn.
He did not answer this anxiety, feeling no cruelty in letting it dangle.
He left her after about half an hour and went down to the lake to see Burkett.
He had intended to put in an hour's fishing but there was an impatience which he could not appease by the sport and so he turned aside into the fields which took him across towards Portinscale.
Burkett had looked disappointed.
ever since Grasmere when the trap the fisherman had sprung — and which had seemed so foolproof — had simply not worked, he had been a little abashed.
Both he and his daughter seemed  diminished: they had stepped out of their class, allowed themselves to imagine things and been very properly put in their place.
Hope was aware of this and not unhappy about it.
The calm appearance of a saunter through the fells concealed immense upheaval.
What was he to do?
Colonel Moore was not the man to betray what he interpreted as his duty and his trust.
Amaryllis would not have the strength to overthrow the Will.
And yet a way had to be found.
One of the reasons for his choice of this area was its proximity to the border with Scotland.
Once over the Border, in the village of Gretna Green, a marriage could be legalised within half an hour — as George and Catherine would have done by now.
A licence, a payment, a swift ceremony and it was sealed.
His only real hope was to get Amaryllis to cross the Border with him.
First let her fear build up: let her come to believe that this prize, this catch of the season, would leave her not only as if she had never met him but somehow spoiled.
For, so her fear would run, he had not been able to accept her trading character.
He would stoke that up.
But whether she would finally flee across the Border with him…
Again like a fist slammed in his mind, his antipathy for her jarred him.
No-one as protected as that would ever be so abandoned as to defy her guardian.
And it would be hard.
Bitterly, Hope thought, as he walked along the margin of the northern shore, ignoring the spectacular, breath-catching view down Derwent Water and deep into Borrowdale, she simply had no real love in her.
None of that selfless sacrificial gambling of an entire life, present and future, which the deepest and wildest love could breed.
How could he be expected to love anyone like that?
But a way had to be found to marry her.
In his latest letter, Newton had again threatened to arrive.
This time it would be even harder to put him off.
Hope had written an evasive reply which he would frank and give to George Wood to post for him but he doubted that he could deter him for much longer.
He was now frightened of what Newton might do.
He had had time enough: Newton was right.
He had been relatively easy to control in the north while it was clear that all the going rested with Hope but in London, Newton had been much more sinister.
And it was Newton who had been the murderer.
Hope flicked his head to one side as if dodging a blow: there had been no need to slaughter those two old booby servants; but Newton had ignored his protests.
No witnesses.
Throats slashed wide open.
He could pay off Newton from a fraction of Amaryllis's dowry — he must see that Newton had no idea as to the real size of it — then he could be rid of him.
And then…as always, Hope could lull himself sooner or later into a mood of self-satisfaction at the prospect of a future rich, secure, free, and attainable…
By the time he came back to the hotel it was dark.
Wood met him at the door.
‘There's a clergyman to see you, sir.’
By now Wood regarded himself as something between his esteemed guest's confidant and his protector.
The Colonel, the Honourable, the Member of Parliament had given him more access to what nearly approached aristocratic companionship than he had ever enjoyed.
Moreover the gentleman was scrupulous beyond praise.
When he had come back from Grasmere the first thing he had done — despite George Wood's vehement protests — was to pay back the loan and bring his hotel bill up to the mark.
No gentleman had ever behaved like that before.
It was the sort of behaviour Wood expected only from his fellow tradesmen.
That a gentleman should do it showed an uncommon understanding of the difficulties involved in running businesses with too much debt outstanding.
Wood liked to think there was friendship in such unusually honourable behaviour: friendship shown in his willingness to frank Wood's letters, in his refusal to lay any blame on that slut Joanna, in his clear affection for ‘Monkey-boy’(whom everybody had now nicknamed thus), in his little compliments to Mrs Wood.
For all these reasons, the unexpected visit of the clergyman was passed on with ponderous confidentiality.
This back parlour, Hope thought, as he entered it for the third time that day, is like a little theatre: Act I, Colonel Moore; Act II, Amaryllis; Act III
‘Reverend…
Nicholson.’
Hope remembered he had invited the chaplain to call on him.
Rather embarrassed that he had waited…as if he had been hanging on…shy, although it could not be the surroundings, he very gratefully accepted the offer of claret, knew it to be a good one and said so…did not know quite what to say…he had found a peculiar empathy grow between himself and this handsome, strong, elegant, privileged man of the world when they had been in the little hill church of St Kentigern's.
At the same time he had sensed a tremor of — he did not know what.
Offering the meagre purse of local gossip, news from Buttermere, Nicholson spoke about Mr Skelton's plans for building a large stone manor house in the area; dwelt longingly on the prospect of Miss Skelton and said something about the wrestling which included a mention of Mary of Buttermere and a young man from the north of the county walking thirty or forty miles just to see her and make his feelings known to her.
‘And what are said to be her feelings about him?’
Nicholson, already a little confused by the claret, was flummoxed.
How could he know — and about a matter of such small importance to such a man?
But he did his best.
Hope did not pursue the matter but saw that the claret was finished rapidly and went up to his room, his brain twisting around obstacles, snaking over the barricades of his common sense, scaling the walls of his strategies.
He wrote a decisive letter to Newton and then tore it up and burnt it.
He scrawled several pages in his journal — without the usual reward of redemptive ease.
He punished himself through two bouts of his heaviest exercises, until his upper arms ached, his stomach muscles felt cramped, his legs watered, head dizzy.
Cold water sluiced but did not cool him.
Jealousy had pierced his side like a spear.
The next morning, shortly after dawn, he had his carriage and four in glittering readiness.
The Monkey-boy, hastily found acceptable clothes, was up on the box, his dressing-case — the inherited, wealthy proof of his existence — set inside the coach like an ark, an altar.
a talisman, a passport — and with Wood seeing them out onto the empty streets, he moved off through the cool, misty town, into Newlands Valley, over towards Buttermere, his heart hammering him on to get back to her before it was too late.