

Old Age: Burden or Benefit?
Introduction
Between 1911 and the 1980s the proportion of the UK population over the age of 65 had tripled from 5 per cent to 15 per cent.
In addition many more now survive into their eighties and nineties.
This phenomenon, often referred to as the ‘ageing’ of the population, is widely viewed as a serious problem or ‘burden’.
Over the coming decades, it has been argued, a shrinking working population will be obliged to finance the pensions, health care and other services required by a burgeoning elderly population.
This chapter argues for a less pessimistic approach.
The 1980s have seen a public debate about the effects upon the economy of the growing proportion of old people in Britain; and the stress has been on the increasing burden of costs that will result (Department of Health and Social Security (DHSS), 1985).
Yet for many years gerontologists, in the many disciplines that make up gerontology, have been arguing that the gloom is overstressed, that future prospects need not be so bad as is often suggested.
This chapter is a brief review of some of the large body of evidence for this more positive view, intended as a contribution to placing the debate about cost in a more balanced framework.
It is not a comprehensive overview of all aspects of a complex set of issues.
This is a field in which speculation and clearly attested fact are not always kept in distinct compartments.
It is important to try to distinguish between fact and speculation and amid the speculation — since contemplating the future is inevitably to a high degree speculative — between the speculation that makes sense and that which does not.
The proportion of the population over 65 will remain more or less constant until after the turn of the century, giving a respite in which to acquire knowledge and formulate policies.
Not until the twenty-first century is the proportion of the elderly expected to grow again.
If fertility remains low  and life expectancy continues to improve, it could reach 20 per cent by the year 2025.
The Changing Age Structure
The facts about the shift in British age structure since the mid nineteenth century are set out in table 5.1 and figure 5.1.
These show that by the 1980s a higher proportion of the population is above the age of 65 than at any time in statistically retrievable history.
As was shown in chapter 2, this is primarily due to the falling trend in fertility over this century which has reduced the proportion in younger age cohorts.
However, as table 5.2 and figure 5.2 show, the other very important component of the trend is that more people than before are living to be very old, into the high eighties and nineties, and this is to some degree due to changing mortality trends at later ages.
In the United Kingdom and the United States the over-eighties are the most rapidly growing age group (Grundy, 1986).
Table 5.1 Percentage of population aged 65 and over, Great Britain 1851–1981
Table 5.2 The very old as a percentage of the elderly in the UK (1901–2001)
Figure 5.1 The age structure of the population of England and Wales, 1851–2021
It should be noted that although the total population over 65 is not expected to increase for the remainder of the twentieth century, this is due to a projected fall in the numbers aged 60/65–74 (by 5 per cent between 1981 and 1991) combined with a rise in the numbers at older ages.
At present 38.2 per cent of the elderly population are aged over 75 and 6.5 per cent are aged 85 years or more.
Projections by the Government Actuary suggest that by 2001 these proportions will have increased to 47.2 per cent and 12.1 per cent respectively (Falkingham, 1987).
However, still in 2001 those aged over 85 will still constitute only 17 in each thousand of total population.
As regards the cost implications of these shifts, although the over-85s are heavier users of costly services than younger age groups, the heaviest financial cost of the elderly arises from pensions not from services and, to repeat, the total pensionable age group will remain stable for the next two decades.
Another important point is that about 60 per cent of the over-65 population is female and the numerical superiority of females rises with each succeeding age cohort.
This is an important reason why the old have a high  propensity to be poor.
Women in the past (and still) have had more limited access than men to financial resources, for example to occupational pensions which will be discussed below (Groves, 1986, 1987).
Figure 5.2 The population over pension age and its age composition, England and Wales, 1881–2021
This long-run shift to an older population is not peculiar to Britain.
It is occurring in almost all economically developed countries including those of Eastern Europe and the Far East, though with some different effects in different countries due to different patterns of mortality.
It is occurring at especial speed in those countries in which development has been recent and fast.
It is projected, for example, to take Japan only 26 years to move from having 7 per cent of her population aged over 65 (in 1970) to 14 per cent (in 1996), a process which took France (with her deviant demographic history) the 115 years from 1865 to 1980, Sweden 85 years and the UK 45 years from 1930 to 1975 (see table 5.3).
Japan has experienced a recent and rapid fall in fertility combined with more gradually lengthening life expectancy.
China, if the one-child policy continues to be pursued successfully at the same time that life expectancy is being extended, looks set for an extraordinarily rapid transition to being the oldest society ever known — an apparently unforeseen   consequence of her birth-rate policy, according to work being carried out by James Smith and Peter Laslett at the Rank Xerox Unit for the Study of Ageing, University of Cambridge.
Table 5.3 Dates of reaching certain percentages of population above age 65 in selected countries
Ageing as a Problem
The ageing of society is being discussed as a problem worldwide.
In the US the Carnegie Foundation has established a Centre for the Study of Societal Ageing at the University of Michigan.
The real problem is, as the Carnegie Foundation has realized since establishing the Ageing Society Project of the Carnegie Corporation of New York in 1982 (Pifer and Bronte, 1986), that we know surprisingly little about what happens to a society and its economy when its age  structure changes significantly.
Ageing is a fundamental feature of social structure and social change.
It is reasonable to assume that such changes have significant social and economic effects, yet they have been conspicuously neglected by social scientists.
There has been interest in these questions from time to time in the past, in particular in Britain between the end of World War Two and the early 1960s.
At this time the low fertility of the inter-war years caused serious fears about the high proportion of elderly people in the population in relation to those of normal working age, especially since it was a period of labour shortage and acute need to restructure the economy.
A certain amount of research into the effects of ageing went on in that period (and not only in Britain) but much of it was forgotten when the crisis of ageing and labour shortage seemed less acute in the 1960s — the ‘age of automation’(Bagrit, 1965), of greater  availability of female and immigrant labour and of youth.
Much relevant research has gone on since then, but it seems to have made very little impact upon the public debate about the ageing of British society.
The work of gerontologists seems often not to have reached the policymakers, the economists and the public.
The chief issues that are singled out in this debate are: that the growing  proportion of retired people will impose a burden of increasing cost upon a shrinking population of working age in terms of pensions and services; and the fact that a growing proportion of these will be very old and therefore more in need of medical and other care will make this burden more onerous still.
Other associated policy problems are pinpointed — for example, an increasing proportion of old people is assumed to imply a changing pattern of demand for housing, in the direction of smaller units.
It is in examining these questions that we need to separate out fact from speculation.
There will be more people in future above current pensionable ages than in the past, barring some fairly improbable changes in fertility and mortality trends (DHSS, 1984; Ermisch and Joshi, 1987).
This is clear from table 5.4 and figures 5.1 and 5.2.
Whether all of these older people will be retired is a separate point, not to be taken for granted, to be discussed below.
There will also be, as certainly we can tell, more very old people in the future than in the past, something also clear from table 5.4.
But, as will also be discussed later, the problems they will pose and their cost cannot be predicted with such certainty.
Table 5.4 Age composition of the population of Great Britain
A Stable Elderly Population for Twenty Years
It is important at this point to repeat another reasonably clear fact already referred to: the rise in the total elderly population will not be immediate.
The proportion of the population over pensionable age is projected to remain more or less level between now and the end of the century, indeed to decline somewhat around the turn of the century and then to rise again in the early  years of the twenty-first century when the larger birth cohorts of the war and post-war years move into their sixties (see figure 5.1).
The levelling-off will be due to the coincidence of the smaller birth cohorts of the pre-war years entering old age whilst the larger war and post-war cohorts are of working age.
This, of course, depends again upon no sudden upturn in fertility in the next couple of decades (see table 5.4).
If no such upturn does occur we actually face about 20 years of demographic stability in respect of overall age structure, indeed probably the most stable 20 years of the entire twentieth century (O'Higgins, 1986).
This at least ought to quieten panic about ageing because, if no more, it gives us a breathing space in which to research and to plan for future policy.
Dependency Ratios
Table 5.4 also suggests another reason not to panic: that over the longer run the rise in the elderly population in the next century and the rise in the numbers of very elderly in this century is to some degree offset by a projected fall in the number of very young non-workers, i.e., that the relationship between total so-called ‘dependency’ and the size of the population of working age may not change significantly.
Though what will happen in the next century up to 2025, as table 5.4 suggests, we can only calculate with a large margin of error.
In that period the overall ‘dependency ratio’ may or may not rise significantly.
If we aggregate together everyone in that ‘dependent’ age group, i.e., those below the age of 16 and above pensionable ages remembering the heaviest demands on services are made at each end of the age range, the percentage of dependants to total UK population has indeed remained remarkably stable throughout this century — 30 per cent in 1901, 36 per cent in 1951, 41 per cent in 1977 — and it is likely to remain so for the remainder of the century; it is projected to be 40 per cent in 2001 (Grundy, 1986, p. 21; table 5.4).
The fact remains, however, that within this stable total age dependency ratio, the proportion of very old will continue to increase to the end of the century and the age structure of the population of normal working age will increasingly be weighted towards higher age cohorts (Falkingham, 1987, pp. 5–7).
There are major problems about defining dependency in these simple, age related terms, to be discussed below.
But staying with this definition for the time being, there is a general assumption in much writing in this field that  although total age related dependency may not be about to rise very much, the shift to larger numbers of elderly and the fall in the numbers of the very young will increase the costs of dependency because the elderly are more costly; they make more demands on expensive services than the young.
Also the services to old and young are not easily substitutable for one another.
But  it is surprisingly difficult to find precise quantification of these comparisons.
A still incomplete, unpublished calculation for 1953–1979 by David Thomson of the Rank Xerox Unit at Cambridge is suggestive.
Using a variety of official statistics he calculates that the total cost of the elderly in terms of publicly funded services and benefits was at most 103 per cent of the cost of a child in 1979.
More, that is, but only narrowly.
It can be argued of course that the disparity will increase due to the coming growth in the numbers and demands of the very elderly.
This is likely, but how great these demands will be is another difficult question.
It is actually the key question in the whole debate, but one in which it is especially difficult to make convincing, informed predictions.
The Health of the Aged
It seems natural to assume that as in the twenty-first century more people live to be very old, more of them will necessarily make heavier demands on health and social services; that people who die in their nineties experience a longer period of dependency and illness before death than those who die in their seventies.
At present this is so.
According to 1986 Treasury figures, in 1985 per capita health and personal social service expenditure for those age 75 and over was £1,340 compared with £530 for those aged 65–74 and £305 for the population as a whole (HM Treasury, 1986).
They occupy about 50 per cent of all hospital beds.
But as Nicholas Bosanquet (1975, 1978) points out this is partly because younger people are now dependent, ill and hospitalized much less than in the past.
Health standards have risen in society at large.
Also Bosanquet has argued vigorously for over a decade — and has not been alone — that this suggests that younger age cohorts are growing up fitter and will not necessarily need such varied and prolonged care in the future.
Alan Pifer of the Carnegie Foundation has recently made similar suggestions (Pifer, 1987): that, for example, the intense and historically novel current interest of the middle aged and young in preventive care — good diet and exercise — may significantly affect their future health (Pifer and Bronte, 1986).
Others, however, suggest, less cheeringly and no less convincingly, that the duration of disability proceeding death rises with age, so the more people who live to a longer life span, the bigger the health bills.
Emily Grundy (1986) has rightly stressed how little is known about the epidemiology and aetiology, let alone prevention and treatment, of some of the major disorders affecting the very old, such as dementia.
But it is equally true that there is no way of foreseeing the health status of the very elderly of 2010 or 2022; people grown up in the historically exceptionally prosperous period since World War Two may have very different health expectations than those currently aged  over 75 who were born before 1911 in a very different environment from the present.
Many of the elderly of the twenty-first century, however, will have experienced the effects of unemployment in the 1980s or perhaps longer, though these may not be the survivors into old age (Moser, Fox and Jones, 1984; Whitehead, 1987).
It is possible that we will see a further slowing of the ageing process as time goes on so that in the next century the experience of being in one's eighties is more like the experience of being in one's seventies at the moment.
What has happened over the course of this century has been an improvement in people's states of fitness at particular ages so that whereas at the beginning of the century people in their sixties were regarded as being old, it is clear that people who survive into their sixties are now mainly, as is described below, generally quite fit.
The disabilities associated with old age do not seem to strike people  significantly until they reach their later seventies.
It may be hard to imagine a situation in  which the onset of old age occurs at later ages than in the past, but a hundred years ago or less it was difficult to imagine the present situation in which old age does not effectively begin until people are in their seventies.
We have to try to imagine a complex future in which different groups of the elderly will have different experiences from those of the present and from one another.
This is already the case, but it is possible that the variety of future experiences in old age will be greater still.
Nor are states of health and states of dependency automatically related to the biological facts of ageing.
An impressive body of research in psychogerontology demonstrates that a good deal of ill health and dependency even in very old age is induced by society's expectation that age brings infirmity and dependence.
This structures personal attitudes of and towards the elderly and is the underlying premise of much policy and its administration.
Such services as ‘meals on wheels’ assume helplessness, but are not what many old people want or need.
As Malcolm Johnson (1982, p. 144) has suggested, they would prefer help with shopping so that they can prepare often more palatable meals of their choice and when they choose thus maximizing their independence and probably their health.
We should also remember that we expect many of the elderly to function under circumstances of stress which would strain people of any age: bereavement, repeated as contemporaries gradually die, worry about money, fear of increasing infirmity, isolation and death.
Among younger people equivalent circumstances of stress are regarded as legitimate qualifications for counselling.
But among the elderly the tensions and illness that may result are defined as natural accompaniments to ageing (Bosanquet, 1978).
Certain biological and functional ‘changes thought to be intrinsically associated with ageing may be influenced by extrinsic and possibly preventable factors’(Grundy, 1986, p. 6).
Certain changes in muscular structure and performance, for example, can be reversible.
Obviously the elderly have ‘real’ needs also.
The point is that we have a very indistinct line between the real and unavoidable problems of ageing and those which are socially and psychologically constructed and may, with care, be reducible.
The serious problem is that in this key area of the debate about ageing so much is speculative.
Where the future cannot usefully be predicted, it makes sense for policymakers to assume the worse and plan for heavy demands on services by the very old.
But this does not mean that we can simply extrapolate from current trends in the use of services to estimate future demands and costs.
Extensive work by gerontologists on service provision for old people and their responses to it suggest that cheaper alternatives to some costly services might enable more of the elderly to remain fitter and independent of institutions for longer.
Over the past ten years it has been government policy to encourage this (DHSS, 1976a).
New approaches to community care, using low-paid or unpaid neighbours or other local carers, as substitutes or supplements to family or friends and supported by official social services, are currently being experimented with in the Kent Community Care Scheme, the Age Concern and Guy's Hospital Home Support Project and a scheme being tried out in Bexley (Challis and Davis, 1983; Maitland, 1987).
The aim of these and other schemes is to provide flexible cost-effective services responsive to the needs of the frail elderly and designed to keep them as long as possible in their own homes rather than an institutional environment.
If such schemes can successfully be developed they may provide future services better suited to the needs of the elderly at lower costs than the continued use of social and health services on current levels.
Even if they do not cut effective costs, they will bring about changes in patterns of demand for services.
They may of course enable people to live in the community longer before a prolonged and expensive period of institutionalized decline until death; or they may fail to bring about any significant changes.
The recent history of community care projects has not been encouraging (Grundy, 1986, p. 22) But this is precisely the sort of area to which research needs to be directed in the immediate future of relative demographic stability, because it is so crucial and because our ignorance of future patterns of demand is so great.
Economic Dependency of the Aged
It is worth adding at this point, in the context of discussion of the cost burden of the elderly, that according to further calculations by David Thomson (1987) based on Family Expenditure Survey data, the share of national resources going to the elderly has not risen proportionately with their numbers over the past two decades.
Such calculations are difficult, due to difficulties in obtaining data on income or wealth distribution among age groups, and  this aspect of distribution has received little study.
However, it appears from Thomson's calculations that the shares of the elderly and the non-elderly have remained roughly stable.
However, the elderly have had to spread their share among growing numbers and the non-elderly among falling numbers.
In 1963 the personal spending of the elderly amounted to 9 per cent of GNP; it was still at this level by the late 1970s and was up only to 10.8 per cent by 1983.
Meanwhile the non-elderly increased their expenditure from 51 per cent to 56 per cent of GNP.
This has given the impression of a significant shift of resources in their direction.
But this shift should be seen in the context of the total demands of the elderly on resources which appears not to have risen so fast; they have so far not been a dependent burden of significant dimensions despite their growing numbers, though as Thomson points out, this could change in coming years.
The Inputs of the Elderly into the Economy
Another problem, however, lies in the very assumption that all of those past retirement age are more or less automatically dependent ‘burdens’ on the economy rather than contributors to it.
Paul Johnson (1987) has pointed out that there is something wonderfully absurd about assuming that a retired 66-year-old millionaire is more ‘dependent’ in an economic sense than a 64-year-old employed road mender.
But this is precisely the type of assumption statistical calculations of age-related dependency ask us to make.
This is adequate if one is simply trying to calculate who is receiving certain benefits, such as old-age pensions, from official sources, but if we are seeking a realistic conception of who is and who is not a dependant or a net contributor to the economy in a broader sense such definitions are not helpful (Grundy, 1986, p. 13).
Calculations that assume that women over 60 and men over 65 are ‘dependent’ must indeed be diverging increasingly from reality.
On the one hand more men are effectively retiring in their fifties due to unemployment (Walker and Walker, 1987).
On the other hand more retired people will have greater power than before as consumers in coming years.
Obvious indicators of this are the numbers with occupational pensions: in 1973 only 60 per cent of men over 55 in full-time employment belonged to a pension scheme run by their current employer.
In 1983 the figure was 75 per cent.
The equivalent figure for women was 31 per cent in 1972 and 63 per cent in 1983.
And the number of house owners among the elderly is rising: in 1985 only 47 per cent of household heads over 65 were house owners.
But of household heads aged 30–60 65 per cent were house owners (Thomson, 1987, p. 47).
Pessimists may say that this will lead to more elderly people being burdened with the costs of deteriorating houses; optimists, that a higher proportion of future cohorts of the elderly will be accustomed to capitalizing on their assets.
They  will either buy down into smaller accommodation in good repair and consume the profit, or borrow or buy annuities on the security of their properties, as many are apparently doing in the United States.
Of course not all of the elderly of the future will be relatively affluent, and, to repeat, we need to be alert to inequalities among the elderly — between age cohorts and within them: the cohorts who will be bringing more occupational pensions and owner-occupied houses into old age will also bring in experience of early retirement and early run-down of resources due to unemployment.
The retired are also important to the economy as suppliers of a wide variety of services and other forms of labour.
It should be remembered that the large majority of the elderly are fit people in their sixties and seventies.
This should be stressed because it is another important fact of change in the elderly population over time.
As was mentioned earlier, at the beginning of this century the consensus was that most people were in a state of physical decline by their early to mid-sixties (Williams, 1970).
Now the consensus among gerontologists is that those who survive into their sixties mostly retain quite a high degree of fitness into their mid-seventies.
That is when old age now begins.
For most people ageing now takes place more slowly than in the past.
The reality of life past 60 for most people has changed faster than society's expectations of it.
Figure 5.3 Labour force participation rates of people aged over 65, 1851–1981
Figure 5.3 charts the falling rate of economic activity among elderly people over a century.
Of those people in their sixties and seventies in the 1980s only about 5 per cent are in full-time employment past normal retirement age; a somewhat larger number, around 10 per cent, let it be known that they work part-time (Social Trends , 1979, Table 11).
A larger number still provide a wide range of formal and informal voluntary services.
In 1981 43 per cent of over-65s give regular help to other elderly people, 25 per cent to the sick and disabled, 11 per cent to neighbours (Social Trends , 1985, Table 11.5).
Twenty-one per cent of those aged 65–74 engaged in some formal voluntary work for a voluntary agency, and 11 per cent of those aged over 75.
Fifty-two per cent of over-65s could be said to give regular practical help to other individuals (Social Trends , 1984, Tables 11.4 and 11.6).
In 1979 22 per cent of local authority councillors were aged over 60 (Social Trends , 1979, Table 15.7).
It is reasonable to assume that all such figures underestimate the real activities of the elderly.
In particular I know of no estimates of the numbers who continue on a part-time basis, undeclared for tax, to sell skills acquired during their working life time.
Professional people do so on a consultancy basis, skilled manual workers as and when they can.
The majority of elderly people are also, as already mentioned, female and continue long past retiring age to perform the tasks almost universal among women at all ages: domestic and other unpaid services for themselves and others, some older, some younger, some the same age as themselves.
They support people active in the labour force, and provide services which would otherwise fall to the health and social services.
The analysis at the University of Surrey by Sara Arber and her associates (financed by the ESRC as part of their Ageing Initiative) of the 1980 General Household Suney suggests that elderly men also provide such services to a greater degree than has been assumed (Gilbert et al., 1989).
But it is unusual for personal care to be given by non-related carers (Evandrou et al., 1986, Grant, 1986).
Ian Timaeus (1986) suggests that the family demands on older people's services may actually increase in future.
Over the 50 years to 1981 a significantly increasing proportion of people have married and have had children.
This is an important change.
The age cohorts who in the 1980s constitute the very old population over 85 are characterized by high rates of childlessness.
Research by Mark Abrams (1978) on those over 75 in 1977 found that one third had no children.
Timaeus estimates that only 16 per cent of those reaching the age of 60 in the early 1990s will have no children at time of death.
In general the never-married elderly make greater use of statutory services including institutional care than others of the same age, so change in marriage and fertility patterns pointed out by Timaeus may have important implications for future service use.
Another possible implication is that into the early years of the next century fewer old people will lack kin support or  would be living alone than is often assumed.
And more will have spouses and children to provide services for.
What we can not tell is whether the trends to increasing divorce and remarriage will be a force for increasing the solitary living or for extending the range of family contacts available to the divorced.
There is not, of course,any serious evidence that kin support for the elderly is declining, despite the persistent myth that it is.
There is a large amount of evidence (summarized by Grundy, 1986) that it continues to be the major source of support for the elderly.
The data produced by Timaeus suggest that kin support has a potential to increase rather than to decline.
The picture which emerges from research, from that of Dorothy Wedderburn in the 1960s to that of Sara Arber and her colleagues in the 1980s, on the relationship between pensioners and younger relatives, friends and neighbours, is not one of simple dependency of the old upon the young, but of an exchange relationship to which both sides contribute which shifts only gradually over time towards the younger participants being the predominant givers (Cole and Utting, 1962; Gilbert et al., 1989; Evandrou et al., 1986) providing a significant volume of services which would otherwise be a costly burden on the state.
Now that we have learnt to take account of the unpaid domestic labour of younger women as positive inputs into the economy (Piachaud, 1985; Joshi, 1987a), it is time to extend this approach to the variety of unpaid activities of older people if we are to obtain an accurate picture of their role in the economy and of the extent to which they are a net ‘burden’ upon it.
It is clear that the simple conception of them as a burden will not do, in view of their roles as consumers, producers and suppliers of services.
In addition there is a mass of evidence that a very high proportion of people in their sixties and seventies are physically capable of remaining longer than they do in the formal labour market.
A good deal of research carried out in Britain and elsewhere between the late 1940s and the present chiefly by industrial sociologists and psychologists, demonstrates fairly conclusively that a high proportion of people in their sixties and seventies can work effectively at their accustomed or preferred occupation, even when this is physically quite heavy or makes significant intellectual demands.
The quality of work produced even by mathematicians appears to decline little over their careers, contrary to popular belief.
At many tasks workers in their sixties and seventies can out-perform those in their twenties, though not those at their peak in their thirties and early forties.
Losses in speed and agility are compensated by greater experience, concentration and motivation.
A certain mental and physical deterioration of course occurs with age, but its speed and effects are popularly exaggerated.
Practice keeps most skills at a high level.
If kept in tune such facilities as memory, flexibility and capacity to make decisions do not easily decline.
Furthermore most workers are understretched for much of their working lives and have spare capacity on which to  call at later ages.
Older people may take longer to retrain for new tasks than younger, but not to a degree that makes such retraining not worth while.
The greatest disability of older people in the labour market is the erroneous belief of employers and the population at large that competence at most tasks declines seriously with age.
It does not and very few people decline in all spheres of competence at once.
The mental functioning and range of capabilities at any age is related at least as much to expectation and habit as to age and physical condition, hence the underused capacity in almost any population at any time is considerable.
Problems are most likely to arise for older workers where work is at a fast continuous pace, fixed at a pace suited to younger workers and over which the worker has no control, or where there are other time pressures.
Where these problems are absent there appears to be little that a reasonably fit older person cannot do with an efficiency equivalent to a high proportion of younger workers (see Stones and Kozma, 1985 for a good survey of research findings in this field): ‘It is clear that as a piece of anatomical and physiological machinery, the human organism becomes progressively impaired from the late twenties onwards.
The effects of the impairments are, however, substantially offset by learning and experience’(Welford, 1985, p. 360).
All of this supports the growing insistence of many gerontologists that we should conceive of the elderly as a resource not as a burden.
However, as a resource of what is a question in a flagging economy which is unlikely in the near future to be in search of recruits to the labour force from marginal groups, as it was in the days of labour shortage in the 1950s (Harper and Thane, 1989).
Things may perhaps be different in the next century.
The evidence does indicate in a high-employment economy the proportion of workers to non-workers can be kept up by keeping more people in full- or part-time work past the current retirement age.
However, apart from the question of whether the British economy will be in this condition in the future, the experience of the last attempt, in the 1940s and 1950s, to keep older workers in the labour force is not very encouraging (Hannah, 1986).
It was not very successful, and reversing culturally well-established retirement practices is unlikely to be easy.
In the short run it may be more realistic to build upon the commitment of formal and informal voluntary service which already exists among the elderly.
Indeed they are being mobilized in some of the innovative caring schemes mentioned above.
The fit ‘young elderly’ are already an important resource for caring for the very old and may more become so.
Conclusions
To sum up: to some, uncertain, degree the needs of the elderly at any point in time are not fixed but are malleable in response to policy and environment  mental changes.
At no time is it sufficient simply to extrapolate from current costs and patterns of use to the future.
There is, of course, something risible about proposing that armies of 70-year-olds should come to the rescue of those older still, and by no means all of those who will be among the young elderly in the year 2010 will want to perform that role.
But the central point is that we need firmly to shift out of the mode of thinking that assumes that at pensionable age most people become useless burdens; to realize that most of them have at least as much to offer as many people in their twenties, and hence actively seek ways to use their abilities positively.
It is necessary to be aware that future conditions and demands may be very different from those of the present.
It is quite inadequate, when assessing the relationship of the elderly to the economy, just to aggregate the costs of services; their inputs should be taken into account.
It is essential to work with a more complex picture of who the elderly are and of their role in society than the simple, depressing picture of a costly burden.
And research must be concentrated on the needs of the very elderly and how to meet them.
Education and Changing Numbers of Young People
Introduction
The large decline in the number of births in Britain between 1964 and 1976 led, in turn, to a decline in the number of school age children.
Education is one of Britain's resources which is channelled predominantly to young people and expenditure on it is thus very sensitive to changes in their numbers.
Informed policymaking in education is dependent on accurate forecasts of the future demand for places.
For education up to the age of 16, the minimum school leaving age, forecasts of the number of potential pupils in a particular school or area will reflect trends in births and migration.
After the age of 16, there are many other factors which influence demand for educational places.
As well as demographic trends these include such social and economic factors as alternative opportunities for employment and the supply of places.
This chapter demonstrates the important role which demographic data and projections play in planning education provision.
It focuses specifically on the contribution of demographic projections to education planning in the context of declining numbers of young people in the 1980s and 1990s.
However, decisions regarding the provision of education cannot be based solely on demographic trends.
For example, the decline in numbers of young people could be a chance to improve educational standards, thus making Britain better prepared to enter the next century and to manage the demands of an ageing population.
This chapter will therefore also discuss the implication of alternative strategies of education planning.
The Provision of Compulsory Education
The area of education most dependent on the number of births is compulsory schooling.
In Britain compulsory schooling starts at age five and continues to  age 16, to which it was raised from 15 in 1972.
The decline of around 35 per cent in the number of births between 1964 and 1977 led rightly to a review of the provision of educational places.
Figure 6.1 shows the forecasts of the numbers of pupils in primary and secondary education to the year 2000 (Department of Education and Science (DES), 1986a).
This echoes the fluctuations in the number of births discussed in chapter 2.
At a macro level the decisions could involve the option of a reduction in the number of teachers and the closing of some schools, which keeps the cost per child constant and reduces total expenditure; or the improvement of educational standards through reducing the number of pupils per teacher and therefore increasing unit costs.
Figure 6.1 Projections of school pupils in England (maintained primary and secondary schools)
However, compulsory education in Britain is essentially provided at a local level and the number of pupils at a particular school can be subject to rapid fluctuations as a result of factors such as changing economic circumstances or new housing developments.
In addition, economic costs may not be the only  criteria on which education policy is based: in rural areas a very small school may be desirable for social reasons, while in an inner city high unit costs may be accepted to help children overcome living in a disadvantaged area.
Resource allocation from central to local government does take into account the a real disadvantage through the use of an index of deprivation derived by combining estimates of the proportion of the children under 17 in the local authority who were in households lacking amenities; in one-parent households; in households with four or more dependent children; with a head of household in a semi-skilled, unskilled or agricultural occupation; in families receiving supplementary benefit; themselves born outside the United Kingdom, or in a family whose head was born abroad.
There is considerable debate over the most appropriate index of deprivation in particular situations.
In the context of educational deprivation this index can be criticized on two grounds.
First there is no use of the proportion of the population in local authority housing.
In chapter 7 Murphy shows that net of many other factors local authority tenants still experience added deprivation.
Murphy's work is supported by Garner (1988) who finds that, in Glasgow, tenancy is an important determinant of school achievement.
Garner's work is important with respect to the second criticism of this deprivation index; the level of aggregation.
She reports that within areas of medium deprivation there can be pockets of extreme deprivation.
In the context of educational provisions this could imply that a school in such an area should be allowed to have a very high unit cost.
Sufficient funds for this may not be allocated if the allocation is based on the medium deprivation of the larger area.
Table 6.1 Probability of advantaged and disadvantaged school leavers qualifying for entry to Higher Education
The need to control for both the individual and areal characteristics is demonstrated by table 6.1 taken from Garner (1988).
The probability of  achieving the minimum qualifications to enter higher education (three Highers) varies between advantaged and disadvantaged areas after controlling for the individual's demographic and familial characteristics.
It is clear that a comprehensive review of both the variables to be included in the deprivation index and the level of disaggregation to be used is necessary and Hobcraft's call for more work in this area in chapter 9, is timely.
School Roll Forecasting
Funds allocated from central to local government are passed on to individual schools.
This allocation requires information on the future demand for places in particular schools — school roll forecasts.
There are five main ways in which these forecasts are used: for resource allocation in the near future; to plan longer-term capital expenditure; to assess planned admission limits for schools; to aid reorganization; and to help forecast the future budget for the local authority — both educational and corporate.
It has long been the view of central government that these forecasts are much more accurate if they are made at a local rather than at a national level (Hammond, 1984).
This is because they will always be small area forecasts.
There is a large literature on small area forecasting techniques (e.g. Platek et al., 1987).
The best tend to require the use of ancillary information, such as, in this context, headteachers' estimates of future rolls.
The choice of data and the accuracy required of the forecasts depends on the use to be made of particular forecasts and the time scale to which they relate.
Resource allocation in the near future requires accurate information not only for each school but within a school for each year.
These forecasts will be based on information on the number of children in a school augmented by headteachers' estimates.
In general, mistakes here are small, and can be corrected the next year.
Medium-term forecasts, say up to five years ahead, are often made for primary schools using recent birth records, together with ancillary information from health records, headteachers and on proposed housing developments.
Secondary school forecasts also use these sources together with information from current primary school rolls and data on the recent patterns of movement between local primary and secondary schools.
The effect of housing developments is usually dismissed as being small unless the developments are very large — typical estimates are around one half a child aged 0–16 per household.
It is for longer-term forecasts that accuracy becomes harder to achieve.
This  is because they require information on future births and migration, for which accurate predictions at a local level are always difficult, and because the ancillary information available will also be less detailed.
However, as Simpson (1987) observes these longer-term forecasts are required to inform policymakers of the potential costs and benefits of alternative strategies as well as for general monitoring.
Therefore they need only be made at a higher level of aggregation and should highlight potential peaks and troughs.
The accuracy of point estimates of pupil numbers is not paramount but it is essential to produce a range of forecasts under different assumptions.
In the main, most Local Education Authorities (LEAs) use a similar method of forecasting.
In his excellent review, Simpson (1987) calls this a cohort survival method.
The numbers in each year are progressively multiplied by some survival ratio to forecast the number going on to the next year, with ancillary information added in as appropriate.
However, there are many variations in the data available and in the forecasts produced.
Among the most common are first, variations in the data available to obtain estimates of the population aged less than five in an LEA.
Health Authority data are often used but their quality varies.
For example, in the Cambridgeshire Health Authority, Jenkins and Walker (1985) found that data were around 20 per cent in error.
Second, little is known about the accuracy of the estimates of the number of school pupils who will come from recent and future housing developments.
Third, there is variation in the level of disaggregation, both demographic and geographic, at which school roll forecasts are made.
Simpson (1984) argues that for compulsory education disaggregation by demographic characteristics is not particularly useful.
However, for post-compulsory education (between ages 16 and 18)‘staying-on’ rates by, say, gender and social class are essential.
This subject will be dealt with fully with respect to higher education in the second part of the chapter.
A clear example of the need to allow for demographic characteristics when forecasting staying-on rates is provided by Mao Qing and Mar Molinero (1986) who demonstrate that LEA forecasts of the number of school pupils aged 16–18 in Southampton are too low because they fail to take into account variations in enrolment by social class and geographic location.
A good review of the major determinants of staying on is provided by Pissarides (1981).
The key is that disaggregation is only necessary if there are distinct differences between the levels of the variable under question.
Fourth, it may be necessary to allow for potential policy decisions.
For example, forecasts may be made for a group of schools and then the results of different patterns of parental choice can be simulated.
Such forecasts will need to take into account planned admission limits for particular schools and can be of great benefit when planning school  reorganization .
In summary there is a need for a unified approach to school roll forecasting based on demographic data augmented by local information.
Such an  approach should also build in the potential for tests for accuracy as well as the flexibility to assess different policy decisions.
Reorganization and Parental Choice
The impact of the decline in fertility between 1964 and 1977 on the numbers of children enrolled in schools in England and Wales is illustrated in figure 6.1.
This decline led to a review of provision, and the DES issued its circular on The Falling Numbers and School Closures to LEAs in 1977 (DES, 1977).
This stated that full consideration would be given to ‘any social or other problems that may arise’, but that ‘the general policy would be for the Secretary of State to approve proposals to cease to maintain under-used schools.’
Pressure on LEAs to reduce provision was increased after the change of government in 1979 and the 1980 Education Act permitted LEAs to open close or substantially alter schools without central government approval.
The 1980 Act also made it possible for parents to send their children to a school of their choice provided that places are available in their chosen school.
To encourage LEAs to accelerate the reduction of places the DES issued another circular in 1981 (DES, 1981) which asked the LEAs to inform the DES how they intended reducing the number of places available.
The procedures for closure allow for periods of consultation and these have often led to bitter disputes within the community with the result that decisions regarding closure are delayed, or based on non-scientific data.
As a result local authorities have often referred the matter to the Secretary of State (85 per cent of cases between 1980 and 1985 according to Audit Commission, 1986).
This has led to further delays.
Meredith (1984) had not been alone in calling for the Secretary of State to reply within a specified length of time.
He argues further that from a legal point of view objectors have few opportunities to present an effective case.
These procedures are essentially intended to assess the social costs of school reorganization.
For these discussions to take place in an effective manner accurate forecasts are needed over the medium term.
These will require, in addition to the factors described in the previous section, an allowance for the effect of increased parental choice.
In two excellent papers Adler and Raab look at the effects of parental choice in Dundee and Edinburgh (Adler and Raab, 1987; Raab and Adler, 1988).
They analysed data on requests to place pupils in particular schools together with census-based area deprivation indices and school-based characteristics.
Their findings are now summarized briefly.
Requests to place pupils in particular schools have been increasing during the 1980s.
The trends tend to be that schools either gain or lose pupils with little interchange.
Most moves are of a short distance and into larger schools, away from schools in areas with a high proportion of local authority housing, towards less disadvantaged areas and to schools with high academic attainment.
These trends are perhaps not surprising but it should be noted that the result will be for schools in disadvantaged areas to lose pupils and to increase their unit costs per pupil.
Mar Molinero (1988) points out that this often leads to a negative correlation between school cost and attainment.
This creates grounds for closure of the less popular school and thus reduces educational provision in the more deprived area.
An allied but unresearched question is that of the extent of parents moving house within an area towards a popular school.
This means that parents would not need to request the preferred school over a less favoured alternative.
Anecdotal evidence such as provided by N.S. Groves (1986) exists but there is currently little systematic research in this area.
A comprehensive review of contemporary school reorganization is beyond the scope of this paper.
However, it is apparent that there is a need for clear procedures which allow rational decision-making taking into account specific factors at a local level.
A very sensible scenario for primary schools is suggested by Adler and Bondi (1988) who propose the following division of responsibilities:
1
central government — to balance the competing expenditure claims of education and other public expenditure programmes, and to provide a general framework for the education authorities, which are actually responsible for the provision of primary and secondary education
2
local authorities — to decide, within the broad financial constraints laid down by central government, what priority should be given to education at a local level; to formulate, within the statutory framework, general policies for local education provision, and, where appropriate, to allocate resources to local communities
3
the local community — to decide within the broad financial constraints laid down by the local authority and in accordance with more general policies, what pattern of schooling  would be best suited to the needs of the local community.
This approach would require improved provision of information from local government to the community and hence increased accessibility of school roll forecasts.
These debates must be informed and the guidelines for forecasts outlined in the previous section would provide a sound basis for practice.
Forecasting the Demand for Higher Education
The reviews of primary and secondary provision were followed, in turn, by a review of higher education (HE) provision.
Higher education is defined in the 1988 Education Reform Bill as courses leading to degrees, higher diplomas or to professional examinations where the standard is higher than that of the advanced ('A') level of the General Certificate of Education.
Therefore it comprises courses which will typically require a high level of school qualifications, and when forecasting demand for HE it is necessary to consider the social and demographic characteristics of those achieving such qualifications.
Higher Education in Britain is divided into two sectors.
The university sector receives funds directly from government while the public sector is funded through local authorities — public sector institutions, such as polytechnics and teacher training institutions, tend to be rather smaller and offer more vocational courses than universities.
The DES (1978) outlined five possibilities for dealing with the declining number of school leavers.
One extreme assumption was that demand would mirror the demographic decline, while at the other extreme there would only be a shallow decline in demand due to increases in both the proportions of school leavers wanting to advance their education and in the number of mature entrants.
In Britain, 15 per cent of the 18–24-year-old population are enrolled on higher education courses.
This is somewhat less than France (19 per cent), Japan (21 per cent ) or the Netherlands (22 per cent ) and far less than the U.S.A. (44 per cent ),(DES, 1987).
If the British proportion were increased in the 1990s then this would only have the effect of bringing Britain into line with her industrial competitors and, presumably, investing for the future.
The DES made explicit forecasts, DES (1983), which acknowledged that both demand for HE and the decline in fertility was not uniform across social classes.
Accordingly they forecast a decline in demand in the thirteen years after 1982/83 of around 25 per cent rather than around 35 per cent as implied by the general demographic decline (see Jones, 1981).
These papers led to a number of alternative forecasts being produced (Diamond and Smith, 1982, 1984; Association of University Teachers (AUT), 1983; Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals (CVCP), 1983; Collins, 1983).
Each projected that there would be little, if any, decline in the demand for HE relative to 1980/81 levels.
The subsequent debate led the government to prepare a new set of forecasts (DES, 1984a).
These were characterized by a much shallower decline in the demand for HE into the 1990s than previously.
The DES (1986b) updated their forecasts in 1986 to suggest that there will be no decline in the demand for HE relative to 1985/86 entry levels.
In this respect all commentators now agree.
The 1987 Green Paper on Education was notable in that it forecast an increase in the number of students in HE in the 1990s.
The reasons for the conflict in the various forecasts lie in the fact that the demand for higher education depends on a multiplicity of factors including the distribution of entrants into HE by age, gender, social class, region of residence, parental qualification and family size; the effects of unemployment and comprehensive education; the national demand for graduate-level skilled labour; and last, but by no means least, the effect of the supply of places on demand.
Methodological Considerations in Forecasting the Demand for HE
Two approaches to forecasting the demand for HE have been commonly used — component forecasts, and aggregate forecasts based on national age participation rates.
The choice is often dictated by the availability of appropriate data.
Lack of data is not a new problem — Burnhill (1985) cites Moser and Layard (1964), who in a paper on planning the scale of HE, stated that ‘on many important topics there were no data at all’, and that ‘we lacked comprehensive data on the school background and GCE performance of students in different sectors of higher education.’
Many of the recent forecasts (Diamond and Smith, 1982, 1984; Diamond, 1985; AUT, 1983; Collins, 1983) have been limited to the university sector because the existence of the Universities Central Council for Admissions (UCCA) means that some individual level data are available at a national level.
Such data have not been available for the public sector in England and Wales until the OPCS Survey of School Leavers (Redpath and Harvey, 1987).
Scotland has historically collected more comprehensive data and the Scottish Educational Data Archive at the University of Edinburgh permits comprehensive analyses over time of the characteristics of Scottish school leavers entering HE.
The aggregate approach, used by the DES, first forecasts the number of qualified school leavers and then multiplies this by the proportion entering HE.
The problems with this approach lie in the fact that the influence of individual components cannot be assessed.
In particular these forecasts assume implicitly that individuals demanding HE will accept the best offer they receive even if the institution is not their first choice and would require them crossing the divide between the university and public sectors.
Component forecasts are common throughout demography.
For example, population projections for England and Wales are made by aggregating separately the components of fertility, mortality and migration.
For HE such forecasts have been confined to the university sector as data are not available for the public sector.
Specific rates of the demand for HE from individuals  with particular characteristics — these typically include age, gender and social class — are calculated and then forecasts are made of the future demand from individuals with these characteristics.
It is to be hoped that data become available to permit this type of forecast for the whole of HE.
Two further approaches have been proposed.
The first is the use of econometric forecasts (Fildes, 1985).
These have been used retrospectively by Pissarides (1982) who showed that the percentage of the 18-year-old cohort gaining two or more A-levels had responded to changes in real permanent income and the ratio of expected earnings of manual workers to university graduates.
He also found that the proportion of school pupils staying on after the minimum school leaving age responded to changes in registered adult unemployment.
The second is to model the transition between compulsory schooling and finishing HE (Royal Statistical Society)(RSS), 1984).
At any age an individual could enter one of a number of states such as university, work or a polytechnic.
This approach would model the probability of moving between different states.
Unfortunately very comprehensive data would be required as there are many possible flows through HE.
It seems unlikely that adequate data will be available in the near future.
Factors influencing the demand for HE
The reason for the increasing size of forecasts of the demand for HE into the 1990s has been the recognition of the offsetting effects of a number of factors on the falling numbers of eighteen-year-olds.
Table 6.2 contains a list of many of these factors.
Most component forecasts have allowed explicitly for at least two out of gender, social class and age (Diamond and Smith, 1982, 1984; Diamond, 1985; AUT, 1983; CVCP, 1983; Collins, 1983) and the DES have discussed their effects thoroughly (DES, 1984b).
In addition Burnhill, Garner and McPherson (1987a, b), and Diamond (1988) have considered the effects of parental education on demand for HE in Scotland.
Table 6.2 Factors influencing the demand for higher education in Britain
The first requirement of any forecast is to choose the base year from which it will start.
The essential criterion is that data are available to assess actual  demand.
There are few data available which explicitly measure demand and all forecasts have used the number of entrants as a proxy.
This means that the base year's entry must reflect unconstrained demand.
The DES (1983, 1984a, 1986b) have used the most recent year for which data are available, arguing that although there were government-induced reductions in the entry of UK students to universities in the early 1980s these were more than offset by increases in the public sector.
Demand was thus satisfied for HE as a whole, although clearly there would be unsatisfied demand for particular courses or institutions.
Diamond and Smith (1982, 1984) and Diamond (1985, 1987) have argued that there is little evidence that all students not admitted to their first-choice institution will be prepared to substitute an alternative institution particularly if this is one from a different sector.
Instead they may be prepared to delay entry.
This means not only that forecasts must be made for each sector separately but that the base year should be the last one for which there were no constraints on the supply of places.
Diamond and Smith base their forecasts for young UK entrants to university on 1980.
In another context Mao Qing and Mar Molinero (1986) argue that for school pupils staying on at school after the minimal school leaving age the mid-1970s were the last time that external factors such as high youth unemployment did not influence demand.
In summary, it seems rather unlikely that forecasts taking the mid-1980s as a base year can claim to be measuring demand accurately.
At the very least the government forecasts should provide a sensitivity analysis of the effects of using different base years.
Gender
One of the most important trends of the past 20 years in HE has been the increased participation of women.
At all levels of education the ratio of women to men has been increasing steadily.
Figure 6.2 shows these ratios for four levels of education: first, achieving five or more O-levels; second, gaining two or more A-levels; third, applying to, and fourth, being accepted for admission to university.
For example, between 1970 and 1982 the ratio of women to men achieving two or more A-levels rose steadily from 75:100 to 95:100 and the corresponding ratio for university entrants rose from 40:100 to 70:100.
Given these trends it was perhaps surprising that in 1984 the DES (1984b) assumed that, despite this steady increase, the sex ratio at university entry would remain constant at its 1982 levels.
Figure 6.3 is adapted from DES (1984b) to include two alternative scenarios.
The first (a) is that the ratio would continue to increase and would approach even numbers during the 1990s.
The second (b) suggests that the ratio may not increase as steadily in the mid-1980s as it had hitherto because the freeze on places and the shift towards science and technology would militate against women.
However, as the number of 18-year-olds in the population declined, this effect would     reduce and the ratio would increase again.
The DES's 1986 forecasts (DES, 1986b) allow the ratio to increase a little but still not to equality.
There seems little reason why the proportion of women entering HE should not equal that of men in the future, particularly as research from Scotland (Raffe, 1984; Willms and Kerr, 1986; McPherson and Willms, 1987) shows that in Scotland women are not outperforming men in all SCE school examination.
Figure 6.2 Sex ratio at GCE and university entry: females per hundred males
Figure 6.3 Sex ratio of qualified school leavers: actual and projected
Social Class and Parental Education
One of the major factors influencing forecasts of the demand for HE has been the social class of the entrant.
Since 1945 the distribution of university entrants by social class has been relatively stable with around 60 per cent coming from upper non-manual backgrounds (social classes I and II)(Robbins, 1963; UCCA, 1986), a group which until recently have comprised only around 18 per cent of the births.
Although the entrants to public sector HE do have a higher proportion from lower non-manual and manual backgrounds (social classes III-V) they are still in the minority (Redpath and Harvey, 1987).
If the distribution of births by social class between 1965 and 1976 and the propensity of each class to enter HE had remained constant then this would not have affected the demand for HE.
However, as figure 6.4 shows there was actually a small increase in the number of births to parents from social classes I and II over this period while births to parents in social classes III-V declined.
A major reason for this contradiction of trends was a change in the structure of British employment away from manufacturing towards service industries in which there are a higher proportion of non-manual occupations.
Associated with this trend is intra-generational social mobility of parents between the birth of a child and its reaching the age of 18.
The DES (1984b) argue that the effect of such mobility is small compared to that of the change in occupational structure.
They assume that any movement is upward and of no more than one (numeric) social class.
Burnhill, Garner and McPherson (1987) have demonstrated that, in Scotland at least, there is much more mobility.
Using data on Scottish school leavers in 1981/82 they find that only around one half had not experienced social mobility between birth and leaving school.
Around two thirds of the mobile increased their social class while around one third moved downward.
Intra-generational mobility raises the question of assimilation — the extent to which the educational performance of the children whose fathers have changed classes resembles that of the children of the established members of a particular social class.
In the absence of any data on assimilation the DES (1984b) fitted two models — No Assimilation and Full Assimilation — and prefer the former on the grounds that for males it appeared to fit the experience of the past ten years rather better.
However, Burnhill, Garner and  McPherson (1987) disagree with the DES (1984b) finding.
They report that the odds of qualifying for HE for the upwardly mobile are doubled relative to those who have stayed in the same social class.
Furthermore, they do not find a ‘downward assimilation’ among the downwardly mobile and propose the existence of a ‘ratchet effect’which could lead to increased demands for HE during periods of high gross social mobility.
Figure 6.4 Legitimate births by social class, England and Wales
The effects of the net changes in social class have been modelled explicitly for the university sector in a number of forecasts (Diamond and Smith, 1982, 1984; Diamond, 1985; AUT, 1983; Collins, 1983) as well as implicitly by the DES (1984a, b, 1986b) .4 These effects have been the most important single factor for which data have been available at a national level albeit only for the university sector.
There are now more parents either one or both of whom will have higher  qualifications and it is unlikely that parents with higher qualifications will desire less education for their children.
Parental education will be confounded with social class and it is therefore important to consider them jointly.
Burnhill, Garner and McPherson (1987, 1988), and Diamond (1988) have studied the effects of parental education on the educational achievement and destination of Scottish school leavers.
Burnhill, Garner and McPherson report that, controlling for social class, the odds of an individual both of whose parents left school after age 17 qualifying for HE are around seven times greater than a contemporary both of whose parents left school at 15.
Diamond considers different sectors of HE and reports that children who do not gain the formal qualifications for HE are around ten times more likely to enter HE if both their parents had left school after age 17 than if both parents had left school by the age of 15.
A drawback of these studies is that the variable defining parental education is rather crude.
The evidence that parental education does play an important role in determining the demand for HE is very strong and there remains a clear need to quantify these effects in conjunction with social class.
Age
The majority of home entrants to HE in the UK are aged 17–20 — around 80 per cent of home entrants throughout the 1970s and early 1980s.
It was this that first prompted the forecasts that there would be a dramatic decline in demand for HE as a result of the decline in the number of births between 1965 and 1976.
However the early forecasts by the DES (1983) were flawed for two reasons.
First they were based on an ‘Age Participation Rate’(APR) defined as ‘the number of young home initial full time and sandwich entrants to HE in a given year expressed as a percentage of the 18 year old population’.
This approach has subsequently been adapted by the DES (1984a, 1986b) in what is termed an ‘Age Participation Index’, a weighted average of age-specification participation rates suggested by Diamond and Smith (1982, 1984) and by the CVCP (1983).
The second area of contention was the treatment of mature entrants.
The DES (1983) assumed  implicitly that all mature entrants would come from a pool of qualified individuals who had deferred their entry into HE.
They argued contentiously that high unemployment might cause mature entry rates to fall, ‘perhaps because potential entrants would prefer to retain their existing employment rather than risk unemployment following a spell of full time higher education.’
As a result the DES (1983) forecasts assumed that mature entry rates would fall at the same speed as the fall in 21–25 years olds — who constitute the majority of entrants to HE aged over 20.
These forecasts were criticized because both current practice and future intentions with regard to increased access to HE meant that many mature  entrants to HE particularly in the public sector — who admit between 70 per cent and 80 per cent of mature entrants — do not possess the formal qualifications for HE.
As a result the later DES (1984a, 1986b) forecasts considered the population of 21–25 year olds with only one A-level.
The effect of this improved treatment of the mature entrants was the major component of the increase in the DES forecasts.
Other Factors Affecting the Demand for HE
In the main there has been little work to evaluate the effects of the other demographic and economic  factors listed in table 6.2.
However, the evidence suggests that the net effect of each factor will be to increase rather than decrease the demand for HE.
First, it is unlikely that the decrease in family size will lead to a reduction in the demand for HE.
In other societies parental expectations for the children have increased as the number of children decrease.
In China, for example, the ‘one-child’ is known as the ‘Little Emperor’and is the subject of very high parental expectations.
The effects of unemployment and of the economic situation on the demand for HE have been the subject of little study.
The work by Pissarides (1982) described above is a notable exception.
Also, Dolphin (1981) showed that demand for HE falls when the value of the student award is cut.
In this paper separate equations were constructed for the university and public sectors with the effect of the value of student support being higher in the public sector.
The DES (1984b) reports some work to identify a link between the proportion entering higher education of those qualified (QPI) and unemployment, and conclude from some aggregate level analyses that if these results are valid they imply that much of 2.1 per cent rise in QPI in 1981/82 could be attributed to the total increase in unemployment — from 1.8 million to 2.7 million between July, 1980 and July, 1981.
The RSS (1984) noted that comprehensive education (non-selective secondary education introduced over the 1960s and 1970s) may encourage demand, particularly from female students.
McPherson and Willms (1987) have produced evidence for this.
The region in which a child is brought up may also have an effect on the propensity to demand HE although this effect will be confounded with many of the factors listed above (see Rees, 1986).
Summary
The second part of this chapter has demonstrated the importance of considering demographic trends and other factors when making forecasts of the demand for HE.
The choice between the two main approaches to forecasting demand for HE — aggregate and component — is often dictated by the availability  of data which also affects whether the university and other sectors should be treated separately.
It remains to consider whether the routine collection of data to permit component forecasts of HE could be justified.
There are many reasons in favour of component forecasts for each sector.
The non-university institutions have more mature entrants, more without formal qualifications, more from social classes III-V, their effective length of course is shorter, and they will be less affected by a switch to longer science and engineering courses than will the university sector.
In addition, there is little evidence that qualified entrants who demand university education but who are not admitted will be prepared to substitute a public sector place.
Between 1980/81 and 1982/83 the freezing of university places at a time when the cohort of 18-year-olds was increasing led to an increase in entry standards as measured by average A-level performance.
The DES (1984b) estimate of those candidates qualified for university in 1980/81 but not in 1982/83 and who did not gain a university place in 1982/83 only 47 per cent went into public sector HE.
Others presumably went into employment thus joining the pool of potential young mature age entrants.
The argument against component forecasts are those of cost.
However, the main costs would be those of constructing a central data base comprising data already collected in most institutions.
As the DES have agreed to update HE forecasts regularly such a development would be timely.
Conclusions
Most commentators would agree that Britain is likely to become a more technological society in future years and so it is likely that there will be an increased demand for a skilled workforce.
Furthermore, the changing age structure of Britain's population described in the previous chapters will lead to increasing demands on the workforce of the twenty-first century to support an ageing population.
It is essential, then, that Britain's young people — likely to be a decreasing proportion of its population — should be educated effectively.
While few would disagree with such a statement it is probable that to achieve this goal education spending per pupil should be increased in real terms during the period of a decline cohort of young people.
This chapter has demonstrated the need to take account of demographic projections when planning education provision and has identified the main areas which should be considered when calculating such projections.
However, it is also clear that such projections can only inform policymaking rather than dictate it and there remains a need for clear national guidelines on the provision of places at all levels of education.
There have been many statements arguing that access to education must be increased especially in higher education.
It is clear that in the 1990s the  demand will exist, particularly when demographic considerations such as changing family size are considered along with those already taken explicitly into account such as age and social class.
The question of access is thus one of improving provision in the areas where demand is great.
Housing the People: From Shortage to Surplus?
Introduction
Housing is clearly and directly associated with population trends: for , a larger population will usually require a larger number of homes.However, the relationship is more complex than simply that between overall numbers of people and of dwellings (i.e. structurally distinct physical living areas).
An increased number of children may not lead to more dwellings being required, but rather to the same number of larger homes; or may affect the types of homes needed, such as those with  amenities like gardens: conversely, an ageing population, which tends to consist of smaller household sizes, may need a larger number of dwellings, perhaps smaller and with special requirements such as ease of access.
Thus population numbers and age distribution affect housing needs directly: other demographic trends such as those in marriage, cohabitation and marital breakdown are also important.
Among policy areas, housing must clearly be responsive to demographic factors and therefore those concerned with housing should be aware of current demographic trends.
However, it is less appreciated that in many cases the causality also appears to work in the opposite direction; that is, the nature of the British housing system tends to form and perpetuate major demographic differentials in terms of fertility, nuptiality and marital breakdown, and mortality.
The nature of the relationship is complex since it will be shown to interact closely with employment patterns as well, leading to a web of interacting ‘careers’.
The rest of this chapter is concerned with the description and policy implications of some of these aspects.
The household, the group of people who live together in a separate living space, is the main link between population and housing.
Analysis of the structure of households can provide indicators of shortage such as the number of families doubling up, and show changing patterns of housing  needs.
I will discuss past and likely future trends in households and housing, and give particular attention to the experience of young people setting up home for the first time.
The definition of a household varies between different statistical sources and, in particular, the definition of a household changed between the 1971 and 1981 Censuses of Great Britain.
In the former one, a household was required to share meals as well as a living space, but the ‘common cooking pot’ concept was dropped from the 1981 Census.
One result of this change was that the number of households enumerated was about 300 thousands more under the new definition or about 13 per cent(Todd and Griffiths, 1986).
Analysis based on historical changes should take account of this fact.
However, definitional factors pale into insignificance when compared with recent changes in household size.
Trends in Households: Past, Present and Future
In order to set the scene, figure 7.1 shows that average household size has fallen over the past century.
It had been relatively constant for at least the  previous three centuries as shown by the work of the Cambridge Group for the History of Population and Social Structure (Laslett and Wall, 1972).
However, since that time, there has been considerable change.
Between 1951 and 1985, the population of Great Britain increased by 12 per cent, but the number of households increased far more — by about 40 per cent .
This means that average household size in Great Britain fell from about 3.21 to about 2.56 persons over this period and this decline is expected to continue at least until to the end of the century (Social Trends 10, 1979, Table 2.3;General Household Survey 1985, 1987, Table 3.11; Department of the Environment, 1986a).
Recent changes in large household sizes have been even more spectacular — in 1971 6 per cent of households contained six or more persons: by 1985, this figure had fallen to 2 per cent(General Household Survey 1985, 1987, Table 3.11).
These falls have been due in part to straightforward changes in age structure: fewer children — who tend to increase average household size — and more elderly people — who tend to live in smaller households — will both lower the overall average household size.
However, as will now be discussed, age structure is insufficient to account for observed changes.
Figure 7.1 Actual and projected average household size: England and Wales, 1851–2001
The number of dwellings in Great Britain in 1981 was 21.2 million, considerably greater than the number of households, estimated as 19.5 million (Social Trends 17, 1987, Table 2.2;Housing and Construction Statistics 1976–1986, 1987, Table 9).
Even if the number of households were to be suddenly increased, if, for example, all households consisting of more than one family were to split into single-family households, there would apparently still be a crude surplus of dwellings.
However, this does not take account of the fact that some of the housing stock will be vacant for frictional reasons, or because of government policy, or its unattractiveness, or use as second homes: furthermore, some dwellings may be unfit, lacking amenities or requiring substantial repairs — in England alone two million had at least one of these physical problems in 1981 (English House Condition Survey , 1982, p. 3).
Nevertheless, these data might suggest that a golden age of housing had arrived, but there is also clear evidence of substantial housing stress in Britain in the mid-1980s.
House prices and house price inflation are high, and the number of people accepted by local authorities in England and Wales because of homelessness doubled from 53 thousands in 1978 to 103 thousands in 1986 (Department of the Environment 1980, Table 1: 1987, Table 1).
Although this chapter can only look at national-level data, indicators of acute housing shortage are much more evident in certain areas such as London since the geographical distribution of housing does not match the availability of employment and the location of places in which people want to live, and regional differential price rises in houses exacerbate this problem.
See chapter 8 for further discussion of the regional distribution of population.
These pressures are much greater among the young who are attempting to  find their own accommodation for the first time.
Before looking at this group, I will first consider some general trends.
Between 1961 and 1971, the number of households in England and Wales increased by 2 million, and by a further 1.1 million in the decade up to 1981.
Over this 20-year period, there were substantial changes in the types of households.
Although care must be taken in interpreting data because of changes in definitions of households, and imprecision in terminology such as‘married couple’, some trends are nevertheless clearcut.
The presentation of data on households is frequently based on the concept of the ‘head of household’, particularly by use of ‘headship rates’.
(The ‘headship rate’ for a particular group, such as single men aged 15 to 29, is the proportion of such men who are designated as ‘head of household’.)
While the concept of headship has been criticized on empirical and political grounds, see for example Murphy (forthcoming), it is necessary to use it here because it is the familiar way of presenting data and also because many data from earlier years are available only in this form.
Changes in the number of households may be broken down into those which can be attributed to the changing numbers in each age group and those attributable to changes in headship rates.
The method is to show the number of households which would be found if the headship rate were to be kept constant at the values in each age-group in 1971, but allowing for actual changes in number of persons within these age groups.
An alternative way is to undertake a similar exercise allowing for sex and marital status as well as age.
The results of this exercise are shown in figure 7.2.
Within each of these age groups, the difference between the ‘observed’ and ‘age standardized’bars gives that change which is not attributable to changing numbers in the age group, and the difference between the ‘observed’and ‘age/sex/marital status standardized’bars gives the change attributable to changes in the headship rates for each marital status of each sex, at each age, i.e. to factors other than the change in the numbers in each age, sex and marital status group.
The main feature is the increase of nearly two million in the number of elderly households in the period 1961 to 1981.
This is largely due to the increase in the numbers of those over pension age during this period, rather than to changes in the propensity to live separate lives.
As the figure shows, about three-quarters of the change in the number of elderly households would have occurred even if their household structure had remained unaltered.
This increase has clear policy implications since these elderly people tend to live in the worst accommodation, and owners often have difficulties in undertaking their own, or paying for, maintenance.
However, there was also an increased tendency for the elderly to live independent lives.
The proportions of elderly people living in households who were neither living alone nor as a couple on their own fell by about half in the period 1961 to 1981, so there is reduced scope for similar falls to occur  in the future.
This greater propensity for elderly married and widowed people to live on their own was found in many developed countries as work by Richard Wall (1984, 1988) has clearly demonstrated.
The reasons for this are diverse: the elderly are better off than formerly, but this is not a sufficient explanation.
We do not have relevant data to investigate such topics as do countries such as Australia and the USA.
From studies of these countries, there appears to be an unwillingness of the elderly to seek assistance from their younger kin, although paradoxically the young report that they are more willing to give help than the elderly are willing to seek it.
While kin are a major source of support, especially when elderly people become unable to live on their own, a considerable number of the elderly have no kin to turn to for assistance: it has been estimated that about one quarter of elderly women aged 60 in the early 1970s had no surviving children (but the proportion will drop in years to come)(Timaeus, 1986).
Figure 7.2 Change in number of households: observed and standardized, England and Wales, 1961–81
Figure 7.3 Percentage change in number of households: observed and standardized, England and Wales, 1961–81
The increased number of elderly households, coupled with increased life expectancy, is leading to a greater number of frail elderly widows living alone.
Since they are increasingly owner-occupiers, they may find substantial financial as well as emotional costs in moving to a more suitable home.
One result is considerable under-occupation among the elderly.
The overall number of those above pension age in Great Britain is expected to remain very close to 10 million for the next 20 years.
However, the numbers of the very elderly will increase substantially: there are likely to be 1.2 million people aged 85 and over in 2006 (Population Projections 1985–2025, 1987, Appendix II), an increase of 75 per cent over the 1986 figure.
Present evidence suggests that the numbers of the elderly who will find difficulties in looking after themselves will therefore increase: for example, about 20 per cent of the 80-and-over group are likely to suffer from dementia (Grundy, 1986).
The housing needs of the elderly, in particular, must be a prominent policy issue in years to come.
Figure 7.3 shows the values of figure 7.2 expressed as percentage change over the period 1961–81.
The sharpest behavioural change has been found  among the under-30 group: if the age, sex and marital status-specific headship rates had remained fixed, the number of such households would have increased by under 200 thousands in the period; in fact the actual increase was over 800 thousands.
This increase is particularly impressive since the decline in marriage rates in the 1970s would have been expected to reduce household formation among young people, since historically young married couples have tended to set up their own households, and young single people to remain with their parents.
This would be expected partially to offset three changes in behavioural factors which have tended to increase the number of households.
The first is the greater propensity of people of all ages to live alone or away from their families; many of these are in cohabiting unions, and therefore reflect the failure of statistical presentation to keep pace with changing social trends (Kiernan, 1986a).
The second main factor is marital breakdown.
Although the majority of those who experience breakdown will find a new partner, a temporary period of separation will increase the number of households and it will also feed the need for an additional pool of housing.
David  Eversley (1983, p. 89) has suggested that marital breakdown on average leads to 1.5 new households in the medium term for every old household that is dissolved.
Using this estimate gives an approximate number of additional households among those under 45 due to the increase in marital breakdown over this 20-year period of around 200 thousands.
The third factor which is mainly relevant to young couples and their parents is the reduction in the proportion of young people who start off married life sharing with their parents (Murphy and Sullivan, 1985).
The numbers of such couples living in someone else's household fell by three-quarters between 1961 and 1981.
Among those in the middle age band, that is between 30 and pension age, the main reasons for the rise in the number of households are the increase in marital breakdown and the tendency for non-married people to live on their own (Haskey, 1987a).
These two emerging types of household have traditionally sought their housing in the rented sector, both public and private.
In this respect they are going against the trend of owner-occupation accounting for a larger and larger proportion of the housing stock — in 1986 about 63 per cent in Great Britain, up from 26 per cent in 1947 (Social Trends 18, 1988, Table 7; Donnison 1967, Table 10).
[Estimates based on the proportion of owned dwellings give a figure about 3 percentage points higher than estimates based on the number of owner households from sources such as the General Household Survey .]
Since only adults set up households, all those who will do so in the next 15 years are alive now, and we can estimate accurately how many will actually be alive in each age group — except perhaps for the oldest age groups — for at least that period ahead.
Other demographic factors which have a considerable  influence on household formation are less easy to predict — one is marriage: for example, the 1978-based official population projections expected two-thirds more married men in the 20–24 age band than were actually found in 1985 (Population Projections 1978–2018. 1980; Sparks, 1986, p. 24).
Another is marital breakdown which leads to additional housing requirements, even if remarriage ultimately takes place.
While any set of projections will be subject to some error for these sorts of reasons, the official household projections produced by the Department of Environment have provided a generally satisfactory framework for consideration of likely future trends in household composition.
In the 1960s and 1970s, the growth in households has been concentrated largely among non-married couple households: the number of those headed by a married couple has remained relatively constant and it is only expected to grow by one million in the period 1961 to 2001.
Therefore the proportion of households headed by a married couple has been decreasing through time — it was 74 per cent in 1971, 70 per cent in 1981, and is expected to be only about 55 per cent in 2001 in England and Wales (Department of the Environment, 1986a).
Married and non-married couple households differ in their housing types: in 1981, 65 per cent of married couple households were owner-occupiers, but only 45 per cent of the others (1981 Census:Housing and Households , Table 15).
If these proportions were to continue to apply to the projected household population, the proportion of owner-occupier households would fall from 58 per cent in 1981 to 55 per cent in 2001 (including allowance for difference in concepts of married male heads and married couple households).
However, present government statements are envisaging up to 80 per cent of households being owner-occupiers.
To achieve this target, something like 9 out of 10 married couples and two-thirds of the others — lone parent families, single people and flat sharers — would also have to be owners at the turn of the century.
Demographic and economic trends make higher rates of owner-occupation increasingly difficult to achieve without further selective measures in favour of owing at the expense of renting.
At present, subsidies to owner-occupiers in terms of mortgage interest tax relief and capital gains tax forgone on owner-occupied dwellings amount to £5 billion per annum : a sum about four times the total spent on National Health Service hospital buildings — i.e. capital spending (Social Trends 18, 1988, Table 7.33).
Increasing further the proportion of owner-occupiers could be achieved by giving substantial inducements to potential owners, or by making the public rented sector less attractive, as is being done in a variety of ways in the late 1980s by the Conservative administration.
The changing demographic composition also has implications for the physical housing stock — trends towards non-family, smaller households suggest that the traditional three-bedroom house is becoming less appropriate  for present needs.
Although there has been a substantial move away from the building of three or more bedroom houses in recent years, they still accounted for 60 per cent of the total housing stock in 1986 compared with nearly three-quarters a decade earlier (Housing and Construction Statistics 1976–1986, Table 6.8, 1987).
However, since new additions comprise under one per cent of the total stock each year, they will have only a trivial effect on the distribution of housing types in the near future (it should be noted that conversions of dwellings are not included in the figures given above).
Housing, Demographic and Employment Careers
So far, this chapter has been concerned mainly with the stock of dwellings and the stock of households.
For most people, change of type or tenure of housing has been relatively infrequent once they have obtained a home of their own in either the owner-occupied or local authority sectors.
However, some of the sharpest effects are seen at the point where household formation takes place since that usually means obtaining a home of one's own.
Demographic circumstances around that time tend to have substantial effects on the type and quality of housing which many people will live in for the rest of their lifetimes.
The time of leaving home usually marks the point where accommodation must be found in the housing ‘market’(using the term ‘market’ loosely).
Patterns of leaving home are affected by housing availability — indeed the relatively late age at which British children leave home compared to many other countries is probably tied up with the lack of suitable type and tenure of housing for young single people (Kiernan, 1986a; Sullivan, 1984; Jones, 1987).
However, at this time when there is an increasing desire among young people to move away, the traditional tenure of first resort, the privately rented sector, has been declining rapidly from 61 per cent of the total in 1947 to 10 per cent in the mid-1980s (Donnison 1967, Table 10;Social Trends 18, 1988, p. 132).
As many commentators, including the Building Societies Association, have noted, owner-occupation is not an ideal tenure for young people who are often mobile and may neither want nor be able to afford owner-occupation.
One consequence of the British housing system is that although young Britons leave home relatively late by European standards, they have some of the highest rates of owner-occupation in the world.
This problem of the lack of suitable housing for young people is exacerbated by the large number of 20–24-year-olds in the 1980s due to the baby boom of the early 1960s.
This is another area where it appears difficult to reconcile demographic and housing trends.
Even if young people do obtain a home in the privately rented sector, it is nearly always a transient tenure whether they are married or not.
Over 90  per cent will subsequently obtain a home of their own in either the owner-occupied or local authority sectors (Murphy and Sullivan, 1985).
Higher and higher proportions of young couples are in one of these sectors at or soon after marriage (Murphy, 1984; Holmans, 1981).
It is between these two sectors that some of the sharpest demographic differentials are found, and I will argue that the unique nature of the British housing market tends to perpetuate and reinforce these differentials in terms of patterns of early marriage, high fertility and marital breakdown.
It is, of course, the case that those from relatively advantaged groups are more likely to obtain the socially preferred type of housing, namely owner-occupation, those whose parents are in higher social classes and/or owner-occupiers being more likely to do so.
In 1983, the General Household Survey, which is the major source of data in this area, showed that among professional worker heads of household, 90 per cent were owner-occupiers, but only 28 per cent of unskilled workers were owner-occupiers (General Household Survey 1983, 1985, Table 6.13).
The National Child Development Study, a longitudinal study of a group of children born in 1958, showed that the children of owner-occupiers had four times the chance of being in their own owned home rather than in a local authority rented home at age 23 in 1981, compared with those children who were in the local authority sector at age 7 (Social Trends 15, Table 8.11; see also Jones, 1987).
However, apart from their own and their parents' socio-economic characteristics, demographic factors such as early marriage and childbearing experience also have a substantial effect.
Young single women with children are overwhelmingly likely to be living in local authority housing, and those who married early and/or had a pre-marital conception are more likely to do so as well.
Figure 7.4 shows that women under age 50 who were still married to their first husband were more than three times as likely to be owner-occupiers than local authority tenants.
Conversely, the reverse pattern was found for single women who had given birth who were five times more likely to be local authority tenants rather than owner-occupiers.
In the mid-1980s, about one-third of first births are illegitimate as was discussed in chapter 3.
Although the context of illegitimacy may be changing, in that relatively permanent cohabitation is essentially equivalent to formal marriage, if similar proportions of these women were to look towards the local authority sector in future, it would indicate a substantially increased need for public housing.
It should be stressed that similar conclusions to those of figure 7.4 hold when comparisons are made within a particular social class to control for the fact that higher social classes are both more likely to marry late and to be owner-occupiers.
Indeed when social class and housing tenure variables were included in a multivariate statistical analysis, the effect was to reduce the magnitude of social class effects, but to leave the housing ones largely intact (Murphy and Sullivan, 1986, Table 9).
The more detailed and precise analyses on which  these conclusions are based are taken from the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys' 1976 Family Formation Survey (Dunnell, 1979), the latest available major national survey on this topic which includes detailed housing and fertility histories, but we simply don't have more up-to-date evidence on which to make judgements.
Figure 7.4 Current housing tenure in 1980 by fertility and marriage history: women aged under 50 in Great Britain
To return to the main topic itself, that of the nature of the relationship between housing and fertility, it can be argued that for, those who choose a local authority tenancy, early childbearing, with or without marriage, is a rational strategy because it facilitates access to such a dwelling.
There are a number of small-scale studies by researchers, such as Beatrix Campbell (1984) and Paul Willis (1984), that suggest that at least some young unemployed teenage girls see childbearing both as a method of obtaining fulfilment and a purpose to life since the usual source, that of paid work, is not available to them, and also as the only means of obtaining a home of their own.
For owner-occupiers, on the other hand, the need to save for a deposit and other expenses, together with the relatively large mortgage payments in  the early years means that two incomes are necessary for an extended period and therefore childbearing will be delayed.
This may be illustrated by considering the position of a man on average wages whose wife doesn't earn, who has two children under 11, and who takes out a mortgage of three times annual income.
With earnings of £188 per week (Nov. 1984 figures), the family would have a disposable income (after tax, national insurance and mortgage and typical rate payments, but including child benefit) of £89 per week: this is not much more than the Supplementary Benefit Long-term Scale Rate for that family of £76 per week at that time.
Of course, mortgage payments will tend to be eroded by inflation, and eventually be paid completely.
In contrast, rental payments are likely to form a more constant proportion of current pay over the life cycle.
This ‘front-loading’ of mortgage payments in the early years of the mortgage (which very frequently coincides with the early years of marriage) will tend to require two earners at that time.
On average, owner-occupiers have tended to marry about one year later and have their first birth about two years later than local authority tenants (Murphy and Sullivan, 1985).
A rational choice model is clearly oversimplified: the idea that couples have a free choice between sectors is — in both senses of the word — untenable: access to different types of housing is determined by ‘constraint’ as well as‘choice’(Rex and Moore, 1967).
In Duesenberry's words if ‘economics is all about how people made choices, sociology is all about why they don't have any choices to make’(1960, p. 233).
For many, the idea of a free choice in housing is a sick joke, especially among the unemployed, those in insecure jobs, and for many in high house-price areas.
Moreover, demographic factors such as unplanned pregnancy may also foreclose options.
If a pregnancy is pre-marital, it trebles the relative risk of a couple ending up in the local authority sector rather than the owner-occupied one (Murphy, 1983).
Nevertheless there is clear evidence that some couples have modified their childbearing patterns in order to obtain a particular type of housing (Busfield and Paddon, 1977; Madge and Brown, 1981).
One consequence of this is that the sharp rise in the proportion of young couples in the owner-occupied sector over the post-war period (and the even greater number who aspire to this sector) must have had some effect in reinforcing fertility decline in Britain in recent decades although, of course, many developed countries have also experienced declines over this period, so it would be naive to emphasize this (or indeed any single cause) as the sole or primary explanation.
A consequence of these differences in the early years of marriage and childbearing is that fertility levels are much higher among those who live in the local authority rather than the owner-occupied sector — and fertility differentials by housing tenure are much greater than other conventionally used socio-economic variables such as social class, female employment, education, or income (see figure 7.5).
This has the result that, in particular, large  families are very disproportionately concentrated in the local authority sector.
We found roughly equal numbers of women in their forties with manual worker husbands in the local authority and owner-occupied sectors in the mid-1970s — but 29 per cent of the former group, and only 17 per cent of the latter, had had four or more children (Murphy and Sullivan, 1986, Table 8).
This means that a higher proportion of children will be brought up in the local authority sector than figures for the distribution of tenure in their parents' age-band would suggest.
Figure 7.6 shows that the average number of dependent children in the household is generally higher in the local authority sector, especially for young heads of household, but by the late forties, the younger ages of childbearing (and the earlier leaving-home patterns of those brought up in the local authority sector) mean that the values are very similar.
(The privately rented sector has low values for a number of reasons: it contains a larger non-married proportion, and the form of stock is often considered to be less suitable for childrearing.
Figure 7.5 Births in current marriage to women aged 40–44 by selected socioeconomic variables, Great Britain, 1977
As in the case of young people and privately rented accommodation, housing for families is another area where there is a clear mismatch between trends in housing policy and the demographic realities.
Since 1979 nearly a million local authority homes have been sold to tenants, out of an initial stock of 7 million homes (Social Trends 15, Chapter 8, p. 123).
The stock which has been sold has been disproportionately in the form of family  houses.
In 1982, a study found that only 2 per cent of sales in the previous six years had been flats (General Household Survey 1982, 1984, Table 5.44).
Moreover, this ravaging of that part of the publicly owned stock which is most desirable and most in demand is not being made up by new building.
In contrast to the private sector, the very small number of new public sector  dwellings now being allowed to be built consists mainly of flats, under one fifth being three or more bedroom houses (Housing and Construction Statistics 1916–1986, 1987), even though there are larger numbers of four or more child families living in local authority accommodation than the owner-occupier sector.
Figure 7.6 Average number of dependent children by age of household head and housing tenure, Great Britain, 1981
The first type of housing achieved is likely to have long-lasting implications — like childbearing.
Rates of movement between tenure types have been very low (Murphy and Sullivan, 1983, Table 3.9).
Childbearing acts as a powerful filter for channelling couples into one or other of the tenures and therefore it tends to reinforce the differences between groups.
Each additional child makes it more likely that a couple who are not already local authority tenants will become so.
Figure 7.7 Male unemployment rates by age and housing tenure, Great Britain, 1981
Since early influences are so important, early adult unemployment is  clearly associated with life chances in many areas especially housing.
It is also one where things have got much worse in the 1980s: in 1984, only 18 per cent of 16-year-olds were working compared to 61 per cent a decade earlier (Department of Education and Science, 1985).
For the unemployed, rented accommodation is the only feasible type of housing, and, as figure 7.7 shows, they are disproportionately being found in the local authority sector.
The overall differential is about two and a half to one.
A subsequent government report repeated some of these analyses for England in 1984, and concluded that these differences had become drastically widened (Labour Force Survey 1983 and 1984 , 1986, p. 45).
They found that for married men who were household heads under age 45, the proportions ‘out of work’(a wider concept than we used which included those who had given up looking for work because they didn't think any was available) was about nine times as high in the local authority as in the occupied sector.
All these findings on the relationship between housing and unemployment are not substantially altered by allowing for the generally lower social status — and therefore higher risk of unemployment — among local authority tenants as both this study and the work of a number of other researchers has shown (McCormick, 1983; Hughes and McCormick, 1987; Murphy and Sullivan, 1986; an extended bibliography of the general topic of housing and labour market interactions is given in Munro, 1986;Labour Force Survey 1983 and 1984 , 1986, Table 6.6; Sullivan and Falkingham, forthcoming, Tables 1, 2).
At a time when over one third of the economically active population aged under 25 have been unemployed at some time in the last 12 months, the prospects of reaching 80 per cent owner-occupation without drastic policy changes seem dim (Social Trends 15, Table 4.26).
Figure 7.8 Male unemployment rates by age and family status, Great Britain, 1981
Given the link between fertility and tenure, and tenure and unemployment, a relationship between family status and unemployment would be expected: figure 7.8 shows that this is indeed the case — the unemployed are much more likely to have children (and — perhaps more surprisingly — to be living away from home).
Unemployment among other household members is also associated with a higher probability of unemployment among young people (Payne, 1987).
One effect is that children, especially  those in large families, are disproportionately affected by increases in unemployment.
Since relatively few people express a preference for changing tenure from the owner-occupied to local authority sectors, when this happens there are often important employment and demographic aspects at work.
Two factors are mainly responsible for movement from the owner-occupied to local authority sectors — unemployment and marital breakdown.
The unemployment rates among married heads of household moving from the owner-occupied to the local authority sector is about six times the rate of those moving in the opposite direction (Murphy and Sullivan, 1986).
Although the numbers of such changes associated with moves are not large, and they cannot account for more than a very small part of the differential in unemployment rates between the two groups, the sale of a large proportion of public housing to sitting tenants who are more likely to be employed than the general local authority sector population will have contributed to the increase in the unemployment rate differential referred to earlier.
In 1985 160 thousand marriages ended in divorce in England and Wales — if these rates were to continue, over one marriage in three would end in divorce.
Women with dependent children have been particularly likely to seek accommodation in the local authority sector after marital breakdown (Sullivan, 1986, p. 41; Grundy, 1985).
Such movements, which often receive priority because of a legal requirement of local authorities under the Homeless Persons Act (1977), also tend to reduce access among other working families.
Once more, general policies which are leading to the residualization of local authority housing are being reinforced by demographic trends.
It is clear that housing tenure is associated with major differentials in patterns of marriage and childbearing.
That tenure is an even more powerful variable for population analysis is shown by looking at its relationship to the factors associated with household dissolution, mortality and marital breakdown.
The long-lasting substantial differentials between social classes is well known and well established due to the excellent analyses produced in the past in the Registrar General's Decennial Supplements.
What is more surprising is that differentials by housing tenure are even more substantial.
For example, John Fox and Peter Goldblatt (1982) have shown that after controlling for age, mortality in the 5 years following the 1971 Census for men aged 15 to 64 was greater for the highest social class, professional workers, who were living in the local authority sector, than for the lowest social class, unskilled manual workers, in the owner-occupied sector (see figure 7.9).
This strongly suggests that housing tenure is associated with more substantial and fundamental aspects than simply housing matters.
The tenure of a person's housing has been shown to be a consequence of marital breakdown in many cases.
However, it is also associated with excess risk as a cause of marital breakdown.
Those who start off their married life in  shared accommodation or in the local authority sector were more likely to experience marital breakdown later, even if other factors known to be associated with marital breakdown, such as age at marriage and childbearing patterns, are controlled for; this excess risk for tenants being of the order of 30 per cent greater than for owner-occupiers (Thornes and Collard, 1979; Murphy, 1985, Table 7).
Figure 7.9 Standardized mortality ratios by housing tenure and social class in 1971: men aged 15–64, England and Wales
The process of ‘residualization’ of the local authority sector has been discussed by a number of authors such as Forrest and Murie (1983).
As more and more owner-occupiers come from relatively badly paid and insecure jobs, the growth of a group of disadvantaged owner-occupiers becomes likely.
There is some evidence for the emergence of such a group in Britain recently.
However, space precludes discussion of this topic.
The reasons for these wide-ranging and very substantial housing tenure effects on demographic behaviour are not well understood; indeed, they have received far less attention than other less-striking ones.
They include the characteristics, background and attitudes of the people involved, the effects of socialization in the tenure type and the ways in which successive post-war governments and parties have encouraged owning at the expense of renting.
The result, however, is not in doubt; the British housing system is becoming increasingly polarized between a majority of secure owner-occupiers who have made substantial capital gains and are receiving large continuing subsidies, and the rest (this includes the group which space has precluded discussing: the marginal group of owner-occupiers, many of whom are in a more precarious position than local authority tenants, and whose problems will become much more prominent in years to come (Karn, Kemeny, and Williams, 1985; Sullivan and Murphy, 1987)).
These housing trends are largely politically determined directly by housing policy and indirectly by wider economic policies, but some features are caused by, exacerbated by and, in turn, influence demographic trends, with consequent implications for many areas of housing policy.
The relationship between population and a topic such as housing is complex because causality does not act in only one direction.
The numbers of people who form (and dissolve) households affects the provision of housing, but availability and type of accommodation affects fertility, nuptiality and mortality, as well as household formation.
Other variables including political decisions and labour market and economic conditions are also important.
The full ramifications are well beyond the scope of this chapter.
It is not even possible to determine how far these observed patterns can be ‘explained’ in sociological, economic or political terms (no doubt there are people who would also see a genetic component here as well).
Simple explanations are likely to come from ill-founded prejudice rather than from detailed analysis of the admittedly poor data which exist on this topic.
An explicit decision should be taken as to whether the decision-making process should attempt to collect new and relevant data: the Rayner Report on Official Statistics (Rayner, 1981) stated that official statistics should only be collected when they are relevant to central government decision-making.
A refusal to collect data shows a distinct unwillingness to start to tackle the sorts of issues which have been raised above.
Internal Migration and the Spatial Distribution of Population
Major shifts in population distribution have taken place over the two decades since the 1960s, despite the fact that the national population size is, by the 1980s, almost static.
Just as with many of the aspects of population composition covered in this book, so also the patterning of people across national space is highly dynamic.
This may seem surprising in view of the fact that the British tend to move house less frequently than people in some other countries like the USA and, more particularly, in view of the wide range of government measures that aim to support the existing patterns and restrict the scale of new urban expansion, such as regional policy, green belts and the urban programme.
There are at work, however, powerful forces for change, including the redistribution of employment opportunities at both regional and more local scales, changes in the preferences of individuals about the types of place where they would like to live, and also the considerable changes in demographic and social structure described elsewhere in this book.
The fall in birth rate, the growth of the elderly population, the rise in the divorce rate, the increase in the number of one-parent families and other factors leading to lower average household size, along with such developments as the increase in the number of working wives, cannot have taken place without having measurable effects on the geographical distribution of population, especially since, as argued in the previous chapter, these changes have tended to occur much more rapidly than the housing stock can adjust to their new requirements.
This chapter outlines the main changes which are taking place in the spatial distribution of the British population and examines the migration patterns which form the principal mechanism behind these trends.
Particular attention is given to the accentuation of the drift from North to South since the late 1970s, the current scale of population deconcentration from the  major metropolitan centres to smaller towns and more rural areas, and the emerging population patterns in the so-called ‘inner city areas’.
Each of these constitutes a traditional area of policy concern, but with the exception of the New and Expanded Towns programme and half-hearted attempts at assisting labour mobility, successive governments have tended to fight shy of the direct management of migration and population distribution, preferring to use indirect measures affecting the location of jobs and housing.
Because this approach appears to generate some undesirable side-effects, this chapter concludes by arguing that closer attention should be given to more direct ways of influencing migration patterns.
These should be aimed at reducing tendencies towards social polarization and at achieving a better matching of people with appropriate jobs and local facilities, thereby increasing not only individuals' quality of life but also the efficiency of public and private investment.
The first stage of this argument, however, is to demonstrate the importance of regional and local perspectives on population and to indicate by reference of the lack of official statistics on local populations and migration, how little attention is currently paid by central government to these questions.
The Importance of Sub-national Perspectives
Sub-national perspectives on population change are essential for at least two very basic reasons (Lawton, 1986).
Firstly, in a society which is consumer-orientated and largely sympathetic to the provision of welfare services, a considerable proportion of both private and public investment is geared to providing goods and services to people within fairly easy reach of their homes.
A single national centre is appropriate only for the few services which involve delivery to all addresses in Britain (e.g. mail order), very occasional visits (e.g. specialized medical advice) or a particular type of service or activity with a client group that lives close to it and is not represented elsewhere in the country (e. g. certain elements of central government, the national media and business services).
Secondly, regional and local populations do not by any means constitute faithful microcosms of the national population, either in terms of the rates of change in their size or in terms of their composition by age, sex, household type and socio-economic characteristics (Lawton, 1982).
Not only does migration continue to produce considerable variations between places in rates of population change (Ogilvy, 1982; Stillwell, 1985), but mortality patterns also differ between places (Townsend and Davidson 1982) and so too do fertility rates, though to a diminishing extent (Newell, 1986).
Even if there existed a uniform nationwide trend in the birth and death rates of each population sub-group identified on the basis of sex, age, occupation, ethnic  status and so on, local populations would still develop differently from one another , and from the ‘national’ trend, because these rates would be operating on the distinctive demographic structures which each locality has inherited from its past histories of fertility, mortality and migration.
For instance, a nationwide rise in fertility rate would produce a much larger increase in the number of births in a recently developed new town with an above-average proportion of young couples than in a retirement area with a population of similar size.
Such imbalances can create major problems for the provision of basic local services such as health care and education (Briault, 1986; Whitelegg, 1986) and for the maintenance of a consistent labour supply (Salt, 1986).
These two factors have always applied, but the significance of regional and local perspectives on population changes seems greater in the last quarter of the twentieth century than previously.
This is partly because of the increasing importance of employment in the service sector, much of it geared to regional and local markets and client groups, but it also has much to do with the particular circumstances of the 1980s.
With the national rate of population growth running at under 0.2 per cent a year, population redistribution has virtually become a ‘zero-sum game’, whereby any increase in one place can take place only at the expense of population levels in another place.
Gone are the more dynamic days of the early 1960s when even substantial rates of net migration loss from the larger cities to other parts of Britain were largely or completely offset by relatively high rates of natural increase and by immigration from overseas.
As a result, according to the 1985-based projections (OPCS, 1988), while population increase of 15 per cent or more are expected by the year 2001 in some counties (e.g. Buckinghamshire, Wiltshire, Cornwall, Shropshire), Merseyside stands to lose over 9 per cent and Cleveland and Tyne and Wear both over 5 per cent of their 1985 numbers.
At the more local scale of the metropolitan districts, the changes expected for Knowsley and Liverpool are as big as -18.2 and -16.1 per cent respectively, while Gateshead and Salford are also projected to lose over 10 per cent of their population in this 16-year period.
With the switch in emphasis from accommodating national growth to the redistribution of an essentially fixed number of people come the problems of spare capacity and loss of investment confidence in the adversely affected areas.
These developments also come at a time when drives for greater efficiency are features of both public and private sectors.
Under pressure from diminishing resources and central government exhortations, much greater emphasis is being placed on the careful targeting of policy measures to the places where people suffer from the most severe problems, as evidenced by the successive reviews of regional policy and by the initiatives of the 1970s and 1980s aimed at rejuvenating inner city areas.
Similarly, the private sector, spurred on by advances in computer technology and by availability of detailed  local statistics from the Population Census, has developed sophisticated targeting procedures for advertising, marketing and product monitoring.
These steps recognize the existence of major differences in the composition of population both between and within regions and urban areas — differences which recent trends towards the increasing selectivity of migration streams seem to be magnifying, as will be shown further on.
The Inadequacy of Data on Local Area Populations
The success of population targeting depends on access to accurate up-to-date information, but in fact the increasing attention being given to sub-national, and particularly local, populations is running far ahead of the availability of data suitable for monitoring trends at these scales.
The annual population estimates constitute the principal source of official statistics on sub-national populations.
As such, they are extremely valuable and their accuracy is known to have improved considerably as a result of methodological improvements made over the last few years (OPCS, 1980; Craig and Broad, 1982).
Even so, considerable errors can build up over the period of ten or more years that elapses between one Census date and the time when the finalized results of the next Census can be used.
While births and deaths are required by law to be notified to the Registrar General, migration — which is generally the most significant component of population change at regional and local levels and has increased its importance as rates of natural increase have declined — is much more poorly documented (Willis, 1974; Rees, 1977; Ogilvy, 1980; Stillwell, 1986).
Heavy reliance is placed on sources set up for purposes other than monitoring population change, including the International Passenger Survey (designed to estimate travellers' spending patterns), the National Health Service Central Register and the electoral roll.
Furthermore, the information which the ‘midyear population estimates’ provide is limited to sex and age group and is not normally available for a finer grain of spatial unit than the local authority district and health authority area.
Some information on other characteristics of the population such as household structure, employment status, ethnic composition and housing situation can be gleaned from the annual General Household and Labour Force surveys, but the problem of small sample size virtually rules out their use at scales below the Standard Region.
As a result, the Population Census is not just the best, but in practice the only, source of reliable data on a reasonably wide range of demographic and socio-economic characteristics at sub-regional scale.
Moreover, it has the advantage of providing data down to the level of the individual enumeration district covering roughly 500 inhabitants, which, even if too small for certain purposes, can be treated as a building block for areas specially defined by the user (Rhind, 1983).
Unfortunately, given  the failure to repeat the practice of a mid-decade Census as first carried out in 1966, this source can provide only snapshots of the population at ten-year intervals, the most recent being 1981.
Its value for indicating the population composition of local areas towards the end of any decade is strictly limited, while by definition its value for monitoring change during the inter-censal period is nil.
The closing stages of the decade are not the most satisfactory time for a description and analysis of the latest trends in the spatial distribution of population!
The North-South Divide
Data deficiencies pose least problems at the broad regional scale because the various sources provide relatively firm ground for examining the latest developments in the balance between North and South.
The more rapid growth of southern Britain is the longest established and apparently most intractable of the geographical shifts taking place in the 1980s, seemingly being treated as inevitable or indeed even desirable by the contemporary Conservative Government.
Since the onset in the late 1920s of severe economic difficulties in areas of coal-mining and heavy industry, there has been a progressive shift of employment opportunities towards the South, albeit not always at the same rate.
There were times — notably in the immediate postwar years and during the early 1970s — when it seemed that the gap between the two halves of the country was beginning to narrow (Damesick and Wood, 1987), but with the benefit of hindsight it is seen that these were periods when special factors were operating (McCrone, 1969; Massey, 1979).
According to later studies (Martin, 1986, 1987; TCPA, 1987; Green, 1988) the gap in the 1980s is now wider than ever; and the latest developments in information and communications technology threaten to reinforce these contrasts (Goddard and Gillespie, 1987).
The hiatus between North and South is most directly shown in terms of trends in employment over the first half of the 1980s.
As table 8.1 indicates, the economic recession of the late 1970s and early 1980s had a much more severe impact on the North, because of the concentration there of the types of economic sectors — principally manufacturing — which were most badly affected.
Moreover, at this time, the boundary between the two parts of Britain was drawn southwards so that formerly prosperous parts of the Midlands, particularly the West Midlands conurbation, found themselves on the wrong side of the line for the first time (Townsend, 1983; Green, 1986).
Table 8.1 Change in employees in employment, 1979–86, and total employment, 1986, by region
The geographical patterning of the subsequent ‘national’ economic recovery has largely served to reinforce this dichotomy.
Whereas the four regions of the South together gained 449 000 extra jobs between 1983 and 1986, the six other regions combined managed a net increase of only 83 000  jobs and in 1986 contained 1.37 million, or 12 per cent, fewer jobs than in 1979 (table 8.1).
Moreover, the latest available data on more local patterns of employment growth in the 1980s indicate the sharpness of the boundary between the two parts of the country, because they show that, though more rural parts of the North performed well at this time, the greatest concentration of rapid job growth occurred south of a line running from the Severn estuary to Lincolnshire (figure 8.1).
There is a particularly marked contrast between the experience of the more urbanized areas of the Midlands and northern England and that of the broad zone to the north and west of London stretching from Hampshire and Wiltshire through to Cambridgeshire and Norfolk.
Here are located a disproportionately large slice of the nation's ‘sunrise industries’.
The London area, too, has participated strongly in this recovery, led by the growth of jobs in financial and other business services in central London and other office centres in the Home Counties (Breheny, Hart and Hall, 1986; Champion and Green, 1987,1988; Hall et al., 1987).
Figure 8.1 Change in total employment, 1981–84, by local labour market area
The impact of these recent employment trends is reflected clearly in the shifts in population distribution which have taken place since the early 1970s (table 8.2).
In brief, the four regions of the South have been absorbing all the    (admittedly rather limited) national increase in population and have been pulling in people from the rest of Britain.
In 1971–76 their overall growth rate was already considerably in excess of that for the rest of Britain, but subsequently the gap has widened, particularly since 1981.
Thus in 1981–86 the South gained 580 000 people, twice the increase recorded in 1976–81, while the rest of Britain saw its population fall by almost 200 000, an increase in the rate of loss compared to 1976–81 and moving against the national trend (table 8.2).
Internal migration within Britain has been largely responsible for these trends, with the level of net immigration to the South rising from 24 000 a year in 1971/73 to 45–50 000 a year by the end of the 1970s and rising steadily since 1981 to reach 69 000 in 1985/6 (figure 8.2).
This has been reinforced by recent changes in international migration, in particular involving a major surge in net inward movement to the South East in the first half of the 1980s.
Table 8.2 Population change, 1971–86, and total population, 1986, by region
At the same time, however, these population shifts have been far less than those required to match the scale of interregional differences in employment change shown in table 8.1.
Indeed, while there is concern over the long-term effects of population losses from northern regions of Britain, in some circles there appears to be even more anxiety about the failure of migration to  produce a speedier matching of workers to jobs (Department of Employment, 1986; Minford, 1985).
Neo-classical models of the labour market contend that equilibriating mechanisms such as migration should work to eradicate spatial variations in unemployment (Gleave and Palmer, 1980), but the continuation of wide regional variations in rates of joblessness through the 1980s suggests that these mechanisms are not working very efficiently (Gleave and Sellens, 1984; Green et al., 1986).
According to Hughes and McCormick (1985, 1987), the key to the problem lies with the limited mobility of manual workers.
Using data from the 1983 Labour Force Survey, they show that whereas unemployment rates for non-manual workers are low, with little variation between regions, those for manual workers are much higher and exhibit a much wider degree of regional variation (see columns 1 and 2 of table 8.3).
In fact, comparing columns 6 and 8 of table 8.3 there is seen to be no net flow of manual workers from the six most depressed regions of the country to the four most prosperous ones.
This suggests that migration's role in swelling the South's labour force is restricted to non-manual workers, for whom the South provided 61 per cent of the movers' destinations, while it accounted for only 52 per cent of points of departure.
Even in relation to non-manual workers, however, serious manpower shortages and problems of relocating staff were being reported in the mid-1980s in many parts of southern England (Parsons, 1987; IMS, 1987).
Figure 8.2 Net migration from North to South, 1971–86
Table 8.3 Unemployed and migration, by religion
Previous studies (see the review in Green et al., 1986) have put forward a wide range of factors to account for this relatively low level of labour mobility, particularly amongst the lower paid.
They include the limited availability of jobs in the recession years, poor access to information about vacancies, lack of the requisite skills and personal attributes, uncertainty about the security of a potential job, the employment situation of other workers in the same household, the stage of children's schooling and reluctance to break family and social ties.
By far the most frequently cited reasons, however, relate to housing considerations (Johnson, Salt and Wood, 1974).
The small size of the private-rented sector and the difficulties which council house tenants face in moving between local authority areas have for a long time constituted major barriers to long distance migration by lower-income workers (Robertson, 1979; Hughes and McCormick, 1981; OPCS, 1983; Hamnett, 1984).
The various government schemes designed to assist labour transfers (Johnson and Salt, 1980) have traditionally made an extremely limited contribution to migration and were cut back further in the first half of the 1980s.
In the last few years these problems have also been intensified by the housing changes described in chapter 7, namely the accelerated contraction of the private-rented sector, the winding up of New Town Development Corporations and other official overspill schemes, the cutback in Treasury funds for new public-sector house-building in general, and the sale of council houses to tenants with ‘Right To Buy’ discounts (Brittan, 1986).
Meanwhile, since the early 1980s the movements of home-owners to the South has become increasingly difficult as the pressures for net in-migration from the rest of Britain and overseas has outstripped the rate of new house building and led to massive inflation in the price of houses and land with planning permission (Champion, Green and Owen, 1987).
The recent changes in the distribution of people and jobs described above are indicative of a fundamental reshaping of Britain's regional structure which has major implications for private investment decisions and raises important issues for central government policymakers.
Forecasts of the South's predominant share of the future growth in employment (Tyler and Rhodes, 1986; Cambridge Econometrics, 1987) indicate to the private sector the broad locations where the greatest returns on capital investment are likely to be won.
Meanwhile, the many parts of the North which are anticipated to experience depopulation for the foreseeable future (OPCS, 1988) will tend to find more defensive strategies being adopted by the private sector and local authorities alike, as their revenue base contracts and as the use of their facilities falls below its optimum level.
The most immediate problem facing central government appears to be the intense pressure building up in southern England.
The progressive dismantling of regional development policy since 1979 has moved more swiftly than steps aimed at deregulating the housing sector.
Minford, Ashton and Peel (1987) have pointed to the massive  distortions caused to the housing system by government intervention including the effects of the Rent Acts, the subsidization of council house rents, the subsidy to owner-occupiers through mortgage tax reliefs, and planning restrictions on housing land.
The Conservative Government's attempts at reviving the private-rented sector have met with very little success though in due course more substantial results are expected from the 1988 Housing Act.
At the same time, the Tory-voting lobby in the country areas of southern England has so far been very effective in resisting the relaxation of planning controls.
All in all, in Britain at the moment there is a major disjunction between government policies towards the economy and those relating to housing.
This has reinforced the problems of regional imbalance inherited from the years of deep recession and the more distant past and looks to be heading to a showdown on the green fields of southern England.
The Exodus from Cities
The single most impressive finding of the 1981 Census in relation to population distribution was the massive decline in population sustained by Britain's larger cities over the previous decade.
The population of Greater London alone fell by almost three-quarters of a million between 1971 and 1981, a drop of almost 1 in 10 (OPCS, 1984).
Even bigger relative rates of decline were recorded by some of the provincial centres, notably Glasgow (-22.0 per cent), Liverpool (-16.4) and Manchester (-17.5).
To some extent, the latter are related to the North-South drift described in the previous section, but they are also partly the outcome of a general shift of population from more urban to more rural areas.
Evidence for the importance of this ‘rural-urban shift’ can be found in the fact that London sustained such heavy population loss in the 1970s despite being located at the heart of the most dynamic region in the UK.
Its influence can also be seen at work within the North where sub-regional studies have shown that many medium-sized places and more rural areas fared relatively well between 1971 and 1981 despite the general appearance of economic malaise conveyed by the regional-level statistics (Breheny, Hall and Hart, 1987; Champion, Green, Owen, Ellin and Coombes, 1987; Townsend, 1986).
In fact, this phenomenon is common to the majority of advanced Western countries and poses some major challenges which need to be addressed alongside the issues raised by the North-South divide.
In one sense, the shift of population away from the original urban cores is by no means a new development; suburban expansion was already underway before the end of the nineteenth century and accelerated dramatically in the interwar period.
Since the early 1950s, however, urban decentralization has taken on completely new dimensions.
With new forms of planning restriction  limiting the amount of suburban extension that could be tacked on to existing built-up areas, housing developers increasingly looked to the surrounding rings of smaller settlements lying within commuting distance of city centres.
By the early 1960s the largest metropolitan areas in Britain had moved into ‘absolute decentralization’, whereby the principal settlements of each began to lose population, and by 1971 several of these areas were facing overall population decline, with residential decentralization taking place across their boundaries and spilling over into adjacent city-regions or further afield (Hall et al., 1973; Spence el al., 1982).
Over the subsequent decade this process intensified so much in both numbers of people and geographical scale that an inverse relationship between urban size and population change rate was generally evident and many of the more remote areas in the west and north of Britain experienced a switch into growth after decades of depopulation (Champion, 1981a; Jones et al., 1986; Champion, Green, Owen, Ellin and Coombes, 1987).
These developments appear very similar to those experienced in the USA and a number of other countries where they have been variously termed ‘counterurbanization’, ‘the rural population turnaround’ and ‘the rural renaissance’(see Fielding, 1986, for a review).
For a while during the 1970s these counterurban tendencies were operating so powerfully that they replaced the North-South drift as a primary dimension of regional population change in Britain (Champion, 1983).
Particularly impressive was the way in which the South East's population began to decline in the late 1960s, following its rapid growth in the 1950s and the early 1960s.
Indeed, by the mid-1970s all three of Britain's most heavily urbanized regions (the South East, West Midlands and North West) were recording rates of population decline similar to or greater than the traditionally depressed regions like the North and Scotland (Champion, 1983, table 8.2, p. 200).
A number of different factors seem to have contributed to this extensive scale of decentralization from the major metropolitan areas, including changes in residential preferences and the search by companies for less cramped factory sites and for cheaper and less organized labour such as married women.
The programme of motorway building played an important facilitating role, while direct government intervention made a substantial contribution in the form of the Location of Offices Bureau, large-scale slum clearance and the official overspill programme, the latter being expanded in the light of the mid-1960s projections of strong national population growth.
Actual demographic trends also contributed to the outward movement, as the rearing of the 1960s baby boom children increased the demand for houses with gardens and as falling average household size reduced the population capacity of cities that had only limited sites available for new housing construction (Champion, 1987b).
At the same time, there was an increase in the number of elderly people seeking retirement homes in the cheaper and more attractive areas away from the more urbanized regions (Law and Warnes, 1976).
On the other hand, the pace of counterurbanization has slowed considerably in the past decade.
Indeed, contrary to the impression of steady acceleration conveyed by the decennial Census statistics, the urban-rural shift in population seems to have peaked in the early 1970s.
According to the mid-year estimates the ‘remoter, largely rural districts’ experienced their highest rates of net immigration between 1971 and 1974, while at the other end of the national urban hierarchy London's rate of net migration loss peaked as early as 1970/71 (Champion, 1981b; Britton, 1986).
All Britain's major cities recorded some diminution in their rates of population decline between the 1970s and the 1980s, but the recovery in London's change rate was particularly remarkable (Champion, 1987a).
Whereas Greater London had been losing 90 000 people a year at the beginning of the 1970s (figure 8.3), its population is estimated actually to have grown between 1983 and 1986, reaching a level of 6.78 million in 1986.
Figure 8.3 Population change for Greater London, 1961–86
To a large extent, this ‘downwave’ in the pace of urban deconcentration can be associated with a significant general fall in levels of residential mobility during the 1970s, as observed both from the NHS records (Ogilvy, 1982; Devis, 1984) and from Census comparisons (Devis, 1983; Brant, 1984; Stillwell, 1985).
As with the rise in counterurbanization a decade earlier, however, a number of specific reasons can be suggested.
Some of these are mirror images of those previously cited; for instance, the recession meant less need for businessmen to seek out large industrial sites, central government began running down the overspill programmes and giving greater attention to the rejuvenation of inner city areas, and ‘baby boom’ was replaced by ‘baby bust’.
Many of the most popular retirement areas appear to have become saturated (Warnes and Law, 1984), while the shake-out of the private-rented sector had passed its peak by the end of the 1970s (Hamnett and Randolph, 1982, 1983a).
There was also a major increase in the number of small households, as a result of the growth of the elderly population, the rise in the divorce rate and the financial advantages of ‘double-income, no-kids’ life styles — a trend to which the building industry was relatively quick to respond in the absence of more lucrative opportunities and as part of subsidized inner city renewal projects (Champion, 1987b).
In international academic circles the counterurbanization phenomenon continues to be the subject of lively debate (Fielding, 1986).
The most fundamental issue at stake is whether it represents merely a continuation of the earlier process of suburbanization and metropolitan deconcentration, albeit on a much larger geographical scale, or instead constitutes a fundamental switch away from the urban concentration process associated with industrialization towards a new ‘post-industrial’ settlement pattern based on medium-sized and small centres (Hamnett and Randolph, 1983a; Robert and Randolph, 1983).
The apparently cyclic pattern of the past two decades raises the further possibility that the large-scale urban-rural shift of the early 1970s was a short-term event resulting from the chance combination of particular circumstances.
If, however, it is the 1980s that constitutes the aberration and if the underlying tendency is instead towards a more dispersed settlement pattern and the growth of smaller cities and towns, then it is important to recognize that the British population remains highly concentrated.
Despite the massive exodus from the major cities in the 1970s, in 1981 more than three-fifths (62.6 per cent) of Britain's 54.3 million people were still living in twenty ‘metropolitan regions’ which occupy little more than one-fifth of the country's land area.
Indeed, fully a quarter of the country's population is accounted for by just the six largest cities (defined on a functional rather than administrative basis).
Most remarkable of all is the degree of concentration in London, which on the same functional basis is as large as the eight next largest cities in Britain put together (Champion et al., 1984, Champion, Green, Owen, Ellin and Coombes, 1987).
While there may be some uncertainty about what the future holds for Britain's larger provincial cities, there can be little doubt about the massive strength of decentralization forces in the case of London.
Even during the  recession years of the early 1980s, the rate of net outward migration from Greater London to the rest of the South East never fell below 40 000 a year and with the subsequent economic recovery it had risen to 65 000 by 1986–87 (Champion and Congdon, 1988).
The massive surge in house prices in London between 1984 and 1987 provides some indication of the scale of pent-up demand for new housing, only a relatively small fraction of which can be met within London itself.
According to Tyler and Rhodes (1986), between 1985 and 1995 there will be a demand for 605 000 new houses in the South East outside London, almost twice the provision then anticipated by the planning authorities.
The future pattern of urban development and resultant population growth therefore depends very much on the outcome of political battles between the various interest groups, including central and local government, the developers and the different types of conservation lobby (HBF, 1985).
Considerations in favour of a more flexible approach towards new building in the South East include the need to continue the momentum of the national economic recovery and the search for alternative uses of surplus farmland, but if no firm guidance on this matter is forthcoming in the near future, decentralization is likely to occur more slowly but take place over longer distances.
This would aggravate the problems of urban penetration into essentially rural areas described by Herington (1984) and would also reduce the options available for dealing with the difficulties faced by lower-income groups in the London area (Eversley, 1972; Buck et al., 1986).
The Inner City Problem
As with the other two scales of population redistribution surveyed above, the distinction between the inner and outer parts of individual cities and towns in terms of their inhabitants' relative prosperity is not new, nor is it unique in Britain (Herbert, 1972).
Though some prestige residential areas survive in the ‘west ends’ of many cities, Britain's inner areas have in general followed the American model in their physical and social characteristics (Hall, 1981).
Here is found the cities' oldest remaining housing stock built to accommodate low-paid workers in adjacent factories and menial city-centre jobs and generally receiving very little maintenance as the owners await the transition of the land to a higher-value use like shops or offices or the threat of compulsory purchase for the construction of new relief roads or other types of public-sector development.
These areas continue to constitute the best option for lower-paid workers, not just because of the relatively low cost of the housing but also because they provide access to a large pool of appropriate jobs both in the central area and in the suburbs thanks to the essentially radial pattern of public transport facilities.
At the same time, the inner city forms the ‘sink’ to  which gravitates a range of marginal and minority groups, including non-white immigrants, young single people, one-parent families and various types of social deviants who prefer the anonymity of big-city life or who have been ostracized by their community of origin (Knox, 1982; Peach, 1982).
As also has been found for the other two scales, however, the inner city problem has become much more evident over the past decade since the deteriorating situation prompted central government to introduce more comprehensive powers in the 1978 Inner Urban Areas Act, to the extent that it was identified by the Prime Minister as the single most important challenge for the new Parliament after the 1987 General Election.
Such has been the rate of change in the last few years that the 1981 Census has become woefully outdated.
For instance, in January 1986 the male unemployment rate for Inner London stood at 21.9 per cent , compared with 14.4 per cent at the 1981 census — a much steeper rise than for Outer London; where the rates were 9.9 and 8.0 per cent respectively.
Even so, the 1981 Census still performs useful functions in showing how these recent trends relate to the pre-existing socio-economic gulf between inner and outer areas and in highlighting the strong association between different types of deprivation.
In London, for instance, the most severely affected boroughs like Hackney and Tower Hamlets, with male unemployment rates of over 28 per cent in 1986, had already seen sharp rises in joblessness between 1971 and 1981, which had driven more people to work outside the boroughs of residence and brought a marked fall in the numbers of women in paid work (Townsend el al., 1987).
Such areas of high unemployment also tend to have below-average numbers of households with two or more wage-earners and disproportionately large numbers with low earnings, while they also score highly on ‘multiple deprivation’ indices based on measures such as educational attainment, life expectancy, ethnic composition and household structure (Donnison and Soto, 1980; Begg and Eversley, 1986).
Table 8.4 gives an indication of the degree of social differentiation across London according to the characteristics available from the Population Census.
It might have been thought that the massive level of population decline experienced by Britain's cities since the 1960s, principally affecting their inner areas as it did, would have helped to reduce these problems.
After all, the planning policies of the earlier postwar period were explicitly designed to reduce congestion and overcrowding in these areas by decanting lower-paid people to the New Towns and redeveloping the inner areas at lower density.
As described in great detail by Hall et al.(1973), however, the success of these efforts was undermined by various factors including the inadequate scale of the original overspill programme, the influx of immigrants from the New Commonwealth and Pakistan, the 1960s baby boom, and a reluctance among both Tory-controlled shires and Labour-held city authorities to countenance the transfer of large numbers of low-income people from town to  country.
As a result, even during the peak years of labour mobility in the early 1970s, the outflows from the cities were dominated in both net and gross terms by people who were home-owners and had higher-paid jobs (Kennett, 1983).
Since then, as has previously been noted for interregional migration, the composition of migration streams from the cities has become even more highly skewed towards the better-off.
Data for Greater London's outflows to the rest of Britain, for instance, reveal the even more important role of the owner-occupied sector in 1981 compared to 1971 and also show that in 1981 there was virtually no net migration loss of people in the lower-paid occupations in both manual and non-manual groups (table 8.5).
Table 8.4 Inner and outer London contrasts
Table 8.5 Migration between London and the rest of Great Britain, 1970–71 and 1980–81, by socio-economic grouping and housing tenure (thousands)
Various factors thus appear to be at the root of the inner city problem, many of them similar in nature to those behind the problems underlying the North-South divide.
In the first place, even though the population of inner  city areas has declined markedly since the early 1970s, the job opportunities available to inner city residents have contracted even more rapidly.
Secondly, migration from the cities has in net terms been removing the types of people that are least affected by increasing unemployment.
Despite the fact that numerous vacancies for less-skilled work are reported to exist in outer city areas, particularly in South East England, a combination of a badly structured welfare system, high transport costs, and difficulties of moving house appears to constitute a major barrier to taking advantage of these opportunities.
In particular, the virtual absence of the private-rented sector in the suburbs and new growth areas, together with the rundown of public-sector housing construction, have made almost impossible a net transfer of lower-paid people out of the inner city areas in the 1980s.
Indeed, pre-existing opportunities have contracted as a result of the sale of council houses, which has proceeded at faster rates in more attractive suburban-type locations (Forrest and Murie, 1983; Kleinman and Whitehead, 1987), while the prices in the owner-occupied sector have risen so far that first-time buyers appear increasingly to be excluded from the housing market (NBS, 1986).
In these circumstances, it is not surprising to find that population loss from inner areas has been running at a lower rate in the 1980s and that the government's efforts at introducing more private investment have met with  some measure of success.
As mentioned in the previous section, there are sound reasons for the slowdown in big-city population decline.
They include the effect of rising divorce rates on the number of one-person households and single-parent families, which disproportionately seek accommodation in the rented sectors because of relatively low average incomes, but are also able to take advantage of the low-cost home ownership schemes introduced by the 1980 Housing Act and largely confined to the urban stress areas.
Further sources of inner city rejuvenation are derived from the bulge of school leavers and young adults who are traditionally drawn towards metropolitan centres and from the changing structure of the labour market.
In particular, the growth of financial and related services, and of the information economy in general , has encouraged young upwardly mobile professionals to buy into renovated inner city districts, particularly in London.
Indeed, according to Hamnett and Williams (1980), gentrification or ‘Chelseafication’ was already proceeding rapidly in London during the 1970s — to the extent that the proportion of professional, managerial and intermediate non-manual workers in Inner London's population increased by the same amount as for Greater London as a whole (Hamnett, 1986).
These developments do not, however, mean that the end of the inner city problem is in sight, but instead tend to mask its growing severity.
It is all too easy to make the mistake of treating it as a purely physical problem that can be overcome by renewal, as was discovered by costly experience in the USA during the 1960s and in Britain a decade later.
In reality, it is a social and economic problem which is not fixed to a particular geographical space but which can transfer itself from place to place if it is not tackled at its source.
One line of evidence is the fact that severe ‘inner city’ deprivation is no longer to be found just in older urban areas but also in the outer council-housing estates on the edges of cities which were built to house inner city residents displaced by renewal programmes (CES Ltd, 1985).
To the extent that the new private initiatives in inner city areas are geared to ‘outsiders’, they do nothing to ease the shortage of accommodation for the less wealthy indigenous residents who are increasingly trapped by the contraction of alternative options.
The plight of the latter is thrown into even sharper relief by the juxtaposition of considerable wealth and severe deprivation which result from these developments.
In common with the number of other world cities, London is characterized by a shift towards a bipolar social structure with a marked under-representation of the middle-income groups which dominate the suburban and outer city locales (Hall, 1986).
Unless firm steps are taken, the traditional residents of inner city areas are likely to become even more peripheral to mainstream national life and act as a drain on national economic growth rather than a resource contributing to it.
Conclusion: The Challenges of Population Redistribution and Associated Social Polarization
This chapter has argued that it is not only national population size, composition and behaviour that matter but also their changing patterns across regional and urban systems.
The reason for this is that few localities contain populations which closely replicate the national profile and even fewer record rates of change similar to the nation as a whole.
The long-term trends in population redistribution during the latter half of the twentieth century have broadly been serving to undo the principal features of population change in the nineteenth century when the North's share of national population increased and people concentrated into the major urban and industrial agglomerations.
The so-called ‘North-South drift’ and ‘urban-rural shift’have become particularly important issues over the past two decades, because with the slower rate of national population growth these forms of redistribution lead not only to relative decline but to an absolute fall in population numbers for many of the less dynamic areas.
These issues have been intensified by the fact that, because of the very restrictive conditions operating in the Britain of today, most notably those relating to the labour market and housing, the migration processes which are largely responsible for these shifts have proved more than normally selective in terms of the types of people involved.
Several implications arise from these developments.
In the first place, population decline means less than optimum use of the urban infrastructure built up during the major redevelopment phase of the later 1960s and 1970s.
Secondly, the increasing selectivity of longer-distance migration brings greater spatial polarization of socio-demographic groups.
There is, of course, nothing new about social segregation, whether by life-cycle stage, wealth or ethnic status; the geographical literature on this topic is extensive (see Herbert, 1972; Knox, 1982, for reviews).
Most attention in the past, however, has been given to residential differentiation within urban areas, whereas the current trends are operating on a much broader canvas, such that young school leavers are drawn to London from all over Britain, older people retire to remoter rural areas where they previously enjoyed holidays, and young married couples move not just to the suburbs but to smaller cities and towns situated at considerable distance from the major urban centres.
Because the British planning system reinforces a natural tendency towards ‘lumpy’ growth, individual places tend to grow rapidly for a relatively short time and then consolidate more gradually, with the result that a place takes on a particular profile which then becomes relatively ‘fossilized’.
The settlements developed under the 1946 New Towns Act provide an extreme example of this process because of rapid initial growth and often sharp cessation of  planned in-migration, leading to major age-structure imbalances which will continue to work themselves out well into the next century (Champion, Clegg and Davies, 1977).
In the short term, it may be very efficient to have an unbalanced socio-demographic structure since a full range of urban facilities may be unnecessary, but the serious longer term implications outweigh these temporary advantages.
Finally, it is important not to neglect the more insidious effects likely to arise from increased spatial polarization.
One is the way in which selective migration tends to lead to cumulative effects on the origin and destination areas, respectively the vicious circle of decline for those places being denuded of their younger and better qualified people and the virtuous circle of growth resulting from the acquisition of young couples and the upgrading of the labour force.
Another is the way in which the less mobile, whether living in declining regions or inner city areas, have tended to become trapped by their lack of resources, skills and housing options within labour markets which offer relatively few jobs and even poorer chances of career development.
Such concentrations of multiple deprivation contain their own built-in momentum that has been characterized as a ‘cycle of poverty’(Raynor et al., 1974).
If through such processes these populations become even more distinctive and ‘one-class’, there is a real danger of their becoming progressively more isolated.
Meanwhile, the existence of labour shortages in the most favoured parts of late 1980s Britain is evidence that opportunities remain, but lie beyond the grasp of the potentially available workforce.
A more effective matching of workers and jobs constitutes one of the major challenges facing central government in the final years of the twentieth century.
It was not faced squarely even in the heyday of regional policy, when measures placed much more emphasis on the mobility of industrial investment than on the movement of workers, and it has been almost completely ignored since the dismantling of regional planning in 1979.
The London area plays a pivotal role in national migration patterns (Flowerdew and Salt, 1979; Salt and Flowerdew, 1980), so policy developments relating to south-east England over the next few years will be crucial to the way in which urban and regional patterns of population distribution evolve in the foreseeable future.
If the housing market in southern England remains as tight as it stands in 1988, then the problems created by recent trends in social polarization are unlikely to diminish at any of the three scales treated in this chapter.
There is a clear need for a population-orientated strategy to complement and reinforce policies aimed at local and national economic restructuring, but, as is argued further in the next chapter, if such an approach is to stand a good chance of success much more attention must be given to the improvement of data sets suitable for monitoring population change at regional and urban scales and to the study of the causes and consequences of internal migration.
People and Services: Central Assessment of Local Needs
One of the most important uses of demographic data, particularly the Decennial Census, is in allocating funds from Central Government to Local Government and to the National Health Service.
The purpose of this chapter is to review how demographic and other information are used in determining expenditure needs, as assessed by Central Government.
As will become clear, the approaches used for Local Government and for the Health Service differ radically.
We present several criteria by which such allocation systems should be judged and indicate many failings, for which remedies can often be suggested.
The allocation procedures, especially for Local Government, are very complex and we cannot provide full details here (a more detailed account of the current system is given by Hobcraft, forthcoming; for a broader, historical sweep see Bennett, 1982; see also Department of the Environment, 1985, and Association of County Councils, 1985).
Instead, we concentrate upon some key components and examples, which serve to illustrate the issues and problems involved.
Local Government accounts for about one-quarter of all public expenditure in the United Kingdom.
Since 1981/2, Central Government has assessed the basic expenditure needs of Local Authorities through a complex formula for determining Grant Related Expenditure (GRE).
This central assessment of local needs totalled £21.2 milliards (i.e.£21 200 million) for England alone in 1985/6.
GRE forms a major component in the formula for determining the actual resource allocation, or the Block Grant (£8.5 milliards in England for 1985/6), which consists of the transfer from Central Government to augment the income that is derived from property rates.
When introduced, the new system was intended ‘to be more comprehensible, stable and equitable as between authorities’(Heseltine, 1980, as quoted in Bennett 1982).
Yet, by 1986, in the Green Paper Paying for Local Government we were told that ‘The Government is concerned, however, that GREs have been subject to frequent changes’(Department of the Environment, 1986b).
What went wrong so quickly?
I shall later argue that the  instability arose mainly from frequent policy changes by Central Government and from the imposition of cash limits on an inherently bottom-up system.
The broad philosophy underlying the system is not at fault, although the somewhat inevitable complexity may have led to a failure to grasp implications of changes in time to prevent the odder features of instability.
The National Health Service relies almost entirely upon Central Government assessment of its budgetary needs.
Since 1977/8, funding for hospital and community health services (about £9 milliards for England alone in 1985/6) has been determined according to a formula named after the acronym of the Resource Allocation Working Party (RAWP), which had the avowed aim of eventually achieving ‘equal opportunity of access to health care for people at equal risk’(DHSS, 1976b).
Since its inception, this procedure has been fiercely attacked on many occasions, including The Black Report (Townsend and Davidson, 1982) and The Health Divide (Whitehead, 1987) for failing to take account of morbidity and of social deprivation (see Mays and Bevan, 1987, for a review of the vast literature generated by the debate  on the use of the RAWP formula).
The formula is being subjected to a review by the NHS Management Committee.
Table 9.1 The main components of Grant Related Expenditure for England and Wales, 1985/6
Grant Related Expenditure
The key principle underlying the assessment of Grant Related Expenditure is to combine estimates of the basic unit cost of providing a service, as judged by Central Government, with estimates of the basic need for the service, which might be the population requiring the service or the physical requirements, such as road mileages or numbers of dwellings.
Thus the expenditure needs are built up from a whole series of estimates, referring to the many components of Local Government expenditure.
Basic expenditure needs for each Local Authority are assessed using over 60 major indicators of needs and associated unit costs, with some 200 indicators being used overall.
Table 9.1 provides a breakdown of the expenditure assessment for England in 1985/6 by very broad headings.
Demographic and social indicators are crucial components of most of these estimates.
Our treatment here focuses on examples where such inputs are important and pays less attention items such as actual expenditure and roads and transport, where demographic inputs matter less.
Central Government assessments of total basic expenditure needs for Local Authorities in England for 1985/6 ranged from £359 per head of population for Surrey to approximately £717 per head for Islington.
Some examples of the sources of major differences between authorities are given in table 9.2, which shows the contributions per head of total population from each of the main expenditure headings.
Figures are presented for Surrey, with the lowest GRE per head of any Authority, for three Authorities with fairly high assessed expenditure needs of around £500 per head (Cleveland, Knowsley and Waltham Forest), and for two  Authorities with among the highest of all assessed needs, at about £675 (Hackney and Westminster).
The final column of table 9.2 presents the range of assessed needs per head across all authorities for each expenditure heading.
The figures for the London Boroughs present several problems of comparison: the estimates for both education and socio-economic deprivation refer to the entire Inner London Education Authority (ILEA), rather than to the individual Boroughs; the estimates based on population density and for transport and recreation redistribution should be the larger of the two figures presented for comparative purposes, in order to include the provisions for the Metropolitan Police; finally, where relevant, we have added average expenditure assessments for the Greater London Council (GLC) to each London Borough, in order to obtain total figures.
The choice of 1985/6, rather than a more recent period, is deliberate, since the comparisons over time made later in this chapter would be precluded by    the discontinuity introduced for 1986/7, through the dismantling of the major Metropolitan Authorities, such as the GLC.
Table 9.2 Components of Grant Related Expenditure assessment, 1985/6 (£ per head of population
The estimated needs for education differ simply as a result of differing proportions of the total population being pupils.
Allocations under this heading are based upon estimates of actual numbers of pupils, with the result that discretionary expenditure on children above the minimum school leaving age is compensated, rather than adhering to a principle of assessing basic needs equitably.
A further adjustment (the ‘Assessment of Educational Needs’ component of the socio-economic deprivation figures, considered below) is intended to allow for varying requirements for special schooling and remedial teaching for deprived groups.
On the whole, there is very little variation between Authorities in the amounts per head allocated on the basis of total population figures, although Westminster provides a striking exception; the very large amount for Westminster derives from the large daytime population, since all provision for library expenditure for commuters is transferred to their place of work!
The quite complicated allowances for provision of expenditure based on different age groups result in almost no differentiation between authorities suggesting that considerable simplification would be in order.
The London Boroughs derive considerable extra assessed needs from their higher population densities, particularly when the figures are made more nearly comparable (those in parentheses); moreover, density is used in several of the other expenditure needs assessments and is probably one of the major factors in providing the higher assessed needs for London, especially Inner London, in comparison with other major Metropolitan Districts.
Rural Shires get slightly larger allocations for roads and there is generally small variation in the allocations for property and development, with Westminster again being unusual because of the large number of shops and restaurants requiring attention.
The next major expenditure heading refers to measures reflecting supposed socio-economic deprivation.
We shall return to this issue later, but it surprised me to discover that the population of Waltham Forest needed more expenditure per head for such deprivation than that of Cleveland and about the same amount as Knowsley; similar observations stem from the comparison of Hackney and Westminster, although this is hampered by including components referring to ILEA.
The London Boroughs again do rather well in terms of provision for transport and recreation (again using the figures in parentheses for comparative purposes), with these allocations being quite dependent upon population density.
The allocations for personal social services differ very substantially between authorities.
It is again perhaps surprising that needs in Waltham Forest are greater than in Knowsley and striking how much higher the estimated needs  are for Hackney than for Knowsley; part of the reason for the lowish assessment for Knowsley is due to the very low proportion of elderly, although this might easily be offset in principle by the atypically high proportions of children there.
We shall discuss these apparent anomalies more fully later.
The next two items refer to actual expenditures incurred, rather than estimated nominal needs.
Housing Revenue Account deficits are zero for most Authorities, but can be quite large; Camden had the highest figure per head in 1985/6, but the subsequent transfer of GLC deficits to individual Boroughs in the following year led to Tower Hamlets showing by far the largest deficit per head, at £286.
Several items appear under the ‘actual expenditure’ heading, including contributions to educational pools and debt servicing.
The final major item covers all allowances for greater costs incurred in London, including differences in salaries.
The notional expenditure level assessed by the GRE plays a vital role in the process of allocation for the Block Grant element of the Rate Support Grant, so that it is of considerable importance for the assessment procedure to be equitable.
A similar though perhaps simpler procedure is expected to be used in assessing expenditure needs for the allocation of central funds to Local Government under the proposed ‘community charge’.
The RAWP Procedure
The complexity of the client group/unit cost approach which is the basis for the GRE contrasts with the formula used to allocate the great majority of current expenditure to the National Health Service.
The main elements of the approach are fairly straightforward, although many subsidiary complexities exist.
Information is available from the Hospital In-Patient Enquiry (HIPE) on national bed-use rates by sex, age group and medical condition for non-psychiatric patients, where conditions are grouped according to the seventeen major Chapter headings of the International Classification of Diseases.
Similar, but more limited, national estimates are available for bed-use rates by psychiatric (mental illness) in-patients by age, sex and marital status.
Day and out-patient visit rates and psychiatric (mental handicap) in-patient bed-use rates are obtainable by age and sex.
Community health service use-rates are available by broad age groups.
These various rates are used in conjunction with the estimated age-sex (and marital status) distributions for Regional Health Authorities in order to derive expected bed-occupancy days (or visits) for each condition in each region.
These estimates thus assume a nationally undifferentiated level of disease prevalence or bed-occupancy.
The second key component in the RAWP procedure consists of an adjustment  which is intended to represent regional differentials in need for each service.
This adjustment depends solely on the age-sex (and marital status) Standardized Mortality Ratios (SMRs) for each of the 17 major Chapters of disease.
Table 9.3 shows the overall SMRs for 1972; these indicate, for example, that there was a 10 per cent relative excess mortality in the Northern Region and an 11 per cent relative advantage in East Anglia.
It is then assumed that these mortality measures correctly reflect more general health (or morbidity) differentials and, furthermore, that 10 per cent extra resources are needed to compensate for a 10 per cent excess risk .
There seems to be absolutely no evidence in favour of this second, crucial assumption (nor is there evidence against; the issue is remarkably unresearched and rarely even regarded as worth discussing; see Mays and Bevan, 1987).
Table 9.3 Differentials in health indicators for Standard Statistical Regions
The use of the SMRs as the sole measure of regional disparities in health needs has, not surprisingly, been the source of much criticism: put bluntly and unfairly, why reward incompetence, since health services are meant to save lives?
The Working Party did consider the possibility of using other measures of health (or morbidity), but gave them short shrift.
Thus ‘factors such as occupation, poverty, social class and pollution are likely to interact in ways which are not fully understood’(DHSS, 1976b, p. 15).
But the Working Party did not need to dally with morbidity indicators, since ‘the reasons for the pattern of differential Regional mortality are not wholly understood but it is believed that Regional differences in morbidity explain the greater  part of it and that statistics of relative differences in Regional morbidity, if they existed, would exhibit the same pattern as those for mortality’(DHSS, 1976b, p. 16).
If we examine the three morbidity indicators shown in table 9.3, which do exist in the RAWP report, we see cases where the differences are consistently larger than for the SMRs.
Wales, Yorkshire and Humberside, and East Midlands always fare worse on the morbidity indicators than on the SMRs; and West Midlands and the South-West always appear even more advantaged on these morbidity indicators.
Although the broad patterns of Regional differences may be  similar (and even fairly highly correlated) they are manifestly not absolutely the same.
Indeed, other things being equal and accepting the other aspects of the RAWP formula, the SMRs suggest that the worst region requires 24 per cent more resources than the best; each of the three morbidity indicators would suggest that much greater disparities in health and therefore funding needs existed, with the worst region requiring respectively, 110, 33 or 46 per cent more resources than the best.
It is remarkable that the Working Party could be so cavalier in ignoring its own evidence; it is perhaps even more surprising that no crash research programme was advocated in order to provide a solid base for the allocation of such a vast sum of money.
It is little short of a national disgrace that allocations are still being made using such a crude approach.
However, many of the severest critics of the RAWP formula seem to have adopted fallacious lines of argument.
There are very large and probably widening socio-economic differentials in mortality in Britain.
Most of the studies which show this are based on SMRs.
Clearly, the SMRs (as used in the RAWP formula) capture these differences rather well, so that a case cannot thus be made for inclusion of measure of socio-economic deprivation in the RAWP formula, as for example The Black Report (Townsend and Davidson, 1982) appears to argue.
However, there are a number of studies which do suggest that socio-economic characteristics are related to morbidity and to access to health services.
There is an urgent need for research to clarify whether socio-economic differentials in ill-health persist at the level of Health Authorities, once the SMRs have been controlled.
Without such research we shall never have a conclusive demonstration of the need (or lack thereof) to include other indicators in resource allocation to the NHS.
A serious extension of the simple analysis presented in the previous paragraph would be of more help than a thousand more studies documenting that socio-economic differentials in mortality exist.
Because the RAWP formula is only used to determine shares of the nationally allocated budget for the NHS, it has not suffered from the same instability of allocations for individual Regional Health Authorities that has occurred for Local Authorities.
It is less susceptible to tinkering with individual unit costs in order to make the total budget for a particular service conform to externally imposed cash limits.
However, this is also a major limitation of the  approach, which fails to capture explicit changes in unit costs and thus makes it far harder to discover what criteria are being used in order to reach the total budget.
The use of the RAWP formula also tends to rigidify the allocation of resources between different specialisms, and thus reflects past expenditure patterns rather than an explicit assessment of needs.
The principles underlying the formula for GRE seem preferable in this respect.
The previous paragraph is not intended to suggest that there have been no problems with the allocation of funds through RAWP.
At the time of writing (in early 1988), there is a commonly recognized ‘crisis’ in the funding of the National Health Service.
Much of the debate properly focuses upon the total amount allocated for the NHS, rather than the RAWP procedure which is used to share most of this money out.
But some of the problems, particularly those of provision of hospital services in inner-city areas, do arise from the progressive reallocation of funds since the introduction of RAWP.
Table 9.4 shows the percentage difference of allocations for Regional Health Authorities from their ‘RAWP Targets’ for four funding years, each three years apart.
The goal of achieving equal provision for equal need would be met (on RAWP criteria) when allocations actually equal the targets.
In the early period of the application of the formula, Oxford RHA was rapidly brought down  to RAWP target levels and Merseyside RHA brought up.
It seems that these two RHAs were singled out as examples, since elsewhere the pace of change was slow.
Table 9.4 Percentage distance of Regional Health Authority allocations from RAWP revenue targets
In the three years from 1983/4 to 1986/7, this situation changed and the Conservative government began to make the RAWP targets ‘bite’.
This has led to particularly large reductions in the ‘over-allocations’ to the four Thames RHAs, at a time when London was undergoing further population loss.
The combination of population loss and greater implementation of the RAWP criteria for achieving equity has led to substantial relative losses of resources for the District Health Authorities covering Inner London.
These Districts contain the most prestigious teaching hospitals, which are staffed by the medical establishment.
Serious issues of equity of provision arise in this context, since major cut-backs in relative resources are likely to be destructive of excellence, which serves in part as a national resource.
Yet it is hardly convenient for patients in areas with growing population to have to travel to Inner London for routine treatment.
And it is surely time that the relatively under-resourced areas of England had a fairer allocation of resources to help fight their manifestly worse health and survival chances.
Perhaps the only viable solution to these problems is to remove one or more major teaching hospitals from London and establish regional centres of excellence.
The Quality of Indicators
We now turn to a discussion of a series of issues associated with the quality of indicators used.
As already shown, these issues are important for the RAWP formula, but the examples considered will be drawn mainly from the procedures used in assessing Grant Related Expenditure.
Estimation of unit costs is always extremely difficult, particularly when the aim is, quite properly, to assess the basic cost of providing a necessary service, rather than the average discretionary expenditure on all service provision.
Such a goal usually makes it almost impossible to use past expenditure levels in estimating unit costs and considerable ingenuity is often required, which sometimes regrettably leads to estimates which are almost pure fabrication.
Although we shall return to unit costs briefly, the main focus of this chapter is on the use (and abuse) of demographic and related data, which feature in population estimates and in the derivation of specific deprivation indicators and of estimates of risk groups or client populations.
There are several criteria by which the specific quality of indicators should be judged, including timeliness ,accuracy ,reliability ,consistency ,specificity , and the choice and construction of the components involved .
Elements of the formulae used in assessing Grant Related Expenditure needs can be shown to fail by all these criteria.
Such failure should, wherever possible, be rectified and a number of suggestions are made.
The failings may also justify some simplification, if only to allow greater resources to be devoted to the most important indicators.
But the failings are not a reason for abandoning a  system which is based upon very reasonable principles, although not always working in practice.
Timeliness of inputs is a major problem in the GRE formulae.
Basic population estimates are updated annually, but heavy reliance is placed upon very dated sources, most notably the 1981 Census, which is already nearly seven years out of date and will be eleven or twelve years old before the 1991 Census results become available.
Sudden and infrequent changes of many inputs clearly undermine stability.
Several inputs used in assessing the population over age 65 ‘at risk’ of requiring personal social services are derived from the 1977/9 National Dwelling and Housing Survey (NDHS).
For example, each person aged 65 and over who lives alone and has mobility problems attracts £729 for personal social service provision, which is by far the largest component in the relevant formula.
Yet the proportion of the total population aged 65 and over in this category is estimated from the NDHS for each Authority and is now ten years out of date, during which period there has been a significant increase in the numbers of elderly, including the very old.
Accuracy of inputs is also crucial.
The 1981 Census was estimated to have been under-counted by about half a per cent(around two hundred thousand people) in England and Wales as a whole and by about two and a half per cent in Inner London (about fifty five thousand people).
The population estimates used in the GRE formulae include a rough and ready adjustment for this under-count, but other Census-based indicators are not adjusted (e.g. single parent families and privately renting households, both of which are differentially under-counted; see Britton and Birch, 1985).
Mid-year population estimates are derived through a continued and complicated updating procedure, with the most recent (adjusted) Census estimates of population as a base.
Comparisons of the 1981 estimates (derived using the 1971 Census as a starting point) with the results from the 1981 Census showed some moderately large discrepancies.
The total population estimates for Districts in 1981, based on updates from the 1971 Census, were generally accurate to within two per cent, but the error was in excess of five per cent in some cases (Thatcher, 1985).
For sub-divisions into broad age-groups within Districts the average error was about five per cent.
The numbers of elderly people were considerably overestimated in London during the late 1970s: this led to an understatement of the SMRs, with consequent loss of health resources; it also resulted in a relative over-allocation for personal social services.
Given that retroactive adjustment (especially downwards) is politically infeasible it is important to achieve higher quality estimates.
A third, closely related issue is reliability of indicators.
An example is provided in assessing the needs for Personal Social Services for children under the age of five, which primarily consist of residential care and foster care.
A  notional £75 million per year is shared out on the basis of a regression formula derived from a 1974 survey, which included only 75 children identified as being in need of personal social services, the dependent variable (see Derbyshire, 1987, for a fuller discussion).
A very limited range of deprivation indicators were used and at least one of the regression coefficients included in the final model is not statistically significant.
Standard errors are large on all the coefficients used in the regression equations for estimating both the population at risk and the unit costs and this could lead to considerable potential error in the estimated expenditure needs for individual Authorities.
Larger samples and a better choice of indicators are required.
Indicators should also be specific .
To continue with the example of assessing expenditure needs for Personal Social Services for the under fives lone-parent families are the main source of the population at risk, but there is no attempt to target the risk group more specifically.
For example, the DHSS maintain records of lone-parent families in receipt of Supplementary Benefit, who are probably at higher risk of requiring support from the Social Services.
It would be possible for these records to be analysed in order to produce statistics at the Local Authority level, which could then be used to improve the specificity of the estimates.
As was shown in chapter 4, some 55 per cent of lone-parent families are in receipt of Supplementary Benefits, suggesting that such specificity could be important in this instance, especially since these poorer families will not be proportionately distributed among all Local Authorities.
Many further examples of this need for greater specificity could be given.
Formulae are often heavily constrained by lack of available data at the Local Authority level, which could be remedied at some cost through the ‘Resource Allocation Survey’ which is later advocated.
In addition to being consistent over time, it is clearly desirable that indicators used within a single year be consistent.
Yet the estimates of the incidence of lone-parent families as used in various formulae for the 1985/6 GRE assessment are mutually inconsistent and also inconsistent with the estimates used in 1983/4.
In 1983/4, estimates of the numbers of lone-parent families seem consistently and wrongly to have been based upon early tabulations from the 1981 Census, which identified 414 298 households in Great Britain containing one or more children aged under 16 living with only one adult.
But the best official estimates for the number of lone-parent families in 1981 suggest that there were in fact some 900 000 such families in Great Britain (see Haskey, 1986, who indicates that an estimate of 825 000 lone-parent families for 1978 was given to Parliament in 1981).
Thus the estimates used in the GRE for 1983/4 were less than 50 per cent of the likely true figures.
For the assessment year 1985/6, the Department of the Environment continued to use these raw Census figures, which show just over a million people in one-parent families (very poorly defined), in their index of an area's social conditions.
In assessing additional needs for educational expenditure (AEN) and the needs for Personal Social Services for children aged less than 17, both the Department of Education and Science and the Department of Health and Social Security use better estimates, which give a total of nearly 1.5 million children in lone-parent families.
Issues of reliability also arise here, since the adjusted national figures are based upon a grossing up of estimates from the General Household.
Haskey (1986) provides estimates of the confidence interval around the adjusted estimate for 1984 of 940 000 families of plus or minus 60 000 families.
It is not clear whether these are true sampling errors, which take account of the clustering of lone-parent families; if not, then the confidence interval would be considerably larger.
The sums of money allocated on the basis of these unreliable estimates are large: each additional child aged 5–17 in a lone-parent family attracts just over a thousand pounds in GRE.
Use of the same proportionate sampling error would suggest a 95 per cent confidence interval of plus or minus 74 000 children in this age-group, leading to a possible error in the GRE under this heading of about –75 million.
Issues of consistency of approach also arise in the choice and construction of indicators , especially those relating to deprivation.
The Department of Education and Science use the most transparent and crude approach to the assessment of deprivation.
For each primary pupil estimated as being in a household where the child, or the head of household, was born outside the United Kingdom, Eire, the United States or the Old Commonwealth, the Authority receives an extra £274; if the pupil is estimated to be in a household which is lacking amenities or overcrowded, is in a one-parent household, has four or more dependent children under the age of 16, where the head is semi-skilled, unskilled or a farm worker, or whose family is in receipt of Supplementary Benefit, the authority accrues an additional £137 on each count.
Multiple deprivation is therefore treated as being strictly additive, which is questionable.
The certain selection-out of advantaged families into private education is ignored, since proportions of disadvantaged pupils are derived from Census figures covering all children aged under 17.
A child qualifying on every indicator would attract an extra £958 to its Local Authority, compared with the basic £825 for each primary pupil.
Similar but slightly larger amounts are allocated in the same way for secondary pupils.
The eventual impact of this redistribution is to alter the amount allocated per primary school pupil from the national average of £950 by fairly small amounts.
ILEA gets £1041, or an extra 9.6 per cent per pupil.
Outer London gets an extra 1.4 per cent, the Metropolitan Districts an extra 0.6 per cent , and the Shires lose 0.9 per cent (or £9) per pupil.
The maximum difference, of £179 per pupil (or 19 per cent) occurs between Newham and North Yorkshire.
In contrast, the estimation of basic spending needs for Personal Social Services is far more complex.
For example, the formula for children aged  5–17 is based on elaborate regression equations, which are presented in a fairly obscure way and involve 12 indicators and 25 regression coefficients, including an interaction term.
But a single indicator dominates the equations, namely the estimated number of children aged 5–17 who are living in a lone-parent family: each such child accrues a thousand pounds.
The average sum allocated for every child aged 5–17 by these children in single-parent families ranges from a minimum of about £100 to a maximum of just over £300; a range of £200.
Each of the several other indicators used affects the total allocation per child by much less, with overall ranges of £12 to £18.
A final adjustment procedure, involving four indicators, could alter the total amount by up to 30 per cent.
Once again, there is considerable imprecision in the various regression formulae used and in some of the indicators.
This is dramatized in table 9.5, which presents the results of setting each coefficient at plus or minus two standard errors in order to illustrate the potential range of estimates for expenditure needs for an authority; it must be stressed that this simple procedure overstates the true variability, but we do not have available sufficient information to enable a better assessment.
The starting point is an estimate of the nominal expenditure of £261 per child aged 5–17 that would be attracted by an average Borough in Inner London, simply on the basis of the estimated incidence of lone-parent families.
If the regression coefficients for estimating the population ‘at risk’ of requiring Personal Social Services are set at plus or minus two standard errors, this estimated expenditure need might range from £167 to £3 56 per child aged 5–17.
Secondly, the estimated number of children in lone-parent families is subject to considerable error, through under-counting in the Census and through the large sampling errors involved in grossing up (at the national level, which may in itself be inappropriate for individual Authorities) from the General Household  Survey.
As a rough and ready indication of the possible errors here, we allow for an error of 15 per cent in either direction, which may be conservative.
On its own, this range of error could produce estimates of needed expenditure per child in an Authority of £222 to £300; if combined with the previous range of errors, the maximal errors might range from £142 to £410 per child.
Finally, the regression equations used to assess unit costs also have large standard errors, which could lead to extreme estimates of £199 to £324, with other estimates at the mean.
In the worst possible case, with all errors operating in the same direction and all being at plus or minus two standard errors (a most unlikely occurrence and an overstatement of the true joint confidence intervals), the estimated expenditure needs might range from £108 to £509 for every child aged 5–17.
Such uncertainty in the allocation procedures (even if considerably overstated) is extremely worrying.
But the approach used has considerable advantage in principle over the cruder system used for educational deprivation, since there is an attempt to relate expenditure needs directly to deprivation indicators, rather than adoption of an ad hoc procedure with little justification other than expediency.
Table 9.5 Personal Social Services for children aged 5–17: contributions (in pounds per child aged 5–17) to GRE from lone-parent families, assessed at average values for Inner London
A crucial issue in estimating groups at risk of needing a service and in predicting relative costs is the choice of explanatory variables .
The desire to avoid using past expenditure in assessing need means that attention has often to be confined to those indicators which are easily available at the Local Authority level, but the choice often appears to be arbitrarily restricted.
The indicators used are often extremely remote surrogates for true risk, and multiple deprivation is rarely treated as interactive rather than additive.
All too often, resort is made to the standard measures of housing deprivation which are easily available from the Census, without any apparent consideration of whether these are sufficiently specific for the purpose at hand.
Many of the difficulties of timeliness, accuracy, reliability, specificity and of the construction and choice of indicators would be eased very considerably if Central Government were to institute a very large continuing ‘Resource Allocation’ survey , with a sample of perhaps two to ten per cent of the population in each year.
Such a survey would probably serve to replace much of the need for a Decennial Census once established and would provide up-to-date estimates.
An annual expenditure of some £3 million to £10 million might be involved, compared with about £40 million for the 1981 Census.
Given that results would be used to allocate over £20 000 million per year, simply for the National Health Service and for the Block Grant, such a seemingly large expenditure would almost certainly be justified by improved efficiency in targeting expenditure.
An ongoing survey would be much more flexible, permitting more rapid introduction of new measures and much wider content than the Census.
When questions, for example on morbidity, had been validated in the General Household Survey, it would be possible to include them in the  Resource Allocation Survey.
More ‘difficult’ measures could be obtained periodically, but more frequently than once every ten years.
Where necessary, the precision of estimates could be improved by using information from several successive years.
Such a large Survey would of course serve many other governmental purposes.
Widespread access by researchers would undoubtedly generate findings which could be used to improve the precision with which resources were targeted.
Broader Criteria for Resource Allocation Procedures
It is more or less impossible to consider formulae used for resource allocation without paying close attention to issues of stability ,equity ,transparency and public accountability .
A system must work, in the sense of providing stable and predictable funding for individual Authorities, otherwise prudent planning is impossible to achieve.
It must work well, in the sense of providing an equitable allocation, so that those in need really benefit.
And it must be seen to work well, which requires the system to be transparent enough for public scrutiny to take place.
One problem is that these goals often conflict.
For example, deprivation is associated with many factors, meaning that any equitable system loses transparency.
If new research demonstrates a hitherto unknown link between needs and an available indicator, equity demands a change to the system, but this serves to undermine stability to an extent.
But these criteria are also sometimes mutually reinforcing.
For example, a just procedure may well require considerable complexity, but if it is stable over time, resources can be invested in making the procedure more transparent through better presentation of the justification for a formula and of the import of complex formulae and their inherent uncertainties in cash terms.
Public accountability and transparency might be assisted by opening up the negotiation process between Central and Local government to participation by disinterested, knowledgeable parties and to non-expert advisors who could seek to ensure transparency, which is manifestly lacking in current procedures, particularly for the assessment of Grant Related Expenditure.
As was shown in table 9.2, Cleveland, Knowsley and Waltham Forest were all assessed as having similar expenditure needs for 1985/6, at about £500 per head of population; Hackney and Westminster have more or less equal assessments at about £670 per head.
Is this equitable ?
Table 9.6 shows several indicators used in the derivation of GRE elements which are related to deprivation.
By many indicators Knowsley is as deprived as Hackney and both Knowsley and Cleveland are more deprived than Waltham Forest.
Yet the GRE figures do not reflect this.
London, especially Inner London, gains considerably from the heavy  weight given to population density and to a range of household characteristics derived from the Census, which are widely used in the redistributional formulae.
Scant weight is given to indices of economic deprivation, such as unemployment levels and proportions of children or families in receipt of Supplementary Benefit.
Needs for Personal Social Services for children are assumed to be predominantly determined by being in a lone-parent family, regardless of the economic circumstances of the family.
Table 9.6 Some indicators of deprivation
Local Authority housing usually satisfies most of the basic criteria used to assess housing deprivation in the Census, for example being self-contained, having baths and inside toilets and avoiding overcrowding.
Yet many of the poorest families, at risk of most forms of deprivation, are to be found in such housing.
In particular, areas like Knowsley and Tower Hamlets, which contain vast tracts of the poorest council housing, do not show up as especially in need of redistributional funding under the formulae used in the assessment of GRE.
In contrast, the privately rented, multiple-occupied flats of affluent young professionals in parts of Inner London (e.g. Camden or Kensington and Chelsea) would show up as deprived on several of the standard Census-based indicators.
The lack of specificity in these indicators leads to manifest failure to achieve equity.
The use of better measures of (housing) deprivation, such as the Census-based ACORN (A Classification of Residential Neighbourhoods) or PINPOINT schemes would undoubtedly be preferable to the current indicators.
Table 9.7 illustrates this point.
The five ‘most deprived’ Authorities are identified under several criteria.
The first three are measures from the GRE assessment, all of which rely heavily on the ‘standard’ measures of housing characteristics from the Census.
It is noteworthy that only London Authorities appear as most deprived by these criteria.
The third item, which simply takes the sum of the four indicators most commonly used as measures of (housing) deprivation in the GRE formulae, identifies Kensington and Chelsea, Camden, and Hammersmith and Fulham as being among the five ‘most deprived’ Authorities in England: while these Boroughs contain pockets of deprivation and of poverty, it is clearly a nonsensical ranking.
The fourth item in table 9.7 shows the five Authorities identified as having the worst housing conditions under the ACORN scheme, which includes multiple criteria and identifies four mutually exclusive groups of housing areas associated with particular deprivation, each of which could be treated separately in the allocation of resources: poor terraced housing, the poorest Local Authority housing, areas with a high concentration of multiple — occupancy and of people of Asian origin, and areas with a high concentration of multi-let property with a significant proportion of people of Afro-Caribbean origin.
The five ‘most deprived’ Authorities now include Liverpool and Knowsley and three of the poorest areas of Inner London.
Even if this classification scheme could be improved upon, it clearly serves far better than the traditional indicators in identifying those areas most in need of extra resources, in order to compensate for poverty and deprivation, through educational and personal social service provision.
Given that these indicators already exist for Local Authorities, it is surely indefensible to fail to explore their potential for improving the equity of resource allocation, and perhaps surprising that they have not yet been incorporated in the formulae for assessing GRE.
Similar arguments might be advanced with respect to the measures of economic deprivation, which are presented as items five and six in table 9.7 and are given extremely low weight in the assessment of GRE, compared with the multiple use of housing indicators and of measures of ethnic origin.
Table 9.7 The five ‘most deprived’ Local Authorities according to several criteria
The same points can also be made in the context of assessment of needs other than for the GRE.
For example, the Department of the Environment makes heavy use of similar housing indicators to those used in assessing GRE and little use of economic indicators in deriving its ‘Z-scores’, presented as item seven in table 9.7, which are used to identify special areas.
These suffer from the further problem of treating all deprivation as relative and scaling all measures to the same variance (as is also done for the index of an ‘area's social conditions’ used in the assessment of GRE).
Clearly it is unreasonable to assume that being one standard deviation above the mean in terms of any indicator corresponds to the same amount of deprivation.
If resources are being allocated in order to compensate deprivation, the absolute amount of deprivation must be relevant.
Stability has manifestly failed to be achieved in recent years for the allocation of the Rate Support Grant.
The previous system was correctly abandoned in 1981 because of absurd instability (see Bennett, 1982) and a major goal of the new approach through the assessment of GRE was stability.
Much turbulence has, of course, been introduced into Local Authority finance in recent years by frequent changes in the system for actual grant allocation, including tapering, claw-backs, targets, and rate-capping.
But changes in the details of the assessment of basic expenditure needs through the GRE have also led to remarkable (and indefensible) instability over recent years.
Since our concern here has been exclusively with assessment of Grant Related Expenditure and not with the subsequent use (and possible misuse) of these  estimates in the actual allocations of money to Local Authorities, we shall concentrate on instability of the GRE.
Table 9.8 Changes in unit costs (per cent)
In table 9.8 are shown some examples of the changes in unit costs which were used in the GRE formulae over the short period from 1983/4 to 1986/7.
One reason that so few indicators can be shown is the all too frequent changes in the formulae used for allocation of elements of the GRE.
The disparities in overall changes in assumed unit costs over a three-year period are quite remarkable.
The unit costs associated with the fire service rose substantially (as did those for the police, which are harder to recover on a consistent basis over time within the GRE system, but responsible for far more expenditure).
These changes reflected Government policy of increasing resources and wages for the police and fire service.
Paradoxically, we might note that these services were responsible for a major portion of expenditure of the Metropolitan Authorities and the rises in expenditure incurred through policy of central Government were used as one of the rationales for dismantling these Authorities.
Primary pupil costs also rose substantially during this three-year period.
At the other extreme the unit costs associated with dealing with deprived secondary school pupils (AEN) were actually reduced in the first year shown here.
The nominal costs of collecting domestic rates were also reduced between 1983/4 and 1984/5 and rose very little over the whole period.
The unit costs used in assessing expenditure needs for indictable offences were reduced overall during the three year period.
Do these major differences in changes in assumed unit costs over time stem from a careful study of differential inflation and actual changes in expenditure?
Studies based upon actual expenditure costs are ruled out in the context of the GRE, since these may reflect discretionary differences in service provision and efficiency.
So where do the unit costs come from?
For many services, these unit costs were undoubtedly determined by arbitrarily imposed cash limits, with the total target expenditure on the item being divided by the  estimated client-group size (or other measure of amount of service provision).
Such a procedure interferes with the inherently bottom-up nature of the GRE process.
Some changes also probably represent deliberate tinkering with the formulae in order to reallocate funds between classes of authority, in accord with sometimes transient political priorities.
Table 5.9 Examples of instability in GRE per head
Table 9.9 shows the year-on-year percentage changes in the assessed GRE per head for each of the major classes of Local Authority and for several individual Authorities.
Within each class of authority, the rank of each individual Authority's change is shown.
Over the first year shown, Inner London fared relatively well, with an average overall increase in assessed expenditure needs of 7.2 per cent, and Outer London and the Shire Counties had relatively small increases overall (2.6 and 2.7 per cent respectively).
For the following period, from 1983/4 to 1984/5, the Shire Counties did disproportionately well and Inner London and the Shire Districts fared badly.
The  changes from 1984/5 to 1985/6 saw Inner London showing substantial relative rises in assessed expenditure needs again, with the Shire Districts again doing relatively poorly.
Why did costs of service provision for Inner London Boroughs go up relatively fast in the first and third periods and barely increase in the intermediate year?
Clearly, this had nothing to do with real costs of service provision or true basic expenditure needs.
On the contrary, the main alterations were driven by political considerations.
In 1983/4 it was deemed important to redirect resources to inner-city areas, following the race riots (for example the weight given to the ethnic indicator in the assessment of educational needs for special remedial provision was doubled).
This shift of resources caused a political outcry from the Shire Counties, so that formulae were then manipulated in order to appease this pressure.
The following year it was the inner-cities' turn once again, especially Inner London.
Externally imposed short-term alterations of this kind in the assessment of GRE clearly undermine prudent housekeeping by local government.
Let us now turn to examining the impact of these fluctuations upon individual Authorities.
Within Inner London, Lewisham experienced the largest increase in GRE per head in the first period, an intermediate change in the next period, and the smallest increase in the third period.
In contrast Lambeth had one of the smaller changes in the first period, the second largest in the next, and the smallest increase in the third year.
Within Outer London, the experience of Bromley and of Newham are almost mirror images: Bromley did relatively badly in the first and third periods and well in the second, while Newham gained in the first and third periods, but had the smallest increase in the second.
Among the Metropolitan Districts, the experience of Liverpool, North Tyneside, and Coventry is most curious: each had relatively very small increases in two of the three years, combined with a relatively very large increase in one year.
Furthermore, the year of relative glut was different in each case.
It surely requires Machiavellian skills or gross incompetence to introduce such remarkable instability into formula funding, although some of the successive changes undoubtedly represent responses to the political pressure from those Local Authorities which suffered severe losses.
Shire Counties fared just as strangely, with both Cumbria and Northumberland being at the extreme low end of the ranking in change among these authorities for the first two years and yet requiring one of the largest increases in the third.
This contrasts with Oxfordshire, which fared very well in the first period and very badly in the next two, and with Somerset, which had the smallest increase in the first period, followed by among the largest in each of the next two years.
Perhaps the most astonishing changes of all occur for the average changes for Shire Districts within each County.
The Districts of Bedfordshire had the  largest increase of any in the first period (10.3 per cent), followed by the second largest decrease (-9.0 per cent ) in the second period, and a middling change in the third.
Cleveland's Districts suffered even more from the vagaries of the system, experiencing the second largest increase (8.9 per cent), followed by the largest decrease (-13.2 per cent ) and then the largest increase (20.8 per cent ).
In contrast, the Districts of Warwickshire experienced very little actual change in their assessed expenditure needs per head over the three years, with relatively small increases and decreases, although their ranking alters dramatically.
All of this instability, it must be emphasized, occurred in the supposedly ‘objective’ assessment of basic expenditure needs for Local Authorities.
These assessments form a crucial input to the determination of the actual funding allocation to each Local Authority through Block Grant.
Furthermore, these figures have been used in penalizing Local Authorities for exceeding expenditure targets set by central Government and for rate-capping.
It is vital to maintaining a credible system of funding local government that absurd fluctuations in the most basic assessment of expenditure needs be avoided.
Conclusion
Somehow, a stronger system of checks and balances and of public scrutiny in order to ensure greater objectivity must be established.
While central Government will certainly wish to exercise its rights to alter spending priorities from time to time, even their own goals will not often be achieved by fiddling with elements of an extremely complicated formula, which introduces unexpected as well as intended change.
The assessment of basic expenditure needs should urgently be removed from the political arena.
If, however, central Government wants to identify further,discretionary needs for Local Authority expenditure over and above this common core, funds can be provided  explicitly for such programmes in a more visible way.
Further instability in Local Government finance will undoubtedly be introduced through a shift to the ‘community charge’.
In Paying for Local Government (Department of the Environment, 1986b), we are promised a new, simpler set of formulae for the assessment of GRE, which will again have stability as a major goal.
No doubt that shift will, once again, introduce severe anomalies in the continuity of assessed basic spending needs of individual Local Authorities.
There is an opportunity for a subsequent improvement, if the system is freed from the worst effects of political interference, which should be made more explicit.
If the formulae are simplified, it may become easier to maintain consistency and public scrutiny and, perhaps, to avoid unforeseen consequences of changes to the elements of the procedure.
Improving the quality and relevance of the inputs to the procedure is undoubtedly an important part of the process of achieving a better system of resource allocation.
A major new Resource Allocation survey would help improve the stability, equity and transparency of the system, if combined with stronger checks against unforeseen  consequences of political interference.
The Changing Form of Women's Economic Dependency
Alongside the changes in the British family reviewed in chapter 3, there have been some dramatic changes during the twentieth century in British women's work.
These changes in female employment are commonly supposed to have influenced rates of family formation and dissolution.
Before such questions can be properly investigated, it is worth asking if the changes do really amount to a revolution in the economic roles of men and women.
The negative answer proposed in this chapter raises some prior questions about policies intended to treat men and women as equals.
If the presumption of wives' financial dependence on their husbands is not outdated in the 1980s, equitable treatment of the sexes in tax, pensions, social security and the financial arrangements on divorce may not be achieved by equal treatment.
If the ‘emancipation’ of women has yet to run its full course, there should be limits to the extent one would expect it to have influenced demographic trends.
It is argued here that economic autonomy is still a long way off for most British women.
Replacing the old presumption of financial dependence upon husbands with one of individual self-sufficiency would be justified if men and women had equivalent earning power.
This would be going further than women have in fact come.
There are financial handicaps to being female which keep most women either dependent on men or disadvantaged or both.
Sex-blind treatment appeals to women's self-respect, and is fine for those who have successfully seized new opportunities in education and the labour market, but as long as equal treatment extends only to paid work, it does not give proper recognition to the contribution and needs of most women.
They still subordinate their cash earning potential to the demands on their unpaid time and energy from their role in the family.
Society still needs a large number of its adult citizens to give caring for others a higher priority than a conventional career.
The expectation that such people will normally be  female is self-fulfilling, but may be neither equitable nor efficient.
This chapter reviews the evidence about the changes and continuities in the role of women and men in the British economy, and summarizes research findings about the direct and indirect effect of gender on women's earning power.
It concludes by drawing lessons for effective policy to bring about equality of opportunity for each sex, and by reviewing the evidence for effects of the changes to date on family formation in Britain.
Changes Over Time
Table 10.1 summarizes some of the changes in women's work, or at least its statistical visibility, over the twentieth century.
At censuses before the Second World War, men outnumbered women in the paid workforce by more than two to one, by the mid-1980s the ratio approaches even numbers with women accounting for 40 per cent of the labour force at the 1981 census and, in 1987, 45 per cent of employees in employment.
Table 10.1 The trend in women's participation in the paid labour force in twentieth-century Britain
The participation rate of women of working age doubled between the 1921 and 1981 (from 30.6 per cent to 61.1 per cent among those aged 20–64).
For married women under 60 there was a five-fold increase from 12 per cent in 1931 to 57 per cent at the 1981 census.
The contrasts sound even more spectacular if the changes are expressed in terms of experience over a lifetime.
In the pre-war world which informed  Beveridge's design for the Social Insurance system (Beveridge, 1942), a woman's labour force career usually ended upon marriage and work outside the home was normally treated as incompatible with domestic duty.
During the post-war period women ceased to quit employment on marriage.
Their withdrawal became temporary and increasingly associated with the presence of young children.
Motherhood replaced marriage as the occasion for leaving paid work and seldom marked the end of a woman's labour force membership.
The increased participation rates from the 1950s to the 1980s have been largely accounted for by reductions in the gaps in employment records around childbearing.
Mothers of younger and younger children have been taking on the dual burden of paid work and child rearing (see Hunt, 1968; Martin and Roberts, 1984; Joshi, 1985).
The Limits to Change
Occupational segregation
There are also some respects in which little has changed.
Men's and women's jobs remain largely separate.
Women's employment has always been, and remains, concentrated in a few occupational categories (see Hakim, 1979: Joseph, 1983).
At the 1981 Census three quarters of all female workers were in just four of the sixteen occupational orders, where they outnumbered men: personal services (e.g. cleaners, hairdressers); clerical; professional workers in education, health and welfare (i.e. school teachers and nurses) and selling (mainly shop assistants).
The majority of female workers work only with other women — 63 per cent of women working with others in the 1980 Women and Employment Survey (Martin and Roberts, 1984, p. 28).
Male workplaces are even more segregated (81 per cent of the husbands interviewed in the same survey in 1980 had no colleagues of the opposite sex doing the same type of work).
There are some ‘integrated’ exceptions among the younger membership of some professions (see Crompton and Sanderson, 1986), but women are still very rare in ‘top jobs’.
For example, in 1984, fewer than 3 per cent of university professors were women.
At that, time a similar proportion of Members of Parliament were female.
This nearly doubled to 6 per cent when 40 female MPs were returned in the 1987 General Election.
Among those jobs classified as Social Class 1 by the Registrar General at the 1981 Census, only one in ten was held by women.
There is, on the other hand, a remarkable concentration of female part-time employees in a few mainly low-status occupations, seldom followed by men.
Part-time Employment
Another qualification that should be made to the picture of a rising trend in women's paid work is that, as can been seen in figure 10.1, participation in full-time employment has not risen.
All of the post-war increase in employment is accounted for by part-time jobs.
This means that in aggregate man-hours of paid work still outnumbered woman-hours by about two to one.
Figure 10.1 The trend in female economic activity rates among women aged 20–64, Great Britain, 1921–81
Unpaid Domestic Work
The picture about paid work must be set alongside that of the unpaid domestic work where the ratio of woman to man hours is reversed.
Jonathan Gershuny's preliminary estimates of time spent in unpaid work (from the ESRC's time budget study in 1983/4, Gershuny et al., 1986, Table 2) are  that women averaged 16 hours per week more than men.
The gap does seem to have been wider in the past (26 hours per week in 1961, for example) but these time budgets confirm common sense and findings from the Women and Employment Survey that women do more unpaid work than men.
Even where both spouses do full-time paid work, wives generally do more of the housework, particularly child-care.
It is also noteworthy that the policy of community care of the handicapped relies almost exclusively on the unpaid caring work of wives, daughters and mothers (Equal Opportunities Commission, 1982; and Finch and Groves, 1983).
The Relative Economic Status of Men and Women
Figure 10.2 Women's wages relative to men's, hourly earnings, full-time manual jobs
As with men's share of unpaid household work, indicators such as the ratio of women's to men's rates of pay, plotted in figure 10.2, and women's share in household earnings, have shown some changes but still display a gulf between the sexes.
Taking data on all full-time manual workers, figure 10.2 shows that the ratio of women's hourly pay to men's suddenly rose in the mid-1970s from the level it seems to have previously held over recorded history, 60 per cent, to over 70 per cent in 1977, a level more or less maintained subsequently.
The pattern of change over the 1970s and 1980s is similar if one considers different definitions of pay or broader classes of worker.
This once-for-all  improvement in the relative wage of women coincided with the implementation of the Equal Pay Act, and this is generally thought to be more than a coincidence (see Zabalza and Tzannatos, 1985).
The contribution of wife's earnings to total household earnings showed some increase during the 1970s and then stabilized.
Amongst non-retired married couples with an earning wife, she brought in, on average, around 30 per cent of their joint earnings — 37 per cent where there were no dependent children, or 25 per cent where there were children, according to the 1985 Family Expenditure Survey (FES).
In 1980 the corresponding figures were 36 per cent and 23 per cent.
There are of course a few cases where wives earn more than their husbands.
This minority appears to have been on an upward trend (from 2 per cent of couples both of whom were employees in 1968 to 5 per cent in 1980 — Elias, 1983), but the conclusion of Lynne Hamill's study of the 1974 FES still stands.
Breadwinner wives who are the couple's sole earners are a rarity, wives are typically joint but secondary earners.
Table 10.2 considers married couples in 1981 where at least one was economically active, i.e. it does not include couples who were both retired, or both students, for example.
It shows that the most common arrangement — in 25 per cent of cases — was for the husband to be employed full-time while his wife was employed part-time.
Two-earner couples with both employed full-time were almost as frequent — 23 per cent.
In just over 40 per cent of cases the husband was, as traditional, the sole earner, and, in roughly equal numbers (5 per cent each) were cases where neither spouse earned, and cases  where the wife was the sole earner.
Perhaps because of disincentives built into the Supplementary Benefit system, the ‘zero-earner couple’ category is bigger than one would expect if the wives of unemployed men had the same economic activity rates as the wives of employed men (see Rimmer, 1987, p. 44 for a discussion of this phenomenon).
Note also from table 10.2 (last figure in fifth row) that it is not totally unheard of for couples to share the rearing of their children by both working part-time, but the number involved was minute — 9000 in the whole of England and Wales in 1981.
Table 10.2 The division of labour within couples with at least one economically active partner, England and Wales
Why Do Women Earn Less Than Men?
The lower level of wives' earnings is accounted for, in one sense, by women's lower hours of work and lower rates of pay per hour.
These are in turn explained by two interacting factors, either of which is a sufficient condition for women's earnings to lag behind those of men: on one hand, the gendered division of family labour, and on the other, unequal treatment of men and women in the labour market.
Both are probably deeply entrenched in our culture.
Economists say that a labour market discriminates between the sexes if men and women of identical productivity are not identically remunerated.
The conventional family division of labour not only reduces the number of hours a woman is available for paid work but also reduces the amount she could expect to earn per hour even in a non-discriminatory labour market.
Interruptions in her employment experience, reductions in her mobility and labour market bargaining power are all ways in which family responsibilities reduce women's pay below what it might have been.
Does it Matter?
There are what economists call ‘efficiency’ reasons, in addition to the obvious grounds of equity, to be concerned about the relative economic weakness of women.
The fashionable discussion of incentives usually overlooks what may be one of the more potent of the disincentives operating on the productivity of the British labour force: the anticipation of domesticity, discouraging young women from seeking training and employers and educational institutions from providing it, even to women who do not take on a family or a traditional role within one.
Although the force of custom and prevailing values may appear sufficient to account for traditional differences in the economic roles of spouses, and although people conforming to convention need not be aware of any financial motivation to do so, customary practice is reinforced by an economic rationale.
If, for whatever reason, a husband initially commands higher rates of pay  than his wife it makes economic sense for him to ‘specialize’ in paid work and let her shoulder the brunt of the partnership's unpaid chores (Becker, 1981, 1985; for a critique see Owen, 1987).
The erosion of a woman's earning potential perpetuates the double-bind of the double burden.
Why should we worry about this if the marriage remains the harmonious institution for pooling resources which is normally assumed, in economic theory as elsewhere?
Should it fail so spectacularly as to break up, the ‘specialist in unpaid work’ is left with depleted earning power.
Old fashioned alimony can be justified on these grounds, and a new fashioned proposal is on the table in Australia that divorce  settlements include a lump-sum compensation for sacrificed earning potential (Macdonald, 1986).
Within an unknown number of marriages as yet unbroken, marital harmony cannot always be assumed.
We probably don't need Jan Pahl's pioneering research to tell us how fragile conjugal consensus is.
She shows that unequal access to cash is a source of friction, and that rows about money are a common cause of the domestic violence which is now coming to light (Pahl, 1983, 1985; see also Brannen and Wilson, 1987).
The ‘domestic bargain' (a phrase coined by Martin and Roberts, 1984) is not always a very ‘good buy’.
Cain (1985) argues that it is the unreliability of marriage, no longer, as we have seen in chapter 3, a contract of total sanctity, which constitutes the economic case for policy interventions to help women in the labour force.
The financial hardship of most lone mothers (see chapter 4) bears witness to the casualties of women's weak position in the labour market.
Empirical Analysis of Women's Low Incomes
My own offering to the state of knowledge about the status of British women has been to investigate two particular questions.
Firstly, how great are the effects of women's family responsibilities on their employment and pay.
Secondly, how far can the low pay of women compared to men be explained by  women's domestic ties?
On the first issue, I have taken evidence from a number of sources and some results are reviewed in Joshi, 1985, 1987a and b.
This chapter therefore focuses more on the work I have done, with Marie — Louise Newell, on the question of comparing the pay of men and women.
There is evidence on both questions, from a unique and important data source: the MRC's follow-up study of the 1946 birth cohort, the National Survey of Health and Development, which also provided material for some of Kathleen Kiernan's research discussed in chapter 3.
Roughly 4000 adults have been followed into adulthood from a sample of births in March 1946.
The results of our investigations of sources of pay differentials are published in a monograph entitled Pay Differentials and Parenthood (Joshi and Newell, 1989).
Marie-Louise Newell and I also used the survey to make a  longitudinal study of occupational change after childbearing (Newell and Joshi, 1986; Joshi and Newell, 1987).
Although the most recent data available to us were collected in early 1978, just before the survey members reached the age of 32 in March 1978, their analysis should remain relevant in the 1980s in the light of the stagnation in the relative pay of men and women since then.
The data given in figure 10.2 can be re-expressed in terms of the ratio of men's hourly pay to women's, which fell in the mid-1970s from the traditional level, around 1.67, to 1.45 in 1977 and after.
The Male-female Pay Gap Among Those Born in 1946
With the data on pay per hour collected for 26-year-olds in 1972 and 32-year-olds in 1978, we asked whether male and female rates of pay were affected to a similar degree by length of employment experience, and whether domestic responsibilities have a direct effect on pay.
The survey data also allow us to explore whether, after allowing for other identifiable differences in the characteristics of male and female workers, the labour market during the 1970s appeared to discriminate against young women compared to their male contemporaries.
We used regression analyses to estimate and compare models explaining the variations in men's and women's pay.
‘Human capital’ variables such as education and employment experience help account for some, but not all, of the variation within and between the sexes.
Information about job characteristics also helps explain pay variations within each sex, and to some extent between them.
In 1972, despite the fact that the women then in the labour force were the relatively well qualified (as those who were deferring childbearing were overrepresented), men's pay exceeded women's, at the geometric mean, by a factor of 60 per cent.
Since the female workers were not in fact very much worse qualified or less experienced on average than the males, there was not much of the gap explained on these counts.
The unexplained gap between the pay of 26-year-old men and women was 51 per cent allowing only for educational background and employment experience, or 38 per cent allowing also for information on job characteristics.
The residual, that part of the earnings gap not explained by personal attributes, is conventionally taken as an indicator of discrimination.
It is more debatable whether differences which are the outcome of different job characteristics are the outcome of unequal treatment or not.
In 1977, the average pay gap was still almost as large — 58 per cent at the      geometric mean — but the women in jobs were more representative of their generation and more dissimilar to men in terms of work experience and education.
The unexplained gap had indeed narrowed (to around 30 per cent for an ‘average’ woman) for the members of this cohort, even when the nature of the job is taken into account.
(Including information about job characteristics improved the extent to which pay variance within the sexes was explained, but it did not explain very much more of the gap between the sexes since men and women in apparently similar sorts of jobs were being paid at different rates.)
Figure 10.3 Male-female pay gap at age 26, 1972:(a) decomposition controlling for education and experience;(b) decomposition according to full model
Figure 10.4 Male-female pay gap at age 32, 1978:(a) decomposition in controlling for education and experience;(b) decomposition according to full model
Even after the Equal Pay Act had effected some narrowing of the pay gap, there was an unexplained excess of men's pay over women's pay worth about 30 per cent of that received by the average 32-year-old female employee in early 1978.
Another finding of these analyses worthy of note is the uneven incidence of sex discrimination (if that's what's explaining the otherwise unexplained gap).
It appears to be much more severe for women with no educational qualifications and low occupational attainments than for those with sufficient qualifications to gain entry to the less-segregated non-manual (non-sales) sector of the labour market.
The news may not be quite as good for female graduates either.
There were perhaps too few such women in this social cross-section of the immediate post-war generation (3 per cent of the age group, 40 cases in the pay regression) for us to draw such conclusions, but similar analyses of a contemporary survey of graduates (Dolton and Makepeace, 1986) also indicates that male graduates in their early thirties were doing considerably better than women.
Effects of Family Responsibility on Pay
When we looked at the additional explanatory power brought to these models by information about the worker's family responsibilities we found that parenthood had little effect on men's labour force participation or pay.
It was, however, a strong determinant of women's employment participation and experience.
Though we found no direct effects on pay, holding other things equal, we found indirect effects of motherhood on pay.
We estimated that the consequences of motherhood lowered the pay of employed mothers relative to their childless contemporaries through factors such as lost employment experience, downward occupational mobility and the low rates paid for part-time work.
These three factors each accounted for similar proportions of combined effect on average pay of around 15 per cent.
Note that this is only half the apparent pay advantage the average woman would reap from being paid like a man.
That both sources of pay differential exist may come as no surprise, their relative size was not anticipated.
In examining the pay advantage of married men over bachelors, we tentatively  concluded that for men, but not women, acquiring a spouse leads to higher pay, and perhaps productivity — an indirect contribution to the economy of a wife's domestic work.
Occupational Change After Childbearing
A separate analysis that Marie-Louise Newell and I have done on the employment histories of women born in 1946 looked for evidence of occupational downgrading associated with childbearing (Newell and Joshi, 1986; Joshi and Newell, 1987).
Close examination of these histories found similar patterns to those reported by other researchers, such as Dex (1987), Elias and Main (1982), and Stewart and Greenhalgh (1984).
Around three in ten of those who reported paid work within 10 years of their first birth had returned to a different type of job that was likely to have been worse paid than the one they last held before the maternity.
Mothers who had left jobs in the middle  of the socio-economic spectrum were most exposed to the risk of falling back on the ladder, particularly if they left a long gap in their employment record.
Women with paper qualifications were more successful at re-entering their original occupation than employees of banks and public administration whose skills we surmise were more specific to the employer.
It may also be that such employers were, at least in the early 1970s, less prepared to make the organizational adjustments which make it feasible for mothers to combine paid work with responsibility for young children.
Figure 10.5 Job downgrading after childbearing.
Estimates based on experience up to age 32, mothers born in 1946, by economic level of job before first child
Lifetime Earnings Profiles
The Opportunity Cost of Child-rearing
A synthesis of my two strands of research is attempted for an illustrative ‘typical’ case in figure 10.6.
This traces the simulated lifetime earnings of a person who leaves school at age 17 and faces an earnings profile of ‘average’ shape, rising with age and experience until a plateau somewhere around age 45 for a continuous worker.
The level of this profile, for a woman, is set to  pass through £6000 at age 24.
Part-time employment is assumed at all times to involve a 10 per cent pay penalty reflecting the ‘crummy job effect’ on the pay of those with current domestic constraints.
It is hypothetically assumed that if a woman marries but remains childless, she would work continuously in a full-time job until switching to part-time employment, set somewhat arbitrarily at age 54, the age when the majority of her employed contemporaries are in part-time jobs.
If she has a break of, in this illustration, eight years out of employment to rear to children, and works part-time for most of the years when they are still at school, the lifetime earning profile is given by the lower line.
The difference between the bottom two lines represents, for this example, the lifetime earnings forgone as a result of having children, and amounts to £135 000.
Figure 10.6 Annual earnings over the life cycle: illustrative comparison of men and women
The top line on the picture is even more speculative, but informed by the analysis of 32-year-olds discussed above, it traces what the person would earn with identical characteristics other than that of being male and staying throughout in full-time employment.
The area between the top two profiles is the totally hypothetical cost of being female; it is the same order of magnitude as the hypothetical cost of a woman becoming a mother.
(Each about 46 per cent of the total lifetime earnings of a woman who remains childless.)
The numbers involved are also set out in table 10.3.
The area  between the top and bottom lines roughly corresponds with the average gaps between couples' earnings which we can observe in totally independent data like the Family Expenditure Survey discussed above.
Table 10.3 Simulated annual earnings at selected ages for an illustrative case
Socio-Economic Variations
One of the many caveats I want to make about these still-experimental calculations is that they are not typical at all socio-economic levels.
The less education a woman has, the less important are the delayed costs on later rates of pay of current absence from the labour market, but the higher is the ‘cost of being female’ relatively speaking.
Women with more education have more to lose from becoming mothers, and perhaps less from just being women.
This could well explain the fact that the trend since 1970 towards deferring first births has largely been confined to women with more education (see Joshi, 1985).
The growing population of ‘Dinkie’ couples (dual-income no kids) was also noted in chapters 7 and 8 as providing a booming market of house purchasers.
The younger mothers in council housing probably face lower opportunity costs to childbearing but a stronger need to supplement family income with a low-paid part-time job.
Looking Forward
Are these findings of the obstacles women face out of date?
One might hope so, but the picture in figure 10.2 does not immediately support such optimism.
Later generations of women have been catching up with their male contemporaries as far as the acquisition of paper qualifications is concerned.
Most of them also expect to form families.
Will these families be more symmetrical as far as the allocation of unpaid work is concerned?
Will enlightened employer practice prevail to preserve skills of workers who are also rearing children?
Or will a new generation of qualified women, some of whom are still keeping open their options, decide that the economic penalties of motherhood outweigh its attractions?
Does it still ‘pay’ to be male as much as our estimates suggest?
New Research
The evidence necessary to answer such a question would need to combine information on pay with life history.
Among possible sources of such information  is the proposed follow-up in their early thirties of a sample of people born in 1958 — the members of the National Child Development Study, another national cohort study similar to that of the 1946 generation described above.
Another such source is the material collected in 1987 for the ESRC's studies of Economic Change and Social Life.
We know that women without male ‘breadwinners’ are over-represented among the statistically visible poor — the lone mothers and the lone elderly women.
What we do not yet know is how women's changing opportunities for paid work have affected their relative risk of poverty.
The implication of sex differences in economic activity for economic inequality are among the questions that are being pursued in my current research with John Ermisch and other colleagues.
We are also looking into implications for inequality in the future of the social differentials in current demographic trends.
Another important area of research is attempting to uncover female poverty that is hidden within households (Brannen and Wilson, 1987).
Policy Implications
The policy implications which I have drawn from the analyses mentioned above have been set out at greater length elsewhere (Joshi, 1986).
The journey to Equality of Opportunity for women has not yet been completed.
Progress is still needed to reduce the sex segregation of jobs, the low pay ghettoes that it permits, and the waste of potential female skills that it entails.
Such progress will run into the familiar obstacles if measures are not also taken to recognize, support and share the unpaid tasks needed to maintain and reproduce the population.
Measures to improve women's access to education, training and remunerative jobs need to be complemented by measures to give families more choice about the management of their unpaid responsibilities.
Examples of measures to support parents would be increases and improvements in childcare, for pre-school children and those of school age; to make parental leave available to parents of both sexes; to recognize childcare as a legitimate work expense for tax and benefit purposes; and to encourage the participation of fathers in child-rearing.
This last suggestion might be taken more seriously as the working week gets shorter and if the pay penalties for devoting time to caring were reduced.
I have an even more fanciful suggestion that we challenge the age segregation of modern society which keeps young children, and their attendants, out of the adult sphere.
As Charlotte Hohn remarked (in her address to the 1987 European Population Conference), modern cities are not ‘kinder-freundlich’.
It is time at least for the English language to take on the concept of child-friendliness.
Women, on the whole, have not achieved an equal economic footing with  men in British society and they will not achieve it universally overnight.
Meanwhile, it would be a mistake for legislation on divorce, tax or pensions to assume that they had.
Equitable treatments must be devised that recognize economic sacrifices (whether they've been made by men or women) as well as economic achievements.
For example, the Home Responsibility Protection of pension rights under the current version of the State Earnings Related Pension Scheme (SERPS) recognizes that valuable work is being done by women who are not earning enough to pay contributions, but does not allow for the fact that the low pay of some who are contributing reflects their domestic responsibilities as well .
British women are still taking better care of their families than their pension rights.
It should not be beyond the wit of woman (and man) to devise more adequate forms of compensation.
The research described here should inform and stimulate the policy debate.
The Economic Role of Women and Demographic Change
The slowly evolving British family leaves a much more easily discernible impact on women's employment in Britain than the possible reverse influence of women's earning opportunities on family formation and dissolution.
There is some evidence of modest influences, among many others, of the female labour market on family building patterns.
The research reported by John Ermisch in chapter 4 has shown that a woman's earning power is positively associated with her chances of both divorce and remarriage.
Máire Ní Bhrolcháin (1986a and b) has investigated the association of employment and birth spacing in life history data, including some from the 1946 birth cohort.
She concludes that during the 1950s and 1960s the prospect of returning to the labour market gave women an incentive to compress their childbearing, thus shortening intervals between births and accelerating the tempo of fertility.
She also suggests that this mechanism was reversed in the 1970s, by which time more mothers were taking up employment between births, which would be likely to encourage longer gaps between babies.
In a series of studies using time series data on fertility and female employment (Joshi, Layard and Owen, 1985; De Cooman, Ermisch and Joshi, 1987 and 1988; Ermisch, 1987) the following account has emerged.
An upward trend in the labour force attachment of successive generations accounts, statistically, for rising female employment (primarily of middle-aged married women) during the 1950s and 1960s, when fertility was also high and rising.
The effects of this trend weakened in the 1970s but the numbers of economically active women were by that time swollen by the fall in the numbers of children and by the fall in the numbers of women entering motherhood in their twenties.
This growth in women's propensity to take paid work probably  has both economic and social origins, but our analyses of fertility suggest that it is not an important explanatory factor in the ‘baby bust’.
Cultural and social forces are also likely to be important in explaining the fall in fertility, but among economic factors the ratio of women's to men's pay emerges as having contributed to falling birth rates during the 1970s.
In contrast, this ratio does not seem to have played much of a direct role in explaining rising aggregate labour supply.
The once-and-for-all improvement in women's relative pay associated with the enactment of equal pay legislation seems to have affected the female labour force indirectly by encouraging the deferment of childbearing in the mid-1970s.
These preliminary results suggest the desirability of looking beyond the female labour market for an adequate characterization of economic influences on fertility.
Conclusion
It is not at all clear that further progress towards improving the economic status of  women would precipitate the demise of the British family or the dreaded (by some)‘twilight of parenthood’.
Effective progress for women involves changes which recognize the family responsibilities of paid workers of both sexes.
This should, if anything, strengthen the family and encourage childbearing.
It is arguable that the Swedish policy of support for parents in the labour force, as well as similar measures in Eastern Europe, have put a brake on fertility decline and perhaps reversed it.