

Seven
The director rubbed his hands together.
He intended to enjoy the next interview, although he couldn't understand why Meik had come to him instead of to Lord Chomsmy.
Perhaps it was because she knew Lord C would extract a high price from her to grant a favour.
He grinned.
She would find he wanted a favour in return, too.
That would surprise her.
Although, after her comprehensive training for C's circus, it was possible nothing would surprise her.
He heard the knock at the door.
Meik entered.
She looked ravishing, dressed in a light blue Summer dress of rayon, which fitted snugly over her perfect breasts, and flared out into a pleated skirt below a wide belt.
She wore no stockings, and her arms were bare.
As she walked, her bubbies jiggled delightfully beneath the thin material, and made him realise why Summer was such a special season.
She tossed back her long black hair, and her enchanting almond eyes shone merrily.
He thought her oriental looks surpassed all other feminine beauty, other than that of the English rose.
Sylvia was an English rose, and when she'd seduced him it had been the pinnacle of his life.
He would always remember her luscious body.
Now, he was in a position to seduce Meik, another member of C's Circus.
How he envied George Chomsmy, who had had his way with all of them.
She stood in front of his desk.
‘What can I do for you, Miss Meik?’
‘I believe you know that the Free Dutch government  have offered me a job in their intelligence service.
I would retain my commission in the Dutch Navy, and be posted to the far east to be stationed in Java.’
‘You would have to leave C's Circus.
That's an awful lot of training down the drain.’
‘I must think of the future.
The war can't go on forever.’
‘How can I help?’
‘Before I escaped from Rotterdam, I worked for British Intelligence.
A ghastly mistake was made during the evacuation, and many secret files fell into the hands of the Nazis.
I was blamed.’
‘And it wasn't your fault?’
‘No, I knew nothing about it until later.’
‘Go on.’
‘My government wants your assurance that it wasn't my fault.’
‘And if I do this for you?’
‘I'll get the job.’
‘That's not exactly what I meant.’
She looked at him, and realised what he wanted in return.
Who would have believed it?
She'd never thought of him as that sort of man.
He was such a dear old thing, although she had heard a rumour about him and Sylvia.
She'd only come to him because she knew the price Lord C would extract from her.
She sighed.
She'd been taught to submit for her country, so why not for herself.
‘You want to fuck me?’
‘Crudely put.
Yes.’
‘When?’
‘There's no time like the present.
My secretary is absent.
Why not take her place?’
She saw the scenario he wanted.
He'd probably dreamed about it over and over again.
A willing young secretary to play the whore in his office.
She moved behind the desk towards him.
She decided to give him a treat.
It would be her last seduction.
There'd be no more when she left C's Circus.
‘You wanted me to take dictation, sir.’
‘Yes please, Miss Meik.’
‘Would it be more comfortable if I sat on your lap?’
‘I'd like that.’
She pushed his chair clear of the desk, and settled herself on his lap.
She saw by the look on his face that he was half afraid of her.
Maybe not of her, but of sex.
He wasn't a worldly man in that direction.
She realised that she would have to take the initiative, or she'd be sitting there forever.
She hitched the full skirt of her Summer dress up above her knees, and swung her long legs for him to see.
Getting no response, she took his hand and moved it towards her bare dimpled knees.
He rested his hand just above her pretty knee, but it remained immobile.
He didn't even begin to caress her bare leg.
She brushed her skirts down over his hand so that it was free to move upwards beneath the pleated folds.
‘Would you believe it, sir.
My last boss used to fumble under my skirt when I took dictation.
He'd push his hand right up, and feel me.
You wouldn't do anything like that, would you, sir?’
‘No.’
‘I knew I could trust you, sir.
You wouldn't touch a girl up, would you?’
‘No.’
‘Can I rely on that?’
‘No.’
His hand began to move slowly upwards, nervously caressing the naked flesh beneath her skirt.
Slowly, so slowly, he moved along the bare skin until his fingertips reached the lace that edged her French knickers.
She imagined that he would come to a halt, but his fingers began to explore inside her knickers, moving steadily towards her warm and willing crotch.
She wriggled her backside on his lap to make the path between her thighs more easily accessible.
His gently probing fingers touched the first dainty hairs of her bonny thatch, and crept through her undergrowth like a lizard through the forest.
Soon, he was upon her labia — fumbling the thick folds and searching between those succulent lips for an entrance into her most intimate place.
She gasped: quietly moaning  in his ear.
His wandering fingers were inside her, pushing their way up into her sticky quim.
He fondled her between her long legs for a long time, and she remained still for him.
She felt him explore every facet of her amenable rosebud, until she was soaking, and he had acquired an intimate knowledge of her femininity.
‘Now you've stoked my pussy, would you like to see her?’
She smiled when he nodded, and taking his wrist she guided his hand from beneath her dress.
She took his fingers, wet from her body, and placing them provocatively between her pouting lips, she sucked.
Sliding from his lap, she stepped back so that he could view her.
Swiftly, she unfastened the small pearl buttons of her bodice, and pulled the dress over her head.
She wore no bra, and her ample breasts swung like melons as she straightened up.
She watched him gazing amorously at those twin orbs, as white as marble, and as plump as pigeons.
‘Do you want to kiss my titties, sir?’
He nodded.
As she bent forwards to oblige him, she slipped her knickers down her long shapely legs.
He kissed the pliant softness of each of her swinging beauties in turn, and watched the cute nipples rise prettily to stand erect like two dinky pink sugar mice.
Hugging his head in her arms, she pressed his face into her breasts: holding him imprisoned in their yielding softness.
He could hardly breathe.
It brought to him a sublime peace and contentment.
Where else would a man reach serenity, other than folded to a woman's bosom.
He remained perfectly still.
It could have lasted forever.
He became conscious of her voice, whispering.
‘Now I'll let you see my pretty pussy, shall I?’
She took it for granted he would be eager, and released him from her bear's hug.
She sat balanced on the edge of the desk, and he faced her, bemused by it all.
If he was sexually aroused, he didn't show it.
She threw herself backwards on to the wooden desk, and swung her legs high above her.
Her knees were well spread, and her open crotch stared him in the face.
He saw the alluring swathe of curly pubic hair which covered her crotch; in the centre nestled the jewel of her sexuality.
A functional organ, but the object of a million fantasies.
The visible sign of her femininity, and the object of men's desire.
The outer folds hung loosely apart, as she strained to part her legs even further for his delight.
He could see the redness within: the secret inner lips which were the gateway to her enchanting love grotto.
He wanted to run his tongue along the folds of her beguiling quim, and bury his face in her nest of pubic hair.
He wanted to kiss her tiny clitoris, to gorge upon the fleshy vulva, and taste the juices of her body.
He wanted to, but he couldn't.
Perhaps she had presented herself too crudely.
Perhaps it was his puritanical upbringing.
He realised his eyes were bigger than his belly.
‘I'm sorry.
I can't.’
‘Can't what?’
‘Kiss you there.’
She swung her feet on to the floor, and stood before him.
Poor bastard.
He had some sort of hang up.
She was sorry for him, but she was no shrink.
Tanya, the Comtesse, would know what to do; as would Madeleine, who had been a prostitute.
He looked crestfallen.
She urged him out of the chair, and when he was on his feet, she began to undress him.
He looked so dejected.
She smiled reassuringly.
When he was naked, she helped him climb on to the desk.
He lay on his back on the hard, polished surface, as she manipulated his half-aroused knob between her slim fingers.
She didn't know whether she should take his penis into her mouth, and didn't like to ask him.
She caressed his anxious dick with growing skill, and he responded to the gentle stroking of her fingers.
He appeared to be back on course.
She eased his foreskin back, and lightly scratched the helmet with her long red fingernails.
He seemed to enjoy it, and his rod rose to her ministrations.
She climbed on the desk above him, and stood with one leg either side of his stomach.
She knew he could see  up between her thighs to the daintily parted lips of her sweet pudenda.
She lowered herself until she was crouched above his thighs; slipping her hand between her legs she manoeuvred the tip of his cue into the moist entrance of her sensuous channel.
‘Are you ready, sir?’
‘Yes.’
‘Ready to fill me with your big cock?’
‘Yes.
Please.
Now.’
‘You can't wait, can you, sir?’
‘Oh God.
Please, Meik.
Take me inside you.
Hurry.’
She had been rolling her hips as she held the tip of his impatient knob just inside her cunt lips.
The slow sexual friction had brought him to the verge of orgasm.
Now he needed desperately to be rooted deep inside her.
She recognised his need, and lowered her body so that his anxious pego infiltrated deeper and deeper into her heavenly playground.
With a slow erotic motion, she slid her smouldering twat up and down his pulsating shaft, until she knew he was on the very point of ejaculation.
‘Come inside me, sir.
Now.
Please.
I want to feel your spunk shoot into me.’
She pumped her thighs the length of his quivering prick with fast, lewd strokes.
He'd been happy to be a spectator while she fucked him, but suddenly he reached up, and pulled her down on to him.
She heard a moan, a deep howl wrenched from his soul, and she felt his warm seed flood into her.
‘Was that nice, sir?
Did I make you happy?’
‘Mmm, Miss Meik.
You did.
You certainly did.’
‘It's not every man who can say he's been frigged over his own office desk, is it?’
‘It will be something to remember.’
‘You never know, your secretary might oblige.
If you ask her nicely.’
He grinned.
‘It's not likely, I'm afraid.’
Lord George Chomsmy was furious when he heard the  news.
Quite innocently, Meik made his temper worse by returning to Holmsly Manor to bid him farewell.
‘So you've opted out of the war effort,’ he greeted her nastily, ‘to go swanning all over the Pacific?’
‘Heavens, no.
You must know the Japanese are making warlike noises at the USA, and Dutch Intelligence say they mean them.’
‘Nonsense, woman.
They wouldn't dare start a war in the Pacific against the Yanks.
The American fleet would cripple them.’
‘Whatever you think, Dutch Intelligence are convinced they'll try, and we don't want to be caught with our trousers down like we were by the Nazis.’
‘I'd like to catch you with your trousers down, young lady.
You've walked out on your friends without any warning.‘
‘I'm sorry.
To the other girls it's a wartime job, but to me Intelligence is a career.
I can't turn down promotion and a damned fine job.’
‘And who got you your commission in the Dutch Navy?’
‘You did, and I'm grateful.’
‘And you show it by putting in for a transfer behind my back,’ he roared, his face as black as thunder.
‘I could still stop it.
I could refuse your transfer until I had a replacement trained to take your place.’
Meik saw she'd been foolish to come.
She knew he was right.
He could insist the post was filled before he released her.
She'd placed herself at his mercy.
She was back to square one.
If it wasn't to blow up into a first-class row, she'd have to bargain.
She lowered her voice, and changed her tune.
‘I apologise.
I was selfish.
I thought only of myself.
You won't halt my transfer, will you?’
Lord C smiled.
He'd outwitted her.
She should have known he'd want one last slice of her cake.
He considered what he would ask of her.
A spanking, perhaps, and then, he would hump her on the sofa.
He recalled her silken, olive-tinted skin, her large malleable boobs, and her pelt of thick pubic hair like moleskin.
His cock began to rise  in his trousers.
She looked so fuckable in her smartly-cut naval uniform.
He was about to open his mouth to demand his pound of flesh when the door flew open, and Betty burst into the room.
She'd been playing tennis, and was swinging her racquet as she walked.
On seeing Meik, she ran to her and planted a big kiss on her cheek.
‘Congratulations.
I heard you got your transfer — and promotion, too.
I bet you're proud.’
‘Yes, I am.
Thanks, Betty.’
‘We're all so pleased for you.
Lovely of you to come and say cheerio before you sail for the South Seas.
Have you packed your grass skirt?’
Betty babbled away, oblivious to the look on the Colonel's face.
One glance would have told her that he was close to a heart attack.
Any chance he had had of giving Meik a parting gift had slipped away.
He couldn't continue to be so churlish in the face of Betty's open-hearted goodwill.
Meik saw her chance to slip away whilst the going was good.
She kissed Betty, and quickly pecked the Colonel on the cheek.
‘Cheerio, both of you.
Give my love to all the girls.
It's been fun.’
Her arse was hardly out of the door when the Colonel turned on Betty.
Without warning he grabbed her tennis racquet — which she'd been swinging so nonchalantly and grasping her by the scruff of the neck, pushed her roughly over the back of a chair.
The dumbfounded girl gasped for breath.
She'd been taken completely by surprise, and fright added to her bewilderment.
‘Crikey, sir.
What's the matter?
What have I done?’
He was still holding her by the scruff of the neck.
One large hand held her down over the back of the upright chair, so that the top of her head was pushed into the seat.
She wore a white tennis outfit consisting of a blouse and a short pleated skirt.
She felt him flip the short skirt up at the back, and jerk her knickers down to her knees.
She clasped the legs of the chair near the floor.
Whatever it was she had, or hadn't, done, she was going to get  walloped.
A scorching sting shot across the smooth surface of her comely backside.
It was an odd flailing sting, which ignited a smarting tingle in the whole of her fundament.
It made her gasp and draw in breath.
A second stroke followed without respite, and she squealed at the strange torment it brought to her twin moons.
It was then she realised that he was lambasting her with the tennis racquet.
She wailed aloud.
‘Stop.
Stop it, sir.
Why are you punishing me?
What have I done?’
But he had no intention of stopping.
She had deprived him of his pleasure with the wayward Meik.
Now, she would suffer for it.
The tennis racquet bounced off her tender bum with all the zing of a good forehand drive.
The strings decorated the white flesh of her young bottom to leave it covered with little pink squares.
The beating ceased, as suddenly as it had begun.
‘Stand up, girl.’
She dragged herself to her feet, and felt the short cotton skirt fall into place over her smoldering hind-quarters.
She stood, holding the cheeks of her arse with the palms of her hands, and snivelled.
She saw there was a lascivious glint in his eyes, and knew her punishment was far from over.
‘I'm going to cane you, Betty Hawkes.
What do you think about that?’
Her heart missed a beat.
She hadn't associated the short sharp dose of the tennis racquet with anything but discipline.
However, as she stood before him, a familiar lust began to pound through her veins.
It was the mention of the cane which triggered it.
She'd woven fantasies of its sting across her tail, but only if applied by him.
Ever since he had spanked her that night in the bungalow at Moascar garrison, she'd yearned for the cane.
Now he was angry enough to give it to her, and she still didn't know why.
‘You know where the cane is kept.
Bring it to me.’
She reached down to her knickers, which were held loosely around her knees by their elastic.
‘And leave your knickers where they are.’
She waddled shamefaced from the room, and returned, a wan figure, carrying a cane.
Her knickers had slipped around her ankles.
‘You look ridiculous, Miss Betty Hawkes.
Hand me the cane, and take those knickers off.’
She handed him the long cane, and flinched when he swished it through the air to produce a vicious, menacing whistle.
‘Now, bend over and touch your toes.
You're going to receive twelve strokes; and then, young lady, I'll tell you what you've done to deserve them.’
She bent forward, and touched her toes with the tips of her fingers.
Her long ginger hair tumbled to the floor; her short white skirt rode up to hint at the delicious curves of her tender derriere.
‘You will count each stroke aloud.’
‘Yes, sir.’
He flipped up the short skirt, so that it rested across her back.
She was immediately aware of her unprotected bare bottom.
‘And you'll remain bent over until you've received all the strokes.
‘Yes, sir.
She was unhappily aware of the picture she must present to him: her long bare legs as straight as a ramrod; her spine curved downwards from her elevated buttocks; and her seat raised so vulnerably.
The thought of presenting her naked behind to him so crudely filled her with a wild abandon.
She wondered whether he found her desirable in such an assailable position.
He tapped the cheeks of her backside with the tip of the cane, and she shivered in fearful trepidation.
Was she really going to be caned?
She felt so defenceless, so powerless.
A warm, apprehensive feeling of pure masochism began to ooze through her.
‘Are you ready, young lady?’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘They will be hard, stinging strokes.’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘Are you sure you want to proceed?’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘I could give you seven days CB instead.’
‘No, sir.
Cane me.’
The rod sliced across the soft spheres of her posterior like the crack of a pistol.
She'd been determined not to scream, but a loud, parrot-like squawk was wrenched from her lips.
She was ashamed.
Her rump burned as though a bonfire had been lit under it, and she realised she was standing upright.
She clasped the cheeks of her bum.
Well, if that was the cane, she didn't want any more strokes.
Yet a hot erotic wave was already spreading through her loins like a sensual fire.
‘You were warned not to stand.
If you do so again, it will be an extra stroke.
Now, get back down, and get your arse right up.’
She found herself straining to touch the floor with her fingers, so her butt was raised even higher.
God, she must have taken leave of her senses.
Her tail burned like a furnace; and yet she was presenting it for more torment.
Surely there couldn't be other women who delighted in such anguish.
She couldn't imagine Meik enjoying it; and certainly not Jacqui.
Her thoughts were interrupted by the sting of the cane zapping across her tingling nates.
She received all twelve strokes: lamenting and bawling at each, as the warmth of her masochistic sensuality mingled with the heat of the assault on her burning fundament.
Between yelps and squawks, she blubbered noisily; so when it was finally over she looked a pathetic sight, standing before him with red, swollen eyes and tear-streaked cheeks.
He made her stand holding up her skirt, and to her delight applied cold cream to her ravished posterior.
The desperate ache in her seat had spread into her body as a lust, an urgent need for sexual gratification.
She purred as his greasy fingers probed between her thighs, and she parted her legs in open invitation.
She felt her skirt flutter to the ground and his hand reach inside her blouse.
‘Did you enjoy it as much as you thought you would?’
‘Enjoy what?’
‘The cane.’
He knew.
He'd somehow read her most secret thoughts.
The realisation sent a shock-wave through her ‘You won't want it ever again, will you?’
‘No.’
‘Never?’
‘Well…
Perhaps not never.’
Eight
The Kitty Kat Club wouldn't allow an unescorted woman inside, so Jacqui  inveigled her next date into taking her.
She had no real idea what to look for, and her date was a dull, insular major in the RA who had no wish to mix.
The star of the show was Kattina, a husky torch singer with a lusty body and an extrovert, Hollywood style.
A tall, statuesque Egyptian, she appeared to know nearly all the British and Australian officers.
Jacqui wondered whether she could be the go-between being used by the Nazis.
It was certainly a possibility, but with her present escort there was no chance to get to know her.
The following night, she returned on the arm of an Anzac Captain; a happy extrovert, who threw money about as if there was no tomorrow.
They were joined by a party of Anzacs, who were on the last day of their leave before returning to the desert.
The first cabaret, before curfew, was innocuous enough; but later the scene changed.
It became a different place, with a different atmosphere.
Champagne became the sole refreshment, and topless girls sported trays of Havana cigars and hashish cigarettes.
A song from Kattina began the cabaret.
She had changed into a gown she seemed to have been poured into, and promised to pop out of.
She toured the tables, suggestively touching her male audience, while crooning ‘Embraceable You’ to a muted trumpet accompaniment.
Jacqui noticed that she spent ninety per cent of her time lingering over the two dozen Allied  officers left in the audience.
A tap dance duo followed, but although they performed topless, the Anzacs ignored their swinging titties to concentrate on boozing and playing poker dice.
The lights were dimmed for the next act, and a roll of drums announced two gorgeous showgirls, who were picked out by spotlights.
Their skimpy costumes were decorated with two huge ostrich plumes, attached to their heads, and to their backsides: and she saw that they were harnessed to look like two ponies.
They trotted in tandem around the floor, high-stepping to the whim of a muscular young man who held the reins behind them.
The girls were tall and slim, and quite strikingly beautiful.
One was a black Ethiopian, the other a pale brown Arab.
They pranced to the familiar melody of ‘Sleigh Bells’, and the little bells on their harness tinkled merrily.
Their spectacular entrance over, the two girls stripped naked, and the athletic young man produced a long whip.
Accompanied by rolls of the drum, the two showgirls used the whole floor to tumble — running, somersaulting, back-flipping — while the whip cracked threateningly around their ankles.
The onlookers were silent as they watched the two naked beauties go through their gymnastic routine, their flying limbs and swinging boobs glistening with sweat.
What followed was a display of tumbling combined with erotic exhibitionism.
The two girls, locked together, performed feats of graceful athletic skill and balance, but in doing so indulged their audience in an orgy of eroticism.
They stretched and rolled their naked bodies with limbs akimbo to show their most intimate places to the lusting, curious or disapproving; while all the time the powerful spotlight highlighted the contrasting colours of their glistening skin, making them look like molasses and honey.
The spotlight faded, and the house lights came up.
The young man began to show his expertise with the long whip.
He made it whistle and crack threateningly, only to wind harmlessly around a girl's thigh or waist.
It cut  through the air to snatch a coloured handkerchief held at arm's length by a smiling showgirl.
It cracked to snatch a candle from between a girl's teeth.
The candle was then lit by her partner, and placed between her lips.
The long whip snaked towards it to snuff out the flame.
The audience clapped.
The black girl bent suggestively forward to slowly slide the lighted candle into her backside, and as she held it in her back passage, the whip effortlessly flicked out the flame.
The Arab girl rolled on to her back to balance on her shoulders, her legs spread wide with her feet pointing towards the ceiling.
Her partner lit the candle, and inserted it deep into the Arab girl's vagina.
The audience sat silent; stunned at the lewdness.
The whip slithered around the floor to raise the tension and anticipation of the audience.
The Anzac Captain, drunk as a fiddler's bitch, fumbled for their newly-opened magnum of champagne, and shook the bottle.
His voice rang through the hush like the shock of an unexpected bomb.
‘Fire!’
A loud gasp turned to uproarious laughter, as a stream of champagne sprayed over the naked showgirl to douse the flame of the candle.
The act was ruined.
The audience fell about laughing.
The management could do nothing but smile at the incident.
Kattina approached their table.
‘That was marvellous.
Nobody's thought of that before.’
‘I'm sorry.
I just couldn't stop myself.’
‘Never mind, Captain.
You all seem to be in good spirits tonight.
Don't tell me you're going home?’
‘Afraid not — it's back to the war tomorrow.’
‘Ready for the big push against Rommel?’
‘What makes you say that?’
‘Several of my friends went up yesterday, and were expecting to spearhead a big breakthrough.’
‘Who're they with?’
‘The Fourth Indian division.’
‘The Fourth are on the coast.
We're an Independent Brigade working the south.’
‘The Qattara depression?’
‘You know as much as we do.
You're not a spy, are you?’
Kattina ruffled his hair.
‘If I were, I'd have to seduce you, and you already have a lovely ladyfriend.’
Jacqui said nothing.
Kattina was either a practised inquisitor, or very naive.
She followed her to the ladies' washroom.
‘Thanks for overlooking that incident.
He's a bit high-spirited.’
Kattina turned from the mirror, and smiled.
It was a perfunctory smile, which gradually changed into something more intimate as she stared quizzically at Jacqui.
It made her a bit uncomfortable.
It was the kind of suggestive look that some lascivious men used under the guise of flirting.
‘No harm done.
It was rather amusing.’
‘It's the first time I've been here.
I enjoyed your act you should be singing in New York or LA.’
‘Why thank you.
Do you know America then?’
‘I am American.
I'm a free-lance journalist, covering the war and its effects on north Africa.’
‘How interesting.
Tell me, are you taking the Anzac Captain home?
If not, come back to my place for a drink.
I've a houseboat on the Nile.’
‘Say, that would be swell.’
They arranged to meet after the show, and Kattina took her to the houseboat which was her home.
Inside, it was luxurious.
The whole place stank of money: much more money than the singer could have earned at the Kitty Kat Club.
She wondered where Kattina was getting that sort of cash.
Maybe there was a sugar-daddy in the background, but there wasn't a hint of a male presence on the boat.
The bathroom was one hundred per cent female, with one toothbrush, and no razor.
She sat and sipped a cocktail, which Kattina had mixed.
It was sticky sweet, almost sickly.
She would have preferred straight brandy.
She noticed Kattina sat on the low sofa beside her, and sat unnecessarily close.
As they  talked, she was soon aware of the Egyptian's hand touching her: so delicately, so intimately.
She realised she was being propositioned.
Kattina was a lesbian.
That ruled out sugar-daddies.
She must be getting the green stuff elsewhere.
It was looking more and more as if the source might be Nazi Intelligence.
If that was so, then she must stick with her.
She gritted her teeth.
She would rather be slobbered over by the randiest male than be touched in that way by her own sex.
She'd had one experience of lesbianism, and had hated it.
When she didn't object, the hand grew bolder.
The slim, perfectly manicured, fingers touched her face and hair like a swarm of honeybees exploring a bed of exotic flowers.
So delicate and suggestive was the touch that her skin tingled.
So slow and patient was the seduction that she almost wished she was bisexual.
No man had ever made such patient and expert love to her.
Kattina was leaning across her body to stroke her hair and nibble at her ears; to cover her face with tiny kisses, and very gently massage the nape of her neck.
After what seemed an age, she felt Kattina's open mouth close over her own, breathing quietly against her lips before licking them with her long tongue.
‘Jacqui, you're so adorable.
I much prefer mature women to young girls, don't you?’
Jacqui gurgled something incomprehensible, as Kattina's tongue shot into her mouth to save her the embarrassment of replying.
The French kiss went on forever, and as the persistent tongue scoured the back of her throat, so she became aware of nimble fingers slipping her blouse from her shoulders and unfastening her bra.
She lay naked to the waist, as the Egyptian playfully kissed her sweet bubbies, and teased her cute pink nipples erect with her lithe tongue.
It struck her as a terrible waste, for she felt nothing as Kattina erotically licked her sensitive flesh in dainty, small circles commencing at her throat, and finishing inside her dinky navel.
As the flickering tongue scooped inside her shallow navel, so she felt gentle hands squeezing her pliant gourds.
She threw back her head, and simulated an anxious moan of quickening passion.
It had fooled many men, but would it deceive a woman?
‘Do you feel something for me, Jacqui my angel?’
‘Ooo, yes…’
‘Could you love me a little?’
‘Oh, I'm sure of it.’
‘You're so adorable.
I could love you all night.’
‘Please.
Oh, please.’
‘You really want to, you angel?’
‘Love me.
Please love me.’
In a trice, she'd lost her skirt, and busy fingers were inside the elastic of her knickers, sliding them down her long legs.
There was none of the fumbling of a man.
Her garments were removed as swiftly as if she'd done it herself.
Naked, Kattina led her by the hand to the big bed.
The hours that followed were full of the lust of one woman for another's body.
The softness of the female flesh writhing above her was very unlike the firm, muscular body of a man.
The physical contact was pleasing enough, but she felt no sexual arousal.
It was when Kattina's fierce tongue finally reached the sensitive folds of her slit that she found herself panting.
It was the climax of an orgy of movement between her thighs.
Kattina's nimble fingers and busy tongue had explored her most secret places, frantically working their way from her cute navel through her tangled pubic fleece to the deep cleft between the cheeks of her bum.
So when those industrious fingers and wet lips finally arrived to caress her defenceless pudenda she at last found herself aroused.
She was aware of fingertips rubbing her clitoris with similar motions to those she used to masturbate.
She realised an orgasm was gathering inside her.
She'd done nothing but lie back, and allow Kattina to make love to her.
Under the same circumstances, she'd have worked a lot harder to please a man, and she'd lost sight of the fact that Kattina was an important lead in her assignment.
She mustn't lose her.
She began to moan and thresh in simulated frenzy.
‘Love me, Kattina.
Please.
More, more.
Jacqui awoke to find herself still wrapped in the other woman's arms.
She dressed without disturbing her, and left a note saying she'd meet her at the Kitty Kat Club that night.
She wanted to spend the afternoon keeping Kattina under surveillance.
At two o'clock she seated herself at a window-table in a restaurant overlooking the Nile, near where the houseboat was moored.
At three-thirty Kattina appeared, and stepped into a taxi which took her into the bustling centre of Cairo.
She alighted at Groppis, and inside took a seat beside an aristocratic-looking Lt Colonel, who had obviously been awaiting her.
Jacqui watched from a distance as they drank iced coffee and danced to the string quartet.
When they parted, she decided to follow the officer, whose taxi took him straight to GHQ Cairo.
It looked more and more as if Kattina was working for Nazi Intelligence.
Later she knocked at the star's dressing room door, and her stomach turned over when she saw who was with her.
It was the secretary to Sheik Asball Hasseinen: the man she'd gobbled to get the information that brought her here.
It convinced her that Kattina was her woman.
The singer caught their quick look of recognition as they crossed in the doorway.
‘Do you know him?’
‘Yes.
He's Sheik Hasseinen's  secretary , isn't he?’
‘How do you know that?’
‘I managed to get an interview with the Sheik for an article I was writing.’
‘He granted you an interview?’
‘Yes.’
‘Then, you had to…?’
‘Sit on that obscene stone thing.
Yes.
Kattina grinned.
‘Poor Jacqui.
That night on the houseboat, Kattina took her straight to bed.
The woman really had got the hots for her.
Later, Jacqui met her kiss for kiss in their lovemaking; even taking the initiative as they drank of each other 's bodies.
And when they surfaced for air, she poured champagne and slipped a Mickey Finn into Kattina's glass.
With her lesbian lover out cold to the world she searched the houseboat.
Kattina was anything but tidy, and she found what she was looking for under a pile of underwear.
Her bank book showed regular monthly deposits, and an address book contained lists of military numbers.
Many were crossed out, and she guessed they were men who'd been killed or posted.
At the back of the book was a list of female names; each followed by a sexual deviation.
She guessed these were harlots who were prepared to entertain the men according to their preferences.
She wondered how many were selling information, and how many were dupes looking for a good time.
The following morning, she rang the number given her by Lord C, and a meeting was arranged in the Tutankhamen exhibition.
Her contact turned out to be a small, fussily-dressed man in a large panama.
She told him of her suspicions.
‘My God, you've done well, Miss Jacqui.’
‘What will you do?’
‘If you're prepared to take her place, I'll have this Kattina woman pulled in.’
‘How can you do that?
She's an Egyptian citizen.’
‘I have special relations with the chief of police.’
‘Taking her place is a tall order.’
‘You must persuade her that it would be best for both of you.
I'm sure she'd rather share the spoils than lose them altogether.’
‘What makes you think she'll trust me?
I haven't given her a hint that I might have Nazi sympathies.’
‘From what you've said, she's hooked on you, so milk the relationship.’
‘Just like that?’
‘You're a top-class agent, my girl.
I don't know which department employs you, but you can come and work for me whenever you like.’
‘Thanks, but I wouldn't want to stay in this country too long.
It's one long round of gin and backsheesh.’
He laughed.
‘But you'll do this job before you leave?’
‘Okay.
I'll try, but you'll have to give me a few days before you pull her in.’
‘Just tell me when.’
Two matelots lowered Ingrid from the submarine into the tiny rubber boat.
Her heart was in her mouth.
She'd hated the submarine journey across the North Sea, especially as she was a bit claustrophobic, but stepping over the side into that ridiculous little rubber boat was terrifying.
A fair swell was running, and the boat bobbed up and down like a cork on the surface.
She sat motionless, watching her companion paddle.
The grey outline of the submarine slowly disappeared into the darkness, and they were alone.
She could see nothing through the night — and hear nothing other than the sound of rolling waves — until the outline of the steep cliffs towered above her.
They were in a narrow Norwegian fiord, and her companion was a Norwegian freedom fighter.
She'd had to wait the best part of a month at Holmsly Manor, and then everything had happened at once.
She'd been given a rail warrant to Lowestoft, where the RTO had handed her over to the navy.
An MTB had whisked her to a waiting submarine, and her second assignment had begun.
The Nazis were working on a new advanced midget submarine, and had chosen a quiet Norwegian fiord as the testing ground.
They were researching a new power source that was being developed by a Danish engineer.
Norwegian freedom fighters had discovered the existence of the base; but had no way of ascertaining whether the Dane was a collaborator or a forced worker.
That was Ingrid's job.
British Naval Intelligence had decided to raid the base; and intended to return with the Dane if he was an Allied sympathiser.
A Norwegian freedom fighter who knew the area was to take her to the nearby village, after which she was on her own.
The rolling of the waves against the rocky coastline made landing difficult, but finally they scrambled ashore.
The winding path up the steep rocks was made more  difficult by the darkness, and Ingrid was glad of the Norwegian's hand to guide her.
All went like clockwork until they reached the top, where a keen wind cut through their thick overalls, making them shiver.
Dawn had begun to break, and daylight crept over the barren countryside.
They stood hand in hand, breathing heavily from their exertions, when two shots rang out.
They fell to the ground.
Someone was taking potshots at them.
Her soldier companion urged her forward along a gully, which they crawled along until a gap between two boulders gave them a clear view of the landscape.
Two Nazi infantrymen were scurrying towards the cover of a large rock.
The Norwegian killed the leader with a single shot, but the other man went to ground.
It was the first time Ingrid had been under small-arms fire.
She was nervous.
She lay in the shelter of the gully, close to the Norwegian's side.
‘What are we going to do?
Are we trapped?’
He chuckled.
‘It's that bastard Nazi who's trapped.’
‘Then we should get away all right?’
‘If there are no more around, yes.’
‘Do you think there are?’
‘I saw a motorbike combination by the side of the track.
They're probably a routine patrol.’
‘What are we going to do?’
‘He'll have to make a dash for it, and when he does — bam, he's dead.’
‘Are you sure?’
‘I've got a bead on him, and as long as I can hold it I'll have him when he moves.
It depends which of us has the most patience.’
Fifteen minutes ticked by, but to Ingrid it was a lifetime.
Her soldier hadn't moved a muscle.
He continued to stare unflinchingly along the sights of his rifle.
Waiting for his prey to rise from the hollow and dash across open ground.
Ingrid was bursting for a wee.
She lowered herself further down into the gully, and urinated on the ground.
When she returned, her soldier grunted, ‘You've made me want to go.
She knew he mustn't move.
There was only one thing for it.
‘I'll get it out for you.’
‘Thanks, pal.’
She fumbled at his fly.
It took her some time to unfasten the stiff buttons.
Her prolonged fumbling had aroused him.
He was hard to her fingers.
‘It seems it has more on its mind than a pee.’
‘You're a big girl.
You know what to do, don't you?’
‘I could wait for it to shrivel up.’
‘That's not very friendly.’
‘You'd rather I tossed you off?’
‘What do you think?’
His partially-aroused prick became as hard as iron as she gently massaged his loose foreskin.
She eased it free from the restraining material, and as she did so she felt his body tense and a shot rang out.
‘Did you get him?’
‘No.
It was just to keep his head down while I moved.’
As he spoke, he changed his position so that he was standing on a ledge with his shoulders and forearms resting on a parapet.
She found she was still holding on to his cock like a little girl might hold her brother's hand.
‘Why did you have to move?
Have you got cramp?’
‘I thought I'd make it easier for you to suck me off.’
‘Who said I wanted to gobble you?’
‘Any sniper will tell you it improves his aim one hundred per cent.
You don't want me to miss, do you?’
‘That's blackmail.’
‘Okay, you hold the rifle, and I'll go down on you.’
She manoeuvred herself so she was crouched between him and the rocks, and taking his long hard knob by the root she began waving it under her nose like a conductor's baton.
‘What the hell are you doing?
Conducting a band?’
Her mouth dived at him, swift as an eagle.
Her fresh young lips closed hungrily around the stiff pole of his organ.
With a shake of her head, she had the thickness of his sexuality wedged into the back of her throat.
She worked her hot tongue the length of that pulsing rod, and back again.
Her small hand slipped under the heavy scrotum to manipulate his two delicate round balls with her supple fingers, and to gently scratch the wrinkled flesh of that hairy pouch with her fingernails.
For long moments she toyed with his anxious, quivering wand, dexterously using her warm wet tongue and soft lips to guide him to the brink of orgasm.
She felt his staff tremble, and she sucked with her lips to milk him with the expertise of a milkmaid.
She felt his warm stickiness on her tongue, and rolled it around her mouth before placing her lips over the tip of his dying penis to suck up the last few drops.
He was silent, as she carefully replaced his sleeping member where she had got it from, and buttoned his fly.
When she finished her task, she watched him climb out on to the parapet.
She wondered whether he'd gone mad, and panicked.
She grabbed at his clothes to pull him back.
‘Christ, man.
What are you doing?’
‘It's okay.
The Nazi's dead.
I got him with that last shot.’
‘Why didn't you tell me?’
‘And stop you when you were enjoying yourself?’
‘Enjoying myself?
You bastard.’
He laughed aloud, and she couldn't help grinning.
She helped him push the motorbike combination over the cliffs into the sea, and drop the two dead men down a deep narrow crevice where they weren't likely to be discovered.
They set off, soon reaching their destination, a small village accessible by one unfinished road, located near the complex which housed the Nazi research team.
It was classified as high security, and there were more guards than engineers working in the compound.
The only civilian workers were a dozen female domestic workers.
One of these women had been paid to pretend to be sick, and Ingrid was to take her place.
The woman, who worked as a waitress in the sergeant's mess, told Ingrid all she knew about the compound, and advised her to steer clear of the cookhouse.
The chef who ran it was a warrant officer and a bastard, who ruled with a rod of iron.
He  did very little work himself, but bullied everybody who did.
Ingrid would be particularly vulnerable, for he was a depraved lecher, and she was young and beautiful.
Too beautiful to be sent into that thieves' kitchen, the woman sniffed.
The chef warrant officer was every bit as odious as Ingrid had been told to expect.
He took one look at her, and despatched another girl to the sergeant's mess.
She was to work in the kitchens.
From the way he looked at her, she reckoned she'd be lucky to last the morning without being molested.
She was right.
After less than an hour, he deliberately nudged her as she carried a pile of plates.
The sound of the crash turned every head, and they smiled as they saw her hustled away towards his office.
He stood in front of her threateningly, and she wondered just what he had in mind for her.
Whatever it was, she had to submit.
She prayed he wasn't a sadist as well as a bully.
‘If you want to keep your job, you'll have to do a lot better than that.’
‘Yes, sir.
I'm sorry.
I'll try.’
‘I'm not certain that it wasn't deliberate.’
‘No, sir.
It was an accident.
I couldn't help it.’
‘You were half asleep.
Daydreaming.’
‘No.’
‘You need something to wake you up, don't you, young lady?’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘And what would wake you up?’
She didn't reply.
She couldn't be certain what he wanted of her.
She didn't know whether to assure him that she needed a dose of his big prick, or a damn good spanking.
He didn't wait for her reply.
‘Get across that desk.’
She hurriedly did as she was instructed, stretching her body right over the wooden top of the desk to grip the far edge.
‘Are you going to thrash me, sir?’
‘I should; but this time I'll give you a choice.’
‘Yes, sir.
Thank you, sir.’
He whipped up the back of her skirt, and kneaded the cheeks of her knickered bum with one enormous hand.
‘Perhaps you would rather a good shafting than the whip?’
‘Yes, sir.
I would.’
‘Then tell me, girl.’
‘Please, sir.
I want you to fuck me.
I want you to stick your hot prick into me.
I deserve it, don't I, sir?
I deserve a damn good seeing-to.’
He needed no more encouragement.
She felt her knickers being jerked down to her knees, and his knob being pressed between her legs in one frenzied movement.
She held on to the far side of the desk, and moaned.
‘Give it to me, sir.
Pump it right up me.’
His cock felt as hard and as long as a barber's pole, as he held it in his fist and ground the round, blunt tip against her tender haven.
She strove to relax: that was the secret she'd learned at Holmsly Manor.
And suddenly she found she was wet.
Gummy mucus was oozing from her slit to swamp the roving tip of his pego, and it was rapidly spreading all over her private parts.
Her short curly pelt, and the thick folded lips of her pudenda, were moist and slippery.
And then she was most cruelly penetrated.
An impatient, callous thrust which ended in her impalement to the hilt.
She howled in simulated anguish, and groaned her lament.
‘There, you Norwegian slut.
How do you like that inside you?’
‘Oh God, yes.
Poke me, sir.
Really fuck me hard.
Make it hurt.’
One huge hand was already placed in the small of her back, pinning her helplessly to the desk: then she felt him wind a thick hank of her blonde hair around his other fist, and jerk her head back.
‘Yell, you whore.
Let everyone know you're being humped.’
She yelped and squealed, working her voice to a crescendo as she bawled at the top of her voice.
As the  pitch of her voice rose, so he increased the tempo of his truncheon grinding inside her.
She felt his excitement mounting, and to accommodate him, she screamed.
As the air rushed from her lungs, so his spunk flooded her innards.
‘You're a real good shag, I'll say that.
Better than that doxy you replaced.’
‘Thank you, sir.’
‘Did you enjoy it?’
‘Yes, sir.
May I make a request?’
‘What?’
‘Let me work in the sergeant's mess, and I'll come to you every day to entertain you.’
‘Each and every day?’
‘Yes, I promise.’
‘Okay, girlie.
You're on.’
There were only half a dozen sergeants in the mess, but the numbers were made up by the civilian engineers who worked on the project.
Ingrid soon discovered from Ilse that the two waitresses had been supplementing their wages by selling sex.
Ilse was a slim attractive country girl of eighteen, with bobbed black hair and a rather long nose.
She made it clear she was making hay while the sun shone.
She didn't like the Nazis, but she liked their money.
After the evening meal had been served and cleared away, Ingrid heard a loud, concerted clapping begin in the dining room.
Ilse slipped her pinafore off with a smile.
‘They're clapping for me.’
‘Why?’
‘To do a show for them.’
‘What sort of a show?’
‘Whatever they want.
Come and watch.’
Ingrid watched her, as she skipped lightly before her eager audience and gave a little half curtsy.
The excited smile on her face told Ingrid that the girl was enjoying herself.
She was obviously a raving exhibitionist.
A country girl, who, because of the Nazi occupation, was able to live a more abandoned life.
‘What would you like?’
‘Give us your chicken routine, Ilse.’
‘Yes, lay an egg for us, Ilse.’
As Ilse happily slipped out of her thin white overall, Ingrid noticed the audience tossing money on to a plate which was being passed around.
Ilse wore no bra, and was twirling her panties around her head in no time.
She had a slim, girlish figure with small breasts like little apples, and thighs like those of an athlete rather than a glamour girl.
Whatever her shape, the men adored her.
She pranced in front of them, more like a circus pony than a chorus girl.
There was a general atmosphere of bawdy fun and anticipation.
A bowl of eggs was produced, and Ilse, standing with legs akimbo, began to push them up into her quim.
Holding her thick cunt lips apart with the fingers of one hand, she carefully inserted the eggs, one after another, into her receptive burrow.
Ingrid watched in amazement as the eggs disappeared as if they were being sucked into quicksand, and looked up to see every man's eyes riveted upon Ilse's gaping crack.
As the last one slowly disappeared into her overstuffed purse, so she crossed her legs to retain them inside her and threw her arms above her head to shout.
‘There gentlemen.
I'm full.
Get the horse.’
Two men grabbed a battered old rocking horse from the corner, and rushed it towards Ilse.
With one hand clamped between her legs to avoid dropping her load, she stepped astride the wooden animal, and gingerly lowered herself to the saddle.
It was a big horse for a child, but it suited Ilse's slim, girlish body admirably.
The two men rocked her: good, hard, vigorous rocking which had her bouncing in the saddle like a rodeo cowgirl.
The audience roared their approval as the rocking became wilder and wilder until she began to utter little squeals of delight.
‘Faster, faster.
I'm coming.’
The audience hushed, watching her face expectantly, as she writhed and bucked in the saddle, holding her head between her palms, and whimpering in delirious ecstasy.
‘I've come.
Oh God, I've come.
Help me off.’
Strong hands lifted her from the rocking horse, and sat her on the table.
She raised herself on her elbows, pushed her thighs forward, and parted her legs as wide as if she were going to give birth.
The eggs popped out of her one by one to the approving ‘oohs’ and ‘aahs’of her enthusiastic audience.
When it was over, she smiled at Ingrid.
‘Money for old rope.
Still, they enjoyed it.’
It was nearly a week before Ingrid dared to ask for a transfer to the officer's mess.
She had religiously sought out the warrant officer chef every day to offer him her tail, and by the sixth day she had him purring like a kitten.
The officer's mess was smaller than the sergeant's.
It catered for three Wehrmacht officers, the Danish research engineer and his chief assistant, and a young SS officer who was the Dane's personal security escort.
It was the first time she'd seen the Dane who was her target.
He was a tall thin man with a stoop, who was rarely seen without a pipe clenched between his teeth.
His gingerish fair hair was balding, but he wore a full beard which was nearly red in colour.
As she bustled about the mess, he didn't so much as look at her, which meant she would have to comer him to talk to him.
On the other hand, his SS escort rarely took his eyes off her, so she decided that perhaps he was the key to the problem.
She played him patiently for two days before she hooked him, and reeled him in.
She allowed him to corner her in the pantry.
‘I notice that you don't go back to the village in the afternoon.’
‘It's not my home.
I'm in digs.’
‘Would you care to walk with me this afternoon?’
‘I'd like that.’
The compound was quiet; the afternoon was hot.
He took her to the deserted camp laundry: a large hut with a great copper the size of a steam-engine, a line of deep sinks, and rows of drying lines.
He was completely open  about what he wanted.
He enjoyed bondage.
Would she be prepared to be tied up?
She pretended she had no idea what he meant.
He explained without the slightest embarrassment, and while he did so he looped lengths of the rope clothes' line by his feet.
‘Shall we begin, Ingrid?’
‘You promise not to hurt me?’
‘I promise.’
‘All right, I suppose so.’
He guided her backwards to one of the posts which supported the roof.
She felt the hard wood press against her back and buttocks, as she was forced to stand against it.
He commenced by criss-crossing the rope around her wrists.
‘When I was very young, I saw a picture in a book.
A book about medieval knights.
It was of a lovely damsel tied to a tree.’
The rope was pulled tight, and her wrists were secured in front of her.
He instructed her to raise her arms above her head, and moved behind the post to wind the rope binding her wrists to the post.
‘The picture disturbed me.
I couldn't get it out of my mind.
I was too young to know anything of sexual images, but I used to imagine all the local ladies tied to trees.’
Her wrists were by now fastened to the post, and she was helpless.
He took another length of rope, and lovingly wound it around the post and her waist.
‘When I was an adolescent, I saw a similar scene in a movie.
The heroine was tied up by gangsters, and left completely helpless.’
The rope cut into her stomach as he bound her to the post from just beneath her breasts to below her navel.
It was like being in a straightjacket.
Unable to move her upper body, she watched him roll a small bundle of laundry and insert it between her buttocks and the post: thereby thrusting her thighs forward.
‘I used to imagine I found the woman in the movie.
She was bound and helpless, and I've masturbated a million times imagining girls I know in such situations.’
He coiled the rope around her thighs, so she had no leeway to wriggle, and then, taking a long copper stick, he secured her ankles to either end.
Her position was such that her feet were wide apart, and she was unable to close her legs.
To raise her knees would cause the ropes securing her body to cut into her flesh.
She was virtually helpless, with her legs wide apart, and her vulva utterly defenceless and exposed.
‘Since I became an officer in the SS, I've often been in a position to satisfy my craving.’
To complete her feeling of helplessness, he gagged her with a wide strip of thick linen, and stepped behind her out of sight.
When he reappeared, he was naked, and she quickly noticed that his member hung limply.
He remained unaroused while he wrenched the skirt of her dress up, and cut her knickers away with a sharp knife.
The knife frightened her, and she was relieved when he threw it down.
Whether because of the thrill of stripping off her knickers so barbarously, or of having her helpless, he suddenly began to breathe quickly, and his prong swelled to working proportions.
He balled her urgently: without feeling; without love.
It was purely penetration followed by frantic movement, and a squirt of semen.
Afterwards, he sat and watched her: drinking in the picture of her despoiled, defenceless beauty.
She knew instinctively that he would like to leave her like that; but he didn't.
He untied her hands without speaking, and walked away.
She cut the ropes with the knife he'd given her, and wondered at the strange types of deviation men dreamed up; deviations she'd have to endure while she worked for C's Circus.
She was now only a step away from her target, so she wasn't far from getting to know him well enough to question him about his allegiance — just as long as she could keep his escort sweet, which would probably mean more bondage if that was the only way he could get his nuts off.
Nine
Madeleine had been in Paris for over a month, and was still ignorant of the fate of Jeanne.
They'd been separated in the fracas which followed their parachute descent into northern France, and she feared that Jeanne had been killed in the fighting.
She had no way of knowing that her friend had been picked up by the Communist Maquis with whom she was now living.
Madeleine had been busy since her arrival in Paris.
Even though the arrangements made by London had gone wrong, she had still found herself in a position to fight the Nazis.
The group who had taken her under their wing were Parisian bandits, who had taken to harassing the Nazis since the occupation.
Madeleine was only tolerated because she had become the mistress of their leader's son, Chicot, who was a psychopath and a cold-blooded killer.
While she was under his protection she was grudgingly accepted by the rest of the gang.
She'd accompanied Chicot on several sorties against Nazi occupation troops, and had been with the gang on a daring bank raid.
Success had been achieved through the meticulous planning of their leader, Papa.
But when they attacked an armoured van containing the Nazi payroll without his guidance, Chicot was killed, and Madeleine was captured.
She was taken to a small Gestapo prison near the Bastille, and thanked her lucky stars it wasn't Gestapo HQ on the Avenue Foch.
She'd heard sickening tales of barbarous  Gestapo torture, and of prisoners who were never seen again.
She prayed she would somehow be able to avoid a journey there.
The cell she occupied overnight was clean, and she was treated humanely.
So far so good, but her heart missed a beat when she was, inevitably, called for interrogation.
She was shown into a large office with a hard-backed chair facing the interview desk.
She sat on the chair and waited.
Twenty minutes later, the door flew open, and an SS Obersturmfuhrer barked at her, ‘Who told you to sit, woman?
Get up.’
She jumped to her feet.
‘Sorry.’
‘You address me as ‘Sir’, or ‘Obersturmfuhrer’.’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘Are you wearing knickers?’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘Take them off.’
‘Yes, sir.’
She hitched up her dress, and swiftly reaching beneath the full skirt, whipped her knickers down her shapely legs.
She knew it was the beginning of the humiliation that would be heaped upon her, and she was determined not to be broken by it.
She recalled the Jewish woman who had lectured them at Holmsly Manor.
She had experienced Gestapo brutality in Berlin before the war.
Yet her first impressions of the Obersturmfuhrer weren't of a brutal man.
He was a slim, handsome man in his late twenties with a polished manner.
A suave sadist, perhaps.
She shivered.
‘Put your hands on your head, and wait.
I'll be back in a few minutes for our little talk.’
It was forty-five minutes before he returned.
Her arms and legs ached, and because of her pending interrogation she was ever conscious of being stripped of her knickers.
It was ridiculous, for the flimsy garment could give her no protection, but nevertheless she felt very vulnerable without them.
The man obviously knew what he was doing.
‘What's your name, Mam'selle?’
‘Madeleine Sabbe, sir.’
‘Your accent is not Parisian, is it?
In fact I doubt whether you are French.’
‘I was born in Belgium, sir.’
‘What are you doing in Paris?’
‘I came here last year, sir.
As a nightclub singer.’
‘And do you still sing in a nightclub?’
‘No, sir.
I left to live with a boyfriend, who turned out to be a bad lot.
He was a small-time gangster.’
‘Was?’
‘You killed him in the raid on the armoured van.
He'd found out there was money aboard.’
‘I don't believe it, Madeleine.
I think you are a member of the Resistance, and if I prove it you'll be shot.’
‘No, sir.
I know nothing about the Resistance, and have nothing against the forces of the occupation.
Please believe me, sir.’
She had managed to project a sob into her voice, as if she wasn't far from tears.
‘You said that like a little girl caught telling lies.
I think I'll smack your bottom, little girl.’
‘No, sir.
Please don't, sir.
I'm not telling lies.’
She was forced to bend over the hard-backed chair, her hands flat on the seat.
She felt the full skirt of her Summer dress being swept up to bare her silken thighs and round firm bottom.
She waited with her buttocks bared like a naughty girl, while he selected an instrument of corporal punishment.
Having made his choice, he showed her a short, stout leather strap, before applying it to her naked seat.
It stung like billy-o.
The leather thwacked down on to the white tender flesh of her bonny twin moons to leave red scorch marks across the ivory white skin.
She yelped and whined, as the stout little strap stoked a fierce glow in her smarting fundament.
‘Oh, ouch.
Please, stop.
I'm not telling lies.
Ooo.
I swear.
Aah.
Ouch.
Really I'm not.’
But he didn't stop.
The heat in her tail burnt like a furnace, as the little strap continued to pummel her sore behind.
It wasn't really the sting of the blows, but the  amount of time the thrashing continued that made her burst into a flood of tears.
‘Are you ready to tell me you lied?’
‘No, sir.
I didn't.
I didn't.’
‘Stand up and take all your clothes off.
I'll have you standing naked on that chair, Mam'selle.’
She heard herself snivelling like a child, and was extremely conscious of the tears rolling down her cheeks as she undressed.
He watched her climb on to the chair, and she saw him grin at the sight of her sore rump, which she thought must burn as brightly as any beacon.
He signalled her to wipe her eyes, and to place her hands on her head again; before he left her to snivel and to contemplate her abused derriere.
It seemed an age before he returned, and all that time she had been painfully aware of the blaze in her inflamed hind-quarters.
She was glad to be standing, for to sit would be agony.
‘Your backside looks sore, Mam'selle Madeleine.
Did you enjoy our little game?’
‘No, sir.’
‘I'm sorry, because we've finished playing games now.
You are a member of the Resistance, and I must know the names and location of your group.’
‘I know nothing of the Resistance, Obersturmfuhrer.’
‘Come to the window, Madeleine.
What do you see?’
She walked to the window, and stood beside him.
In the courtyard below a parade of SS thugs was being inspected.
‘Your SS soldiers, sir.’
‘If you don't co-operate, I'm afraid you'll be seeing a lot more of them.
No doubt you've heard of our interrogation methods.
For attractive women, the first persuasion is invariably multiple rape.
Do you fancy those men taking your body, one after the other?’
‘Oh Christ, no.
Surely you won't order that?
I've got no connection with the Resistance.
I'm nothing but a small-time  gangster's moll.’
‘I'd love to believe you, Madeleine.
I really would.
I'll  give you a little more time to think it over.’
He walked towards the door.
‘What are you going to do?’
‘I shall raffle you, to see who will be in the first half dozen.’
She was left alone in the room.
She certainly didn't like the idea of multiple rape.
She'd worked as a prostitute long enough to know she'd survive, but she didn't fancy six cocks one after the other without respite.
Yet she wouldn't be able to live with herself if she informed on Papa.
As she stood helplessly naked on the chair with her hands on her head, she felt embarrassed and angry.
Her backside still burned from the blistering spanking he'd given her, and now a queue of men were gloating over her nudity through the open door.
She realised that it had been deliberately left open to add to her humiliation.
She tried to shut it all out of her mind, and remember that she should consider herself lucky, for Avenue Foch would be a thousand times worse.
Twenty minutes later he returned, smiling as if he were her beau.
‘I've got a little game we can play.
You'll like that, won't you, Madeleine?’
‘Whatever you say, Obersturmfuhrer.’
‘Good.
Now, you get down from the chair and lie on your back on the bench.
Flat on your back, and raise your legs please.’
She stretched out on the narrow bench gazing at the ceiling, and he pushed her legs backwards until her knees were touching her shoulders.
She knew that in such an obscene position nothing was concealed from view.
Her open thighs allowed a complete picture of her genitals surrounded by their carpet of short curly pubic hair.
She was salaciously helpless before him.
He showed her a box of ordinary, clip-on clothes' pegs.
‘I'm going to ask you questions, Madeleine, and every time you answer no, I shall adorn you with one of these pegs.
Do you understand?’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘You are a member of the Resistance, aren't you?’
‘No.
She felt him pinch the fleshy outer folds of her labia between his fingers, and clip a peg on to it.
‘You know their leader?’
‘No.’
He conscientiously pinched the opposite fold of her sweet vulva, and fastened a second peg to her.
‘Then tell me where their HQ is in Paris.’
‘No.’
Another peg was clipped into place on her poor mistreated twat, and so it continued until there was no more room.
Two rows of pegs decorated her succulent crack, making it appear she had a wooden hedgehog between her legs.
But even when he left she didn't dare unpeg herself: she just lay still and waited.
In spite of her sore butt and the strange sensation between her legs, she wasn't unduly stressed.
She'd suffered worse treatment from punters in the past.
In fact, she was rather taken with the Obersturmfuhrer, who wasn't at all what she'd expected.
Her reveries were interrupted by the entrance of two female SS officers.
Tall, smart women strutting in their black uniforms and leather boots.
They laughed when they saw her.
‘The games lovers play!’
‘It was the Obersturmfuhrer.’
The woman chuckled.
‘He's like a lover, isn't he?
But we're here to change all that.’
The two amazons crossed to her, and forced her legs right back until her knees touched her ears.
The cheeks of her rounded arse curved up from the bench to culminate in her wide-open thighs, and the wooden hedgehog perched amongst the foliage of her lush bush.
It didn't surprise her that their actions were more cruel than the Obersturmfuhrer's, as they passed a wide leather strap over her body and under the bench.
When pulled tight it effectively secured her to the bench, and as it passed behind her knees, so her legs were strapped in the position where her feet were above her head.
‘Okay, little lady.
No more games.
You're going to get a real whipping now, and the only time you speak is to tell us you're ready to inform on your friends.
Understand?’
As she nodded, she saw the older woman swinging a whip.
It was a short whip tapering quickly to a fine tip.
She'd come across one like it in a house of ill-repute where it was known as a squirt.
She sighed with relief.
She knew it would give a nasty sting, but it wouldn't cut her flesh to ribbons.
She was terribly conscious of the lewd position she'd been forced to adopt, and was very aware of her thighs spread wide as she lay defenceless on her back, doubled up like a  jack-knife .
Worst of all, her feminine genitals were displayed for all the world to see, lewdly decorated by two rows of pegs clipped to her vulva.
She tried to banish the humiliation to the back of her mind, but it was worse than the physical pain.
Once she had admitted that to herself, she realised the aim of these people.
At Avenue Foch they used physical hurt to break their prisoners, but here they used humiliation.
Well, humiliation was of the mind.
It couldn't kill or maim her.
She could tolerate that.
Her spirits rose.
She'd see the war won yet, and these bastards defeated.
The beating was methodical.
The little squirt cut across her bare backside at intervals of fifteen seconds.
Every stroke was applied with precision by the bitch of an SS officer, and after each stroke she would smile and run the whip lovingly through her fingers.
If she wasn't enjoying flogging her victim, she was giving a good performance.
Madeleine strove to relax, but the pain was real.
The bulk of the whip was always aimed at the tightly-curved cheeks of her arse, but the tip flicked indiscriminately on to her thighs and belly, and sometimes snaked into the tender cleft between her plump twin moons.
She allowed herself the luxury of screaming, and yelped as each stroke ignited a searing throb in her outraged fundament.
And when she thought it was about to finish, the whip began to flick at the pegs.
One by one their grip on her cunt lips was broken until she was free of them.
She bawled lustily as each peg was snatched away, and screeched when the tip  of the squirt went a centimetre too far to flick her quim lips.
What happened next took Madeleine completely by surprise.
All her concentration was on the squirt.
She didn't notice the second SS officer raise her skirt to her waist, and mount the bench above her head.
The officer had quickly positioned herself with one foot on either side of Madeleine's head, and was crouched down over her face.
She watched the bitch pull the crotch of her knickers aside, and just managed to close her eyes before a gush of warm piss splashed over her face.
She heard a harsh laugh, and a voice shout at her, ‘Open your mouth, French whore.
You'll be getting no champagne for a long, long time.
You'll have to make do with this.’
The urine sprayed over her face and neck and breasts, and into her open mouth.
She choked on her own revulsion; and she panicked.
She began to struggle, to twist her head, and writhe against her bonds.
She screamed wildly, and the piddle poured down her throat.
She spluttered and choked.
They had broken her.
She was on the brink of defeat.
With one huge effort, she forced herself to relax.
She stopped struggling; she swallowed the liquid; and she somehow managed a wry smile.
‘It'll never take the place of vintage wine.’
The two women exchanged glances, and released her.
She sat on the edge of the bench, nonchalantly swinging her legs.
It took a lot of effort to appear casual.
Her bottom stung as if she'd sat on a nest of hornets, but she wanted to show them she'd survived.
‘You've been brave, little one.
So we'll let you pleasure yourself.’
She said nothing, and kept her eyes downcast to avoid looking into their faces.
She must do nothing to antagonise the bitches.
‘However, your bravery will do you no good when we take you to the Avenue Foch, where there will be no kind Obersturmfuhrer to hinder our work.
You'll find you'll be only too pleased to talk to us then.’
She watched the younger woman place a strange object in front of her.
It had the appearance of a tall metal candlestick, but in place of the candle was a fat rubber dildo.
When it was positioned between her open legs, the tip of the dildo was about nine inches below her labia.
‘Carry on.
You have our permission to pleasure yourself.’
She felt such a clown, standing before them with that vulgar object between her open legs, but she slowly sank down towards the disgusting dildo and manipulated her thighs until the blunt tip was nudging at the portals of her reluctant orifice.
By rubbing her clitoris with two fingers, she aroused her sexuality sufficiently to ensure a secretion of bodily fluid to moisten her unwilling channel.
Carefully, she inserted the thick blunt object into the entrance of her slippery tube: and sank down on to it.
The two Gestapo officers watched her without emotion, while she masturbated wildly as if deriving pleasure from her actions.
They watched patiently until she had impaled herself to the hilt on the huge dildo, and then they left.
She was left alone for some time, but didn't dare move away from the tall candlestick and the rubber dildo.
She held the tip of it just inside her pouting snatch, and only sank down on to it when she saw the door opening.
It was the Obersturmfuhrer.
‘Are you doing that because you enjoy it?’
‘No.’
‘Did those cows hurt you?’
‘Not really.’
He pointed to a door.
‘Go and clean yourself up.’
It was a small, sparklingly clean toilet and wash room.
She soaped her face and shoulders and breasts where the filthy Gestapo cow had pissed over her.
It was difficult to see her backside in the mirror, but she could make out the pink weals which had been raised on her tender white bum-cheeks by the little squirt.
It was sore, but the skin wasn't damaged too much, and there was no bleeding.
Back in the room, he made her kneel before him, as he sat on the upright chair.
Her abused posterior faced him, and he began to soothe it by gently applying a liquid cream.
It felt deliciously cool to the hot flesh.
‘I'm sorry that you haven't spoken.
Once you leave here I can't protect you, Madeleine.’
‘I know.’
‘However, I can tell you something which may have a bearing on your stubbornness.’
‘What is that?’
‘An hour ago, a man we know as a Parisian gangster was killed by one of our sentries.
Before he died, he cursed us for killing his son.
Apparently, his son was the albino who was shot during your raid on our armoured van.’
Papa, she thought.
Papa was dead.
Now there was no need to remain silent.
With both Chicot and Papa gone, there was no one left to protect.
The remainder had all been in favour of killing her.
She had no allegiance to them.
She told the Obersturmfuhrer all she knew of the gang, and of her involvement.
‘It's good that you have spoken, but you will have to go for trial because you killed a man on that raid.’
‘I know, but I miss the Avenue Foch, don't I?’
‘Yes, you won't be sent there.’
He looked at her small dainty body as she knelt before him.
He'd thought she was something special from the moment she'd been brought in.
He'd never allowed his personal feelings to interfere with his work before, but her cute, pocket Venus body; the worried look of fearful apprehension on her pretty face; and her utter stoicism had somehow got under his skin.
‘Stand up and face me, Madeleine.
I may be able to keep you here as my mistress.
You would be confined to the building, naturally, and you would have to live in the cells, but it would probably save your life.’
‘Thank you, sir,’ she said simply.
‘I'd like that.’
She saw that to stay here under his wing would be the best thing that could happen to her.
There would always be a possibility of escape once she got to know the routine.
She could never like the man, because of what he  was, but he had been kind to her considering he was her inquisitor.
Her training and her sense of self-survival told her to consolidate her sexual hold over him.
She knelt between his knees looking small and vulnerable: her lips pouting provocatively, her eyes full of feminine promise.
Her expert fingers fumbled clumsily at his fly, as she wanted to present herself as a nervous, but willing, maiden.
He sat back watching her; a quizzical look on his face.
Once she was inside his trousers, her slim fingers caressed his sleeping organ until it jumped in her hand as if it had been bitten.
She felt it swell like a balloon inflated by a pressure pump.
She eased it free, allowing it to stand proudly erect in the open air.
She was too sore to want it inside her, and her mouth still retained the lingering taste of urine.
Gently, she took the bottle of liquid cream he had used on her ravished buttocks, and poured a liberal dose into the palm of her hand.
She rubbed her palms together to spread the cream evenly, and placed both fists around his pulsating knob to massage the cream into the smooth, hot surface.
The cool cream, and the expert manipulation of her dancing fingers produced a hard-on like he'd never had before.
She leaned forward to stroke the blunt, creamy helmet with rhythmical little movements of her swinging boobs, before rubbing his thick foreskin between thumb and fingers to jerk him off.
He came over her sweet melons and into the hollow of her throat, while she massaged the warm spunk into her ivory-white skin.
She knew by the expression on his face that he was hers, and she was confident her sexual ability could keep him happy until she was ready to move on.
And that was as soon as she could escape from this bloody prison.
Ten
Christine woke up feeling horny.
Her fingers slipped between her thighs; she was wet.
She turned on her back, and idly fingered her clit.
He was asleep in the other twin bed.
She wondered whether to climb in beside him, or quietly masturbate.
Twin beds were a put-off; a typically American idea straight out of the movies by way of the Hayes censorship office.
She'd been in the States for nine months now, and was getting to feel like a native.
She glanced at the sleeping man.
He was a young Irish American who'd picked her up in a New York bar a week ago.
Who he was or what he did, she didn't know, and didn't care.
He was amusing, and a tiger between the sheets.
That was a change from the senators and congressmen and captains of industry, whom she'd been seducing since she arrived on these golden shores.
They were all older men, who gave her little satisfaction: although to be honest, she hadn't gone to their beds for gratification.
Her assignment for C's Circus was to manipulate men of power and influence to work towards unity with the British Commonwealth in their desperate fight for world freedom.
She decided that fingering was doing little for her, except making her more and more randy.
She crossed to the other bed, and gently pulled back the sheet which covered him.
He was lying on his back, and if he was awake he didn't show it.
She sat at the foot of the bed, and appraised his muscular young body.
She wanted to  kiss his firm stomach and thighs; to lick his smooth tanned skin; to bury her face in the soft mat of curly hair which covered his chest.
She remembered last night.
She'd done that, and more; now she wanted it again.
It was the same each time she slept with him.
Maybe she was falling in love.
She tossed the idea aside, and dived down on to his slumbering dick.
It came alive at the touch of her delectable lips, and she could feel his zealous prong swelling inside her mouth.
She knew he wanted her as much as she desired him.
Last night had been wonderful; but then, every time her body played host to his thick prick it was sheer heaven.
It was a nice thick cock, too.
She sucked in her cheeks on it, manipulating her lithe tongue around its thickness.
Not very long, but thick.
She could get it all into her mouth, although the thick, blunt tip felt like a wedge in her throat.
Slipping her hands beneath his scrotum, she urged the two heavy testicles up towards his stomach.
While her busy tongue licked the wrinkled pouch, she could feel the thick shaft bouncing against her forehead.
She sucked each ball deep into her mouth, and heard him moan with pleasure.
So, he was awake.
She wanted him inside her.
Her luscious honeypot was dripping mucus at the thought of welcoming his handsome John Thomas.
She grabbed his hand, and urged him to sit up.
He glanced down at his thick cock, which was standing up like a telegraph pole.
‘Someone's been hard at work, I see.’
‘One of your girlfriends, maybe?’
‘I was dreaming Hedy Lamarr was giving me head.’
‘Screw Hedy Lamarr.’
‘I was getting to that!’
She took a swipe at him, as she turned to kneel, clasping the wooden footrail.
Her thighs were well spread, her back arched, and her backside was thrust out towards him like some amorous baboon.
She made it very plain what she wanted.
Christine had no inhibitions.
‘Take me from the back, doggie fashion: and you can pretend I'm who you like.’
He got to his knees behind her, and manoeuvred his pulsing pego between her open thighs.
She was soaking wet.
The stickiness drenched her genitals, and spread down the inside of her legs.
He slipped into her squelching hole as easily as a knife into butter: and she moaned blissfully when she felt herself well and truly corked.
‘There's only one woman I want, Christine.
And she's got me trapped deep inside her cunt!’
She squeezed him with her vaginal walls, as he moved his goodly weapon, so slowly and so deliberately, inside her.
She felt him lean forward over her back, his chest and stomach bearing down on her as he reached for her sweet bubbies, swinging like ripe peaches beneath her.
As he kneaded her luscious hanging fruit, so he allowed his full weight to crush her slim body until she collapsed on to her stomach.
He was perfectly still on top of her.
His stiff rod was still cosily tucked inside her jubilant love box, his chin dug into her shoulder, and his lips were close to her ear.
‘Have you any idea what I do for a living, Christine?’
‘You're a professional copulator?’
‘I'm FBI.’
‘A Fed.
One of Hoover's men?’
‘That's right.
Does it make any difference?’
Her heart missed a beat.
She was certain his hand cupping her left breast must have felt the flutter.
‘No…
Should it?’
‘I've a proposition to put to you.’
‘You mean all this has been FBI work?’
‘No, Christine.
I don't mean that.
The idea that you might be the person we've been looking for came after I'd met you.’
‘What is it that is so important it can't wait until we've finished screwing?’
He tried to move inside her, but she gripped him so tightly that there might have been a claw inside her vagina.
‘There's a man inside the Defence Department who we want to know more about.’
‘What's he done?
Committed some sort of crime against America?
Like shouting out loud that they should be fighting a war.’
He smiled to himself.
The girl wasn't afraid to say what she believed.
Two days later, she sat in a small bar, which was the latest haunt of the upwardly-mobile in Washington DC.
She knew the man by sight, as he was amongst her tennis fans.
She'd decided to go along with the FBI for a laugh, and because it might possibly help British Intelligence.
However, she decided not to tell Lord C at the moment.
She'd see what developed first.
Her target — the man she knew by sight — sat at the bar.
She went over to sit next to him.
He noticed her immediately.
‘Say, you're the Aussie tennis player, aren't you?’
‘That's right.’
‘The girl with the great forearm drive.’
‘So they tell me.’
‘That's some strength you've got in that arm, lady.
I bet you could smack  ass harder than my old Nanny.’
‘Wanna try, buster?’
‘Whenever you like, Nanny.’
‘No time like the present.’
She'd called his bluff.
She took his arm firmly, just above the elbow, and jerked him halfway off his stool.
He was putty in her hands from the beginning.
He hadn't been bluffing.
He liked to be dominated.
It was his bag.
‘Before we go any further — you are serious?
You're not just stringing me along?
Not just taking me for a ride?’
‘No, I like to call the tune.’
‘You really enjoy doing that?’
‘I do,’ she lied.
They took a taxi to his place, and once inside the cab his hand wandered on to her knee.
She gently covered it with her own, and deliberately pinched the flesh with her long fingernails.
It was vicious, and it drew blood.
He  squealed in pain and surprise, and snatched his hand away.
She grabbed his ear like a small boy, and growled in it, ‘Don't dare touch me, you oaf.’
‘I'm sorry.’
‘You will call me Madam when we're alone.’
‘Yes, M'am.’
She twisted his ear.
He flinched.
‘Madam,’ she said.
‘Yes, Madam.’
‘And when I shout, you jump to it.
‘Yes, Madam.’
By the way he was wriggling on the seat, she guessed he had an erection.
‘Have you got a hard-on?’
‘Yes, Madam.’
‘Get rid of it, quickly.
I'll tell you when to get an erection.’
‘I can't.
How about giving me a hand job?’
‘You lout, don't dare speak to me like that.’
She made him stand idly on the sidewalk while she made a big deal of paying the cab driver.
In the apartment, she rounded on him.
‘If you ever speak to me like that again, I'll flay the skin off your arse.
You're here to please me, and don't you forget it.’
‘I'm sorry, Madam.’
‘I'll tell you what to do, and you'll jump to it; or else!’
‘I understand, Madam.’
She could see him trembling in anticipation, and was surprised to feel a twinge of excitement in her own loins.
She'd never spanked a man in cold blood before.
‘Get your pants down.’
He said nothing.
She watched him unfasten his belt, and drop his trousers.
His underpants followed without him being told.
She thought he looked a pathetic figure of a man.
He reminded her of a naughty little boy standing with his trousers around his ankles, and his willy hanging like a worm between his legs.
She pulled a straight-backed dining chair into the middle of the room, and sat on it.
‘Come here.’
He waddled towards her, taking short little steps as his trousers trailed on the floor.
‘Over my knee.’
He stretched willingly across her knees, and she began to wallop his bare backside with sharp, stinging blows.
She heard him draw in breath sharply, but he made no other sound.
Her flailing palm cracked down on his eager butt, turning the skin a bright pink.
She had no intention of holding back.
He wanted a whipping; she'd give it to him.
She slapped his behind with blistering whacks until she became aware of the pain in her hand and wrist.
She hadn't realised a man's rear was so bony.
Unlike the rounded curves of a woman's plump nether cheeks, which were pleasantly padded, a man's bum was slim, with little flesh covering the bone.
She reckoned her hand must sting as much as his butt.
That was no way to go about things.
‘Get up, man.
My hand hurts.
Fetch me something to tan you properly.’
He returned with a wooden paddle.
An instrument which American parents favoured to warm naughty girls' and boys' posteriors.
About the size of a table-tennis bat, but more elongated in shape, it was guaranteed to scorch any recalcitrant bum.
She stepped back from the chair, and pointed to a nearby footstool.
‘Kneel on that stool, and stick your behind in the air.
I want your hands flat on the floor.’
She swung the paddle with such enthusiasm that it landed with mind-boggling force across his fundament, making him yelp and grab the cheeks of his tormented seat with both hands.
‘Get back down, man.
If you think that hurt, just wait until I get the hang of it.’
She leathered his inflamed haunches with calculated, stinging blows of the paddle, and between his yells realised she was as aroused as him.
Juices were seeping from her hot crack to soak into her knickers, and she could see he had the most enormous jack-on.
‘You're enjoying this, you disgusting man.
You want to masturbate, don't you?’
‘Do it for me, Madam, please.’
‘I'm not touching your repulsive prick.
You'll have to jerk yourself off.’
He needed no further invitation.
Reaching between his thighs, he grabbed his rock-hard chopper, and started frantically milking himself.
As she thrashed his bare arse with scorching strokes, she watched him ejaculate on to the floor.
‘Now you've shot your load, you can eat me out.’
She blindfolded him with her sopping knickers, and balanced herself on the edge of the table.
Forcing him to kneel, she guided him between her open thighs, before lying back to spread her legs.
His tongue darted into her glutinous slit and, locating her erect sensitive clitoris, rolled it between his lips like a ball bearing in oil.
She moaned.
Her clit was on fire.
The dancing heat spread to her loins, and she orgasmed.
As she did so, she felt him greedily lapping her love juice as if she was oozing nectar from heaven.
His busy tongue darted between her slippery cunt-lips into her wet gaping hole, like a little penis inside her pulsing vagina.
She gasped with delight as the tongue slid from her quim along the cleft between her bum-cheeks to tantalise her small brown hole.
She felt his lips close over her anus, and suck avidly at that secret place.
Suddenly, the tip of that persistent tongue was trying to penetrate into the puckered tightness of her bumhole.
She spread her legs a little wider, as his mouth feasted upon her from arsehole to clitoris, slobbering over her saturated crotch.
She came again and again, as he ate out her genitals with a lust she'd never before experienced, and swallowed her slimy mucus as if her vagina was secreting the food of the gods.
She was desperate for a cock inside her.
Her swollen vulva burnt with a fierce passion.
She knew she was like a bitch on heat.
She led him to the bedroom, and spreadeagled him on the bed before tying his wrists to the iron headrest.
She swung his legs over his head, and fastened  his ankles to the bedrail beside his wrists.
She secured him with his genitals helplessly exposed, in a position that men liked to force upon women.
Whether because of the position she'd made him adopt, or the bonds securing him, he was as stiff as a fence post.
She certainly had no need to arouse him.
He was raring to go.
She mounted the bed, and straddled him: her hot arse over his belly; her face towards the foot of the bed.
Urgently, she reached down between his legs, and grabbed his zealous tool.
She manoeuvred her bush over it, and placed the blunt eager tip against her anxious quim lips.
And then, with a gasp of pure bliss, she slid very slowly down, so that it entered between the folds of her itching rosebud.
Millimetre by millimetre, she impaled herself until she had all of that throbbing stallion inside her.
Elated to be filled with hot cock, she tightened her vaginal muscles.
As she held him vice-like inside her, she selected a nine-inch vibrator from his box of toys.
She greased the tip, and presented it to his arsehole.
He groaned a little.
‘You're a lucky man.
I'm going to give you some idea of what it's like to be fucked.’
As she spoke, she forced the vibrator into his back passage.
She watched his sphincter muscle stretch, and then open.
She watched the vibrator disappear up his rectum; and heard his gasp as he tried to move his swollen prong inside her.
She bore down with her backside, sitting on his belly with his penis gripped inside her.
She knew he was on the brink of orgasm, and was aware of a gathering in her own loins.
She switched on the vibrator, and stabbed it in and out of his backside like a demented piston.
All the while her thighs pumped at his quivering prick.
They came in unison, screaming their release simultaneously.
She undid his ankles, and left him with his wrists secured and the vibrator buzzing up his arse.
She threw herself down on the sofa, and slept.
When she awoke, the light was seeping through the curtains.
She walked into the bedroom.
He was as she had left him.
‘Sleep well?’
‘How could I sleep like this, you bitch!’
She grabbed his cock.
‘Be careful, my man.’
‘I'm sorry, Madam.
I didn't mean it.
A slip of the tongue.’
‘Make me a cup of coffee.
I'll be in the bath.’
He brought the coffee to her, and she drank it sitting in the bath.
She instructed him to wash her, and was surprised when he soaped her as gently as if she was a baby.
After soaping her every nook and cranny, he rinsed her, and kissed her body reverently as if she were some deity to be worshipped and adored.
She allowed him to towel her, and powder her body.
She thought it was all getting too nice and intimate.
He had a semi-hard-on the whole time he was bathing her, and without warning she grabbed him by it, and led him to the bath.
As he stood facing the dirty water, she wanked him off.
There was no titillation; no sexual sensuality — just a mechanical pumping of his John Thomas in her fist.
She rubbed him until he ejaculated into the bathwater.
‘What do you say for being allowed to bathe your mistress?’
‘Thank you, Madam.’
‘And for masturbating you?’
‘I'm not worthy of you, Madam.’
‘That's better.
Now you may drink my bath water.’
She left him and his apartment, and was glad to be going home.
Her FBI lover was waiting outside her apartment.
‘Hi.
I thought I'd find out how you got on.’
‘Fine.
He's mine.
I own him.
He's given me the key to his apartment.’
‘Say, you're good.’
‘Glad you're satisfied.’
‘I'm afraid I haven't been entirely honest.’
‘I see.
Want to tell me why not?’
‘I'm not FBI, I'm Central Intelligence.
We want someone like you to keep us informed.’
‘About whom?’
‘All sorts of guys, but mainly the British Embassy.’
She wasn't taken aback.
She'd been in the business long enough not to be surprised by anything the intelligence services got up to.
She thought Lord C and the Director wouldn't be too happy to know the Yanks were spying on them.
She realised they'd want her to be a double agent, so they'd have a mole inside American Intelligence.
‘What do you say, Christine?’
‘Okay, sounds fun.’
She rang Sylvia in New York, and asked her to come to Washington.
They agreed it would be unsafe to try to get a message to London.
Sylvia had asked for a recall, so it would have to wait until she returned to England.
When Sgt Betty Hawkes returned from 34 HQ Communications, she went straight to bed.
Colonel Lord C had decided to recall Sylvia from the USA, as he had become increasingly worried about Madeleine and Jeanne in Paris.
He'd heard nothing from them for over three months, and was forced to assume that they were either dead, or prisoners of the Nazis.
Against the Director's advice, he'd decided to despatch Sylvia into occupied France to try and discover what had happened to them.
It was the least he could do.
Betty was asleep as soon as her head hit the pillow.
She'd had to dash to HQ Communications, as the Colonel had insisted his coded message go out that evening.
On her return, she'd found him entertaining several field officers from the nearby KOSB battalion.
She was woken in the early hours by a hand pulling back the bedclothes, and a cold body plonking down beside her.
She smiled contentedly like the Cheshire Cat, and stretched her arms to wrap around his neck as he lay beside her.
She liked it when he came to her room.
It meant he wanted her.
Sometimes when she went to him she wasn't so certain.
He stank of alcohol, and she hoped he wasn't too drunk.
She could smell it on his breath when she kissed him, so she buried her face in his chest and stroked his shoulders.
The alcohol made him impatient, and she felt his cold hand on her cosily warm tummy.
She brought up one leg and wrapped it around his thighs, thereby giving his marauding fingers easier access to the haven between her legs.
She was aware of his fingers beginning to explore the carpet of soft hair which led to her sweet pudenda.
He rubbed his fingertips through the soft thatch, and the short curly hair caught in his nails.
She flinched, and whispered in his ear, ‘Ouch, you're pulling at my wool.’
‘One day I'll get the scissors and shear off all that fleece!’
‘Pussy would be cold then.
Why do you want to take her coat away?’
‘So I can kiss her, all bare and smooth.’
‘That sounds nice.’
‘When it begins to grow again it will be all prickly.’
‘It will be worth it.
I've never been shaved down there.
I shall be like a little girl again.’
‘And you shall have a big lollipop to suck.’
She could feel that she was already soaking wet as she nuzzled up to him like a happy, purring cat.
And as she rubbed against him, her skin became more and more slippery, until she squelched as her open crotch ground against his thighs.
He urged her to turn over, and she could feel that his prong was hard and ready for her.
She flipped over with her back to him, and pushed her hot little bum into his lap.
His hand was between her thighs, and his fingers played a sexy tune on her rapacious twat; when the tips of his fingers began to dance on her sensitive clitoris, she could have screamed with delight.
She pulled both her knees up to her chin, and opened herself wide for the cock she was so desperate to have inside her.
He entered her without further ado.
His long stiff pole sunk between the petal folds of her lubricated quim, and slid smoothly up into her heavenly channel.
She lay perfectly still, curled up like a ball, rapturous that she was being fucked.
Each inward stroke brought a little gasp from her, and each outward stroke ended with a sigh.
So sleepy  and content was she, that she didn't notice the blunt tip of his great knob slip from her, and move an inch upwards to the forbidden portals of her virgin bottom-hole.
Only when he exerted pressure against the sphincter muscle which guarded that secret orifice, did she realise his intention.
He meant to enter her back-way.
She was about to be buggered.
She jerked away — an involuntary movement.
‘No, you mustn't.
Not up there.’
He made no attempt to object.
His prick slipped smoothly back into her vagina, and continued to shaft her with glorious piston movements.
It was all so quick and effortless that she wondered whether she'd been mistaken about his intentions.
Perhaps he'd just slipped out of her, and located her anus by mistake.
Perhaps he'd had no real intention of stuffing her up her back passage.
She lost momentum thinking about it, and he fell asleep before he climaxed.
She kept him inside her until he grew limp and slipped out.
She heard him climb out of bed, and go to his own room.
She pretended to be asleep.
She wanted to think about his big dick up her rectum.
Should she allow it?
Was it dirty?
Would she enjoy it?
Would he lose respect for her afterwards?
She wasn't entirely ignorant.
She knew about anal sex, but it was something she'd never been asked to do.
She'd never even pushed her finger up her own arse for sexual purposes.
She explored around the puckered surround of her anus, and using her middle finger, firmly stabbed the first joint into the tightly guarded entrance.
She gasped as she pierced herself and, holding her breath, pushed her finger as far up her bum as it would go.
Slowly, she revolved it, before pulling it out with a plop.
Could she really take his cock up there.
She was nervous about the whole business.
Yet the more she thought about it, the more she was inclined to let him have his way.
After all, he obviously wanted it of her, and she wanted to please him.
Perhaps she'd enjoy it, but she wondered.
Sylvia had enjoyed her months in the States, but was glad to be going home.
Everything was too bountiful in the New World, and after the austerity of wartime Britain, it gave her a feeling of guilt to be bathing in luxury when her countryfolk were fighting a war.
Once she'd received her recall from Lord C, she was aboard the next trans-Atlantic seaplane from New York to Lisbon.
She found the crew very friendly, and the skipper went out of his way to dance attendance on her.
She was invited into the cockpit, and shown the controls, which meant nothing to her.
It was as they approached Portugal that the skipper began to hint at what he wanted of her.
‘Let's talk about you, Sylvia.’
‘Okay, but I'm not so interesting as flying a seaplane.’
‘What do you do for a living?’
‘I'm an actress.’
Sylvia had to have a background story, and she enjoyed making up tall tales to tell anybody she was unlikely to meet again.
‘Hollywood?’
‘Not really; I'm a stage person.
I came out with a show before the war, and stayed on.’
‘You're a serious actress.
Might I have seen you on the Great White Way?’
‘No, on both counts.
I'm a song-and-dance girl, and we didn't play on Broadway.’
‘What takes you back to Britain in the middle of a war?’
‘Just that, the war.’
‘You're a brave girl.’
‘I'm not, but I'm British.
I felt guilty staying away so long.’
‘You might be able to help me when we land in Lisbon.
And earn yourself a few dollars at the same time.’
‘Sounds fine.
What have I got to do?’
‘I've got a film to deliver to a chap.
It's from Hollywood, but a bit blue, if you understand.’
‘A dirty movie?’
‘Something like that.’
‘What do you want me to do?
Act out the plot?’
He looked suitably embarrassed.
‘Really, Sylvia, you misjudge me.’
‘I doubt it, buddy.’
‘It's a bit dodgy getting it through customs.
They're liable to confiscate it for the further entertainment of customs officers.’
‘I'll bet.’
‘As an actress, you can say it's your own film.’
‘Me?
Star in a film?
That's a laugh.
But where do I take it?’
‘You needn't bother about that.
A man will pick it up from your hotel.’
‘Who's it for?’
‘A businessman.
It's to keep his contacts sweet.
I'm afraid he's a well-known Nazi-sympathiser, but it's nothing to do with the war.’
Sylvia thought differently.
 Lisbon was crawling with spies, and information changed hands for vast amounts of money.
It was more than possible that this businessman was in the business of spying.
A Hollywood blue movie would be just the kind of bonus to keep his agents sweet.
It was just the kind of chance she couldn't miss, and if she had to miss the next flight home she was sure Lord C would understand.
She got the reel of film through customs without any trouble, and a man came to collect it at the hotel.
He was a small, immaculately-dressed man, who put her in mind of a jockey.
He spoke quickly and nervously, but although he appeared highly-strung, she sensed a cold calculating brain behind the facade.
She handed him the reel.
‘What's the big deal?’
‘It's a blue movie.’
‘So I gather.
But what sort of porn is it that it has to be brought all the way from the US of A?
Don't Europeans film that sort of stuff?’
‘This is a bit special.
Filmed in Hollywood, it's bits from wild Parties, and naughty screen tests for budding  starlets, in addition to top actresses letting their hair down.
You get the idea?’
‘I do.
I do.
You must have paid a fortune for that.’
‘I did, lady.’
‘Can I see it?’
He paused.
‘On one condition.’
‘Go on?’
‘I'm showing it tonight to an audience of businessmen, and I always get red-hot when I watch this kind of thing.
Now, if you were there to cool me down…’
‘You want to screw me, while we're watching it?’
‘Something like that.’
The address he gave her was of a private cinema in the old quarter.
She stood in the projection room watching him welcome the punters.
There were over two dozen of them.
There probably wasn't a Nazi agent amongst them, but they were all local spivs touting for the Nazis.
What she needed was a list of their names for British Intelligence.
She took the bull by the horns.
‘Any chance of a list of these men?’
‘Holy heaven, woman.
What for?’
‘I'm a working girl.
If they're into this sort of thing, they're all potential clients.’
‘I thought you were an actress.’
‘Call it what you like; it's still the oldest profession.’
‘You don't look like a common whore to me.’
‘You think not.
Stop the film and watch me perform, then.
Afterwards, I'll give you what you wanted.’
He stopped the film, and switched on the house lights.
The audience muttered, and shifted impatiently in their seats until Sylvia appeared on the small stage.
She'd stripped to her stockings and garter belt, and carried a high stool centre stage.
The impatience disappeared.
She had the men's undivided attention.
She sat balanced precariously on one cheek of her behind on one side of the high stool.
‘No, I'm not here to tell you a story.
Nothing happened to me on the way to the theatre.
I saw the girls on the film, and thought I was overdressed.’
There were a few, half-hearted chuckles to keep her happy, but she knew it wasn't her jokes that they were appreciating.
She rocked her shoulders and her delicious boobs bounced for their titillation.
‘I don't know about you, but that film made me horny.
I sure as hell feel like masturbating.
You wanna watch?’
All eyes were on her naked body.
She went to the wings, and came back trailing a broom.
‘No, man, I'm not going to sweep the stage.
I've got another use for this old broom.’
So saying, she stood in front of the stool with her backside just balanced on it; her lovely legs straight and her feet planted firmly on the floor.
A hushed audience watched her spread her legs, and present the broom handle to her open crotch.
With clinical detachment, she eased the handle of the broom into her vagina, and did things with it that only the randiest teenager would do behind closed shutters.
The audience was silent, drinking in the obscene spectacle she was making of herself.
Coins rained down on to the stage, and accepting their payment caused her more embarrassment than the impromptu show she was putting on.
Back in the projection room, she insisted on the list of names before bending over the balcony, so that he could shag her whilst they both watched the film.
The following morning, she caught the first flight out of Lisbon on one of the old KLM Dutch airliners, which had escaped the clutches of the Nazis to work the Portugal-England route.
When she arrived at Holmsly Manor, she found that word of her Portuguese exploits had gone ahead of her.
Unfortunately, there was only one name on the list unknown to Intelligence, so she hoped that one would be worth the debasement she'd heaped upon herself.
Lord C told her to take a spot of leave before reporting for a short parachute course.
It was a skill she needed to master if she was to drop into occupied France.
Her father was a diplomat at the Embassy in Rio de   Janeiro , and as she had no other family she insisted on joining the course at once.
Betty Hawkes took her to the local hop that evening, where they danced to the strict tempo of Victor Sylvester records: a very different world to the music of Miller and Goodman and Basie that she'd jived to in the States.
She liked Betty, and wondered what was troubling the girl.
‘What's the matter, Betty?
Something's worrying you, isn't it?’
‘I'd like to talk to you, but I find it difficult.’
‘If I can help, I will.’
‘I'm not really one of C's Circus.
I never had the training you did.’
Sylvia grinned.
‘You didn't miss much, unless you're a sex maniac.’
‘I'm in love.’
‘With the bold Colonel Lord George?’
‘How did you guess?’
‘It shows, my dear.
And anyway, we all were, a bit.’
‘Jacqui and Meik told me he made you do some dreadful things.’
‘It was his job to see we were taught, and ours to learn.
I think no less of him.’
‘Jacqui said he caned all eight of you.’
‘That's about right.
And now you want him to cane you?’
She blushed.
‘He already has.’
‘Then what is it?’
‘Did he make you take it — well — up your bottom?’
‘Anal sex?
Yes, of course.’
She blushed again.
‘I see.’
‘You've never had it that way?’
‘No.’
‘And he wants it that way.
Or is it that you want him to?’
‘A bit of both.
When he tried to put it in my back passage, I said no.
Now, I think I want it.’
‘It's a lady's privilege to change her mind.’
‘I'm a bit frightened.
Will it hurt much?’
‘Sex always hurts a bit, doesn't it?
It's part and parcel of it for a woman, don't you agree?’
She was dubious.
‘I suppose so.’
‘I'm off to bed, Betty.
I'll drop in on the Colonel, and tell him his pretty young secretary is just dying to be bummed!’
‘Don't you dare.’
Sylvia left next morning, but however Betty tried, she couldn't push her latest dark desire to the back of her mind.
She lay in bed, curled up like a ball, grasping her twin moons, and erotically easing them apart so that the cleft widened to expose her tight little bumhole.
She imagined the nozzle of an enema being pushed up there, and then a rush of water filling her bowels.
She'd never had an enema, and had always dreaded the thought of it.
Now, she wanted one.
It had suddenly become associated with sex; and the sexual drive was all-powerful.
She found her fingertips creeping ever nearer to the puckered surrounds of that dark desire, and she had to force herself to stop.
God, it was bad enough masturbating as often as she did, without pushing her fingers up her arse.
It was all getting out of hand.
She decided there was only one cure, and that was to do it for real.
Yet she only wanted to do it with Lord George.
She'd no desire to present her behind to any other man.
Tomorrow she would speak to him.
She'd bring it out into the open.
She'd confront him in a matter-of-fact way.
He might be embarrassed.
She smiled.
Serve him right.
However, Betty didn't know Lord C very well if she thought she could embarrass him.
Nearly half a century of debauchery had made him immune to such mundane feelings.
She marched into his big library as bold as brass, and stood in front of his favourite chair.
She'd discarded her ATS tunic and shaken out her tightly-rolled strawberry-blond hair, so that it fell seductively around her shoulders.
Her khaki tie was tucked into her shirt between the protruding roundness of her shapely breasts, and her  freckled arms were bare to the neatly rolled-up shirt sleeves.
She took a deep breath, and dared herself to blush.
‘About the other night, sir.
When you were drunk.’
‘What about it?
And I am never drunk, Sergeant Hawkes.’
‘You were as hot as hell after my bottom.’
‘If by that schoolgirl remark you mean I desired to sodomise you, you're right.
But you wouldn't let me, remember?’
‘I was taken by surprise.
I've never done anything like that before.’
‘Oh, it's a cute little virgin botty, is it?’
‘Yes.’
‘And you want it to remain that way?’
‘I…
I'm not sure.’
‘Don't worry, sweet Betty.
I shan't rape you there.
If that's your wish, I shall respect it.’
‘I mean, I'm not sure I'd like it.
Whether I ought to let you do it to me.’
‘You've been talking to someone.’
‘Sylvia.’
‘If I remember correctly, Sylvia was an eager pupil.’
‘As will I be, George.’
He looked at her quizzically.
‘You're sure you want to?’
‘Certain.’
He walked over to the cabinet, and poured two large scotches.
Betty watched him as he splashed a little soda in each, and handed her one.
The big library was where she'd first met him.
It was the scene of the initial embarrassments of all his agents.
Where they'd all met with their initiation into his flamboyant world of sex.
It was an ideal setting: ornate; stimulating; deeply impressive.
She drained the glass, and the fiery liquid heated her belly and her blood.
She watched him undress in the easy manner of a long-standing husband before his wife.
He'd discarded his trousers and was unfastening his shirt when she realised she was staring.
Her eyes were fixed upon his slumbering  member hanging limply and harmlessly between his legs.
She looked away quickly, and unfastened the waistband of her uniform skirt.
She allowed it to fall in a circle around her feet, and slipped her khaki shirt off over her head.
She wore no bra, and her delicious plump melons hung like forbidden fruit from her slim shoulders.
Her garter belt was a pre-war birthday present, and she wore a pair of the precious nylons that Sylvia had brought back from the States.
She saw him draw in his breath as he drank in her youthful beauty.
Clad only in garter belt and nylons, she was confident of her sexual attractiveness.
‘You're very beautiful, Mistress Hawkes.
Now, may I see that delightful little derriere?’
He kissed her lightly upon the lips, and turned her so her slim, shapely back and plump, rounded buttocks faced him.
She felt him kiss her neck and shoulders: hot, passion-filled kisses accompanied by his lustful urgent breath upon her cool skin.
Slowly, so very slowly, the kisses and caresses moved down her spine until his lips reached the tip of the cute valley between her fleshy nates.
A firm, but gentle, pressure of his fingertips urged her to bend forward.
She gasped, and a shiver of delightful anticipation sent a tingle flowing through her.
She placed the palms of her hands on the seat of the chair in front of her, and was immediately intensely aware of her naked posterior curving outwards towards him.
It had begun.
He knelt behind her, his hands fondling the firm flesh of her bared behind: kneading the comely plumpness of her twin globes like soft, malleable dough.
And as his fingers fondled her gorgeous nether cheeks, so his kisses became more and more intimate.
His lips foraged deep into the cute valley between her moons, as she spread her legs to enjoy his long tongue exploring her lush carpet of soft fern.
Flushes of erotic feeling engulfed her, as he took an eternity to seek out and tease her dainty clitoris.
And when she had risen on the wings of ecstasy, then, the tip of his prying tongue alighted upon her dinky bottom-hole.
His lips closed over the whole of that puckered orifice, and she could feel his tongue darting into the very  folds of her anus.
She was burning to be entered — which hole he filled she no longer cared.
Her body screamed for his charger.
By now, it was like a swamp between her legs, and his rock-hard prick slipped easily into her saturated love box before she realised his intention.
She gasped.
It was like a huge slippery pole inside her, and he moved with piston-like thrusts in and out of her juicy tunnel.
Only when his knob was saturated with her gooey love juices did he present the tip of the monster to her dinky young anus.
He rotated the blunt, oily tip around the entrance of her virgin arsehole until she began to relax in spite of her innate fear.
By some instinct, he knew the exact moment she relaxed, and she was shocked to find her sphincter muscle consent to the invasion of its domain.
She swooned with contentment.
Once she was penetrated, he grabbed her sweet bubbies, swinging freely below her, and drove his throbbing stallion far, far into her rectum.
For the first time in her young life, she was having her backside well and truly corked.
And as he withdrew to plunge again into her willing vagina, she realised she didn't mind which orifice he filled.
She just wanted him inside her.
‘How is it?
Shall I continue?’
‘It's nicer than I thought it would be, but come inside my cunt.
I want to feel your seed where it counts.’
Eleven
Jacqui was on one end of a double-headed dildo when she decided that the time had come to turn Kattina in.
She had made it clear to the woman that she had strong Nazi sympathies, and often attempted to talk about the war in the desert, but to no avail.
Kattina was a convinced lesbian, and the only interest she had in Jacqui was the use of her body.
She lay placidly on her stomach as Kattina straddled her buttocks, stroking her spine and shoulder blades with her long fingers while sometimes throwing herself forward to lie across Jacqui's slim back and nuzzle her neck or her ears.
Quite suddenly, she forced Jacqui to change position.
Jacqui found herself on her knees with Kattina behind her.
They were kneeling back to back, their buttocks touching, and each with one end of the double-headed dildo still embedded securely in her gaping twat.
Jacqui found Kattina insatiable.
The woman couldn't keep her hands off her.
She was far worse than any man she'd ever met.
She rolled off the bed and excused herself, and as she wandered naked towards the bathroom she waved like a besotted lover.
While she was away, she made a quick phone call to the British Intelligence number she'd been given.
Half an hour later, the Egyptian police arrived.
Kattina was summoned to the gangway of the houseboat to meet them before they tramped aboard like a herd of elephants.
Jacqui heard voices raised, but couldn't understand what  they said.
She lay covered with a sheet when Kattina returned to dress.
‘The pigs.
They're arresting me.’
‘Great heaven, what for?’
‘I am supposed to be a Nazi spy.’
‘Are you, Kattina?’
‘No…
No, of course not.’
Jacqui waited for her to continue.
If the woman was to give her any information, it must be now.
Kattina lowered her voice to a whisper.
‘I'm mixed up a bit in it.
Just a little bit.
I take messages and leave them in a dead letter box.
Do you know what I mean?’
‘I think so.’
‘Will you help me?’
‘What can I do?’
‘The messenger is the Sheik's secretary, who you know.
I leave the letters at this address,’ she explained, as she pushed a note into Jacqui's hand.
‘Will you continue to do that for me?’
‘Of course I will, but they won't be able to hold you.
You'll be back here in no time.’
‘Wait for me, won't you, Jacqui.’
Jacqui smiled reassuringly.
Hopefully it would be the last she saw of her lesbian lover.
She decided to go to the Kitty Kat Club that evening, as that was where the action seemed to be, but the Sheik's secretary forestalled her.
At two that afternoon he rang the doorbell of the flat she rented in Heliopolis on the outskirts of Cairo.
She had no idea how he knew Kattina was in police custody, or that she had agreed to take over the job.
However, he had come to make it clear that he wanted to continue the arrangement he'd had with Kattina.
She could have called his bluff and told him to drop dead, but there was just a chance he might ditch her: and then all that spade work would be for nothing.
He leered at her.
‘I've got a couple of hours to spare this afternoon.
We could cement our relationship now.’
‘I can guess what you want, but it won't take a couple of hours.’
‘It will.’
‘You do still want fellatio?’
‘That's all I ever want, glamorous lady.’
‘You're not likely to last much more than two minutes — certainly not two hours.’
‘American lady, I want my prick in your mouth for two hours: never mind how many times I come.’
The bastard, she thought.
‘Okay, if that's what you want.’
‘It is.’
It was something she'd never done before, or dreamt of doing.
Two solid hours of gamming, as the rough soldiery called it, would be enough to give her permanent pursed lips.
The Egyptian had taken a chance, and it had paid off.
Why the American woman was so keen to become a link in the Nazi spy network he didn't know or care.
He thought she was by far the most gorgeous female he'd ever met.
He was a mouth fetishist, and to him a western woman's lips were perfection.
He regularly went to the pictures to gorge himself upon the facial close-ups of the movie queens, while he surreptitiously masturbated.
He adored Ginger Rogers and Loretta Young and Marlene Dietrich.
Sometimes, when he passed those gigantic hoardings advertising Hollywood films with vast drawings of pouting female lips, it was all he could do to stop himself wanking on the spot.
It was this terrible, secret hang-up which tormented his soul.
He'd paid countless prostitutes to satisfy his craving, but never had a woman done it of her own will, until Jacqui.
And now he had her on the hook for the second time.
He felt jubilant, elated.
His ultimate fantasy was a movie star fellating him for hours and hours.
Jacqui was as beautiful as any film star.
He jerked down his shorts, and sat with legs spread on the edge of a slope-backed chair.
His dick stood up as  stiff as a poker, but he felt no embarrassment, only lust.
He beckoned her to sit between his thighs, and his heart missed a beat when she meekly obeyed.
She reached out to touch his quivering knob, and he slapped her fingers.
‘No…
Only your lips must touch me.
Do you understand?’
Jacqui nodded.
She hadn't been looking forward to this session; yet, deep down, there was a contrary twinge niggling at her sexuality that insisted she might enjoy it.
She recalled that as a young girl she'd often sucked slowly at a big lollipop to see how long she could make it last.
She lowered her head and took the tip of the throbbing rod between her lips.
He watched her lower her head until her luscious lips were but an inch from his impatient weapon.
A shiver of eager excitement surged through his loins and into his breast, contracting his chest muscles as if he were about to suffer a heart attack.
And when her soft red lips closed over the tip of his rapacious tool, he felt he was being lifted into paradise.
His breath came quickly, avidly: with a deep, unfettered lust.
‘Allah…
Oh Allah.
I am blessed.’
He was far past worrying about sacrilege.
He was in a heaven of his own.
The millions of hours he'd spent thinking and dreaming about his fantasy had become reality.
The first time this American woman had fellated him had been perfection.
This time was beyond that.
And there was the promise of more to come.
Much more.
She held him deep within her delectable mouth, and her soft petal lips sucked like an angel.
He withdrew with a quick jerk, and deliberately ejaculated over her face.
He'd made no attempt to hold back as he knew there was more to come.
His spunk had spattered over her lovely face, and large globules hung from her succulent red lips.
He reached forward, and gently spread the sticky mess over her smooth flesh with his fingertips.
Tenderly, he massaged her face until there was no cream left.
Her facial skin had absorbed it as if it were the most expensive cosmetic cream.
‘Again.
Make me come again.’
The woman took the limp, empty member between her lips, and patiently caressed the softness with her tongue.
For over fifteen minutes she dutifully teased and titillated his slumbering pestle with sweet sucking and gentle licking until finally it answered her patient ministrations.
Blood began to course into the gristle to make it erect again, and he was suddenly full of urgent need.
But now he realised the woman was in control as she held his risen monster in her exquisite mouth, and in spite of the urgent movement of his thighs she devoured him as she pleased: sometimes allowing him into the back of her deep throat; sometimes sipping at the helmet of his quivering phallus.
She performed her task so well that it was twenty minutes before she brought him to a thundering climax.
A climax which had him physically screaming his release.
She held him in her throat, and grabbed the root of his shaft with both hands so he was unable to withdraw.
His emission shot into her mouth, and she slowly and deliberately sucked his balls dry before withdrawing her lips, and spitting a mouthful of semen and saliva over his belly and crotch.
He wanted to hit her, but he daren't.
Instead, he grabbed her head between the palms of his hands, and forced his prong back into her mouth.
She held him passively between her lush red lips again, and he was happy.
Jacqui glanced surreptitiously at her watch.
Over an hour of her ordeal was over.
She lay with her head resting on the inside of his thigh, and held his limp prick loosely between her tired lips.
She moved her nimble fingers beneath his crotch to play with his two empty balls.
Provocatively, she titillated his hanging scrotum; caressing the wrinkled pouch with little scratches of her long fingernails.
‘Would you like to see me naked?’
She slipped a strap from her shoulder to enable him to look down her blouse into the deep valley between her magnificent white boobs.
Seeing his eyes move away from her mouth for the first time since the whole affair had  begun, she shook her shoulders so that her full, rounded gourds trembled like jelly.
Her blouse moved further down, and when her two pert pink nipples were fully in his view, she whispered enticingly, ‘What do you say, do I strip for you?’
He hesitated.
‘Yes, I think I'd like that.’
She took her time, undressing slowly and seductively.
She had never spent so long taking her clothes off, but when she finally stood alluringly naked she saw that he was still looking at her mouth.
She tried teasing him with her perfectly-rounded breasts, swinging the soft globes against his face.
There was no response.
She moved downwards to tease his limp pego with her luscious melons, but to no avail.
She realised that only her mouth would do.
She popped his lollipop back into her mouth with a sigh, and sucked.
She had learnt that to be aroused he must see her mouth, and she looked up at him sweetly while holding his John Thomas between her lips, and sucking in her cheeks.
She was surprised to find it rising for the third time, but though it hardened she knew it would take an age to bring it to orgasm.
He wasn't likely to be satisfied with less.
She patiently gammed him for long minutes; fondling his testicles with one hand, and exploring the cleft of his arse with the other.
As she sucked, so her fingers reached his back passage.
Uninvited, she positioned two fingers at the entrance of his arsehole, and crudely thrust into him.
He squealed at the intrusion, and she felt a shudder run through his body.
‘Remove your fingers, immediately.’
She obeyed, disappointed that her efforts hadn't appeared to bring him closer to orgasm.
‘Kiss me there.
‘Where?’
‘My anus.’
She hesitated.
‘lt I do, then that's all I do for you.’
‘I agree.’
‘No more sucking, finito.’
‘Yes, yes, I agree.’
His cock was quivering before her.
He had grown stiff  beyond belief.
This was obviously another of his kinky fantasies.
She watched him kneel on the floor and, taking a deep breath, she switched off all sensitivity to close her lips over his wrinkled anus.
Simultaneously, she reached between his legs and jerked him off.
A few drops of semen leaked out of him as he collapsed on to the floor, whimpering like a child.
She dragged him to his feet, and saw great tears rolling down his cheeks.
‘What the hell are you crying about?’
‘You have fulfilled me.
I am not crying.
These are tears of joy.’
She could have hit the bastard, but she realised she now had the upper hand.
He was now weak; she was strong.
‘Have I?
I'm pleased for you.
Now, where is the message?’
He fumbled in his pocket.
‘You know where to take it?’
‘Of course.
Kattina told me.’
‘There will be another tomorrow.
I'll come again in the afternoon.’
‘You'll do no such thing.
I'll meet you at the Almades opposite the Daily News offices.’
‘But I want to see you again.’
‘There'll be no more fellatio.’
‘But…’
‘No buts — just get out of here.’
He went meekly, and she wished that she'd said that in the first place.
She wished it even more after she dropped the message in the dead letter box, for there was one waiting to be collected.
It read that she was to go to Port Said where she'd be met outside Simon Artz.
It also said that she was to stand no nonsense from Sheik Hasseinen's messenger.
She grinned wryly.
It was a bit late for that.
Simon Artz was a big store in Port Said.
Its neon-lit name was one of the first things visiting ships saw as they entered the harbour.
She'd hardly arrived at her specified destination when a small Arab urchin slid up to her side.
‘You American lady?’
‘Yes.
‘Mrs Simpson, maybe?’
‘No, of course not.’
‘Miss Jacqui?’
‘How did you know?’
‘Never mind.
You follow me.’
‘Why?
Where are you taking me?’
‘I take you see Clark Gable, missie.
‘Don't be cheeky.’
‘So sorry, Mrs Simpson, Queen of England.’
She followed the boy to a house set back in a palm-lined road, which was light years away from the urchin's poverty-stricken background.
He left her at the large ornate gate, and she walked up the short drive to the front door.
The whole frontage was planted with short flowing shrubs and cacti, but gave the impression of opulence.
A short, squat man with piercing eyes and no hair answered the door.
He spoke in a guttural accent, and reminded her of Eric Von Strondheim.
For a silly moment it crossed her mind that he must be the Nazi spy.
He certainly would be if this were a movie.
She was ushered into a large room filled with fine ornaments and luxurious furnishings.
The air was heavy with Middle Eastern scent.
‘Good afternoon, Miss Jacqui.’
She turned to see a tall athletic man smiling at her.
Dressed in an English Savile Row suit he was probably the most handsome man she'd ever set eyes on.
He possessed striking grey eyes, a firm jawline, and the most divine smile.
In spite of all her worldliness and sophistication, Jacqui's heart missed a beat.
He poured her a long cool gin sling, and bade her sit.
‘Now you're one of our little band we had to see you.
You understand that, Jacqui.’
‘Do I pass muster?’
‘You're a most beautiful woman.’
‘Thank you.’
‘Since Kattina's arrest we have had to reorganise.’
‘Why?’
‘British Intelligence managed to flush her out.’
‘But she was arrested by the Egyptian police.’
‘By orders of the British.’
‘You're certain?’
‘Since her arrest, they've trumped up charges against her, and she's been deported to Beirut.’
‘Can they do that?’
He shrugged.
‘The British can do what they like.
They're a bombastic race.
Why do you hate them?’
‘My grandpa was killed in nineteen-seventeen, and my dad in nineteen-forty.
Both fighting for them.’
‘ As an American citizen and a journalist you are able to move about freely and to mix with British servicemen.
We expect great things of you.’
They talked over a meal that was prepared especially for her, and she found him a charming and entertaining companion.
He disclosed nothing of himself, but the more he talked the more convinced she became that he was not the Nazi agent in charge of their operations in Egypt.
However, she was sure she wasn't far away from her goal, and that this man could lead her there.
Time slipped by easily in his company, and before she'd realised it, the sun had set.
‘You realise it's too late to return to Cairo tonight.’
‘I was thinking that.’
‘Have you booked into a hotel?’
‘No.’
‘Perhaps you'd care to stay here with me?’
She agreed to stay.
She had to keep close to this man even if it meant sharing his bed.
Not that it would be any hardship, for she found him very attractive.
They laughed, talked, and drank champagne: and the natural progression was to his bedroom.
There was never any need for her to take the initiative or inveigle him into bed.
He guided her every step of the way, and for the first time since she'd joined C's Circus she felt like a woman being seduced.
She relaxed, intent on enjoying her seduction.
He undressed her with care; slipping the loose silk dress from her shoulders, and helping it down her slim body until it fell in a circle around her feet.
She wore nothing  beneath other than cami-knickers, but before they followed her dress he nuzzled her graceful neck, and stroked her striking red hair.
She raised her face to him like a shy virgin, and he kissed her passionately on the lips while his fingers busily freed her of her underwear.
He lifted her naked body, and carried her to a large bed covered by a thin rubber sheet.
She found it cool to her back.
Gently, he began to massage her with a greasy perfumed oil.
He started with her feet, covering each toe individually with oil, and continued up each leg, caressing the skin with the light greasy oil.
Next, he took each hand in turn, and smeared the greasy oil between her fingers, and thence upwards to the slope of her shapely shoulders.
There followed a long, lingering time of sheer  ecstasy , as his busy fingers stroked oil into her back and belly and buttocks.
It was like nothing she'd ever experienced before: a sensuous hedonistic time of utter physical pleasure.
And then those nimble, caring fingers began to fondle her breasts; covering the soft malleable globes with a thin coating of the erotically perfumed oil.
Finally, he attended to the most intimate places between her thighs by coaching her to open wide her legs, so that all her personal nooks and crannies could be saturated with the greasy oil.
He handed her the bottle of oil, and she watched him undress.
He had a lovely body, perfectly proportioned and slim like whipcord.
She treated his body with the same gentle reverence as he had used: her soft capable hands caressing him as she massaged the oil into his skin.
She worked with a tenderness that only a caring woman is capable of.
She lingered over her task, and it was an age before she'd covered him from head to toe: finishing her work with nimble fingers on his risen member.
When they were both soaked in the greasy oil, she watched him pour the remainder of the bottle over the rubber sheet.
She knelt on the greasy bed, feeling like something out of the Arabian Nights , and laughed when he pushed her backwards into the pool of oil.
She floundered like a seal in the greasy mess, and when he threw  himself on top of her, the battle began.
Because of the oil, kissing and oral sex were taboo, but everything else was in bounds.
He grabbed greedily at her full breasts with both hands, squeezing them fiercely, but their plump oiliness just slipped through his fingers until she was free.
Her two stiffly erect nipples glistening with oil seemed to signal to him to try again.
She giggled when his second attempt ended in the same way, and when he grasped her in a great bear hug, she was able to slip away as easily as if it were a child holding her.
She soon realised strength meant nothing in their oily state, and her lithe body twisted and turned to avoid his lunges.
They fought like two great reptiles in a sea of mud: winding their limbs around each other until they resembled two serpents coupling.
When their fighting ceased, she sat astride his chest, gradually sliding down to his toes like a small girl down a banister.
Sitting with her legs spread wide she allowed his toes to skid through the oily mat of her saturated crotch.
Exhausted by their exertions, the pace of their battle slowed, and both became aware of the burning sexual need which had been ignited inside them.
However, normal coupling was impossible, as they slipped and slid on the oil surface of each other 's bodies.
His rampant pole moved all over her greasy belly and thighs, and when she spread her legs to capture the greasy thing inside her, it slid about like a duck on ice.
At last, with greasy fingers, she managed to guide him to her saturated hole, and he penetrated her as easily as her own fingers did when she masturbated.
They had to fight again, but this time it was a battle to achieve copulation in spite of the oil.
They found they had to aid each other to achieve coupling, or they would slip apart to achieve nothing.
The oil mixed with the glutinous juices which oozed from her agitated vagina to create a mess such as she'd never known between her legs.
Her quim swum in oil like a sardine in a tin.
His prong began to thrust in and out of her like a greased piston, and she found it slipped up her arse as often as it penetrated her vagina.
She had reached a zenith of feeling, and really didn't care which hole he  was shafting so long as he was inside her.
As she whimpered and writhed beneath him, her legs wound around his shoulders, she found his oily prong kept slipping from her.
They struggled to stay coupled as they sensed their climax approaching.
They fought frantically to hold each other close, but the oil defeated them.
Each tried desperately to grip the other, but it was impossible, and they were forced to lay perfectly still with their genitals interlocked until she was conscious of his emission shooting inside her oil-drenched love passage.
She heard a loud, high-pitched scream, which almost drowned his grunt of animal passion when he ejaculated.
The scream was her own, as her orgasmic juices added to the squelching mess oozing from her steaming twat.
They shared a deep marble bath, with warm water showering them from above, and as the oil was washed from their bodies so he fucked her again.
It was an experience Jacqui would never forget, and she prayed she wouldn't have to have this magnificent young man arrested when the end came.
Twelve
Jeanne had been living with the Communist Maquis since the disastrous parachute drop over two months ago.
She'd done very little except cook for them, and run a few messages.
The group did little other than a few acts of minor sabotage, as they didn't have the arms to take on the Nazi army.
When Jeanne had found herself separated from Madeleine, she'd been distraught and convinced her friend had been killed.
Later, she liked to believe she was alive, perhaps working for another resistance group.
Everybody working for the Maquis knew about her loss, but no one helped — although their local information gathering was first-class, and they seemed to know just about everything that happened in Paris.
It was the mother of one of the leaders who told her of a woman of Madeleine's description being held by the Gestapo.
Jeanne requested an armed raid on the building to rescue the woman, but the group leader wouldn't hear of it.
Finally, she cajoled half a dozen men to help her break into the jail.
It was a complete failure.
The SS guards routed them: all the men were killed and Jeanne was captured.
She was placed in a small cell without being interrogated.
The one unshaded light bulb shone continuously down at her, and she was kept in complete silence.
Otherwise, she was treated reasonably.
She was fed regularly, and there was a toilet in her cell; but the door grill was permanently open, and she was certain she was being watched twenty-four hours a day.
On the third day, she was taken for interrogation, and try as she might, she couldn't stop the butterflies in her stomach.
She was pushed into a big office where she was faced by a rather handsome Obersturmfuhrer.
She had no way of knowing it was the same man who had interrogated Madeleine, then made her his mistress, any more than Madeleine could know that her friend was in the building being interrogated by him.
He was sitting on the edge of the big desk when she entered.
She watched him nonchalantly swinging a vicious-looking little whip, and feared it would be a part of his interrogation technique.
Her fear was well founded.
He smiled at her like a cat smiling at a mouse.
‘Remove your clothes, young woman.’
‘What?’
‘I want you naked, girl.
Quick.’
She scrambled out of her clothes, and stood gloriously nude before him.
Her slim shoulders made her ample boobs appear even bigger, hanging like two deliciously ripe melons.
Her slim waist emphasised the voluptuous curve of her hips; and her pert, plump, rounded buttocks stuck out like two shapely globes.
She felt absolutely helpless and extremely vulnerable standing completely unclothed under his watchful eyes.
She saw that the riding crop had a flexible shaft with a wide flap of leather at the end.
She'd be surprised if it wasn't applied to her rump in the very near future.
She kept her eyes meekly downcast, her head slightly bowed.
She'd been taught that it paid to be passive.
‘You and your friends didn't achieve much, did you?’
‘No, sir.’
‘I shall want to know all about you, and each time you fail to answer, I'm afraid I shall have to use my little persuader.’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘Let me introduce you to it.
Hold out your hand.’
She reluctantly held out her hand, palm upwards, and felt like a naughty schoolgirl who'd misbehaved in class.
She saw him raise the crop, and heard the whistle as it  travelled towards her outstretched palm.
She expected the thin, whippy shaft to cut viciously into her flesh, but instead only the soft leather flap landed on her hand.
It stung, and drew an involuntary squeal from her.
‘Did you enjoy that?’
‘No.’
‘Then I suggest you answer my questions.
Who were your friends?’
‘I can't tell you that, sir.
‘Turn around.’
She very reluctantly turned her back to him, knowing full well what was coming.
She heard the crop swish ominously, and again it was the flap which cracked across the fleshy left cheek of her plump posterior.
She flinched.
It stung rather than hurt.
‘Your friends were Communist Maquis, weren't they?’
There was no point in denying it.
‘Yes, sir.’
‘What group?
‘I don't know.’
The flap of the crop stung the right cheek of her splendidly curved derrière.
It was like the sting of a bee.
She winced, but uttered no sound.
‘I won't ask you any more questions until I get a proper answer.
This is your last chance.
Who were your friends, and why did they so foolishly raid an SS building?’
She said nothing.
He commenced to walk slowly around her, flicking the crop menacingly towards her, but never quite touching her.
‘Well?’
‘I've nothing to say, sir.’
He continued to flick the crop, but now the leather flap began to make contact with her tender flesh.
It flicked against the  underoll of her exquisitely curved buttocks, and against the backs of her legs.
It flicked behind each dimpled knee; and then scourged her at intervals from her pretty ankles to her shoulder blades.
Finally, he moved around to face her.
She was covered in a mass of little red marks like mosquito bites.
‘I'm waiting for you to speak, young woman.’
She remained defiant.
The leather flap flicked at the smooth curve of her belly, and her beautiful globular breasts.
It flicked each in turn, making the plump moons bounce as she flinched from each sharp little sting.
It didn't really hurt her: even when he had her part her legs to apply the flap to the tender inside of her thighs, she was in no real pain.
‘Bend your knees, girl.’
She obeyed reluctantly, knowing what he had in mind.
She gritted her teeth as she watched him swing the flexible whip between her legs.
She was ready to scream blue murder when the flap landed on her tender slit.
Instead, she breathed out noisily.
The tip of the flap just touched the sensitive, thick lips of her vulva.
Once…
Twice.
The sensation was like being nipped by a small insect.
‘You liked that?’
‘No, sir.’
She couldn't tell him that it had aroused her; that the smarting of her breasts and belly and buttocks had combined to generate an absurd pleasure; that the gentle scourging of her flesh had stimulated a tide of salaciousness; that she was enjoying it.
‘I think you're lying.
I think you're enjoying the pain.’
‘No…
No, I hate you.’
He handed her a leather skirt.
‘Put it on.’
She looked at the skirt.
What did he mean to do?
The lingering tingling sensations caused by the whip glowed all over her body.
She realised she was breathing heavily like an over-anxious doxy.
God, she was behaving like a raving masochist.
She was finding delight in the pain he was inflicting.
The twinges she felt in all her tender places were sending lewd, suggestive signals to her loins.
She was like a bitch on heat.
‘You want me to fuck you, don't you?’
‘No, Obersturmfuhrer.’
‘Then put on the skirt, and we will continue with our little game.’
She took the garment, and struggled to pull it up over her hips.
It was a size too small, but finally the leather  stretched so that it fit her like an elastic corset.
The curve of her arse was emphasised by the tightness of the fit, as it encased her derriere like a second skin.
‘Why have you given me this to wear?’
‘I am going to give you the whipping you long for, and you don't want your flesh cut to ribbons, do you?’
She shivered.
‘No, I don't.
Nor do I long to be whipped, Obersturmfuhrer.‘
She wondered what made him think she desired a flogging.
She knew he was in a position to do what he wished, but what made him think she would enjoy it?
She realised that in his own way he was being considerate, for by refusing to talk she was laying herself open to torture.
‘Bend forward over the table, young woman, and grasp the far edge.’
She did as she was bid: her nude belly and breasts pushing into the hard wooden surface.
Her ample rump stuck out towards him.
‘Arch your back, and stick that backside right out.’
She arched her back, and realised that doing so made her butt stuck out even further.
She could feel the soft leather stretched as tight as cat-gut across her protruding arse.
‘On tiptoes please.’
She raised herself on her toes, and was very aware that his target, her posterior, rose another few provocative inches, presenting her comely rump as a full rising moon.
So preoccupied was she thinking about the unseemly position of her raised buttocks, that she didn't see the whip rise to crack across her beleathered fundament.
The indescribable sting wrenched a high-pitched squeal from her throat, as she clutched the leather skirt which covered her burning seat.
A second, searing stroke made her gasp for breath, as fire exploded in her backside as if she'd been hit by a ball of lightning.
The tight leather skirt served to spread the sting across the surface of her whole comely derriere, making it feel like her arse was a bonfire.
She was conscious of him watching her writhing and panting on the table.
The anguish in her tail was like a red-hot  brand which was gradually burning into her very soul.
She let out a long whistle, and heard him chuckle.
The man was a raving sadist, she thought, and then realised it was a requirement of his job.
She received three more strokes at one minute intervals, and each ignited an inward blaze of masochistic torment, which heightened until she was at one with the smarting pain.
She stuck her arse out, perversely wanting more, but no more came.
She was stunned at what was happening to her.
She'd never entertained masochistic desires.
Where had this dark side of her come from?
Had they put some strange aphrodisiac in her food to make her act this way?
Perhaps they wanted to try and drive her crazy.
She felt the tight leather skirt being wriggled upwards to bare her scorching behind, and when his cool fingers touched her hot flesh she realised just how hot she was for him.
Oh Christ, she wanted to be fucked even more than she'd hungered for the whip.
This Nazi bastard had discovered a devil inside her which she hadn't known existed.
His fingers slipped between her thighs as she parted them as eagerly as a girl whose lover had returned from the wars.
‘You're soaking wet, girl.’
‘Am I?’
‘You really enjoy being beaten, don't you?’
‘Do I?’
She was ashamed, though far from surprised.
The bruises on her tender bottom should have been visual signs of her hatred of him.
Instead, they were badges of her aroused masochistic passion.
She'd never been thrashed before, apart from the half dozen strokes of the cane suffered at  Holmsly Manor.
Lord C had said she'd borne them with stoicism, but looking back she realised she'd been disappointed not to receive the whole dozen.
So deep in thought was she that she was surprised to feel the tip of his rampant knob slipping between her gooey quim lips.
She moaned a little and relaxed.
He penetrated her willing love box with one long, easy thrust — and suddenly she was corked.
His pego was deep within  her, filling her completely.
She groaned quietly, blissfully satisfied.
She was still positioned over the table, and could feel the full weight of his body stretched over her back.
The touch of his naked thighs against her inflamed rump made her raw flesh tingle, but in spite of that — or because of it — she rubbed her bruised buttocks against him.
His piston began to move inside her.
She gasped.
The tempo of his strokes increased.
She whinnied.
She could almost hear the squelching slurp inside her, as he shafted her from the rear.
She felt his hands reach beneath her and grasp her gorgeous ripe melons.
And when he squeezed their tender roundness while still rooted deep within her, she couldn't bear it.
She squealed like a tabby cat beneath the lecherous neighbourhood tom.
Yet, even as she squealed, she pushed back the tormented cheeks of her arse on to him.
His pole was impaling her to the absolute limit, and she began panting as if she'd just run the four-minute mile.
Her passionate performance quickened him towards climax.
As his hot spunk sprayed into her, she clutched the far side of the table and screamed obscenities.
He stood back.
Her dazzling heights of ecstasy fascinated him.
He would keep her for himself.
On no account would she be sent to the Avenue Foch.
She and Madeleine would make a fine pair of concubines for his personal pleasure.
Unfortunately for Jeanne, he was called away early next morning.
When she was taken for further interrogation the following day, it was with mixed feelings of anticipation and dread.
Her step was much lighter than it had been the previous day, but when she saw that her inquisitor wasn't the Obersturmfuhrer, her heart sank.
In his place, two female SS officers stood facing her.
‘So you're the young woman who enjoys being thrashed.’
‘No.‘
‘We heard differently.
But no matter, for you aren't to be beaten.’
She sighed with relief, but the look in the SS officers' eyes warned her that she had something worse in mind.
‘No, my dear, we have something rather special in store for you.
A new little contraption we want to try out, so you're to be a guinea pig.
Exciting, isn't it?’
She moaned, ‘No.’
‘So we can concentrate on our experiment, you won't be asked questions during our session.
If you wish to tell us your little secrets, do so now, and we will find another pretty French girl to take your place.’
She said nothing, but the cold sadistic look in the eyes of the SS women told her that she could expect no mercy.
Unlike the Obersturmfuhrer, who appeared to have a streak of kindness in his Gestapo soul, these women were as hungry for cruelty as wolves for their prey.
‘This is your last chance, French whore.
Do you wish to talk?’
‘No.’
‘Then take off your clothes, and we'll begin.’
Reluctantly, Jeanne undid her blouse, and slipped it from her slim white shoulders.
She wore no bra, and her milk-white boobs popped into view like two delicious peaches — but much, much bigger.
Jeanne had the kind of titties of which Mae West would have been proud: large and firm and magnificently rounded.
Other women took one look at them, and went green with envy.
The SS women were no exception.
‘You have beautiful breasts.
Wasted on a French harlot.
Your effete men wouldn't appreciate them, would they?’
‘I don't know.’
Her answer enraged her inquisitor.
‘Don't know?
Are you a virgin?
Well, we know what to do to French whores with big tits, don't we, Helga?’
The other woman smiled.
‘We tickle them.
What do you think of that?’
Jeanne remained silent, and looked fixedly at the floor.
The SS woman pulled her face upwards by squeezing her chin, and growled in her ear, ‘With a whip.
That's how we tickle them.
How would you like that?’
‘I wouldn't.
I wouldn't like it at all.’
The woman pushed her away.
‘Then get your skirt off, quickly.‘
Jeanne unbuttoned the pleated blue skirt, and eased it down over her hips.
Her narrow waist emphasised the rounded curve of her hips and plump hindquarters.
The women smiled their approval when they saw the bruising on her bonny white bum.
She was made to stand naked on two stools which were some yard apart.
She balanced precariously with one foot on each.
With her hands clasped behind her back, she was fully exposed to any eyes which might look her way.
Standing there naked, her legs wide apart to display her femininity, she felt like a model in a porn show.
And as she stood, she saw a dozen men enter the room to stand in a semicircle around her.
It was a degrading experience; as it was meant to be.
She could see the men's eyes fixed on her jewel, and could almost feel them mentally fucking her.
The arrival of a strange machine on wheels broke the spell.
She felt more at ease, but not for long.
The machine's four wheels could be clamped immobile by a brake lock, and its legs supported a platform some four feet from the ground.
On the platform was a contraption which looked a bit like a steam engine.
A long piston rod protruded, and was driven by a big wheel.
She didn't have time to more than glance at it before two pairs of strong hands lifted her from the stools, and placed her unceremoniously on a table top.
The last thing she saw was the audience of men gazing at her curiously as her body was handled like a lump of meat.
After that, all she saw was the ceiling.
Her upper body was secured to the table top, and her legs were swung upwards until her knees were jammed beside her ears.
She felt her legs being secured in that position, so she was doubled over to look like a sandwich.
She could only see the ceiling, but she could imagine the sight her bottom made: just overlapping the table, with her thighs spread wide to present a perfect picture of her intimate sexual opening to an enthralled audience.
The humiliation of her position  was boundless, and she tried to close her mind to her awful predicament.
Worse was to come.
She was unable to see the thick, penis-shaped dildo being fitted to the piston rod, or the big machine being placed strategically by her rear end.
The machine was manoeuvred so that the tip of the dildo was just touching the lush folds of her sweet vulva.
A spot of light oil was dribbled on to the dildo from a greasy oilcan.
Because this was the contraption's trial run, it was to be driven manually by turning the big wheel.
All was suddenly quiet, and she could picture the audience, goggle-eyed as the driver's hand clutched the wheel.
What she felt was a thick, oily wedge inching between her quim lips into her most intimate love grotto.
She could hear the audience begin to breathe heavily as they watched the machine-driven dildo lewdly disappear, centimetre by centimetre, into her cute snatch.
She could feel the thick phallus-shaped wedge burrowing further and further into her gaping hole until it had impaled her to the hilt.
It was as if some gigantic cork was being used to plug her like a bottle of rare wine.
She relaxed: being the centre of attention appealed to her exhibitionism, and being stuffed by the giant wedge appealed to her newfound masochism.
All in all, she was actually beginning to enjoy this new-fangled machine, which was giving her such a delightful mechanical rogering.
Her rapture heightened as the wheel turned to move the dildo backwards and forwards inside her with long, regular strokes.
It pleasured her for what seemed an age, until the uniformity of the thrusting in and out of her steaming fanny stimulated her to a delirious orgasm.
She was unable to suppress a low, blissful moan as she achieved climax.
Then, at the very instant of her rippling orgasm, a great stream of warm milk shot into her unsuspecting tunnel to drench her very womb.
She squealed.
A quick, piercing scream; a squeak of surprise, and of pleasure.
The dildo was made with a hollow tube through which liquid could be squirted by the machine.
A flood of milk seeped from  her open twat, and the audience chuckled at her predicament.
Her strange torment was over.
She was led back to her cell.
Because of plumbing repairs, she was required to enter the cell block through the front door.
It was then that she and Madeleine saw each other: and it was at that instant that their military training served them well.
Each wanted to run to the other.
Each wanted to shout a greeting.
Each wanted to smile encouragement.
Neither blinked an eyelid.
It was four hours later when Madeleine managed to slip in to Jeanne's cell.
Jeanne sat hunched up on the wooden cot which served as a bed.
She was still naked.
Madeleine smiled through the bars.
‘I thought you were dead.’
A tear ran down Jeanne's cheek.
‘And I you.’
‘I heard all about the interrogation, but I had no idea it was you.’
‘It wasn't too bad.’
‘You must talk, Jeanne.
Tell the Obersturmfuhrer a little of what he wants to know, and he'll protect you.
I'm his mistress; you must become the same.
Otherwise those disgusting SS bitches will put you to that machine again.’
‘But it doesn't worry me, Madeleine.’
‘You had better start worrying then.
Imagine what those bitches might put on the end of that piston rod in place of a dildo, what agonising liquid they could have squirted into you by that pressure pump.
They won't be playing games with you tomorrow.’
‘Oh God, I hadn't thought.’
‘Do as I say, and we'll be together.
We'll make a great team, Jeanne.
And maybe we'll even get out of here alive.’
Thirteen
Ingrid had been given a month to complete her mission, which was as long as it would take the Navy to organise a commando raid.
She'd already been there over two weeks, and still hadn't been able to speak to the Dane.
He was invariably escorted by the SS Security Officer, and while the Nazi ogled her, the Dane never so much as looked her way.
To make matters worse, the two men had been ordered to Germany to attend a conference, and had been away for eight days.
By the time they returned, Ingrid had less than a week left, and she was becoming agitated.
If British Naval Intelligence heard nothing from her, they'd presume the Dane was hostile, and the raid would go ahead as planned.
If she found he was pro-British and being forced to collaborate, the Marine Commandoes would endeavour to get him out alive.
Two days after the two men returned from Germany, the SS officer pulled her aside in the officers' mess.
She knew what he wanted before he spoke, and also knew she would have to give it to him.
‘I wish to see you this afternoon, Ingrid.’
‘Why, sir?’
‘You know why well enough.’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘In the laundry building, as usual.’
‘Yes, sir.’
Another session of bondage in the laundry building  wasn't her idea of a great afternoon, but she didn't loathe it.
She'd tolerated two sessions already, and even got a bit of a kick out of them.
It was a bit of excitement to relieve the monotony of life in a bleak Norwegian village.
She'd get an even bigger kick if they led to an intimate tête à tête with the Dane.
The Nazi was waiting for her when she arrived; lovingly fingering several lengths of rope which he'd meticulously arranged in coils on the floor.
He glanced up at her.
‘Ah, Ingrid.
Take your clothes off.’
She was surprised and relieved, for usually he liked to bind her fully-clothed, and cut away her knickers with the sharp knife she dreaded.
She stripped off her black waitress's uniform, and stood before him dazzlingly naked.
She saw him glance at her gracefully curved female body, as beautiful as any fashion model's; but there was no appraisal of her beauty in his eyes.
He placed her on a wooden table in an open space.
By its foot were two benches of the same height.
‘On the table, Ingrid.
On your back.’
She did as she was ordered, and lay flat on the table with her legs dangling over the end.
He picked her legs up one by one, and placed them on the two benches.
However, a space had been left between the end of the table and the two benches, so that her plump buttocks had no support from beneath.
Her arms were placed by her sides, and the back of her head lay flat on the table.
From the corner of her eye, she watched him pick up the first coil of rope.
‘I'm going to tell you another story, Ingrid.’
He slipped a loop around one of her wrists, and passed it under the table to secure it to her other wrist.
‘I told you how my interest in bondage began.
Now let me take you a step further.’
A longer length of rope was circled around her shoulders and under the table, then over her gorgeous breasts and downwards until her rib cage was completely covered in coiled rope, which fastened her to the hard wooden table.
‘When I was twelve, I saw a French gangster movie.
I remember little about it, other than that the heroine was captured and tied to a bed.
It aroused me uncontrollably.’
Each of her long legs in turn was bound to one of the two benches.
Rope circled them from ankle to thigh.
‘My elder sister was a pig to me.
I used to fantasise about tying her up to a bed, together with all her giggling friends, like the woman in the film.’
A final rope was circled loosely around her neck to prevent her raising her head.
She saw him pick up a long strip of heavy material.
‘No blindfold, please.
Don't blindfold me.
Please.’
Her pleading was to no avail.
The material was bound over her eyes, and all was darkness.
‘At that tender age, I was curious about women.
I'd never seen a female naked.
My parents were very puritanical.’
The darkness frightened her.
‘Please.
Don't hurt me.’
He ignored her.
‘I was crazy to see a girl naked, and especially to see between her legs.
I used to fantasise that the bed would divide up the middle, so I could part it to spread the girl's legs wide like an inverted letter Y before me.’
As he spoke, he moved the two benches outwards, so she was in the position he had described: her body bound to the table, her legs spread wide on the two benches like an inverted Y. In spite of the darkness, she knew that her quim was now utterly exposed and helpless before him.
He could walk between her parted legs, and do what he wished to her naked vagina.
She trembled in anticipation.
A shiver of fear ran through her, to be replaced by a strange tingling of masochistic pleasure.
She imagined she could feel the short curly hairs of her silken bush standing on end, and knew her cunt lips would be hanging partially open as if in invitation.
‘When I had the woman trussed up like you are, Ingrid, then I would inspect her sex.
I'd probe inside that fascinating red hole to view the very core of her femininity.’
She was aware of his fingers parting the swollen lips of  her engorged fig, and fondling the whole length of her dewy slit until he came upon her cute little clit.
She felt the hood over that sensitive spot being peeled back, and the small pink organ enticed out, until it stood proudly erect screaming for the touch of his fingertips.
He fondled and massaged around her excited labia.
His fingers slid along her moist vaginal tunnel, continually teasing her pulsing clit, or nipping the fleshy outer folds of her swollen purse.
‘I developed an uncontrollable urge to feel right inside that secret tunnel.
To have my hand right inside that magic cave.’
She immediately knew what he meant to do.
She was to be fisted.
She recalled thinking how small his hands were: rather like a woman's.
She breathed a sigh of relief.
‘Have you ever had a fist inside you, Ingrid?
Would you like that?’
‘No, I haven't; and I wouldn't.’
But she knew she was going to get it anyway, and surprisingly she wasn't worried.
She'd noticed that when he touched her sexually he was always gentle.
Only when he had a rope in his hand was he cruel.
‘Don't disappoint me, Ingrid.
Don't spoil my fantasies.
Otherwise I will have to punish you — Punish you severely.
You wouldn't want that, would you?’
‘No.‘
‘Be a good girl, and you'll enjoy it.’
She moaned, ‘Yes, sir.’
He presented his fingers to her opening, and they slipped inside her easily.
She relaxed.
It was the first lesson she'd learned at Holmsly Manor.
Relax.
Relax.
Everything is easier if you relax.
She could hear the Comtesse saying it over and over again.
And before she knew what had happened, his knuckles had slipped inside her pelvis, and she had swallowed his whole fist inside her dewy cavern.
‘Oh God, you're inside me.
Please be careful.’
To her relief, he was as caring as a perfect knight, as his hand moved erotically against the resilient walls of her  distended orifice; until she felt him pull it from her like a huge cork.
She was conscious of a strange emptiness inside her.
Then she heard the sound of a flask being unscrewed.
She'd noticed a vacuum flask by his side when she entered, and had wondered what devil's brew was in it.
‘I'll cool you down after that, Ingrid.
Before I ball you like I used to dream of frigging my sister all those years ago.‘
She was aware of something very cold nuzzling at the entrance of her steaming crack.
A moment later, that icy coldness was being pushed into her, and she realised it was an ice cube that he was inserting into her sensitive channel.
She shivered, her cunt involuntarily shrinking as he pushed cube after cube into her spongy grotto until she was full of a numbing coldness.
‘Is that cool enough for you?
You hot little bitch.’
She shivered.
‘Yes…
Yes.
I'm cool now.
You can take them out.’
‘They come out as water, young woman.
When you've melted them.’
She heard footsteps, as if he were walking away, and wondered whether he was leaving her.
What if he went, and someone came and saw her there?
What if a crowd of soldiers came by to see her bound helpless with her legs spread, and her quim exposed to them.
They'd fuck her one after the other and she wouldn't even know who they were.
‘Don't leave me, sir.
Please don't leave me like this.
I'd hate someone to come along and see me.
Please, I'd be so humiliated.’
She heard nothing.
Where was he?
She imagined she could hear breathing.
She tried to convince herself he was still there — smirking at the sight of her in the ropes he'd tied to her naked body.
The ice was beginning to melt, and she could hear the drip of water from her ice-cold slit on to the ground.
An age passed.
The ropes began to cut into her flesh, as she wriggled against them to avoid cramp.
She was on  the point of shouting for help.
She was past caring who saw her bound up like a chicken, when she felt the blunt tip of his throbbing penis nudge against the portals of her dripping honeypot.
The bastard had been standing silently between her legs all the time: leering over her torment.
She groaned rapturously as his warm staff infiltrated far into her cold, wet passage, until she felt his advance halted by half-melted ice cubes.
He ignored the partially melted ice, and began to shaft her with unbounded enthusiasm.
She trembled at the strange new erotic sensation of hot and cold flushes within her loins.
When finally he grabbed the ropes which secured her, and shot his load deep inside her pulsing jewel, she screamed a combination of thankful relief and dark ecstasy.
She had no idea why she felt a twinge of disappointment when he took off her blindfold, and partially unbound her.
‘I expect to see you again tomorrow afternoon, Ingrid.
And whatever task I have for you, you'll do it.
Otherwise I'll have you thoroughly whipped, do you understand?’
Her stomach turned over.
‘Yes, sir.’
The following afternoon, as she approached the laundry, she wondered what was in store; and dread, mixed with more than a grain of excitement, gnawed at her innards.
Her heart missed a beat when she saw that he'd brought the Dane with him.
‘Ingrid, you know Herr Christanssen?’
‘Yes, sir.
By sight.’
‘I want you to be nice to him.
He's never had a woman.’
‘Yes, sir.’
She kept a straight face, but she wanted to jump with joy.
The Dane stood a few feet away from her, shuffling his feet.
‘You understand what's wanted of you, Ingrid?’
‘Yes, sir.’
‘Well do it, and make sure you satisfy Herr Christanssen, or you'll get that whipping I promised you.’
‘Yes, sir.
I'll do my best for the gentleman.’
She thought it was funny how things had worked out.
All that time, and she hadn't been able to get him to look at her.
Now, his security escort was dishing him up to her on a plate.
She would soon be alone with him, but she mustn't be over-zealous.
She must wait until after his seduction before she made herself known to him.
Then, if she'd given him a good time and he was a collaborator, he might not report her.
The SS officer winked encouragingly at the Dane, and left.
She saw that the Dane was on the point of following him, so she hurriedly caught his arm and guided him into the laundry house.
At the far end, clean sheets were airing under an open roof.
She unpegged half a dozen, and made up a bed on a pile of linen.
He watched her without comment, and when she began to undress him, it was like undressing a baby.
He only came to life when she began unbuttoning his trousers, for as she touched his fly buttons, so he grabbed at his belt.
‘You'll stay a virgin all your life if you don't let a girl take your trousers off.’
She smiled sympathetically, and gradually he overcame his shyness.
She eased down his pants to his ankles, and she saw that his cock was already as stiff as a poker.
When she glanced at it, she understood the reason for his shyness.
His dick was perfectly formed, but measured no more than three and a half inches.
She saw he was bright red as she stared at him.
She reached down, and placing the palms of her hands under his scrotum, rubbed briskly at his testicles.
‘He's a lovely little chap.
Look — he's standing up for me already.’
He looked shamefaced.
‘Little is the right word.’
‘Don't be silly.
He's sweet.’
She quickly dropped to her knees, and popped it into her mouth before he could run away.
She could suck it as easily as the sticks of liquorice she used to adore as a girl.
She could get it all in her mouth and slip her tongue around it, and it didn't prod into the back of her throat, half choking her.
She sucked sweetly for a while, her busy tongue teasing at the shaft with exquisite enthusiasm.
She grinned up at him.
‘See, he's ever so hard for me.’
Reassured, he smiled, and she jumped to her feet to strip off her black, waitress's uniform.
She had deliberately left off her knickers, so when she dragged the dress over her head she revealed herself standing nude.
She heard him gasp at the sheer beauty of her superb feminine body.
It was as if he'd never seen a naked woman.
She fell back on to the bed, half dragging him on top of her, and feigned girlish shyness.
‘Do you want to touch me?’
‘May I?’
‘You can if you like.’
‘You're so smooth, and soft.’
‘Am I?
Where do you want to touch me!
My breasts!
He nodded.
She guided his hand to her elegantly-moulded globes, and pressed it to their soft plumpness.
She saw him watching her pink nipples swell until they stood cutely erect like two dainty sugar bonbons.
‘Do you think they're pretty when they stand up like this?’
‘They're lovely.’
‘Would you like to kiss them?
They love to be sucked.’
She didn't wait for his reply, but eased his head down until his lips touched the erotic swelling of her beauteous boobs.
She saw he was nervous, and encouraged him by gently stroking his neck and shoulders.
She felt him kiss her breasts: a light touch with closed lips, which did nothing to arouse her.
‘Suck my nipples.
Please.
Make them tingle.’
Slowly she manoeuvred him until they were both on their sides in each other 's arms; she smiled as she watched his lips nervously close over a pert nipple.
‘Suck.
Suck me, and I'll make love to you so much better.’
He sucked.
Gently at first, but as it aroused her he opened his mouth to take in the full upward curve of her left breast.
He sucked like a babe, as she teased his back with her long fingernails.
She watched quietly, like a proud mother, until he'd had his fill; and then, taking his  hand, she eased it gradually down her belly.
It was like being caressed by a dead fish until his lifeless fingers reached her soft foliage.
That was the trigger which set him off.
He came alive to run his fingertips through the soft warm mat of her pubic hair: and thence, to the thick, folded lips of her luscious rosebud.
She lay still as he stroked her like a cat, and the love juice began to ooze from her to dampen the whole area of her crotch.
She sighed erotically in his ear, as the tips of his fingers explored between her mature quim-lips to run the whole length of her crack as if he were playing scales on a piano.
She took his hand and guided him to her clitoris.
He wasn't slow to learn.
His nervous fingering of her sweet clit quickened her breathing, and she rolled over with him above her.
Her legs were spread wide to accommodate him, and his pecker slid into her like a warm spoon into thick cream.
His penetration wasn't deep enough for her to really grip him with her vaginal muscles, but he had seen how clitoral massage aroused her.
He slid his small hard tool out of her glutinous passage, and guided it between the lips of her cunt to rub it against her throbbing clit.
He'd already learned what most men overlooked that she loved clitoral stimulation as much as penetration.
He worked his dick up and down her slit, rubbing at her pulsating clit a multitude of times before plunging it back into her squelching hole.
He continued his new-found movements, knowing she was deriving pleasure from them, as she writhed and moaned below him.
Her fingers clawed his back, her mouth covered his, her tongue darted down his throat.
When she screamed in a frenzy of excitement, he knew she wasn't play-acting.
He had managed to slake her lust.
She orgasmed with a series of low, satisfied grunts, as his ejaculation shot spunk into her as if from a gun.
She sighed in his ear, ‘Christ, you learn quick.
That was marvellous.’
‘Thank you.
I never thought I'd be able to…’
‘Satisfy a woman?’
‘Yes.
‘Why?
Because you haven't got a big prick?’
‘Yes.’
‘It's the way you use it.
Some guys with whoppers use them like sink plungers, as if all a girl needs is filling up.’
‘You've been sweet to me.
I can't think why: especially as I was forced on you.’
She rolled him off her and sat up, resting on one elbow.
He looked like the cat who'd stolen the cream.
He was almost purring.
She took a deep breath, and crossed her fingers.
She'd never have a better opportunity.
‘You're Danish, aren't you?’
‘Yes.’
‘Do you like it here?’
‘I like my work.’
‘Working for the Nazis?’
He was silent.
It was a good sign.
She took the bull by the horns.
‘Are they forcing you to collaborate?’
‘What makes you ask that?’
‘The SS guard who's always with you.’
He spoke quickly, ‘He's my bodyguard.’
She lowered her voice.
‘I'm not what I seem.’
‘What do you mean by that?’
She lied.
‘I'm a Norwegian freedom fighter.
We want to know whether you'd be prepared to go to England.’
‘How do I know you're who you say?’
‘Because I've everything to lose by telling you.’
‘How could you get me to England?’
There's to be a commando raid in about a week.
If I get word to British Naval Intelligence, they'll see you're escorted safely back to England.’
‘I'd like that, if you can do it.’
That evening, back in the village, Ingrid instructed her Norwegian soldier escort, and he signalled London.
She'd completed her assignment successfully.
Now it was up to the Marine Commandoes.
Sylvia landed with her knees bent, and rolled over as she'd been taught.
The chute billowed above her like a  great lifeless bird.
She unstrapped the harness, and glanced around for a spot to hide the acres of silk canopy.
A hand touched her arm.
She hadn't noticed the man approach in the shadowy moonlight.
‘I will take that, Mam'selle.’
‘We have to hide it, bury it if possible.’
He sighed.
‘And waste all that silk, Mam'selle?
My wife and daughter would kill me.’
He took her to a small farmhouse, and hid her in the bam.
He told her his instructions were to take her wherever she wanted to go, but nothing else.
So dubious were the powers-that-be in Britain of a single female agent being dropped into occupied France without back-up that they'd refused to give their assistance.
Finally Lord C had persuaded SOE to meet her in one of their dropping areas.
However, even they wouldn't allow her near their reseau, and had enlisted a comparative outsider to meet her.
‘We can move at dawn, Mam'selle.
Where do you wish to go?’
‘Paris.’
‘Which part?’
‘I really don't know.’
‘You must know someone there.
Have you a contact to meet?’
‘No.
I'm seeking two British agents who were last heard of months ago.’
He shrugged his shoulders as if both she and her employer were mad.
He obviously thought her friends would either be dead, or in the hands of the Gestapo.
Only the crazy British could send such a lovely young woman on such a wild goose chase, and probably to her death.
‘Do you know anyone in Paris?’ she asked.
‘Only my cousin Louis.
He went there a year before the war, and is doing well I believe.’
‘Do you think he would help me?’
‘I'm certain of it.
Louis would do anything for a pretty girl.’
Louis turned out to be a pimp who worked several girls around the Gare du Nord.
His knowledge of Paris was confined to the underworld, but he did know that the bandit, Chicot, had a mistress who was said to be British.
However, Chicot and his father had been killed by the Nazis, and no one knew what had happened to the girl.
Sylvia agreed to work the streets for him on the understanding he would find out what she wanted to know.
She didn't really have any choice, for she had no other contacts in Paris.
Thus Sylvia resigned herself to walking the streets until something turned up.
Four nights and a dozen punters later her luck changed.
It was mid-evening, and she'd been on her beat for about ten minutes, when an elderly, smartly-dressed man passed her.
She didn't really notice him, for she was trying to avoid the approach of a loiterer.
It was when the older man turned that he caught her eye.
He was obviously a toff.
She wondered what he was doing in that part of Paris on foot.
She watched him walk back towards her raising his hat in greeting.
‘I really couldn't believe my eyes, Mam'selle.
What are you doing here?’
‘As you see, M'sieur.
I am working.’
She thought perhaps he'd mistaken her for someone else.
There certainly wasn't any need for such a gambit with a woman of the street.
‘But you are too beautiful, too charming for such an area.
You should be decorating a high-class bordello.’
It was meant as a compliment.
She smiled to herself ‘Thank you, M'sieur.’
‘Would you like that?’
‘Like what?’
‘A place in such an establishment?’
‘Naturally.
Isn't it every working girl's goal?
No more walking the streets.’
‘Then we must talk about it, but not here.
Take me to your apartment.’
She led him to the dismal apartment rented to her by Louis.
As they walked he offered her his arm, unlike  most punters, who followed her at a discreet distance.
If nothing else, he was a gentleman.
Once inside, he placed his hat, gloves and cane on the table and perched on the edge.
‘The bordello of which I talk is on the Rue la Boutie under the charge of Madam Edith.
You know of it?’
She didn't.
‘Yes, M'sieur.
I know of it, naturally.’
‘It has an excellent reputation, and care is taken of the girls’ welfare.’
‘Yes, M'sieur.’
‘Would you like me to recommend you?’
‘Please, M'sieur.’
‘First I must see your body without those dreadful clothes you are wearing.’
‘But my clients like them, M'sieur.’
She knew he was right, though.
She removed the clinging pink sweater, made famous by the Hollywood Oomph Girl, Lana Turner but which made Sylvia look the part of a streetwalker, and stripped herself of the gaudy, lace-edged cami-knickers she wore beneath.
She saw him admire her alluringly seductive feminine body; his eyes roaming over her delectable breasts and silken white belly to the ravishing curves of her rounded thighs.
He spoke in English.
‘You are the perfect English rose.
Do you know that?’
She strangled the reply which so nearly escaped her lips.
She looked suitably puzzled.
She'd very nearly been caught out.
He reverted to his native language.
‘You don't speak English?’
‘No, M'sieur.’
‘Pity.
We could have passed you off as the English rose of our collection, although I trust you haven't the natural frigidity of your British sisters.’
‘Do you wish to put me to the test?’
‘I really haven't the time.’
‘Perhaps if I fellated the gentleman, would that prove my true Gallic blood?’
‘All right, I agree.
That would be pleasant.’
She dropped to her knees, and unbuttoned him with quick busy fingers.
Smiling up at him, she reached inside his fly to scoop out his genitals in the palm of her hand.
He was an old man, and his penis remained unaroused.
She cupped his testicles in her cool hands, and took the tip of his limp prick between her moist red lips.
Her nimble fingers began to caress the wrinkled pouch which was his scrotum, and to fondle the two unequal balls which were his testicles; while her soft lips slid erotically down his shaft taking more and more of his quickly swelling cock into her sweet mouth.
She ran her lithe tongue over the helmet of his quivering rod, and sucked at the trembling shaft like an angel from heaven.
She had him completely relaxed, and wallowing in her fellation, as she worked patiently to bring him to orgasm.
She rolled his stiffened cue around her mouth, and licked at the hardness like a child savouring a stick of rock.
As she sucked in her cheeks greedily, so she felt him approach his climax.
‘Do you wish to come over my face, or shall I swallow your semen, M'sieur?’
‘I'd like to come in your mouth, and watch you swallow it.’
She placed his pulsing prong back into her luscious wet mouth, and sucked until his spunk fired into the back of her throat.
Meticulously, she sucked him dry, and stood up to open her mouth for him to see his seed swimming over her pink tongue and gums.
She saw the gleam of excitement in his eyes as she swallowed.
Then, as if to prove she'd taken it all down her gullet, she opened her mouth wide for his inspection.
He smiled.
‘You're a real professional, Mam'selle.’
It was a back-handed compliment, and one she'd have rejected angrily before she'd joined C's Circus.
Now, she found it made her preen.
The house on the Rue la Boutie was large and comfortable.
Most of the girls rarely ventured outside, but Sylvia spent every off-duty moment away from the cloying  atmosphere.
She found it strange and a trifle exciting to sit at the cafe tables, and watch Wehrmacht, Luftwaffe and Nazi naval personnel walking in the leafy boulevards.
Since the war had begun, she'd only seen the enemy on newsreels.
It gave her a perverse buzz to be amongst them, knowing she was doing her bit to bring about their defeat.
The brothel was a fabulous place: luxurious furnishings, subdued lighting, and all the little extravagances that help part a punter from his cash.
However, what made it special were the theme rooms.
Half a dozen rooms were decorated to imitate various fantasy settings, where customers with sufficient money could take a girl into the environment of their choice.
There was a desert island room, a medieval castle, a railway Pullman carriage, a dungeon, a school classroom, and a hospital ward for those who'd never grown out of playing doctors and nurses.
On the third night, Sylvia was chosen to accompany a punter into the medieval castle.
He was a Wehrmacht major, a middle-aged man, and non-combatant, who had delusions of grandeur.
He'd been given a position in prison administration in Paris, and Sylvia thought he might be of help to her in finding Madeleine and Jeanne.
She entered the theme room, which was decked out to look like the great hall of a medieval castle.
She was to be the Honourable Lady Penelope, a British aristocrat who was seeking the protection of an influential Wehrmacht officer after Britain had fallen to the Third Reich.
She was an aloof, high-class woman willing to give herself and talk dirty to seduce a Nazi officer.
When he entered, she was sitting at the big table.
She smiled when she saw him attired in Norfolk jacket and cords — his idea of how the conqueror would dress.
She rose as he came towards her.
‘Ah Major, I'm so glad you could come.’
He clicked his heels and kissed her hand in true Teutonic manner.
‘Good evening, Lady Penelope.’
‘Sit down.
Won't you have a whisky and soda?’
He accepted the drink.
‘Thank you.’
‘Life is no longer easy for a well-bred girl,’ she exclaimed, determined to lay it on thick to please him.
‘Since you liberated Britain we are no longer privileged.
Our servants are all working in your new factories.
All our inherited wealth has been confiscated to rebuild our war-torn country.’
‘Soon you will be part of the Third Reich, the greatest empire the world has ever seen.’
‘Yes, Major.
I do admire you all so, but what am I to do?
I need a strong man to protect me.
A strong Nazi like you.
Will you be that man, Major?’
‘I may.
You're very beautiful, but will you be grateful enough?
I have no need of a proud woman.’
‘I'm not proud, Major.
You make me feel weak and feminine; bewitched by your manliness.’
She wondered whether she was laying it on too thick, but he appeared to preen.
‘You may show me that you're not too proud.’
‘Then relax, Major.
Take off your jacket.’
She watched him remove his jacket and, standing before him, coyly began to unknot his tie and unbutton his shirt front.
‘May I undress for you, Major?
I want to be naked for you.’
He didn't reply, so she stooped to take the hem of her silk dress and pull it over her head with one swift movement.
She shook her head to rearrange her disarrayed hair; the golden tresses tumbling about her face and shoulders in glorious abandon made her look doubly desirable.
Pouting seductively, she assumed a pose which presented her as a raving sexpot, as she alluringly slipped the flimsy straps of her silk and lace petticoat from her ivory shoulders.
A tantalising wriggle freed her magnificent breasts, and she saw him gawk in wonder at the delicately rounded snow-white globes.
That look was enough to tell her she'd bewitched him.
She shook her hips, and the flimsy garment fell from her like a leaf from a tree, revealing her glorious nudity.
That nakedness was broken only by the slim white garter belt around her  perfect waist and the pure silk stockings which encased her shapely legs.
She was the ultimate picture of feminine beauty.
All that was left was for her to undress him.
She stripped him with nimble fingers, and when the task was done, folded his hairy scrotum into the palm of her cool hand.
She stood perfectly still holding his balls, and breathing gently against his chest for several moments.
She could feel the tension building up in his body, and guessed it was time to put on her act.
She began in a frenzy of movement.
Her hands massaged his testicles and fondled the shaft of his risen pole, while she covered his chest and belly with a flurry of butterfly kisses.
‘God, you're so strong and masterful.
I want you something rotten.
I want you to fuck me.
I want your hard prick inside me.’
She was on her knees before him, her lips encircling the tip of his rampant prong while she sucked sweetly.
‘It's so lovely and big, so nice and hard.
Can I have it for my very own?
My pussy's all wet and greedy.
I want your hot cock up me, now.
Please, Major.
Poke me.
I'm such a wilful girl.
I need a good shagging.
Oh, screw me, please.’
Her voice ended in a shrill scream, as she threw herself back on the table and flung open her legs.
She had him standing between her thighs, and he had only to position his rod at her welcoming portals to be inside her.
‘Impale me, Major.
Now I know why your Adolph Hitler says you're the master race.
Drive your great Nazi tank inside my wanton cunt.
Fuck me silly.
Now.
Now.’
She inflated his ego until he was at bursting point.
He thrust into her ripe fig, obviously believing that his penis had the magic power to make her his slave forever.
She squeaked in simulated ecstasy as he plunged inside her.
‘Merciful God, I'm penetrated.
I have an enormous prick filling me.
Now shag me, Major.
Fuck my arse off.’
To give him his due, he tried.
He rammed his stiffened baton in and out of her burrow, and all the time she urged him to greater efforts.
When he came, it was an anticlimax, but she squealed anyway and clung to him as if he'd showered her with a gallon of spunk.
Her legs were still on his shoulders as she pulled his head down to lightly kiss his lips.
‘That was wonderful, Major.
I've never been rogered like that before.
Are you going to do it again?’
He promised he would, but two weeks passed and he never returned.
She kept hoping, as he was her best chance of finding Madeleine and Jeanne.
She wasn't to know that he'd been posted to Berlin.
She became depressed at not knowing what to do for the best, and at leading the life of a whore.
She had no friends, no contacts, and no way of completing her assignment successfully.
All the girls in the bawdy-house were indolent and frivolous: without a thought in their heads other than the size of a man's cock or the latest women's fashions.
She became slack: half-forgetting that her customers were all her enemies.
One slip, and she'd be in the hands of the Gestapo.
She was made to realise this the evening two Waffen SS officers visited the house.
They were drunk when they arrived — two handsome, swaggering young thugs on leave from the Russian Front.
They surveyed the menu given to them by madam, and with a loud guffaw chose the room of golden showers.
They pointed out two girls at random to accompany them.
One was Sylvia.
She complained to the madam that she never went into that room.
‘Can't you give them someone else?’ she asked.
One of the SS officers overheard her.
‘Now that's a choosy young madam.
She never goes into that room, huh?
I shall enjoy pissing over her.’
The other laughed.
‘She looks English.
A real hoity-toity British cow.
Are you British, young woman?’
She bit her lip.
‘How could a British woman be in a Paris brothel?
I'm a French woman, and proud of it.’
‘Then you'll be proud to oblige two of your country's conquerors, won't you?’
‘Yes, sir.
I'm sorry I said that.
It's just that I prefer the other rooms.’
‘Well tonight it's golden showers for you, young lady.
So smile if you please.’
She managed a smile.
‘Yes, sir.
‘That's better.’
Once inside the room, the two officers stripped off their black uniform jackets, and sprawled on the long sofa.
It was comfortable, but covered with thin rubber sheeting, as was all the soft furnishing.
Sylvia watched the younger, more arrogant, man stand up to unbutton his breeches.
Estelle, her companion for the evening, seemed to know the drill, for she placed three glasses together on a low table and, taking the man's limp penis between her thumb and fingers, pointed it towards the glasses.
A stream of urine splashed into the first glass, and as it filled Estelle guided the stream to the next glass as if she were holding a hose pipe.
Finally, when the stream dried up to a dribble, she popped the man's wet dick in her mouth to savour the last few drops.
The young man laughed, and sat down.
Litres of beer were ordered for them all to drink.
Sylvia realised it was to fill their bladders for the games to come.
Unfortunately, the two men seemed to be in no hurry.
It was Estelle, bubbling like a small girl at a party, who started the ball rolling.
‘Watching you wee-wee made me want to go, too,’ she giggled.
She spoke coyly, but her actions were more blatant.
She stood before them, bending her knees and crossing her legs like a schoolgirl desperate to convince teacher she wanted to leave the room.
She squeezed her pelvis, and moaned.
‘Oh, I must do a pee.
I shall burst.
I shall wet myself.’
The young SS officer grinned.
‘Go on, then.
Get on with it.’
‘Oh, I couldn't: not in front of people.
It's so rude.
I should die.’
He held out a tumbler.
‘Here, relieve yourself in this.
I'll hold it for you.’
‘Oh, I couldn't.
I just couldn't.’
Sylvia thought she saw her blush.
The girl was a good actress.
‘It's either that, or wet your knickers.’
‘Oh, dear.
What shall I do?’
Reaching quickly under her skirt, she jerked her knickers down her legs, and stepped out of them.
Then, with skirt high and legs apart, she rolled back the thick outer lips of her quim with her thumbs to reveal the secret pink sponginess which surrounded her most intimate entrance.
The tips of her fingers teased her wide open vagina until her audience could catch a glimpse of her wee-wee hole.
Sylvia watched in awe; the woman had no inhibitions.
The men chortled lewdly, as Estelle conjured up a trickle of pee that turned to a stream, and splashed into the tumbler like a miniature Niagara.
As the last few drops dripped from her wet twat, the two men were galvanised into action.
They stripped the giggling woman, and pushed her on to the floor.
The younger man dived between her thighs to gorge upon her wet muff, while the older man stood astride her hips to piddle over her breasts and belly.
A warm stream of urine was soon gushing down upon the naked flesh of her full white bubbies — splashing on to her stomach, and into the hollow of her throat.
She was still laughing.
He guided the stream upwards to her head, and soaked her face.
The laughter turned to gurgling, as she willingly opened her mouth to receive the gushing stream of piss.
Sylvia watched Estelle's mouth fill, as the pale yellow liquid ran out on to her chin.
She watched her throat move as if swallowing, and realised that Estelle was gulping down great mouthfuls of the liquid.
She wasn't looking forward to her turn.
They returned to the beer, and by the time Sylvia's turn arrived she was quite merry.
She found she was bursting for a pee, but was determined not to repeat Estelle's performance.
By that time they had all discarded their clothing.
The younger man lurched forward to fondle Sylvia's scrumptious young boobs, but the sudden movement startled her, and she automatically drew back.
It made him angry.
‘It's time this snooty bitch tasted piss.’
He stood before her as she sat on a low chair, and drenched her with his urine.
As he did so, the older man picked up the glasses which had been filled previously, and deliberately poured them over her head.
The cold piddle soaked her lovely blond hair, and trickled down her face on to her shoulders and breasts.
The man then piddled on her until she was soaking wet.
Estelle laughed.
‘My word, that was more a torrent of piss than a golden shower,’ she cried.
‘Open your mouth,’ the younger man demanded.
Sylvia refused, keeping her lips closed tight.
‘Open it wide.’
She knew she didn't dare refuse any longer.
She opened her mouth, but spat out the sweet and sour liquid which splashed on to her tongue.
Even as she was spluttering, Estelle straddled the older officer who was lying on his back on the floor.
She crouched over his face, her cunt lips inches from his mouth.
Sylvia watched, mesmerised, as Estelle peed over the man's face and into his open mouth.
He willingly licked Estelle's soaking twat between gulps of her warm pee.
Suddenly, she felt the younger man push her down on to her back, and lift her legs high.
Sylvia found herself with her naked slit facing the ceiling, and felt his fingers busily parting her thick cunt-lips.
She was bursting to relieve herself, but even though that was what was wanted of her, she couldn't.
She strained.
She relaxed.
She strained again.
She willed the piss to fountain out of her.
Instead, a trickle appeared, to dampen the inside of her thighs.
The young man laughed, and she felt his tongue travel the length of her parted crack.
The touch triggered her off, and the pee squirted out of her, upwards like a drinking fountain.
He bathed his face in the fountain of her body liquid, and filled his mouth to capacity.
Then, moving upwards, he placed his mouth over hers, and dribbled her own piddle between her lips until her mouth was full.
She was forced to swallow.
It was the beginning of a long night, and by morning  all four of them were sleeping soundly.
When she woke, Sylvia bathed and dressed, and went out on to the busy streets of Paris as soon as the two Waffen SS officers had gone.
It had been a night to remember, not least because even Lord C hadn't thought to include such tricks in his training schedule at Holmsly Manor.
Once she'd got over her natural disgust, she'd found it stimulated a weird, perverse feeling of being naughty, like a child playing in a lavatory.
However, it gave her no carnal pleasure, and she wondered how it could ever be associated with erotic games.
Estelle had appeared to be aroused by it all.
She must ask her what she got out of it.
A hand touched her on the shoulder.
She flinched.
In an environment of danger, a touch on the shoulder could so easily mean arrest.
It was Louis.
He'd discovered that her friends were alive, and being held in a Gestapo jail near the Pont du Sevres.
Her first task was to get the information to London.
She promised Louis all the money she had earned, and asked him to go to his cousin who would contact the SOE reseau.
They would have a radio operator who could pass on the message.
She decided the time had come to leave the bordello, and seek lodgings somewhere in the vicinity of the Pont du Sevres.
There she would be nearer the two girls, and would be able to watch the daily routine of their Gestapo guards.
It was up to her to try and work out a plan of escape, but without expert help that wasn't going to be easy.