

Mind Like A Sieve
Bernice woke from a strange dream in which the Doctor was mashing potatoes before a crowd of derisively laughing robots.
An unfamiliar face appeared before her.
Something was pressed into her hand.
‘I think this is yours,’ said a voice she didn't recognize.
Her hand reached automatically for her left ear.
‘I didn't even notice it was gone,’ she said.
‘That's Rodo for you,’ said the voice.
‘He used to steal Twikka bars from the hypermall and the surveillance cameras didn't see a thing.’
Rodo.
The name meant something but she didn't know what.
‘Very interesting, I'm sure.
But I'd much rather be given useful relevant information like where I am.’
Even to herself she sounded much less convincing than usual.
Evidently this was the case.
Somebody laughed nearby.
Something told her that turning her head to locate the source of that laugh would be a really bad idea from the pain side of things.
She coughed.
The roof of her mouth was coated with something disgusting.
She attempted to laugh.
‘What have I been eating?’
Something warm and metallic was pressed to her lips.
An over-sweet, over-carbonated liquid slipped over them.
‘Thank you very much,’ she said, genuinely grateful.
‘Have you got anything to eat?’
A small, dry fibreburger was provided.
Bernice propped herself up and took a bite.
Although she was hungry she wanted to throw up, which made swallowing difficult.
Nevertheless she managed to eat it all up.
She took the can in her gloved hand, which was caked in black mud.
A series of images passed before her mind's eye.
An ugly, leering man in a bar.
A mahogany hatstand in a mile long white  corridor.
The wrinkled face of a gigantic tortoise.
She couldn't yet decide which bits were real and which were dreams.
Life had often treated her like that since she had met the Doctor.
The Doctor!
‘My friend — I have a friend with me—’ Damn, she had moved her head!
Her brain had obviously decided to mount a break out attempt on her skull.
She let out a cry.
Grief, I hate people seeing me like this, she thought.
‘The weirdo in the hat, we know,’ said her rescuer.
She examined him more closely.
He too was covered in mud and green dirt, but the features that they almost concealed were boyishly pleasant.
The kind of guy, thought Bernice, who had probably made a lovely baby but would be an embarrassing boyfriend.
He had a few days growth of stubble but something about him was fundamentally clean cut.
His hair was dark, thin and wispy.
He wore a tattered leather jerkin and denims.
‘You only just made it,’ he told her.
‘A couple of minutes more and you'd have been somebody's dinner.’
She sipped at the can.
‘I'm terribly sorry, but I really have no idea what you're talking about.’
Another face presented itself to her and this time she remembered it.
‘Rodo.’
He grinned.
The other youngster said, ‘I'm afraid he's forgotten your name.’
‘Benny.
Look, about my friend, I must get back.’
‘Yeah,’ he said guiltily.
‘Let's hope he doesn't get too close to the swamp.’
Bernice had had enough of this.
‘What swamp?’
Rodo replied, ‘The swamp you near enough got yourself eaten in.’
More memories bounced back to crowd her perception.
A tentacle…
Wasn't that another dream?
She felt for her throat and touched tender tissue.
Obviously not.
She turned to the younger stranger.
‘Thank you, Mister?’
‘Just Sendei,’ he replied.
Bernice was disappointed to see the deadened look in his eyes as well.
‘I still can't recall exactly what happened,’ she confessed.
‘It's not surprising,’ Sendei explained.
‘The gas from the swamp induces a dream state.
I reckon it must draw the little  squirrely things to the monster.
It works on people, too.
One of them nearly got Rodo when we first arrived here.’
He seemed intelligent.
‘Thank you again,’ she said and handed back the now empty can, ‘but I've got to find my friend, the weirdo in the hat.
He's in a spot of bother with some big tortoises.’
Rodo started.
‘There, I told you!
A can't give you that sort of mind bust!’
Sendei shrugged.
‘Okay, okay.’
Bernice attempted to rise.
‘I left him behind a ridge of small hills, in a very flat area —’
‘Try telling that to our pilot,’ said Sendei.
He cocked his thumb over his shoulder.
‘You've just come along to fulfil his prophecy.’
Bernice had just enough strength to raise her head and see past him.
Awareness of the exact nature of her surroundings was alarming.
She was in the passenger section of a large, open topped vehicle.
It was moving at an incredible speed through the green desert.
A dirty looking young man was at the wheel.
‘Turn this thing around!’ she shouted.
‘Where the hell do you think you're going?
The Doctor's back there!’
‘We're going forward,’ said Sendei.
‘What other way is there?’
Jinkwa and Fakrid hoisted the freak into the tank between them.
‘Careful,’ the General warned.
‘The flesh of parasites is flimsy.
They have no shell to protect them, remember.’
‘Their internal organs are particularly susceptible to pain,’ Jinkwa said.
‘I can hardly wait to begin the interrogation.’
The creature was lowered into the space next to the vacant sensornet console at the rear of the vehicle.
Its silly stick, the other items it had used in its contraption, and the environment tracker, had already been loaded aboard by Fakrid.
Attempts to move the blue wooden object had proved fruitless.
Jinkwa stared down at the creature's ugly face.
It looked like any other parasite.
Could it really possess the intelligence to outwit the eight twelves?
Fakrid powered up the traction motor.
‘We will now return to the battlezone,’ he said.
‘To your post, Jinkwa.’
Jinkwa took up his position at the console.
He began to compute the orientation vectors for their return.
Klift entered the flight deck.
Rosheen immediately waved him to silence.
She pointed at the Cell.
‘It's made contact with something down there.’
‘On Sakkrat?’
‘Yes,’ replied Rosheen.
‘On Sakkrat.’
‘What's happening?’
Sheldukher quizzed the Cell impatiently.
It had been silent for several minutes.
‘The mind…has shielded itself…’
‘Then break through the shield!’
The Cell fizzed unhappily.
The bubble steamed up.
Parts of its head wrinkled up into a half frown.
‘I…will attempt…to communicate…but it is…very strong…’
‘I must know,’ said Sheldukher.
‘The Highest Science.
Ask it about the Highest Science.’
The Doctor's mind sensed the return of the invader.
This force possessed none of the gentle, coaxing qualities associated with telepathic races.
It bludgeoned harshly with its ceaseless questions.
‘Tell me,’ it sent.
‘Tell me about the Highest Science.’
The Doctor knew that it was futile to resist the intruder.
It was undisciplined but incredibly powerful and, after all, its initial greeting had all but burnt away the shields around his mind.
There was only one strategy left open to him.
Counter information.
The Cell groaned and closed its eyes.
‘Two ounces of corn…flour…’ it said.
‘Two eggs…a glass of medium sweet…sherry…’
‘What?’
Klift spluttered.
‘The secrets of Sakkrat?’
Rosheen laughed.
‘It's rambling,’ said Sheldukher.
‘Force it to speak the truth.’
The Cell spoke again.
‘Mix the eggs…into the flour…not too frothy now…sprinkle the nutmeg to taste…whisk lightly…’
Sheldukher smiled despite himself.
‘I am quite looking  forward to meeting the owner of that mind.’
The Doctor's subconscious danced happily along the ethereal plane that carries telepathic communication.
Until his body recovered from the effects of the psychic blast this was his only means of defence.
He had never favoured telepathy as a means of communication; something about rolling words about on his tongue (particularly ones with lots of rs in) appealed too much to him.
But he was confident enough to attempt turning the tables on his inquisitor.
He sent, ‘Why should I tell you anything?
I don't even know your name.’
Nothing could have prepared him for its response.
For a second, it shared with him an existence of utter misery and unbearable agony — the frustration of an active intelligence trapped in a twisted body.
Hatred oozed from it.
The Doctor recoiled in shock and threw the barriers back up around his mind.
For this was not the anger of the cripple, who can never be sure if he has been shaped by some vengeful god or made accidentally by a purposeless universe.
It was loathing.
For humans.
For the beings who had created it and would not let it die.
The Doctor introduced himself tentatively.
Surely there was something he could do to alleviate the suffering of this creature?
‘Good morning, my friend,’ he greeted it.
‘I am the Doctor.’
The Cell experienced new emotions as the stranger re-entered its consciousness.
Its mouth curled upwards for the first time.
It sensed forgiveness and compassion.
An almost frightening moral certainty swept over it and began to soothe its pain.
Bernice had attempted, with little success, to explain her presence on the planet.
She was irritated with herself.
Her normally lucid style had slipped and she had forgotten huge chunks of the recent past.
Bits of her story had disappeared as she had told it.
‘There's something very important about this planet,’ she finished, sipping at another of the pink cans, ‘but I can't think what.
It's as if I was talking to somebody.
About a book or something.’
She shrugged her shoulders.
A doubt nagged at her.
She was almost sure that if somebody had asked her about all this business when she had first woken in the back of the vehicle, she could, despite her pain and discomfort, have replied.
Although she now felt a little better physically, her mind had developed a nasty habit of wandering.
‘Don't worry yourself, doll,’ Rodo said, tapping her reassuringly on the shoulder.
‘It looks like you got here pretty much the same way as us.’
Sendei nodded.
He reached out a hand to the small metallic dispenser beside them and pressed the sensor plate on its side.
Another can shot out with a clunk.
‘What is this stuff, anyway?’ asked Bernice.
She swished the dregs around at the bottom of her can.
‘I hate to say it, but it's pretty disgusting.
Hardly Solar Cola.’
‘We don't know,’ Sendei said.
He indicated their driver.
‘Molassi found the machine along with a heap of other junk just after we got here.
It must have been brought here like us.’
He swigged again.
‘It tastes okay.
A bit sweet, I guess.?
I'm missing something here, thought Bernice.
Something really obvious is staring at me and I can't see it.
It's as if there's a kind of screen before my eyes.
I can't even remember the really important thing about this place.
And didn't I make some sort of arrangement to meet somebody?
She leant forward and rested on the padded cover of the front seating.
‘Hello,’ she said, in what she thought was a friendly enough manner.
‘Enjoying the ride?’
Molassi took his eyes off the way ahead.
His command of the vehicle seemed fairly arbitrary.
On a crowded traffic way he'd have been dead in under a minute but the barren landscape of this world offered little in the way of obstacles and the vehicle seemed able to right itself over the irregular peaks that occasionally reared unexpectedly out of the mists.
He simply stared at her.
Bernice's instincts remained sharp enough to warn her that here was somebody dangerous in a very unsubtle way.
The threat in those pale blue eyes disturbed her.
They reflected a kind of profound stupidity in their owner.
Like a child sticking out its tongue, they seemed to be saying,I know something you don't know .
Rosheen had prepared a simple meal for herself and Klift.
He gulped down the spread of cold meats eagerly but chewed slowly, like the old man he had become.
‘So we are at Sakkrat,’ he said between mouthfuls.
‘It looks like it,’ she replied.
‘At least we'll die knowledgeable.’
She found that he revolted her.
You pathetic old fool, a voice inside her head screamed.
Their love vows meant nothing now.
He was no longer the same man.
‘Rosheen,’ he began falteringly.
‘That time on Ita —.’
‘Does it matter?’ she snapped.
‘You don't understand, do you?
Sheldukher controls us.
He can make us do anything he wants.
We're his puppets.
And when he's finished with us we're dead.’
She turned away from him.
‘What does it matter about Ita?’
He laid a land on her shoulder.
‘We were together.
Lying on the banks of the lake.
You held my head in your arms.’
She sighed.
‘So what about it?’
He smiled.
‘It was the best day of my life.
Whatever happens now, I want you to know that.’
He wiped his mouth and walked quietly from the cabin.
‘Perhaps I should have killed you then,’ Rosheen quietly.
She followed him in the direction of the flight deck.
Sheldukher considered turning up the voltage on the Cell again.
Its eyes had closed, apparently in concentration, some minutes ago.
But now an incongruously beatific smile had etched itself across its slit of a mouth.
‘What have you got to be happy about?’ he wondered.
A chunk of its purple crystal section cracked into pieces.
Its roots rustled contentedly and it sighed deeply.
Sheldukher leapt for the computer linkage controls.
Klift entered the flight deck.
‘What's going on?’
The Cell was jerked rudely back into life with a massive charge of electricity.
Its high pitched screams for mercy were literally unbearable and Klift turned away, sickened.
‘I've not finished with you yet,’ Sheldukher told it.
It screeched incoherently back at him.
‘How can you keep it alive?’
Klift asked.
‘It should never have been created.’
‘You could say the same about anybody,’ Sheldukher snapped back.
‘I don't agree with that.’
‘It's a little too late,’ Sheldukher said calmly, ‘for you to start moralizing, my friend.’
He finally removed his hand from the voltage control.
The Cell groaned.
It spoke again.
‘Sheldukher,’ it roared gutturally.
‘I…will…destroy you…’
‘You are hardly in a position to try.’
‘I was…close to the…end…’
‘It was killing you.’
‘It felt my…pain…
It showed me…peace…’
Sheldukher turned to Klift.
‘Such a useful piece of apparatus.
If only it were more reliable.’
‘I don't understand.’
‘The Sakkratian intelligence was about to grant its death wish.
’ He slapped the bubble, the interior now spattered with droplets of blood.
‘I feel like a general in charge of a suicidal army.’
Rosheen hurried in.
‘Postine's woken up,’ she reported.
‘I can hear her trying to get out of her cabin.’
Sheldukher handed her a cotton disc from his belt pouch.
‘Tranquillize her.’
‘You've just got to be joking.’
‘Don't disappoint me again, Rosheen,’ he warned.
He pointed to the door.
‘Both of you.
Out.’
They left without further question.
Sheldukher turned back to the Cell.
‘Now report,’ he ordered simply.
‘I have pinpointed the…exact location…of the Sakkratian…’ it gasped, almost with reluctance.
‘Excellent,’ said Sheldukher.
‘We make progress, at last.’
The Doctor's mind slowly reassembled its awareness of itself.
‘How can one's unconscious be knocked unconscious?’ he wondered curiously.
The force of the disconnection had certainly lessened the chances of a swift revival of all physical functions.
He could only hope that his Chelonian captors weren't engaged in fiendish torture or hadn't cut off his legs or anything.
After all, it would take ages to grow another pair.
Bernice's fingers worked on her coat button.
It was a simple task made difficult by something she couldn't name.
Her grip slipped helplessly from the enamelled disc.
She had curled herself up in a corner of the motorspeeder to get some rest, but there was too much adrenalin swimming aimlessly about her system and her eyes kept opening themselves.
She waited for the unpleasant tingling on the back of her neck to go away and bother somebody else.
It didn't.
Rodomonte started to sing.
She looked over, and saw him sprawled over the inbuilt mini-heater vent.
‘Oh, give it a rest,’ she shouted across.
‘Don't mind him,’ said Sendei.
He sat alertly upright next to her.
‘It's the prophecy, see.’
‘I don't see,’ she replied weakly.
He scrabbled in Molassi's red box and handed over a small multicoloured disc, marked ZAGRAT SHEER EVENT SHIFT Patent Licence 110044.
An artist with delusions of grandeur and a virtual airbrush to match had provided a holographic picture of a ruined temple on the flipside.
Bernice had seen such items in the Cultural Histories Museum on Adorno.
‘It's a discod, isn't it?’ she said.
‘Parallel reproduction.’
Astonishing that she should remember that and not what that weird word ‘tardis’ that kept battering at her brain meant.
‘Look at the lyrics, girl,’ said Rodomonte.
Bernice squinted into the vinyl effect swirl.
The encoded information shot out at her misted but still functional retina to form generic groupings that became words flitting across her mind.
Got me out of reality
Hounded by wolves of transcendentality
Sucked out through the door by a flashing blue light
Struck out at the clever boy who said he was right
Got me in nowhere the end of the road
Weirdo in the hat speaking secret code
By the roadside at the ruin saw a pretty lady crying
The rocks fall down below hear the cries of the dying
‘Nauseating ninth grade dribble,’ was her verdict.
‘That doesn't matter now,’ enthused Sendei.
‘Listen.
I'm the clever boy, you're the pretty lady.’
‘Don't be ridiculous.
It's just a —’
‘Coincidence?
That everything on Sheer Event Shift is coming true?’
All that was left of Bernice's rational practicality marshalled itself for a final, concerted assault on her bewildered brain.
Coincidence , it screamed at her,coincidence !
‘What do these lyrics mean anyway?’
Sendei shrugged.
‘Nothing.
Or so I'd always thought.
Everyone thought that Zagrat were just a bunch of old beardies from the headster time.’
‘The what?’
He looked at her curiously.
She didn't look old enough not to know of the riggers.
‘Every three years,’ he explained, ‘the riggers on Earth change the music style.
To keep things fresh.
Zagrat were the most popular band of the headster time, but now they're just embarrassing.’
‘But somebody told you to think that?’
He looked confused.
‘So?’ he asked, as if overt state manipulation of popular entertainment was the most natural, acceptable thing.
‘What happens to all the old groups then?’ she asked.
‘They get an allowance until the riggers bring their cycle back again.
For nostalgia value.’
Bernice shook her head.
She didn't remember anything like this the last time she'd been on Earth.
‘I suppose we're going to these ruins, then,’ she said.
Ruins , part of her brain protested.
She glanced back at the discod.
The track listing read: EVENT SHIFT, UNDER THE SWAMP, NO SLEEPING, THE RUINS, GHOSTS AND GUILT TRIPS.
‘Five tracks on one discod,’ she sneered.
‘Hardly what you'd call value for money.’
‘Every number is over twenty minutes long,’ Sendei told her.
‘Nobody ever understood the lyrics until now.
Most of their other discods were about elves and warlocks, but this one is just spaced out.’
‘Oh.
Great.
I'd love to experience it,’ she said without enthusiasm.
‘Not possible.
Our system blew after we got here.’
She slapped her thigh and giggled.
‘Shame.’
A cramp jabbed her across her middle.
She cried out and doubled up then sat up.
During the second that pain lasted, everything was gone.
Every memory, every thought, every trace of her identity was wiped from her mind.
Her senses returned.
Rodo pressed another pink can into her grasp.
She tore off the ring with nimble fingers.
Molassi had listened to the conversation between the clever boy and the pretty lady.
Geeks.
Still, they were not to know.
They were just pieces in Matyre's game.
And Matyre was but a tool, too.
Of the higher power.
The power that had selected him to fulfil the prophecy.
Yeah, him.
The bastard son of the scuzziest Whirli Go Round operator this side of Alpha Centauri.
He was.
going to change the universe forever.
He was going to be crowned Wizard King.
The motorspeeder journeyed on through the plains of Sakkrat.
The tracks it left behind it bisected a faded trail of bootprints.
The boots in question had belonged to an explorer called Gustaf Heinrich Urnst.
Deadly Weapons
The Doctor's eyes flickered gingerly open.
He had been knocked unconscious on so many occasions that the process of revival had become for him little more than the formality of asking three simple questions as soon as his senses could be trusted to provide reliable answers.
‘Where am I?
Who am I?
And who are you?’
He leapt up to discover the truth.
This was a bad move.
In his confused state the Doctor could not reasonably have been expected to remember that he had been captured by Chelonians — creatures whose girth was of a considerably more impressive span than their height.
His head smacked firmly and noisily on the low metal ceiling of the tank, threatening to send him spinning back into unconsciousness almost straight away.
‘Foolish parasite,’ said a low voice.
The Doctor looked about him.
The tank was about ten metres wide and fifteen metres long.
The panels that ran along the walls were covered with large, functional looking controls that, thought the Doctor with distaste, had none of the elegant modernity of the TARDIS console.
The two Chelonians he had seen earlier were strapped into padded harnesses that suspended their front set of limbs conveniently over the main instrument panel.
Smaller levers had been built flush into the floor for them to manipulate with their rear feet.
‘Nice vehicle you have here,’ he said.
‘A little spartan,’ he ran his finger along the nearest buttress and examined the dust it collected, ‘probably seen better days, but nothing a good lick of paint and a few ornaments wouldn't help to brighten up.
I think perhaps a scatter cushion in that corner, maybe some chintz curtains?’
The Doctor had expected this to provoke some reaction but  the Chelonians remained resolutely silent, their eyes fixed on the big screen that showed a trundling view of their journey through the wastes.
The smaller spoke to the larger.
‘Orientation vectors will be aligned in two time units, sir.
We're passing close to the battlezone.’
Uncomfortably the Doctor edged himself closer on his knees.
He insinuated himself between the shells of his captors and coughed loudly.
When this failed to elicit a response he turned directly to the larger.
The red stripes across the top half of its shell marked it out as some sort of high ranking officer.
He struggled to remember the details of Chelonian military hierarchies.
‘Marshal,’ he began, ‘you look like a man I can do business with —’
The other Chelonian interrupted him.
‘The General does not converse with parasite scum!’
The Doctor feigned disappointment.
‘Oh dear,’ he said.
‘And I so wanted to chat with him.
Still, he's a busy man, I'm a busy man, maybe some other time…
’ He edged towards the emergency escape hatch at the rear of the tank.
The smaller Chelonian whirled about and kicked him painfully in the ribs.
Winded, the Doctor toppled over on to his side.
‘We must kill it, sir,’ he heard it say.
‘If only to stop the ache of its stupid squeaking on our eardrums.
Surely such a creature cannot be of use to us?’
‘It is a clever little thing, Jinkwa,’ the General replied.
‘It fakes the ignorance of the parasite to confuse us.’
He turned to meet the Doctor's gaze as he righted himself into an undignified crouch.
‘The freak would do well to keep in mind that we have preserved its existence on the grounds of its intelligence alone.’
The Doctor shook his head.
‘Oh no,’ he contradicted.
‘I'm afraid you really have come to the wrong man.
I mean,’ he gestured expansively about him, ‘look at this wonderful craft of yours: a tank that doubles up as part of a spacecraft.
You're obviously much cleverer than I am.’
He leant forward to confront the General.
Suddenly he looked much more like the genius he was.
‘What could I, a mere parasite, possibly offer you?’
He was answered in part by a deafening blast from outside the vehicle.
The heads of all three of its occupants whipped round to the large screen, where a buzzing black shape hovered expectantly.
‘Oh no!’ cried the Doctor.
‘Why on earth didn't you tell me?’
He leapt for the navigation panel before Jinkwa could stop him and began to manipulate the unfamiliar controls with ease and skill.
The tank twisted violently about at its top speed.
The harnesses that supported the two Chelonians swung from side to side, knocking them against the sides of the tank.
The black cloud returned to the screen as if it had followed them.
The Doctor cursed and spun the tank about again, this time almost tipping it over on to its side.
‘Stop him!’ shouted the General.
Jinkwa stretched out a foot and cuffed the Doctor about the chin.
He was knocked away from the panel.
The black cloud fizzed its way towards them until it almost filled the screen.
The Doctor hauled himself up and reached for the tank's hyper reverse facility.
It shot backwards at an incredible velocity, rattling its passengers up and down.
Still the shape pursued them.
The Doctor wrestled frantically with the controls.
‘Give it more lateral!’ the General cried.
‘That's exactly what it wants us to do,’ the Doctor snapped back.
He wheeled the tank ever so slightly to one side.
The shape darted forward for the kill.
But the Doctor had already wrenched the tank about and stepped up the output of the traction motor.
As the tank lurched away the shape ignited on a surface of bare rock, blasting it to pieces.
There was silence inside for some seconds.
The Doctor mopped his brow with his handkerchief.
‘Unthinkable,’ the General said at last.
‘That black fire has claimed the lives of at least fifty Chelonians.
And yet the parasite evaded it.’
‘I merely confused it,’ said the Doctor.
‘You can't just run away from one of those things.’
‘You talk of the eight twelves' energy bolts as if they were  alive,’ remarked Jinkwa.
‘In a way,’ said the Doctor, ‘they are.’
Bernice munched on another fibreburger, wiping away the unpleasantly spicy taste with more of the pink drink.
In the first faltering light of the dawn, she mulled over Molassi's headster time discod collection.
‘These are probably worth a bomb,’ she told Sendei, who had spent the night as sleeplessly as her.
‘No probably about it.
Maybe we'll find a discod mart about here,’ he joked bitterly.
‘We could make a fortune.’
‘They're in such good condition for antiques,’ she continued, examining another.
‘What do you mean, girl?’ asked Rodo.
‘The oldest can only be about ten years old.’
The confusion that had overcome Bernice earlier returned.
She stared blankly at the boys for a couple of seconds, then shook her head and tried to ignore the fears that crowded her.
She noticed that Molassi was regularly throwing threatening glances over his shoulder.
She replaced the discods hurriedly.
‘Don't worry about him,’ laughed Sendei.
‘Shouldn't somebody else take over at the wheel?’ she asked anxiously.
‘He must have been driving for hours.’
‘Doesn't need to sleep, does Molassi,’ Rodo explained.
‘The night is his hour, that's what they used to say at the fairground.
Just like his old man.
Had to sleep with both eyes open in case somebody pulled out a knife on him.’
‘There's more to it than that…’
Bernice began, but the spirit of enquiry was sapped by the deceiver in her brain.
‘Anyhow,’ Sendei continued, ‘while we've got this we can make him do pretty much what we want.’
He produced another discod from his jacket.
Bernice examined it curiously.
She was even less impressed by this lyric scan.
‘Liquorice castles in ivory skies, Spinning top girl with whirligig eyes,’ she read disparagingly.
A component somewhere deep inside the motorspeeder chose that moment to explode from stress.
The vehicle ground to a halt.
Evidently it did not share the tireless dedication of its driver.
‘Cam lock cellulizer's gone,’ Molassi shouted back at them.
‘Has he got some sort of fault indicator up there?’ asked Bernice.
Rodo shook his head.
‘Uh-uh.
Guessing.’
He leant forward.
‘It can't be the cam lock or the internal pressure gauge alarm would be sounding.’
Molassi laughed.
‘And how do you know, sir, that the gauge isn't screwed as well?’
Rodo scrambled from the passenger section and joined Molassi at the inspection hatch on the left side of the vehicle.
‘Sump channels, must be,’ he diagnosed.
‘Nah,’ scorned Molassi.
Rodo jostled him angrily, ‘Who bought the thing?’
‘We all did,’ Sendei whispered to Bernice.
‘You know nothing, funny man,’ drawled Molassi.
His hand reached for the knife on his belt.
‘Liquorice castles…’ sang Sendei.
Molassi scowled at all three of them and sheathed the knife He strutted angrily and aimlessly off.
Wizard King had no business to be hanging round freaksters.
The Grand Warlock was polishing the crown of ice magic in the ruins and he had to find him.
Bernice noted that the air was clearer here and the mist thinner.
The words ‘Rarefied atmosphere, yes ?’ spoken in her own voice, returned to bother her.
She couldn't remember who she had been talking to.
Rod grabbed a couple of cans from the dispenser and followed him.
‘Hey, Molassi!’ he called.
‘It's got to be the sump channels, I'm telling you —’
Bernice turned to Sendei.
‘What now?’
He shrugged.
Suddenly he gave a cry and put his hand to the back of his neck.
The attack seemed to pass.
Bernice stared curiously at him.
‘What stuff do you do?’ she asked, hoping that she'd got the correct slang.
‘A?’
She'd heard of that.
Hadn't the source been blocked years ago?
‘I don't touch drugs,’ Sendei replied.
His dilated pupils told one story, the honesty of the eyes that enclosed them another.
Bernice jumped from the ‘speeder.
‘It's cold.’
‘Yeah,’ he agreed.
‘When the motor stops so does the heater.
We'll look for some firewood.
That was why we stopped before.
Didn't have much luck.’
Bernice peered into the inspection hatch.
‘Have you got any idea about this thing?’ she called up.
‘It must be ancient.’
‘It is,’ he replied, misunderstanding her.
‘And no, I don't.
I'm no good with machines.’
Bernice rose to face him.
‘I've got an idea what might be wrong —’ she began.
Sendei interrupted her.
She had been resting against his trunk and now he could see what had happened to it.
‘The lock on my trunk's been forced,’ he said angrily.
‘Molassi's taken my books!’
He leapt from the ‘speeder and then halted himself.
‘No,’ he said, ‘I've already…’
His voice trailed off.
‘I know how you feel,’ said Bernice.
‘I can't remember much.
I was on this planet.
Heaven.
A great place, right out at the edge.
I remember waking up in my tent.
It seems quite a while ago now, but it's about the last thing I remember.
It feels like somebody else's memory.’
She pointed to the inspection hatch.
‘There,’ she said.
‘A faulty connection on the inward combustor.’
‘You a driver?’
Sendei asked her.
‘I can get it going for you, I think,’ she replied.
‘Girls at school used to say their Professor could fix anything.
I remember that at least.’
She reached inside the hatch and began to unscrew the connection.
‘There,’ she said triumphantly, displaying the frayed ends of the linkage.
‘I was right.’
Sendei knelt down beside her as she fiddled about inside the hatch.
‘How about the weirdo in the hat?’ he asked her.
‘Sorry?’
‘That guy you were with.
Rodo saw him.
You were very insistent about going back for him.
Giant tortoises, you said.
Said he was a doctor or something.’
Her face remained blank.
‘No,’ she said.
‘Maybe I was dreaming it.
I don't know any doctors.
Or anybody that wears a hat.’
‘Sentient defence installations,’ the Doctor explained.
‘Commonly known as living bullets.’
‘You have knowledge of the eight twelves?’ asked the General.
‘What kind of creatures are they?’
The Doctor chewed over possible responses internally.
Knowing too much was an occupational hazard of his travels.
On occasions when he knew too little he preferred to keep quiet.
Unless, as now, his survival was dependent on the provision of the information available to him.
‘I've seen similar systems, yes,’ he said eventually.
‘They must be an incredibly advanced race.
To fashion patterns of light into such weapons.
To give those weapons a destructive consciousness all of their own.’
Jinkwa spoke.
‘Could you do it, freak?’
The Doctor frowned.
‘Doctor, if you wouldn't mind.
With the right equipment and several hundred years of practice,’ he lied, ‘possibly.’
‘Yet,’ the General remarked, ‘you created a debilitating weapon from parasite junk.’
‘Oh, that,’ the Doctor said dismissively.
‘Oh no, it was a miracle that came off at all.’
The General turned his piercing green eyes on the Doctor's face.
‘I do not believe you, parasite.’
The Doctor faced him back.
‘Believe what you like.’
‘You are not of this planet?’
‘Correct.’
‘Then how do you come to be here?’
The Doctor shrugged.
‘Much the same way as you and your eight twelves, I imagine,’ he bluffed.
‘There I was, merrily going about my own business, when I suddenly disappeared in a puff of metaphysics.
To reappear here.’
The General growled disbelievingly.
His rejoinder was forestalled by Jinkwa.
‘Sir, we have arrived at base camp.’
The vapours cleared from the screen to reveal the remnants of the Chelonian assault force.
The Doctor was shocked by the extent of the damage.
Logic suggested that the Chelonians had marched themselves into battle with their customary lack of subtlety, only to find that their enemy was of a higher calibre  than anticipated.
‘My, my,’ he remarked.
‘What a mess.’
Jinkwa spluttered.
‘Show respect for the  mighty Chelonian assault force, parasite!’
‘Respect?’ snorted the Doctor.
‘The respect your race displays to the species it murders?’
‘Your race is less than life,’ Jinkwa snarled.
The Doctor turned to the General.
‘Charming.
I suggest, General, that if we are to secure a good working relationship, such remarks could be kept to a minimum?’
‘You are a parasite, Doctor,’ he replied.
‘A freak, maybe, but still a parasite.
We tolerate you.
We do not work with you.’
The Doctor nodded.
‘Ah,’ he said hurriedly.
‘Well, if that's all settled.’
He had now firmly ascertained that he was too important to kill.
In other words, he had a licence to do virtually anything.
The tank came to a halt in the middle of the camp.
The General and Jinkwa were lowered down and out.
The Doctor gathered up his hat and umbrella and hopped down after them.
A welcoming party of three juniors awaited them.
They bristled at the sight of the Doctor.
‘Do not be alarmed,’ the General told them.
‘We have good reasons for keeping this parasite alive.
How goes the campaign?’
‘Since you gave the strategic movement order, General Fakrid,’ the first replied briskly, ‘there have been no further engagements with the enemy and no further casualties.’
‘Strategic movement order,’ laughed the Doctor.
‘That's a good one.
Perhaps next time you could surrender and call it a tactical strike without arms.’
‘Silence!’
Jinkwa ordered.
‘The condition of the wounded worsens steadily,’ the junior continued.
He shuffled uneasily.
‘There is one casualty that puzzles us, sir.’
‘In what way?’ asked the Doctor curiously.
The soldier gaped at him.
Fakrid sighed.
‘Answer it.’
‘Well,’ he said, ‘perhaps it would be best for you to take a look for yourself, sir.’
‘Excellent,’ the Doctor said happily.
‘Lead the way.’
He strode confidently towards a nearby tent of clear plastic sheeting, over which the gaudy Chelonian flag fluttered limply at half mast in the moaning wind.
The Chelonians bustled after him.
Jinkwa pushed his way to the front of the party and nudged the Doctor none too gently.
‘Freak,’ he whispered.
‘Make no mistake.
Whatever the General may consider best, I will destroy you at the first available opportunity.’
‘They can't really be friends,’ said Bernice as she worked on repairs to the faulty connection.
‘What's that?’
Sendei asked absently.
He was hunched over next to her, clutching at his stomach.
‘Rodo and Molassi, I mean.
One looks stupid but harmless, the other could be a candidate for the psychiatric adjustment clinic.’
‘They aren't really friends, no,’ Sendei confirmed.
‘Then again, I'm not too sure myself what being a friend is about anymore.
Not since Hugo, anyway.’
‘Hugo?’ she queried.
‘Right now,’ Sendei continued, ‘Hugo's probably languishing in a confinement block on Exalfa.
Bread and water notwithstanding, I wish I was with him.’
‘I've heard of Exalfa,’ said Bernice.
‘It's a small trader, one of the Inner Planets.’
‘We stopped there,’ said Sendei.
‘The four of us.
We had another week before the Festival and we figured we could hitch ourselves a ride the last leg of the way on a fast freight loader from Exalfa City.’
‘What happened?’
‘Well,’ said Sendei, ‘it looked like just about everybody else had had the same idea.
Molassi got mad because we weren't going to make the gig, Rodo took some bad A from a backstreet dealer.
‘They started a fight in a big bar in the city centre.
All kinds of people Molassi had been winding up about their music taste started piling in.
Soon it was the four of us against all of them.
The manager was okay — all she wanted was to get the  place calmed down — and she showed us out the back way.’
‘So what happened to Hugo?’
Sendei sighed.
‘He found out next day that Molassi had knifed somebody in the confusion.
The guy was  paralysed and the doctors couldn't straighten him out.
So Hugo went to the police.
‘When Molassi found out, he panicked.
He bribed an operator at the transmat port to send us over to the space docks.
We grabbed the ‘speeder from the motor park and amazingly enough got ourselves passage to the Festival on a grain hopper.’
‘Why did you run?’ asked Bernice.
‘You don't owe Molassi any favours, surely?’
He shifted uncomfortably.
‘I guess not.
And that's what I mean about friends.
I stuck with Molassi 'cause he's supposed to be a friend of Rodo's, who's supposed to be a friend of mine.
And look where it's got me.
Stuck in the middle of some crazy loser's dream that's coming true.’
‘At least,’ Bernice reminded him, ‘you remember who your friends are supposed to be.’
The Doctor's ebullient mood was muted by the sight of the Chelonians' makeshift field hospital.
The small, dimly lit plastic tent was crammed with survivors from the eight twelves' second attack: soldiers who had been pulled from the wreckage of their half blasted tanks with feet missing or shells split.
Most were connected up to fluid intake tubes.
It was immediately evident to the Doctor that, accustomed as they were to successful action, the Chelonians were ill prepared for such a large number of casualties.
The junior led them to a trooper lying plastron up some distance from the others.
‘Why is this brave warrior isolated from his brothers in the hour of supreme glory?’
Fakrid demanded angrily.
‘We feared contamination,’ the junior replied.
‘As you will see, the lad appears to be suffering from some sort of alien plague.’
The Doctor edged forward to the soldier and began to examine him.
The Chelonian's eyes stared vacantly at the roof of the tent.
‘He returned from patrol duty shortly after you departed to investigate the second energy trace,’ explained the junior.
‘We noticed something wrong straight away.’
The young soldier gave a cry as he saw the Doctor.
‘Parasite,’ he groaned.
‘Mumtaz,’ the junior ordered a nearby subordinate, ‘show the General what the boy brought up.’
Mumtaz shuffled forward bearing a white tray on which a mangled piece of pink metal had been wrapped in plastic.
‘What that might be, we don't know.
But it certainly isn't a foodstuff, as he obviously believed,’ said the junior.
‘What we do know is that he is delirious but constantly conscious.
The alien contamination has poisoned his mind.
He seems barely able to recognize us and refers to last year's campaign on Azrad as if it were yesterday.’
‘That isn't surprising,’ remarked the Doctor, straightening up, ‘when you consider that he has ingested bubbleshake.’
He took the tray from the orderly's grasp and shook his head sadly.
‘What do you know of this, Doctor?’ queried Fakrid.
‘Bubbleshake,’ he replied, ‘is very nasty stuff.
It was invented by the Joseph-Robinson corporation, a particularly unscrupulous food company that operated for a time amongst the outer colonies of the planet Earth.’
‘I see,’ said the General.
‘The substance from that metal container is suited only for consumption by parasites.’
The Doctor shook his head.
‘Oh no.
It has a very similar effect on human systems.
It was designed for use as an appetite suppressant, to be taken along with a certain pill.
When it's taken on its own, the body becomes reliant on further doses of the drink, an addiction that leads to hyperactivity, personality changes, compulsive behaviour, short term memory loss, and eventually the total disintegration of the brain.’
‘Why would parasites poison one another in this way?’ asked Jinkwa.
‘It is illogical.’
‘Not from the commercial point of view,’ the Doctor pointed out.
‘Before the revenue laws were tightened up, the Joseph-Robinson shareholders made a fortune out of this stuff.
They argued that people had a choice.’
He returned the tray to the orderly and went to stare out through the transparent sheeting.
‘The pathetic exploits of parasites,’ Jinkwa scowled.
‘I remember the many stupid things they have created.
Roadways that run through city centres, food refrigerators that destroyed  the ecosystem of their homeworld.
Why should we allow your destructive race to flourish?’ he shouted after the Doctor.
‘Is there a cure for this?’
Fakrid asked anxiously.
The Doctor was touched by the General's concern for the life of just one of the least important members of his force.
‘Bubbleshake contains the extract of the Fabi weed,’ he answered.
‘Only a massive course of decontaminants can restabilize the brain cells.’
He turned back to the young soldier and patted him affectionately.
‘I think forced withdrawal is your only option.
As you say, your Chelonian constitutions are much stronger than those of us parasites.
He may well pull through.’
He swung his umbrella over his shoulder and made for the exit.
‘Where do you think you're going?’
Jinkwa demanded.
‘Out,’ the Doctor replied shortly.
‘I need time to think.’
‘You are to devise a means to destroy the eight twelves,’ said Fakrid.
‘Exactly,’ he replied.
‘And I just cannot concentrate with people fussing around me.’
He pushed through the tent flap.
‘Follow it,’ the General commanded Jinkwa.
Jinkwa opened the sheet.
The Doctor whirled angrily about.
‘If you want me to help you, just leave me alone for a while!’
Jinkwa turned to Fakrid for instructions.
‘We'll leave it,’ the General decided.
‘It isn't foolish enough to attempt escape.
And it may yet provide the means of our victory.’
Bernice dusted herself down.
Her hands were covered with blue oil.
She had thrown away her gloves.
‘That's it,’ she announced proudly.
‘One fully functional motorspeeder.’
She flopped down on to the padded driver's seat, planning to catch up on her sleep.
She felt desperately tired but couldn't yawn.
It was almost as if she had forgotten how to.
She heard the crack of another can opening behind her.
She turned to see Sendei gulping down more of the pink drink.
‘You!’ she called, with uncharacteristic rudeness.
‘Chuck me a can!’
Sendei obtained one from the dispenser and tossed it to her.
She tapped it with her palm repeatedly to quell its inner fizzing  and pulled open the ring.
The sweet liquid felt good on her tongue.
In her desperate condition, stuck on some rock of a planet without a trace of memory as to how she had got there, the drink felt pretty much like her only reason for living.
She drained the can, crushed it in her hand and was about to throw it away when she realized that Molassi was standing right next to her.
His face was curiously calm.
‘Where's Rodo?’ demanded Sendei.
Molassi took the can roughly from his grasp.
‘On a rock.’
‘What do you mean?’
‘On a big, high rock.
Almost as high as he is.
Says like he's gonna jump off.’
‘Grief!’ exclaimed Bernice.
‘Where is he, Molassi?
I've still got your discod, remember,’ Sendei threatened.
Molassi turned from them.
‘I'll take you to him, if you like.
You can rescue your funny man again.’
Bernice and Sendei left the protection of the motorspeeder. and followed him into the mist.
The Doctor strolled in an apparently leisurely manner around the perimeter of the Chelonian camp.
Despite his earlier protestations to Fakrid, he had begun to feel a little lonely pondering his various dilemmas.
A movement in the mist revealed itself as a single patrol guard.
‘Hello, soldier,’ the Doctor greeted him warmly.
‘Hello, sir,’ the soldier replied politely.
‘Now, isn't that remarkable?’ said the Doctor, sitting down next to him.
‘The first friendly words I've heard all day.
I thought you Chelonians were a taciturn bunch.’
‘Depends, sir.
On whether we think we've got anything interesting to say.’
The Doctor smiled.
‘Unlike parasites, eh?’
‘If you wish, sir.’
‘I thought you didn't care to converse with the lesser races, anyhow.’
‘If the General says we're to let you pass, then I'll let you pass.’
The soldier sighed.
‘As I see it, sir, this whole operation's washed up.
Can't really see the point of hanging on to old  grudges at this late stage.’
‘Indeed not.’
The two of them stared aimlessly into the distance.
For a few seconds there was no sound but the ever present atmospheric rumblings.
‘Are you from a military family?’ the Doctor asked, more to break the embarrassing silence than out of genuine interest.
‘Like my mother before me, and his mother before him,’ replied the soldier proudly.
‘I suppose you trained at all the military academies?’
‘The best, sir.’
‘Of course.’
The Doctor turned to face him.
‘What was their strategy on war priorities?’
‘Well,’ the other said, ‘they always used to say, if you've got an infestation ahead of you and an infestation behind you, always go for the infestation to your side.’
‘Wise words,’ chuckled the Doctor.
‘You see, I find myself in a similar position.’
The soldier was puzzled.
‘Sir?’
‘Well,’ the Doctor began, ‘first I've got your General Fakrid barking at me to find a way to polish off these eight twelves.
Secondly, a dear friend of mine has gone wandering off with a person I'm fairly sure is addicted to a very nasty personality altering drug.
And thirdly, I have certain highly specialized information about this planet, worrying enough in itself, that somebody has been trying to prise from my mind.
Which do I attend to first?’
‘When I had my first implant, sir,’ the soldier confessed, ‘my old woman said to me, Frinza, he said, get yourself in the army soon as you can, boy.
A life of excitement and a good pension waiting for you at the end of it.’
‘And?’ the Doctor prompted him, now interested.
‘Well, I had considered floral arrangement as a career.
So, like you sir, I didn't know which to choose.’
‘But you obviously plumped for the army.’
‘More for the pay than any other reason,’ the soldier admitted.
‘Didn't seem much of a life to me.
Parading up and down, shouting and hollering, shooting down the occasional little animal.’
He sighed regretfully.
‘Looking back on it now, sir, I wish I'd stuck with my flowers.
I was happy as Buf positioning my stalks, you know.’
The Doctor smiled.
‘Do you know,’ he said, ‘it's at times like this I think there's hope for the universe yet.’
‘Doctor!’ a voice called out behind them.
‘Doctor!
Where are you?’
‘Uh-oh,’ said the soldier.
‘Better look sharp, it's the General.’
He straightened himself up, put on an aggressive looking frown and motored off.
‘Goodbye, my friend,’ the Doctor muttered softly and raised his hat in farewell.
‘Parasite scum!’
Jinkwa blared as he emerged from the mists.
‘We have indulged you long enough!’
‘A good twenty minutes, I'd say,’ nodded the Doctor.
‘You can't bake a potato in twenty minutes, let alone cook up a masterplan to defeat an invincible alien force.’
‘Oh, Doctor,’ threatened Fakrid, ‘you'd better have come up with something.
For  your own sake.’
‘Yes, yes.
For my own sake, final chance, etcetera, etcetera,’ he said impatiently.
‘Do not mock us, Doctor,’ warned Jinkwa.
‘You will find that our patience is not inexhaustible!’
‘Well, then,’ he said smugly, ‘it's just as well that I have worked something out for you, isn't it?
I'd hate to have kept you waiting a whole twenty minutes for nothing.’
‘You may have the mind of a genius, Doctor,’ said Fakrid.
‘But you prattle like any other parasite!’
The Doctor drew himself up angrily.
His pliant features contorted into an expression of indescribable apoplexy.
‘Me , prattle?’ he screamed.
‘As the representative of a species that never ceases its overweening boasts of ‘military conquest’, perhaps you should examine your own conversational shortcomings before criticizing mine!’
Fakrid bristled.
‘The Chelonian race is rightly proud of its great accomplishments!’
‘What accomplishments?’ the Doctor jibed.
‘A campaign of mindless slaughter here, a consolidation of unjustifiable genocide there.
A race of bullying cowards, sweeping through the  stars on a mission of extermination with no philosophy more inspiring than their own petty arrogance behind it!
‘I have encountered many species in my time, Fakrid,’ he concluded, ‘but never have I been forced to endure such unfounded bombast!’
It is doubtful whether even one of the eight twelves' living bullets could have cut through the atmosphere created by the Doctor's words.
The Chelonians appeared stunned by his outburst.
‘You will live to regret those words, parasite,’ Jinkwa said eventually.
‘The weapon, Doctor!’
Fakrid stormed.
‘Now!
Or you die!’
‘The weapon?’ the Doctor queried absently.
‘Oh yes, of course.
How silly of me to forget.
The deadly weapon that will destroy the eight twelves and restore the mighty Chelonian race to its position at the top of the universal tree!’
Fakrid motioned to Jinkwa.
The First Pilot raised the small blaster in his left foot.
‘Your last chance, Doctor!’
He beamed back at them.
‘Your deadly weapon has been staring you in the face from the moment you first arrived here, Fakrid,’ he said.
Fakrid's eyes darted from side to side, ‘Where?’
The Doctor smiled.
‘It's called diplomacy,’ he said.
Bernice and Sendei rounded the outcrop of rock indicated by Molassi.
They saw Rodo balanced precariously on the edge of a sheer cliff face about a hundred feet above them.
‘What are you up to, you idiot?’ shouted Sendei.
‘I rather think one is supposed to talk suicides down gently,’ Bernice reminded him.
‘I've had it,’ Rodo cried down to them.
‘I've had it with all of you.’
Sendei stepped forward.
‘Come back to the ‘speeder, Rodo.
We're going to the ruins, remember?
You've got to come with us.’
‘Forget it, shortie,’ came the reply.
‘When the food runs out, we're finished!’
‘Keep him talking.’
Bernice whispered to Sendei.
‘You,’ she pointed to Molassi, ‘come with me.’
Molassi shrugged.
He had nothing better to do.
And hey, the Wizard King could show mercy too.
She led him stealthily up the path Rodomonte had taken to the summit.
Climbing to the top of a precipice in the company of a psychopath was not something she would have considered in her normal state of mind, she felt sure.
But in the hazy world she had mysteriously entered it seemed as wise a move as any.
She heard Rodo's voice again as they reached the top.
He was now seated on the very edge of the drop, swinging his legs childishly down at Sendei.
‘When I give the word,’ she whispered to Molassi, ‘grab him.’
They edged closer to Rodo.
He turned, saw them and giggled without any of his old charm.
‘Now!’ shouted Bernice.
Molassi darted forward.
Rodo pushed him back with unexpected strength and stood up arrogantly.
He dangled his foot over the drop.
Bernice threw herself recklessly forward, knocking him over and then back.
The entire experience was over in seconds, before she had time to panic.
‘You fool!
’ Bernice shouted at the giggling body beneath her.
‘You nearly got us both killed!’
Molassi laughed behind her.
The Wizard King could sneer at the games of mortals.
Angrily, Bernice picked herself up and went off down the winding path.
‘Get yourselves killed, then.
I don't care.’
‘I still do not trust the parasite, sir,’ Jinkwa confided.
‘What is this diplomacy it claims to possess?
I have never heard of such a thing in all the worlds.’
‘Nor I,’ said Fakrid.
‘But remember, First Pilot, how the eight twelves’ attack on our vehicle was beaten off by the Doctor's skills.
If we have any chance of defeating them, the freak will provide it.’
‘Thank you, General,’ said the Doctor, returning from the quiet corner of the camp where he had been working.
‘And here it is!’
With a flourish he produced another motley collection of  spinning components, this time cobbled together from the Chelonians' technical stores.
‘Ah,’ Fakrid grunted appreciatively.
‘So that, Doctor, is a diplomacy.’
‘Indeed,’ he lied happily.
‘One of the finest achievements of parasite thought.’
‘On what principles does it operate?’
‘Ah,’ the Doctor said knowingly.
‘Well, perhaps it's best to think of it in these terms: the dog kicks the cat, the cat kicks the budgerigar.’
‘These terms are unfamiliar to us.’
‘It's not complicated,’ he continued, ‘just a matter of perspective.
You quite happily went around killing parasites because they had no way to defend themselves against you.
Now the eight twelves are killing you for the same reason.’
‘I see,’ said Fakrid, not seeing at all.
‘And a diplomacy will reverse this situation?’
The Doctor nodded.
‘It will restore you to a more tenable position, yes.’
‘Then we must apply it immediately,’ the General said eagerly.
‘Jinkwa, secure the diplomacy to the command vehicle.’
‘No no no,’ the Doctor flapped.
‘I must take it across to the eight twelves.’
‘What is the meaning of this?’
Jinkwa snarled.
‘Do not trust it, General!’
‘Don't get yourself excited,’ scolded the Doctor.
‘That's half your trouble.
Hopping about like a cat on hot bricks when a little reasoned thought would serve you better.’
‘Why must you go alone, Doctor?’
Fakrid enquired suspiciously.
‘Because the diplomacy may affect you, too.
Remember what happened to you earlier,’ he pointed out.
‘This time, it could be much worse.’
He hoisted the contraption in his arms and made for the battlezone.
Suddenly, he turned back to them.
‘Of course, there is another way to solve the problem,’ he said tantalizingly.
‘What is that?’ growled Fakrid.
‘Well you could always just call it quits and head off somewhere else.
The eight twelves don't seem particularly bothered about any other area but their valley.’
‘That suggestion is truly worthy of a parasite,’ Jinkwa replied.
The Doctor shrugged.
‘Oh, well,’ he sighed.
‘It was worth a try.’
He doffed his hat and walked off into the mist.
‘Expect me back within the hour,’ he called back.
‘I shall return!’
From their hiding place on the rim of the wide valley, two of the eight twelves observed the Doctor's approach.
‘It looks human’, said the first.
‘And unarmed,’ said the second.
The Doctor was confident that his scheme would prove successful The Chelonians were fooled.
Now all he had to do was to convince the mysterious eight twelves to negotiate a settlement.
Poor creatures, he though.
Transported to this bleak planet only to be confronted by a marauding gang of giant tortoises.
No wonder they had opened fire.
That small part of the Doctor's character that allowed for scepticism reminded him of all the times such naivety had landed him in trouble before.
He picked his way around the smoking wreckage of the Chelonian tanks.
In the middle of the valley he hastily dismantled his collection of rubbish for fear that the eight twelves might mistake it for a weapon.
Then he turned outwards, coughed, straightened his tie, and began the real business of diplomacy.
‘I come in peace,’ he shouted.
His voice echoed around the valley.
There was no response.
‘Please hear me out.
I wish to negotiate a settlement between yourselves and your attackers.’
‘It's all right, we understand,’ a voice came from above him.
The Doctor blinked in astonishment.
On the top of the rockface before him stood two practical looking young women in their early twenties.
Although tattered and torn, their clothing revealed them to be citizens of late twentieth century Earth.
‘Good grief,’ exclaimed the Doctor.
‘And who might you be?’
The first introduced herself.
‘I'm Vanessa, she's Hazel.’
The Doctor chuckled.
‘So you're the eight twelves.’
‘Do you know anything about how we got here?’ asked Hazel desperately.
He nodded.
‘I have a fair idea, yes.’
‘See, we were on this train.
The eight twelve semi-fast Amersham to Aldgate.
Then suddenly,’ she concluded helplessly, ‘we were here.’
The Sceptic
Bernice's fingers drummed on the plastic of the dashboard.
She felt calm.
Just at the moment I'm fine, she thought.
I don't need a past.
I don't need a future.
Just let me sit here on my own at this moment forever.
Molassi and Sendei appeared, carrying the staggering Rodo between them.
The spell was broken.
‘Help me with him, Benny,’ Sendei pleaded pathetically.
She replied with a venomous glance.
Molassi almost dropped Rodo into the back of the ‘speeder.
He climbed into the driving position next to her and jerked his thumb backwards.
‘Get back over,’ he said.
She almost argued with him, but his hand had slipped meaningfully down to the handle of his knife.
She obeyed.
The ‘speeder burst into life.
It shot forward in erratic leaps before settling back into its usual roaring rhythm.
‘See, I told you.
It was the sump channels,’ said Rodo gleefully.
All the suspended pain, anger and confusion of the last day overcame Bernice.
‘What's going on here?’ she wailed.
‘I don't know where I am.’
She turned to Sendei.
‘I don't know any of you, I don't want to know any of you!
I just —’
Rodo smiled.
‘Yes?’
‘I just want to die!’
Rodo giggled.
Sendei said, ‘Look, it's all right.
We're going to be okay.
The ruins —’
‘Shut up about your ruins!’
She would have cried but her eyeballs were burning, hot and dry.
She sneered at Rodo.
‘You think you're so clever.
But you're  a nothing, nothing but a nothing.
You wear those clothes, you behave that stupid, sad, pathetic way, all to express your personality, right?
The truth is you haven't got a personality!’
She leapt at him hysterically, tearing at his face.
‘What have you done to me?’
She slumped backwards limply, staring in confusion at her hands.
Sendei nudged her gently.
He offered her a can.
‘It's in the cans, isn't it?’ she said weakly.
‘What is?’ he asked stupidly.
‘I don't know.
Some sort of drug!’
She leapt up suddenly.
Her dulled eyes flashed momentarily with renewed alertness.
‘Some sort of drug!’
The storm finally broke.
The Doctor wrung out his hat and turned back to Vanessa and Hazel.
‘You were saying?’
They had run for shelter in a tiny cave on the side of the valley a second after the storm had begun.
The suddenness and ferocity of the downpour had caught all three of them by surprise.
Despite having been in the open for only a few seconds, they had been soaked.
Vanessa produced a long black rod with a transparent sphere attached to the end.
The business end.
There was a small activator stud at the other.
‘Yeah,’ she said.
‘Well, then we found these.
Just lying in the open.’
The Doctor took it from her very gently.
‘Fascinating,’ he said, turning it over in his hands.
‘I haven't seen one of these in years.
Fortunately.’
‘Don't worry, we've got another one,’ Hazel said proudly, brandishing it.
The Doctor gave a strangulated squawk.
‘Please,’ he said, ‘would you be extremely careful with that.
Strangely enough, something about it makes me feel rather unsafe!’
‘So anyway,’ Vanessa continued, ‘then all those tanks appeared.
This voice kept shouting something.
I can't really remember what.
It didn't sound friendly.’
‘Something along the lines of surrender immediately or face total annihilation, I imagine.’
‘Yeah, that was about it,’ Hazel confirmed.
‘We shouted back, trying to explain who we were and where we came from.
But they kept coming.
It was pretty frightening.’
‘Basically,’ said Hazel, ‘we was shitting bricks.’
‘What a colourful turn of phrase you have,’ the Doctor said.
‘So we let rip,’ said Vanessa, indicating the black rod in the Doctor's hand.
‘I thought they were guns.
And I was right.’
‘Considerably more than just guns,’ said the Doctor.
‘Every bullet is itself an artificial intelligence.
It works out what the target is, where the target is, and how to get rid of it, all for itself.’
As he spoke, he unscrewed the transparent sphere gently from the rod.
‘But not any more,’ he said.
Removing a tiny red element from inside, he crushed it between his fingers.
‘That's fixed it.’
‘Here, what have you done?’
Hazel cried in alarm.
‘What are we gonna do about them aliens now?’
‘Oh, you needn't worry about them,’ the Doctor reassured her overconfidently.
‘I have the whole situation under control.’
He gestured to the other rod.
‘May I?’
Without really knowing why, Hazel found herself handing it over.
There was something about this weird little man that she trusted.
‘Weapons,’ the Doctor tutted as he disarmed the second rod.
‘They're so unsubtle.
I've never been one for loud bangs.’
Coincidentally, or maybe not, the storm chose that moment to let off a sheet of dazzling green lightning and an earsplitting crack of thunder.
All three of them jumped a foot in the air.
‘Who are you, anyway?’ asked Vanessa.
‘And how did we get here?’
He sighed.
‘It's a long story,’ he replied, ‘that began in the past, or perhaps the future.
And who knows where it will end?’
He turned abruptly.
‘I'd like to know a little more about you,’ he said.
‘I've travelled in the rush hour myself, and I must say two passengers in one compartment seems unlikely.’
‘Oh, there's plenty more,’ said Hazel.
‘Back there.’
She pointed backwards, away from the valley.
‘So why are you two all alone?’
‘We got fed up waiting,’ explained Vanessa.
‘And besides,’ Hazel continued, ‘there's this prat of a bloke  who's made himself our glorious leader.’
The Doctor glanced at his watch and considered.
A settlement between the Chelonians and the eight twelves was still his aim, after all.
And his hour was not up.
He still had a good forty minutes to prove the power of diplomacy.
‘Very well,’ he said.
‘I'd like a word with the rest of your people, if only to explain what's going on.
It'll take a few trips, but I should be able to get everybody involved in this mess back home eventually.’
He grinned disarmingly.
‘Next stop, Earth.’
‘There, we was right!’
Hazel shouted excitedly.
‘About what?’ enquired the Doctor
‘Well,’ said Vanessa.
‘We always thought we were on another planet.’
‘Very astute of you,’ the Doctor said approvingly.
‘But Witcher,’ she continued, ‘that's the bloke who's put himself in charge.
Well, Witcher thinks there's been a nuclear disaster and that we're the only survivors.’
‘Never mind,’ the Doctor said, stepping bravely from shelter into the rain.
‘I'm sure he'll understand when we explain the truth.’
Not for the first time that day, the Doctor was to be proved wrong.
Sheldukher completed checks on the F61.
The descent spiral would bring them out from the cloud at almost the exact point where the mysterious Sakkratian doctor had been located by the Cell.
The heat shields were still intact and the computer assured him that they would not crack or fall off on the journey through the atmosphere.
It would, he thought with a smile, be most unfitting to explode on landing under the circumstances.
Rosheen and Klift had already changed into more sensible clothes for deep space exploration: dark blue atmosphere suits with floppy plastic helmet attachments that folded back hoodlike behind their necks.
‘Hadn't you better get suited up?’ asked Rosheen.
He stood up from the flight deck console and crossed over to where Postine lay, successfully sedated, on a buttress.
‘Dear me, no,’ he said.
‘You don't expect me to discover  the secrets of Sakkrat dressed like a rescue ranger, do you?
‘Besides,’ he continued, ‘the atmosphere down there isn't all that thin.
The only problem of that nature that we have to worry about is an electrical storm about a thousand kilometres wide.’
‘It sounds more like a hurricane,’ said Klift stupidly.
Rosheen was alarmed to see Sheldukher prodding at Postine's body experimentally.
‘I wouldn't,’ she warned him.
He looked up and smiled.
‘Such concern.’
‘I just don't fancy tackling her a third time.’
‘You shouldn't have to,’ he replied.
‘When Postine next revives, her brain activity should have returned to normal.’
‘Which doesn't go far beyond maim, raze, kill at the best of times, if you remember,’ Rosheen said.
‘Exactly,’ said Sheldukher with relish.
‘She's so delightfully unsophisticated.’
Klift spoke again.
‘I see you finished the machine.’
‘What machine?’ asked Rosheen.
Klift pointed to the far corner.
An oblong box about four feet by two sat on the console, blinking its flashing lights at them
‘He showed me that before we went into sleep,’ he told her.
‘He took it from the gene labs.
Said it was a prototype.’
‘It isn't perfect, no,’ agreed Sheldukher.
‘But it will do.’
Rosheen crossed over.
Inside the box, concealed beneath a transparent cover, were a mass of tiny wire filaments.
‘It's a carrying case for the Cell,’ she guessed.
‘Yes,’ Sheldukher confirmed.
It was certainly one of the most surreal sights the Doctor had experienced in his many years of travelling.
Thankfully, the storm had abated, at least for the moment, and the eight twelves had emerged from the shelter of their dull grey carriage.
They were now gathered around a large rock, on which stood a rather ordinary looking, dark haired, middle-aged man.
The most striking feature of his appearance was a sheepskin jacket which looked as if it had seen better days, sometime in the late nineteen seventies.
The Doctor, Vanessa and Hazel joined the gathering crowd as unobtrusively as possible.
The Doctor had known many of the great leaders in the history of Earth and his instincts told  him immediately that Witcher was not one of them.
‘Now listen,’ Witcher addressed the crowd.
‘We all know what's happened.
We all know what we've got to do.’
There was silence.
It appeared that nobody did.
‘That radioactive storm was just the beginning.
There's probably nuclear fall-out creeping all over us at this very moment.
Yes, my friends, we have one obligation and one, sole obligation alone.
We have to survive!’
He obviously expected some sort of reaction.
The crowd of commuters stood muttering in bewilderment.
‘Our lives in this brave new world will be tough, my friends.
Oh yes.
We must learn to live without televisions or microwave ovens.
The womenfolk will all have to be pregnant all the time, of course, if the community is to survive.
It'll be like Raquel Welch in that film with the dinosaurs, except there won't be any dinosaurs.’
He licked his lips.
Hazel nudged the Doctor.
‘See what I mean?
What a git.’
‘My Dad bought a car off him once.
And he was on the PTA at school,’ said Vanessa.
‘A second hand car sales man with delusions of grandeur,’ mused the Doctor.
‘I've faced worse.’
He stepped forward and raised a hand.
‘Excuse me?’
Witcher looked at him in amazement.
‘Who the hell are you?’ he demanded suspiciously.
‘I'm the Doctor,’ he said, doffing his hat to the crowd.
The commuters warmed to the little stranger immediately.
Not so Witcher.
‘A scavenger, eh?
Come to steal food from our tribe?’
‘Er, no,’ the Doctor said politely.
‘Actually, I've come to take you all back home.’
There was a burble of relief from the crowd.
At last, here was somebody who might offer a perfectly sensible explanation for what had happened.
‘Home?’ scoffed Witcher.
‘Home?’
‘Yes.
Home.’
‘You must have flipped, mate.
There's been a nuclear accident, savvy?
Or maybe the Ivans changed their minds again and opened up.
We'll probably never know.
You've got to accept it.’
‘Well, I could be mad,’ the Doctor said.
‘Perhaps I'm a lunatic  with a fevered imagination.’
He smiled.
‘It must be very fevered.’
‘Listen,’ Witcher said firmly.
‘Either you join us and help us to survive or we leave you.
We can't carry deadweights in our tribe.’
The Doctor had had enough.
He shouldered his way through the crowd and joined Witcher on the rock.
‘Oi!’
Witcher cried, his dreams of empire crumbling.
‘Oh, do be quiet, there's a good fellow,’ said the Doctor.
The crowd roared with laughter.
The Doctor remembered why, long ago, he had decided not to go into politics.
‘My friends,’ he said, ‘all I ask of you is a little patience.
The truth will be revealed in time.
The important thing to do is wait.’
With that, he hopped down from the rock, leaving its previous occupant free rein over the throng.
‘Don't listen to him,’ Witcher blustered.
‘He's mad.’
‘Tell him, Doctor,’ Hazel shouted encouragingly.
‘Tell him we're on another planet.’
‘Oh no,’ the Doctor mumbled to the ground.
‘Did you hear that?’
Witcher crowed gleefully.
‘He thinks we're on another planet.’
The Doctor chose wisely to ignore him.
‘We must move out,’ Witcher continued.
‘Our food supplies are already depleted.
We must go to the ruins of London for food.’
The Doctor imagined the likely result of such an action.
The thought of Witcher squaring up to Fakrid was not a comforting one.
He turned back.
‘Yes, you are on another planet.
But you'll be perfectly safe here until I have time to take you back!’
‘Take us back, eh?
In your spaceship?’
‘Yes.
In my spaceship!’
Witcher was uncomfortably aware that nobody was laughing at the Doctor.
‘He's a spy,’ he ranted.
‘Sent to steal away what food we have by another tribe!’
‘Don't be such a plonker,’ Hazel shouted up at him.
‘And you're no better, you two,’ he retorted, pointing at the two young women.
‘You've about as much sense as that bottle  of tomato sauce over there.’
‘Everything the Doctor has said is the truth,’ Vanessa told the crowd.
‘We know, we've actually seen alien beings.
Somehow we've been transported to another world.’
Witcher could see the belief in the eyes of the commuters.
He made a last desperate attempt to sway them back to him.
‘Don't listen to them.
They've been reading too much space fiction.
It's like something out of that rubbish they used to put on after Grandstand.’
He pointed to the Doctor's umbrella.
‘What's that, then?
A space gun?’
The Doctor fixed him squarely with a look that had frozen the hearts of evil intelligences the universe over.
‘I am presently endeavouring to protect you from a race that considers all human life to be a dangerous, parasitic infection.
When I look at you, it is barely within my powers to convince myself that this is not, in fact, the case!’
He stormed off, the tails of his jacket flapping behind him.
He felt a presence at his elbow.
Vanessa and Hazel had followed him.
‘We believe you, Doctor.’
‘I know.
’ He smiled and took both of their hands.
‘I'm relying on you now, both of you.
You must keep Witcher and your people back, out of sight behind the valley.
It's very important.’
With that he relaxed his grasp and set off alone in the direction of the Chelonians.
A few minutes later the Doctor had reached the valley.
Suddenly he threw himself down on the ground and rolled over and over in the dust.
He hated getting his clothes dirty, but the effect had to be convincing.
Then he walked over to the assemblage of components he had constructed earlier and tore it to pieces systematically.
Fakrid and Jinkwa had spent an anxious hour waiting for the Doctor.
The rain had done nothing to improve their temperaments.
‘Where is the freak?’
Jinkwa demanded.
‘The hour is almost up.’
One of the surrounding officers spoke up.
‘There it is, sir!’
They motored forward to greet him as he appeared from the mists.
He staggered forward, covered in dirt, his clothing ripped and ragged.
In his hands were clutched his umbrella and all that was left of the diplomacy.
‘Doctor,’ Fakrid croaked angrily.
‘What happened to you?’
He collapsed at their feet.
(I hope I'm not overdoing this, he thought.)
The Doctor raised his head.
‘They're…gone…’
‘The eight twelves?’
Jinkwa queried anxiously.
He nodded.
‘The dip…the diplomacy…
It was too much for them.’
Jinkwa smiled.
‘Another Chelonian victory!’
The Doctor grunted indignantly, ‘Hardly.’
‘That is how it will be written in the history books, Doctor,’ Jinkwa sneered.
‘Don't I get a medal?
A certificate?’
He looked up at the circle of menacing faces surrounding him.
‘A glass of water would be nice.’
‘Your only reward will be annihilation, parasite,’ Jinkwa continued, ‘after we have drained the knowledge from your brain.’
A trooper appeared with a message for Fakrid.
He snatched it away anxiously.
The Doctor stood up, swayed and reeled about.
‘I won't deny it was tough,’ he continued.
‘You've never seen such creatures.
Huge green blobs seven feet across.
With one glowing eye.
Urrgh.’
He shuddered.
‘Thankfully, the diplomacy destroyed them all.
Now you can all go home to Chelonia.’
‘Not yet, Doctor,’ Fakrid said menacingly.
He limped forward, waving the message angrily about in his front right foot.
‘This report has just come in from the Environments Officer.
Did you really think a Chelonian officer would trust your word?
I ordered listening posts to be established as soon as you were gone.’
‘Why's that?’ the Doctor asked guilelessly.
A rising tide of panic was creeping up on him.
‘Nothing left here for you to shoot at.
There's certainly nothing worth eating.’
Fakrid read from the golden sheet.
‘Listening station five  reports: The parasite known as Doctor was then heard to say ‘Not any more.
That's fixed it.
I have the whole situation under control.’
Inference is that Doctor disarmed the weaponry of the eight twelves.’
Fakrid looked up from the paper and screamed:
‘And the eight twelves are parasites !’
Jinkwa raised his blaster.
‘Die, Doctor!
Die!’
Yet again, Fakrid stayed him.
‘Oh no, First Pilot,’ he said.
‘Before the Doctor dies, let it witness the destruction of the other parasites it was foolish enough to disarm!’
‘No, Fakrid,’ the Doctor pleaded.
‘You cannot do this, I beg of you!’
‘I do not listen to the words of parasites,’ Fakrid replied.
‘Jinkwa, make preparations to clear infestation!’
Bernice threw five of the pink cans over the side of the motorspeeder.
They exploded in fizzy blasts against the rocks.
‘What are you doing?’
Sendei asked.
‘That's our only supply of water!’
‘After that storm?’ she exclaimed.
‘Oh no, I think we've all had a bit too much of this stuff.’
Rodo leaned over and put his arm around her shoulder.
‘Come on, girl, take it easy.’
She shrugged him off angrily.
‘It's a drug, you idiot!
We don't know what it is or where it came from, but there's obviously something in it!’
‘Correction,’ said Rodo with sudden menace.
‘We don't known what you are and where you come from.
All's I see is a crazy woman throwing away our supplies.’
‘Listen,’ she said impatiently.
‘Sendei, you said you don't touch drugs.’
‘Right.’
‘Well, neither do I. At least, as far as I remember, I don't.
Another thing.
I don't suffer from constant around the clock insomnia.
I'm not given to panic.
I have a good memory.’
Sendei sighed.
‘Look, we don't know if it's got anything to do with the drink.’
‘Of course it has!’ she shouted.
‘We don't know what it could be doing to us.
We'd be the last people to see what it's doing  to us.
It could be killing us!’
‘It must be something in the atmosphere,’ said Sendei.
‘That's what I reckon.
Something in the atmosphere of this planet.’
Bernice grabbed more of the cans and began to hurl them overboard.
‘It isn't you, Sendei, it's the drug talking!’ she cried.
‘It's been staring us in the face all this time.
We've got to destroy this stuff before it destroys us!’
The others hauled her back from the edge.
She struggled furiously for a few seconds but her former strength was lost to her.
She flopped backwards suddenly like a broken doll.
‘Crazy,’ Rodo said calmly.
Sendei nodded.
‘Yeah.’
‘There can't be anything in this stuff,’ Rodo continued as he broke open another can.
‘I could tell if there was.’
‘Yeah,’ Sendei said again.
But something deep inside told him that Bernice had been right.
She sat up weakly.
‘I was probably just dreaming,’ she told them unsteadily, her words slurred and slow.
‘Sure,’ Rodo said.
He passed her the can.
‘I mustn't drink it,’ she said as she did.
‘It's addictive.’
She smiled as the familiar sweetness passed over her tongue.
‘I think it's going to kill me.’
The motorspeeder came to a sudden halt.
They looked forward to see if another component had malfunctioned.
But Molassi had stopped the vehicle himself.
He stood upright on the driver's seat, staring up into the clouds.
Here it was.
Another sign for the Wizard King.
At the edge of her hearing, Bernice picked up the sound of a roaring furnace engine, overlaid with the high pitched whine of cooling heat shields.
She knew that sound well from her days as an explorer.
‘It's a ship!’ she cried.
‘They've come to get us, boy!’
Rodo screamed illogically at Sendei.
They scrambled from the ‘speeder on to the hard rocky ground.
A huge black shape moved between the clouds, which rumbled and spurted unhappily at its passing.
‘It's a freight vessel,’ said Bernice.
‘Old fashioned transporter carrier.
A Kezzivot, I think.’
The ship disappeared into the distance, taking their hopes of rescue with it.
‘Just passing by,’ Molassi grunted.
He slid down into the seat again.
Bernice shook her head.
‘No.
It was on a descent pattern.
Coming in to land somewhere near here.’
Sendei panicked.
‘We've got to find it before it takes off again!’
‘We don't need to,’ Bernice replied happily.
‘It's a freighter.
It must have somebody to trade with.
Perhaps this place isn't as empty as we thought.’
Rodo jumped with glee.
He pointed to a small ridge of higher land before them.
‘There's probably a city just over those hills!’
Molassi had already started the ignition sequence.
The ‘speeder set off again with a renewed sense of purpose.
Bernice felt a lot happier.
If there were space travellers on this planet, and it seemed that there were, their forward flight through the wastes took on a more logical purpose than the pursuance of a prophecy from a discod sleeve.
Rodo might even be right.
There could be a city over the hills!
Although only twenty eight tanks — just over half the original number — remained, the amassed Chelonian assault force made a terrifying spectacle.
The sweeping of the disintegrator ports, the rumbling of the traction units as they powered up, the distant crackle of internal radio communication: all conspired to create the impression of one vast, murderous, destructive creature.
The Doctor stood outside the command vehicle under heavy guard.
Fakrid and Jinkwa ambled smugly up, having completed their preparations for battle.
‘The time draws near, Doctor,’ Jinkwa sneered.
‘The parasites will be swept from the surface of this planet!’
‘Fakrid, once again I beg of you, stop this senseless slaughter,’ the Doctor pleaded.
‘Those people pose absolutely no threat to you.
Just go!
Leave this planet alone!’
The General sidled up to him.
‘You never understood us, Doctor.
It is not the Chelonian way to turn away from an enemy.
It is not in the Chelonian nature to deceive.
It is not part of our code to stand helpless and alone and wait for death.
All  these things you have done.
Because you are a parasite.’
‘And all parasites must be destroyed,’ Jinkwa concluded.
The Doctor thought of Vanessa, Hazel and the other humans from the train.
He could not bear the thought that his own underestimation of the Chelonians would be responsible for their deaths.
He stepped forward.
‘I cannot allow you to do this, Fakrid!’
Fakrid smiled mockingly.
‘You cannot allow…
And what exactly to you propose to do to stop me?’
That, thought the Doctor, was a very good question.
He simply hadn't had time to lay one of his spectacular contingency plans or clever traps.
It was just like the bad old days again.
And just like in the bad old days, it was coincidence rather than cleverness that saved the Doctor.
Every head turned up automatically at the sound of the furnace engine.
A huge black shadow passed over the area.
Grit stung the Doctor's eyes.
A powerful backblast blew one coating of dust from his clothes and replaced it with another that was tinged with soot.
The Chelonians milled about confusedly in the sudden darkness, their optical aids realigning frantically to provide them with a coherent picture of their environment.
The Doctor wiped his bleary eyes with his scarf and doffed his hat to the landing spacecraft.
‘I think my luck has finally changed,’ he said happily.
Death Of A Salesman
The motorspeeder had entered a canyon at least a mile wide.
For ten minutes now, the roar of the engines had been overlaid by a scraping, spluttering sound.
A bank of purple neons had begun to flash on the dashboard.
Molassi didn't know or care what that meant.
But it was soon to become apparent.
He wrenched the wheel around to negotiate a treacherous curve.
The chassis lurched forward and then back sharply, knocking the four passengers off balance.
The engine gasped and died.
Sendei sighed.
‘Another fault.’
Bernice shook her head.
‘I don't think so.’
They jumped as a cheery metallic voice rasped tinnily from a concealed speaker.
Bernice almost laughed at the comical expression of shock that passed momentarily over Molassi's normally impassive features.
‘We fuel cells have done our best You really put us to the test Exhausted now the charge is done Replace it with another one’
Rodo smiled.
‘Auto messages.
For kids.’
‘Very funny,’ Bernice said tersely.
‘Do we have another charge for the fuel cells?’
Sendei shrugged.
‘Didn't know we needed any,’ he said pathetically.
‘The guy that sold us the ‘speeder said it was good for another million miles.’
‘And you believed him?’ she said incredulously.
He leaned forward aggressively.
‘Look, we hardly expected to wind up here, did we?’
‘I suppose not.’
She climbed out of the ‘speeder and gazed up at the darkening sky.
‘But here we are.
For better or for worse.’
Rodo joined her.
‘Where's my city now?’
‘We all saw that ship,’ said Sendei.
‘There's got to be  people around here.
There must be.’
Bernice moved purposefully over to the corner of the passenger section where their meagre supplies were stored.
She began to pack them together in a pile.
‘We'll just have to continue on foot,’ she said briskly.
Sendei smiled and helped her.
‘You're some lady,’ he said.
She smiled automatically.
‘Thank you.’
For a moment there, she had almost felt like her old self again, or at least glimpsed the idea of what her old self had been.
What she should be were it not for the constant muscular spasming and the recurrent confusion of her senses.
Could those senses be trusted?
Had the ship been real?
And what about those eight dark shapes on the horizon?
‘My God.’
‘What is it?’
She pointed.
On the other side of the gorge stood a line of eight irregularly shaped monoliths.
They were barely visible against the shifting darkness of the clouds.
Bernice blinked and squinted.
The objects remained, in all their unlikeliness.
It was impossible to believe that they had fallen so mathematically into place by themselves.
The jagged outline of ageless stone suggested the lost, the ancient.
Rodo's gleaming, futuristic metropolis was not in evidence.
 Molassi screamed with delight.
‘This is it, boys!’
He scrambled down into the cold, howling plain that separated them from the stones.
Bernice calculated that it would take the best part of an hour to reach them on foot.
In the perilously low night temperatures of this planet, it was a foolish journey to make.
Sendei and Rodo were already scrambling over the side of the ‘speeder.
‘I wouldn't,’ she called.
‘You could die of exposure.’
Sendei turned.
‘Don't you remember?
The prophecy.’
Bernice leaned over the ‘speeder and pulled out the Zagrat discod.
In the dim light it was difficult to make out the illustration.
But there, behind that gaudy, fantastical temple stood  a line of monoliths.
Eight in all.
Of irregular height.
So, she thought, I am the pretty lady.
Sendei is the clever boy.
The weirdo in the hat, whoever he might be, is the weirdo in the hat.
And the explanation for all of this lies in those stones.
She slipped the discod into her coat pocket, collected some cans from the dispenser, and made to follow the others.
Behind her a bleeper sounded.
The word EMPTY lit up on the dispenser.
The Doctor had been all but forgotten by the Chelonians, which suited him perfectly.
He scuttled behind the nearest tank and watched Fakrid and Jinkwa's predictable reaction to the latest development with amusement.
‘A parasite spacecraft!’ exclaimed the General.
‘I have seen similar.
Look at it.
Unsightly and inefficient.’
The Doctor was forced to agree.
The ship, large and grey, sat only a few hundred metres from the assault force.
Weld scars confirmed his suspicion that a hefty furnace engine had been appended to its original short hop retro reaction coil system.
The roomy silos of the hull flanks gave it a bulbous appearance that defied approval by any aesthetic but the purely functional.
Nearly all of the Chelonian tanks could have fitted inside.
‘I hazard that it is constructed of reinforced megalanium,’ Jinkwa said.
‘We can easily destroy it.’
‘And by Mif, we will!’
Fakrid shouted.
‘Order all stations to open fire in thirty seconds.
We'll blast the wretched parasites half way across the universe!’
The Doctor was less worried than he might have been.
Nobody would be foolish enough to land an old ship like that in the middle of a war zone without a very good idea of how to defend it.
‘We're in the middle of a battle!’ cried Klift.
The tanks edged forward on the big screen.
‘I am well aware of that,’ Sheldukher said calmly.
He leant over the Cell, which had now been transferred, painfully, to its carrying case.
‘Suggestions, please.’
‘Taking off would be a good idea, I think’ said Rosheen.
The ship's aged sensor pods had provided the computer, and  thus the Cell, with a swift approximation of the state of play outside the ship.
‘The creatures…outside would…appear to be…reptilians with bionic…rebuild,’ it reported.
‘Suggest adoption of…
McArty technique…’
‘What's that?’ asked Klift.
Sheldukher replied while fiddling furiously with the communications panel.
‘Don't you remember your military history?
McArty led the third campaign against the Iguanoids in the Koftan war.’
‘I remember,’ said Rosheen.
‘But he had months of planning and an intelligence network the size of a planet behind him.
How are you going to find the right frequency before they blow us to pieces?’
‘I don't need to,’ said Sheldukher.
He stepped back from the console and whispered to the Cell.
‘It's all yours now.’
Rosheen and Klift looked on.
Neither had confidence in Sheldukher's plan.
‘Five…four…three…two…’
Jinkwa's foot hovered eagerly over the firing button.
Fakrid prepared to give the order.
‘One…fi—’
Jinkwa's eyes swept crazily from left to right.
His limbs pulled themselves up at ridiculous angles.
His heart pumped faster and then slower.
His ears popped and fluid seeped from his nose.
The world had turned upside down again.
The Doctor jammed his fingers in his ears.
The ultrasonic whine had created a pressure of its own, threatening to compress his brain.
His hat flew off.
‘The McArty technique,’ he said.
‘Very clever.
But not nearly refined enough!’
He collapsed, rolling about in agony, teeth gritted.
‘Turn down the power!
Turn it down!’
Sheldukher reached out for the modulator control.
‘What are you doing?’ asked Rosheen.
‘Turn it up.
Destroy them!’
‘Certainly not,’ he said, reducing the power of the emission.
What do you take me for?’
‘A lunatic who wouldn't let a bunch of bionic reptiles loose unless he had a good reason.’
He pointed to the screen.
‘Out there is a very clever being.
A telepath with knowledge of the Highest Science.
I can't risk destroying it.’
He crossed over to a concealed hatch on the wall, punched in a complex security code, and withdrew a fearsome looking, three foot long rifle.
It was time for Postine to play her part.
The Doctor pulled himself up and dusted himself down.
The disabling whine had lessened to an irritating tinnitus.
‘My own way was much better,’ he said, jamming his recalcitrant hat back on his head.
‘Subtler, even.’
The hatch at the base of the command vehicle swung open and Fakrid lurched out.
To the Doctor's amusement he was cross eyed.
His limbs flailed impotently, pulling him helplessly in four different directions at once.
His injured rear left leg wheeled over and over in a frantic bowling motion.
‘Doc…tor…’ he croaked, his mouth seizing up as he tried to speak.
‘Yes?’ he replied politely.
‘If this is your doing…’
Fakrid's mouth clamped shut with a snap and he was reduced to making mumbled threats, none of which sounded very pleasant for the Doctor.
‘Cybernetics,’ the Doctor sniffed judgementally.
‘So very useful.
Until somebody throws a spanner in the works.’
He turned to face the ship.
‘I think it's time I made the acquaintance,’ he said, and strode confidently over to the entry hatch on the side, umbrella readied for knocking.
Before he could reach the hatch, there was a sharp crack and it slid slowly open.
The Doctor raised his hat.
‘Hello, I'm the Doc —’ he began.
An enormous bald headed woman dressed in battle fatigues merged.
She carried an enormous weapon.
The Doctor turned.
‘Not today, thank you.’
The woman sprang forward.
She turned the rifle on its side and clubbed him down brutally with the butt.
Rosheen watched as Postine came into view on the big screen, her massive frame picked out in infra-red against the night.
She marched over to the nearest tank.
One of the reptiles crawled aggressively towards her, its limbs flailing helplessly.
Postine subdued it with a single blow to its long wrinkled neck.
‘They look like tortoises,’ said Klift.
‘Giant tortoises.’
Rosheen turned from him dismissively.
Was he going senile?
‘I've never seen that species before,’ Sheldukher confessed.
More of the confused reptiles emerged from their tanks.
‘They're rather sweet, aren't they?’
‘Oh yes,’ said Rosheen sarcastically.
‘We could take them home and sell them as pets.
Psychotic tortoises would have gone down well on the North Gate.’
‘I don't think they're locals,’ Sheldukher surmised.
‘This is hardly the environment for reptilian life.
There can be only one explanation.’
‘And what's that?’
‘They've come to steal the secrets of Sakkrat,’ he said.
The Cell spoke up, ‘Sheldukher…’
‘Yes?’
‘The sensor pods…have completed their search…of the area…’
‘Good.
Anything of interest?’
The Cell squirmed.
‘Massive amounts of…clean rad energy have been…released here…recently.
There is a…a group of humanoids…on the other…side of…the westward valley…’
Sheldukher sighed with satisfaction.
‘Is that so?
Somehow, I didn't think this Doctor was a tortoise.’
He snapped open a direct link to Postine.
‘Postine, this is Sheldukher.’
The only reply was a guttural grunt.
In the background they heard the sound of brittle necks breaking.
‘I told you to assemble them, not disassemble them,’ he chided her.
‘Some have weapons, master,’ Postine's flat, low pitched  voice filtered back.
‘Well, do your best.
Anyway, prepare to receive secondary instructions.’
‘Shall I kill them, master?’ she enquired eagerly.
‘No no no,’ he replied, irritated.
‘Just listen.
When you've finished with the reptiles, I want you to round up a group of humans.
They are on the other side of the valley.’
‘Instructions accepted, master.’
Rosheen asked, ‘Do you really think she's stable enough?
She might well turn around and kill us all.’
Sheldukher turned to her.
He produced the black square.
Rosheen had almost forgotten about it.
She took a step backwards.
‘At the first sign,’ he said calmly.
‘At the very first sign of such an act…’
The threat was obvious.
Rosheen considered.
That was the trouble with Sheldukher, she decided.
He seemed so ordinary, so harmless.
He was almost fun to be with at times.
Doubtless many of his victims had believed the same.
But she had recognized faint glimmerings of fanaticism in his recent actions.
Fanaticism was a flaw.
A flaw which could lead to him making mistakes.
She would be waiting for that moment.
Waiting to take her chance.
The cold could have killed them.
Bernice shivered inside her coat as she ran the last few feet to the stones.
Only the promise of an answer to the mystery of her blanked out past kept her going.
She had stopped to drink from a can on the way up, caring little now for what it might be doing to her.
All that she knew was that she needed it.
She found the three others standing disconsolately between the jagged stones.
For that was what they were.
Nothing more than blank, toppled chunks of rock.
There were no inscriptions or markings.
Only the precision of their linear positioning suggested that they had any significance at all.
They crowded forward silently.
In response to the unasked question she handed them the last cans.
‘That's it.
There's no more,’ she told them.
‘We'll survive,’ said Sendei, with an optimism she could tell  he didn't feel.
‘There's water here.’
She laughed and pointed to the can in his hand.
‘That isn't water.’
She looked around.
A huge dark rock, at least two hundred feet high, reared up a short distance away.
It was hard to make out its shape in the darkness.
It was bulky and rotund at the base and tapered into slender points at the top.
Slender points.
Or could they be slender spires?
She ran over to the rock and touched it.
Its surface was worn and rough, but her fingers could make out irregular indentations and shallow groove markings.
She stepped back and looked up again.
This was the temple.
‘Sendei!’ she called.
‘Sendei, come over here!
Look!’
All three youths ran over.
‘What gives?’
Rodo asked, confused.
‘This’ she said, patting the stone.
‘This is the temple.’
‘The Temple of the Event Shift,’ Molassi said slowly.
‘Here the Wizard King meets the Lady of the Moonlight.’
He ran wildly around the temple, his boots crunching in the thin soil.
They heard him give a cry of wonder from the other side and followed him.
Molassi had passed through a tiny opening that could just be made out in the dim light.
It had obviously once been a door ,but the stone lintel above had given way centuries before.
Whatever decorative covering had concealed the entrance had likewise rotted into dust.
Rodo made to follow Molassi.
Bernice halted him.
‘Do you think that's wise?’
He shook her off aggressively.
‘This is it, girl!’ he snarled.
‘The Temple of the Event Shift!
Molassi was right, Zagrat was right!’
He slipped himself through the gap.
The jangling of his chains and bells was swallowed up by the blackness.
Sendei wasn't ashamed to show his fear.
‘I suppose we'd better go in,’ he said with trepidation.
‘At least wait until it's light,’ Bernice advised him.
She spoke with sudden authority.
‘One doesn't go blundering into unsound structures without a light source at the best of times.
Would you go potholing without a rope?’
Sendei licked his lips.
‘I owe it to them,’ he said.
‘We were brought here together.
There must be a reason.’
Bernice frowned.
‘You told me you didn't owe them anything.’
He smiled.
‘I don't remember.’
She took his hand and squeezed it.
She knew that nothing she could say would change his mind.
She also knew there was a possibility that she would never see him alive again.
‘Take care,’ she said.
‘I'll be waiting here, just outside.’
He nodded awkwardly and followed the others through the gap.
Bernice shivered again.
She walked back over to the standing stones and leant her forehead against one of them.
The irritating clarity which her dissolving mind afforded long gone events brought back memories of an archaeological expedition to classify similar megaliths on Sensuron.
The team had chosen one stone each, the stone that most resembled them, and given them nicknames.
Hers had been called, affectionately, Snooty Cow.
She prayed to the spirits of the long dead gods to whom the stones had been erected.
If I'm going to die, she pleaded with them, kill me now.
If I'm going to live, give me a future to live in and a present to build from.
Long sleepless hours passed.
Bernice's spinning head finally turned from the stone.
Why hadn't the temperature killed her?
Perhaps it wasn't as cold as it seemed to her distorted senses.
She gasped.
An old and deserted city had been revealed by the daylight.
It sprawled, as cities will, on a hillside some distance away.
Rosheen stepped on to the surface of Sakkrat.
Sheldukher walked ahead of her, hands clasped behind his back.
The atmosphere was fuller than she'd anticipated.
The low pressure was uncomfortable, however.
It gave the misty, miserable planet an added aura of gloom.
Postine's task had been completed.
She stood proud and upright next to an ill-matched circle composed of frightened humans dressed in most unsuitable clothing and whirring, clattering, helpless tortoises.
‘Excellent, Postine,’ Sheldukher congratulated her.
She inclined her head.
‘Master.’
He swept the crowd with a brief glance.
‘What a bizarre collection we have here.’
Only a few yards away, the Doctor stood with Vanessa and Hazel.
He had sneaked himself into the crowd of humans as the huge woman had herded them over from the train.
Her rifle butt had given him a nasty knock, but there would be no lasting damage.
Still, he had been knocked out twice in a short space of time and would appreciate some rest.
He thought longingly of returning for a cup of cocoa and a slice of toast to the TARDIS.
He had a feeling that precious moment would be some time away.
‘What's going on here then, Doctor?’ asked Vanessa.
‘I thought you said all we had to do was wait and you'd get us home.’
‘I'm afraid you may have to wait a little longer,’ he replied apologetically.
‘And what are those horrible Ninja Turtle things?’ asked Hazel, indicating the Chelonians.
‘Please indulge me just a moment,’ he said.
‘To be honest, I'm not quite sure myself what's going on.
It makes a change, I suppose.
Although,’ he added ruefully, ‘I much prefer it the usual way.’
He tried to keep his eyes off the little man who had emerged from the ship.
He was of average enough appearance: smooth skinned, dark haired, in his early fifties.
He wore a neat, unremarkable dark blue suit with a fashionably wide collar.
He strutted about with the woman at his side, looking the picture of a freighter captain.
But there was something worrying about that deceptively bland face.
The Doctor's well honed instincts warned him.
Watch out.
Shifty.
Intelligent.
Probably dangerous.
Definitely mad.
In fact, the kind of person who could easily keep a deformed monster alive in eternal agony.
His thoughts were interrupted by an irritating tap on the shoulder.
He turned to confront Witcher.
‘Oh no, not you again.’
‘Listen, Doctor Spock,’ Witcher blustered.
‘I've had just about enough of this.’
The Doctor tried to shake him off.
‘Please go away,’ he said through gritted teeth.
‘This is all some sort of joke, isn't it?’
Witcher shouted.
Everybody turned to look at him.
‘Well go on, then.
You've had your laugh,’ he continued hysterically.
‘Wheel on Jeremy Beadle and get it over with.’
To the Doctor's chagrin, Witcher's outbursts had attracted the attention of the little man and his two female aides.
He had hoped to remain out of their way and gain some thinking time.
‘What is going on here?’ the little man said smoothly.
Witcher strode forward.
‘I'll tell you what's going on, mate,’ he said, slapping a none too friendly arm around the other's shoulders.
‘You've gone too far this time.
Digging molehills in somebody's garden, maybe.
Smashing up somebody's car, maybe.
But this…’
He gestured inarticulately around at the spaceship and the Chelonians.
‘I'll have the law on you for this, mate, I tell you,’ he finished helplessly.
The Doctor watched all this in horrified fascination.
He had no choice but to intervene.
Before he could, the little man brought out a small laser pistol from a pouch at his belt.
He pulled the trigger.
A bright yellow beam shot from the tip.
Witcher gaped down at the smoking hob in his chest.
‘You are a spaceman,’ he gasped, and died.
His killer sighed and pocketed the pistol.
He turned to address the crowd, who were now, understandably, bunched together in alarm.
‘The same for anybody that gets out of line,’ he said calmly.
There was almost, thought the Doctor, a trace of boredom in those measured tones.
He returned his glance to the area around the body.
His eyes swept over Vanessa and Hazel uninterestedly, then settled on the Doctor.
‘Who are you?’
‘Beg pardon?’ the Doctor said stupidly.
Vanessa and Hazel were astonished by his sudden adoption of a broad West Country accent.
‘I said, who are you?
What is your name?’
‘Ah well, seeing as you ask, I'm Norman.
Norman Brown.
But what's it to you mister?’
‘And what are you doing here, Mister Brown?’
The Doctor sucked at his teeth.
‘Well there I was, clearing out my hamster's cage, when all of a sudden, whoosh, off I goes to another planet.
I'm a bit worried 'bout my Elsie.
See, it's gone five and she'll be creatin' if I'm not back for my tea.’
Sheldukher raised a hand to silence him, a pained expression on his face.
What a grubbing non-entity.
Probably a remedial.
He turned dismissively and moved off with his entourage.
‘What was all that about, Doctor?’
Vanessa asked.
‘It's very simple,’ he said lightly, but his eyes betrayed the seriousness of his thoughts.
‘And from now on, it's Norman, please.’
Death By Trivia
The exploration of the temple was an unsettling experience, for Sendei at least.
Its ancient architect had cut large openings in the outer walls to allow light to filter through, but the planet's night, moonless and starless, offered no illumination.
They seemed to have been stumbling through pitch blackness for hours now.
Molassi led them silently onwards and downwards.
He did not stop to warn them of any of the unseen hazards he was first to discover.
Sendei and Rodomonte were forced to navigate the tiny passages for themselves, and had narrowly avoided falling into open pits at least twice.
‘Rodo,’ Sendei called.
The jangling of his friend's bells and chains, which he had been using as an aid for navigation, had ceased abruptly.
‘Rodo!’
He sensed Rodo's presence a few metres ahead of him.
‘Rodo, speak to me!’
Rodo's voice came back.
‘He's gone.’
‘Molassi?’
‘Who else?’
There was panic in his voice.
Sendei licked his lips nervously.
‘Let's turn back.
Let's go back for Benny.’
He heard Rodo slide to the ground defeatedly.
‘You lead the way, then.’
Pointlessly, Sendei looked around.
His eyes were wide open but he could see nothing.
They were trapped.
‘We've got to go on,’ he said.
Rodo pulled himself up.
Sendei felt his friend's hand brush his cheek.
‘Not just the clever boy, are you?’ he said admiringly.
Sendei smiled.
‘Come on.’
He pushed Rodo aside and took the lead, his hands outstretched.
The rough rock walls had already scraped a layer  of skin from the palms.
A few minutes of silent shuffling brought them to a junction.
The passage was narrower here, tapering off into three turnings.
None of them offered any distinction from its neighbour.
Then a voice echoed tunelessly from the passage directly opposite.
‘Source of the Light, Wizard of the Night, Wild Lady of the Ruins…’
Both Sendei and Rodomonte recognized the opening lines of another of Zagrat's interminable anthems.
Rodo sighed with relief.
‘Molassi.’
Sendei remained still and silent, ignoring Rodo's push at his shoulder.
‘There's something wrong.’
‘Get mobile,’ Rodo urged impatiently.
‘Light,’ said Sendei.
The outline of the junction was just visible.
The light was coming from straight ahead, the same passage that Molassi's voice echoed back from.
‘Move,’ Rodo said.
‘Come on!’
Sendei walked on reluctantly.
Now that the answer to the mystery seemed so close, why did every instinct warn him to turn away from it?
The passage continued for another few metres.
As he edged forward, Sendei glanced up occasionally at the far end.
The light was brighter now.
Details of decorative paintwork were visible on his left side although only the lower portion of the work could be seen clearly.
It depicted what he took to be some sort of religious ritual.
Most of the figures involved were obscured by the slanting roof.
The passage had obviously once been a high ceilinged corridor.
Sendei turned the final corner and emerged into a small circular space.
The walls were covered with a riot of colourful designs, patterns that swirled like those on a headster-time blouson.
Molassi sat cross legged next to a thin column of bright white light, which stood like a radiant strut at the centre of the chamber.
His mantra like repetition of the lyrics continued as the others emerged wide eyed into the light.
Such power.
All there in the light, waiting to be claimed by the Wizard King.
He was protected now.
It was time he started getting mad with the freakster and the clever boy.
‘This place is,’ Rodo shrugged his shoulders.
‘Cosmic.’
That  word was so uncool, so headster-time, but there was no other way to describe the sight.
Sendei looked into the pillar of light.
Its core was unbearably bright, but the outer edges were tinged a paler green.
A low buzz of power warned him away from touching it.
He turned to examine the walls.
The people of the planet could be seen more clearly here.
They were humanoids: short, Caucasian but hairless, with thin lips and bulging black eyes.
Most were naked, indicating a profound environmental change at some point in their planet's history, although some of the women wore simple, collarless robes of deep purple.
Some were eating, drinking or making love; others spun cloth on machine looms or baked bread in silvery stoves.
Another group, exclusively male, was gathered around what Sendei guessed was a highly advanced piece of technology.
Two of them were making adjustments with hand tools.
Two others stood watching over them with plans clasped in their hands.
There was evidently more to this alien antiquity than he had first supposed.
Perhaps it had been an oligarchy, in which scientifically aware elders kept the mass of the populace in a state of ordered ignorance.
It was a sociological model established on many worlds, arguably on old Earth itself.
He turned back to the pillar of light, into which Rodomonte was now staring gormlessly.
Might it have been placed here in the temple by the rulers to inspire the religion of the herd?
Molassi sang on.
‘Wizard King, shine the light on your servant, Wild Lady of the Ruins, protect us from the moonlight's scars —’
‘Moonlight's stars ,’ Rodomonte corrected automatically.
He hated Zagrat, but Molassi had spun the discod so many times on their journey to Evertrin that he could have recited all their lyrics backwards.
Molassi turned and looked at him.
‘Give me a can,’ he said.
Rodo laughed nervously.
‘You heard what the pretty lady said.
None left.’
Molassi leapt up.
He grabbed Rodomonte by the scruff of the neck and pushed him towards the light, holding his nose inches away from the crackling fluorescence.
‘Give.
Me.
A. Can!’
Molassi repeated, tightening his grip.
‘There's none left,’ Rodo gasped.
‘There's none left!’
‘Put him down!’ shouted Sendei.
He took the Deep Space discod from his jerkin and held it meaningfully towards the light source.
Molassi relaxed his grip.
Rodo collapsed, choking.
The bastard had gone too far this time.
Well over the limit.
Sendei backed off, alarmed by the ferocity in Molassi's eyes.
Molassi growled, sprang forward, and shoulder-butted Sendei to the ground.
His hand clamped around the clever boy's neck.
Sendei raised the discod again.
‘Drop it!’
Molassi screamed.
He bashed Sendei's head against the wall.
‘Drop it!’
Rodo pulled himself up, rubbing at his throat.
He hooked an arm around Molassi's spitting, jerking body and pulled him off.
‘There's no more stuff, Molassi.
No more stuff!’ he said again.
Sendei got up, bruised and angry.
He had tolerated Jab Molassi for too long.
The crazy headster needed teaching a lesson.
He looked down at the discod still clenched in his hand and threw it impulsively into the pillar of light.
It glittered eerily for a second and exploded, forming a cloud of tinsel.
Sendei realized immediately that from every possible viewpoint, the destruction of the discod had been a bad move.
But his mind had clouded over again at the wrong moment and now it was too late.
There was silence.
Molassi pushed Rodomonte away and strutted forward.
His expression was unreadable beneath what was now almost a full beard.
His pale blue eyes were fixed on Sendei's own.
His hand slipped down to his belt.
His knife struck upward and punctured the area below Sendei's ribcage.
Sendei watched it happen.
He saw the blade go in and then come out gleaming red with his blood.
He sank to his knees, more from shock than pain.
He couldn't die.
Not now, not when there was so much left to discover.
‘It was only a discod,’ he whispered weakly.
The answer had been so close.
‘It was my life, clever boy,’ said Molassi.
He wiped the blade clean on his skin coat and walked out.
Rodomonte hovered nervously on the other side of the chamber.
He tried to think of something to do or say, but it was too late.
Sendei's kneeling body twitched and then was still.
Sheldukher panned the scanner camera slowly over his captives.
He slammed his fist down angrily on the console and turned to the twinkling carrying case.
‘You are certain there is no other life in this area?’
The Cell groaned an attempted response.
‘Well?’
‘I have…located no other…life signs…’
Sheldukher sighed.
He returned the scan to the small group of humans, watched over by the formidable figure of Postine and the less formidable figure of Klift.
They really were a most peculiar bunch.
What were they doing here?’
Rosheen entered the flight deck.
Her left hand was concealed behind her back.
‘I interrogated a sample, as you ordered.’
He swivelled his chair to face her.
‘And?’
‘Well,’ she said, ‘I'd say they were remedials of some sort.
They say they come from Earth, and that they were transported here by some means they cannot understand.’
Sheldukher nodded.
‘Many remedials call their worlds Earth,’ he said.
‘The low quotient members of society have never been noted for their imagination.’
‘I assume they were brought here in a spacecraft,’ Rosheen continued.
‘They have no conception of any technology beyond level three, so we can take their account of a magical transposition less than literally.
They are obviously very primitive.’
She glanced out at the humans.
‘I've no idea why they are here, though.’
‘And the tortoises?’
Sheldukher asked.
‘I can't get very much out of them,’ Rosheen admitted.
‘They're called Chelonians.
As we know, they're cyborgs.
Their tanks seem to be part of the framework of a ship; there are meteorite impact scars on some of the surfaces.
From the angle at which their vehicles were pointing, I'd say they were getting ready to blast those remedials.’
‘Chelonians,’ Sheldukher muttered.
‘Indeed.’
‘So what's your next move?’
‘I have to find this doctor.’
‘Use the Cell.’
He shook his head.
‘I can't risk losing it.
It was almost destroyed the last time.’
He leant forward suddenly.
A detail on the screen had caught his eye.
He selected the relevant area and magnified it.
One of the humans, the short man in the hat, was talking animatedly to two young women.
His face achieved several improbable expressions as his arms flew wildly about, like an epileptic conducting a symphony orchestra.
‘Norman Brown,’ Sheldukher mused.
‘I wonder.’
He opened a communications channel.
‘Postine?’
‘Master?’
‘Postine, when you assembled your human prisoners, exactly where did you find that short man with the umbrella?’
‘Master?’ she grunted uncomprehendingly.
Sheldukher rolled his eyes up to heaven.
He flicked open another line.
‘Show her, Klift.’
A few seconds passed.
‘You're right,’ said Rosheen, her attention-held by the screen.
‘There is something odd about him.
And he dresses slightly differently from the rest.’
Klift's voice filtered back to the ship.
‘Sheldukher?’
‘Yes?’
‘She says she found him just outside the ship.’
‘Did she indeed?’
Sheldukher said.
‘Behind the Chelonian lines…
Thank her for straining her brain cells for us.’
He broke the connection.
He stood up and moved towards the door.
‘I think we've got him.’
Rosheen saw her chance.
She raised the oddly shaped blaster she had taken from one of the Chelonians and fired.
The bolt shot past him and blasted a hole in the wall next to his head.
His instinct for self preservation had warned him of her move long before she had made it.
He extended a leg and kicked the weapon from her hand.
They both dived for it.
He reached it first, typically.
‘Kill me,’ she taunted him.
‘Pull the trigger.’
He smiled.
‘You still need me,’ she gloated.
‘You need all of us.’
He removed the charge from the blaster and tossed it aside.
There was no need for such a weapon.
His hand went into his pocket.
The black square appeared.
A rush of blood went to Rosheen's head as the infection he had implanted did its work.
Her heart palpitated.
She felt her spine curving and keeled over on to her front.
‘Expect me back in a few minutes,’ she heard him say distantly.
He left the flight deck.
She raised a hand to her hair.
It was thinner.
Her fingernails were flecked with white spots.
Bernice lay face upwards on the rock.
Her ambitious trek to the distant city had been curtailed by protests from her overworked nervous system, crying for more of whatever the pink cans contained.
Her mouth was filled with bilious acids that her stomach had sent up in sympathy.
Footsteps crunched past nearby.
She propped herself unsteadily up on her elbow.
Molassi appeared from the mist.
It was much thinner here.
His breath formed green clouds in the clear air.
‘Molassi!’ she cried out.
‘Where are the others?’
He stared at her for several seconds as if he could not remember who she was.
Then he strode forward and shook her roughly by the shoulders.
She tried to resist but hadn't the strength.
‘You've got stuff,’ he slurred in her ear.
‘Where is it?
Tell me!’
She shook her head.
‘It's all gone,’ she said weakly.
‘The dispenser is empty.’
‘Where is it?’ he screamed.
‘I'm the Wizard King.
You must tell me.
Where?’
Bernice pushed him away.
‘I don't know, I…’ she began confusedly.
She registered the bloodstains, dark red on the dirty white skin of his coat.
‘Where are the others?
What have you done with them?’
He took her roughly by the hair and pushed her face down into the ground.
He kicked her savagely.
Then he walked away.
Bernice fought back a wave of panic.
She got to her feet and  started to run back down to the temple.
She collapsed twice, but pulled herself back up angrily and went on.
The temple came back into sight at last.
In the daylight, it resembled a gigantic anthill.
Small holes dotted its rough green bulk.
She walked around the building, trying to find the entrance.
Two bodies were sprawled outside it.
Rodo lay face downward, his arm draped protectively over Sendei's shoulder.
Bernice saw that he was sobbing silently.
‘Rodo,’ she called.
He looked up, his eyes small red weals.
His jacket was covered in blood.
Bernice prodded Sendei's body gently.
His head flopped back pathetically.
She winced and turned away.
‘It was Molassi,’ Rodo stammered.
‘Molassi killed him.’
He staggered into her arms.
‘Sendei was all right,’ he said.
‘He was my mate.’
Suddenly he broke free from her grasp.
‘Where's Molassi?’ he shouted.
‘You've seen him, haven't you?’
Bernice nodded.
Her head turned automatically over to the city on the horizon.
Rodomonte grunted and stumbled off.
‘He'll kill you,’ Bernice shouted after him.
‘He's insane.’
Rodo did not reply.
She turned back to the body.
It wasn't right that Sendei should just be left here.
She peered cautiously inside the temple.
Daylight showed a rough-walled stone entranceway and several small tunnels leading off from it.
A trail of blood had been left by Sendei's body, dragged up from below by Rodomonte.
She went back out into the daylight and began to gather together some of the larger rocks that were scattered about.
The Wizard King knew that his coronation was near.
The ice crown was waiting for him in the city, protected only by the ghosts.
Still, something was wrong.
He recalled the lyrics of the final track of Sheer Event Shift, the mournful Ghosts And Guilt Trips.
Don't meet your masters unprepared
The dragon is stirring in its lair 
Hyper destiny is a kinetic philosophy
Got to open your mind and stare
Yeah, Matyre was a poet.
A dark poet that sang about dark things.
And old geek critics had laughed at him.
Well, the laugh was on them now.
The higher power that gave Zagrat their music was warning the Wizard King in those words.
He had to open his mind or the dragon would destroy him.
He took a small cube of A resin from the pouch next to his knife.
There was no pipe to hit, so he'd have to swallow it.
Jinkwa had stopped trying to break free from the trap.
His spirit had not been broken; rather he was afraid of tearing himself apart with the involuntary jerking of one side of his limbs in the opposite direction to the other.
He had managed to find the General, but with one eye pointing up at the sky and the other angled down at his nose, there was little scope for effective communication.
‘Gen…eral,’ he stammered, ‘we must…be free…of this…’
‘Do you…think I…did not know…that?’
Fakrid retorted.
‘We must…override the…parasites’…signal…’
‘Fear not…
Jinkwa…’ the General stormed through his vibrating lips.
‘The Doc…tor has…deceived us…for the…last time…’
‘Sir?’
Jinkwa's peripheral facets caught a glimpse of Fakrid's twisted features.
His mouth was contorted in a grotesque snarl, pulling back his lips to reveal yellow teeth dripping with misdirected digestive enzyme fluids.
‘When the…time…comes…the Doctor…will be…immersed in…boiling mercury…’ he threatened with relish.
‘And I…will make…a nosebag of…its skin…’
The Doctor had decided to share as many of his various dilemmas with Vanessa and Hazel as time, and their limited comprehension, would allow.
He needed allies, and with  Bernice hopefully safely out of harm's way with Rodomonte and his friends, these two young women were fine substitutes.
‘My main worry,’ he concluded, ‘is that the Fortean flicker may start up again at any moment.
It would be just my luck to get myself knee deep in even worse trouble.’
‘I hope your friend's all right, Doctor,’ said Hazel.
‘What with that funny drink and all that.’
He sighed.
‘She's very capable,’ he said.
‘I'm sure she'll be all right.
Almost sure, anyway.’
Vanessa dug him in the ribs.
‘Watch it.
Here comes trouble.’
Witcher's murderer had emerged from the spaceship and was walking towards them.
He signalled to the enormous woman to join him.
‘Good morning, Norman Brown,’ he said sceptically.
The Doctor returned his menacing glare with an expression of vacuous innocence.
‘Ah.
Morning, sir.’
‘Morning, Mr Sheldukher,’ the other corrected.
The Doctor struggled hard to retain his composure after this revelation.
Never would he have expected encounters with an assault force of Chelonians and the galaxy's most notorious criminal in the space of a day.
One problem at a time was more than enough.
But that was a Fortean flicker for you.
‘Morning, Mr Sheldukher,’ he replied.
Sheldukher pointed to a nearby mound of rock.
‘What is that?’
Vanessa spoke up.
‘It's where we buried the man you killed,’ she said bravely.
‘How touching,’ he said flatly.
He turned back to the Doctor, and looked disdainfully at his attire.
‘Why do you wear that?’ he asked, indicating the sweater.
‘Why?’ repeated the Doctor.
He pointed to each of the question marks in turn, answering in his village idiot voice.
‘Why.
What.
Where.
How.’
Sheldukher smiled and stared into those innocent eyes again.
‘Who.’
‘And who, of course.’
‘Of course.’
Sheldukher turned around and walked over to where another of the eight twelves, a woman in her late twenties, sat on a rock.
A baby was cradled in her arms.
It could not have been more than six months old.
‘If I may?’
He plucked the child from its mother's arms before she could protest.
It started to cry.
Vanessa and Hazel turned in agitation to the Doctor.
He stood frozen, his face a mask of indecision.
Sheldukher held the baby up with one hand.
‘I'm looking for somebody,’ he drawled casually.
‘And they know who they are.
Unless that person steps forward immediately, this child will die.’
There was a long pause.
‘Very well,’ Sheldukher said eventually.
He glanced over at the huge woman.
‘Kill it,’ he said simply.
‘And mind my arm.
I'm rather attached to it.’
Postine, unquestioning as ever, raised her weapon.
‘No!’
The Doctor leapt forward.
He snatched the baby from Sheldukher's grasp.
It stopped crying.
Sheldukher smiled and produced his laser pistol.
Guilt Trips
Bernice heaved the final stone into place on top of the makeshift burial mound.
Sendei's accusing face was at last concealed from her.
She sank down to the ground, hugging her knees and rocking herself back and forth to keep warm.
The craving for the cans had returned, this time coupled with a dull, burning pain that seared along her arms and legs.
Withdrawal symptoms, she knew.
Without any information as to the nature of the chemical that had poisoned her system she had no way of telling if she would come out alive at the other end of the process.
Even if she did, she might end up a helpless vegetable.
Sendei, despite his faults, had been her last link with a sane, reasonable universe.
More than that, he'd been a friend, in a funny sort of way.
Now he was gone and she was alone again.
‘It's way past time,’ she thought aloud, ‘you started thinking for yourself.’
She forced a grim grin.
‘Smile, and the galaxy smiles with you,’ she said, and clambered to her feet.
She set her sights on the city and pushed herself painfully on.
‘Forward!’ she cried halfheartedly.
‘What other way is there?’
The still atmosphere of this area had protected the city well.
Rodomonte hardly noticed the magnificent, unearthly architecture preserved so beautifully away from the squalls of the less temperate zones.
He stumbled with vengeful intent through wide, open-topped courtyards and along covered, low-ceilinged walkways.
The toppled heads of long forgotten deities and dignitaries observed his passing, the silence they had enjoyed for centuries broken by the rattling of his chains and bells.
It was easy enough for Rodomonte to follow the path taken by Molassi.
Recent bootprints were marked in the thin coating  of green sandy soil that had been blown by gentle breezes over the buildings.
Molassi seemed to be heading for a large structure.
It was a cone, similar in shape to the temple, that dwarfed the other buildings in this quarter of the city.
That made sense.
There was something in the last track of Sheer Event Shift about the Wizard King being crowned in a towering castle.
Rodomonte came crashing to a halt as withdrawal pains shot through his arms and legs.
He cried out and grabbed at a nearby wall to steady himself.
The nausea threatened to overcome him, but his determination to avenge the death of his friend was too strong.
The pain subsided.
He pulled himself up and went on.
Minutes later, he stood outside the cone shaped building.
Its sides were moulded in a swirling, perfectly symmetrical design.
A small flight of steps led up to its entrance: a low, doughnut shaped arch through which Molassi had recently passed.
Rodomonte picked up a football sized rock that lay close to the entrance, and passed through.
Unlike the temple, this building was illuminated.
The entrance hall was lit by three light pillars.
Rodomonte picked his way around them cautiously.
‘Molassi!’ he called.
‘Molassi!’
His shouts echoed around the cylinder formed by the walls.
Unsurprisingly, there was no reply.
He walked on further into the building and through into a vault at the end.
It seemed to be empty.
He glanced upwards.
At the very top of the structure, at the point of the cone, a space had been left open to let in the light.
Murky clouds passed over, mocking its long-dead designers' memory of the now obscured sun.
There was another source of light.
Rodomonte saw where a large stone had been lifted, presumably by Molassi, to reveal a wide hole through which shone an upward rushing beam of soft yellow light.
He ran over and peered down.
Rungs had been moulded into the stone on either side.
With the rock still grasped firmly in his left hand, he began to negotiate the glowing gap.
He was going to kill the evil headster whatever he did.
Only nuttos take resin straight, his Pa used to say.
If you're gonna drop A, hit the pipe.
Now the Wizard King understood why people said that.
It was a conspiracy, see.
Only special people, chosen ones like him and Matyre, could see it.
All the stiffs, straights and squares, hippies, heavies and hardcases, they were all in it together, trying to stop the headster-time ever coming round again.
And when you took A resin straight, well then, yeah, then you could see it, see what they were up to, bribing riggers, faking reports.
You could see a lot on A, more than usual.
So while his real eyes glanced round at another vault of blank green rock, his A eyes saw the first of the ghosts sliding out of the stone to say hi.
It felt inside his head.
It wanted to know all about him.
Well, that was cool.
It had to be sure he was the Wizard King, after all.
So he thought up lots of cool things he had done, to impress it, to show it how much he deserved the ice crown.
Like when he'd pushed that mouthy girl under the Whirli Go Round.
Like when he'd poured acid into Hugo's water carrier.
Like when he'd killed the clever boy, who had blasphemed the  headster time.
But the ghost wasn't interested.
It kept asking him something different, something weird he didn't understand.
This wasn't right.
Now it was showing him something back.
It was vaguely familiar.
Yeah, it was the opening credits of that cruddy freakster holo show Rodo used to record sometimes.
And then he saw a face he recognized.
It was Matyre.
This was more like it.
But no, it couldn't be Matyre.
His hair was cut short with a cowlick dropping over at the front, like a freakster.
He was wearing chains and bells like a freakster.
‘Great.
So, Slon, how do you feel about Zagrat, looking back from the freak time?’ asked the bimbo interviewer.
‘Zagrat was sad music, Erada,’ he replied primly.
‘My new discod Style Over Substance couldn't be further away from it.’
‘Yeah it's like, well,’ Erada remarked, head tilted nervously towards an unseen floor manager, ‘the lyrics, well, yeah, the lyrics are very different to those on Zagrat's final discod,Sheer  Event Shift .’
‘Now they were appalling,’ laughed Matyre.
‘The music company wanted new product fast before the headster time ended so I dashed it off one afternoon after I'd dropped some A. Goodness, some of the interpretations people came up with!
And it was all rubbish!’
‘Yeah.
Great.
Well.
So you've no A influenced numbers on Style Over Substance , yeah, no?’
‘Certainly not,’ he replied firmly.
He turned to face the camera lens.
‘Listen, I love my fans.
So listen, kids.
Don't touch dumb hallucinogens like A. Listen to your Ma and Pa, and forget the headster time ever happened.
It's fun to be a freakster!’
Molassi reeled.
He couldn't believe it.
Matyre had sold out .
Sold out to the freaksters.
And Zagrat didn't mean anything.
It had never meant anything.
The freaksters had taken over.
It was like the headster time had never happened.
He reached for his knife.
The Doctor was marched on to the flight deck of the F61 at pistol point.
He looked about at the patchwork of technologies.
‘Oh dear,’ he said flippantly as he caught sight of the Cell, floundering helplessly in the carrying case.
‘Not another one.’
He addressed Sheldukher.
‘Call me old fashioned, but I think brains belong in heads, not in tanks.’
‘It's not a brain, and that's not a tank,’ Sheldukher replied evenly.
‘Same difference,’ the Doctor said casually, and slipped into the command chair as if he had been the ship's pilot for years.
‘Get up,’ Sheldukher said smoothly.
‘Shan't,’ said the Doctor with infinite menace.
The tension of the moment was broken by a groan from the corner.
Rosheen crawled limply into view.
The Doctor leapt instinctively to her side.
Surely this couldn't be the woman he had seen earlier?
She appeared to be at least twenty years older.
He felt for her life signs, then looked angrily up at Sheldukher.
‘You had no right to do this,’ he blustered.
 Sheldukher slipped the laser pistol back into his pocket and substituted the black square.
‘Nothing irritates me more than righteous indignation,’ he said lightly.
‘And I'll do it again  if you refuse to co-operate.’
The Doctor settled Rosheen as comfortably as possible in a chair.
‘What is it you want from me?’
‘The Highest Science.’
The Doctor shrugged.
‘I'm as much in the dark as you are.’
‘You didn't arrive with those remedials.
You must be a Sakkratian,’ Sheldukher continued with cool logic.
‘Really,’ the Doctor snorted.
‘Do I look like the kind of person that would make his home on a ball of rock like this?’
‘Then you've come to steal it.’
‘I have come on a scientific investigation to rectify the freak effect which brought those poor unfortunates,’ he waved at the screen, ‘to this forsaken place.
I'm afraid that the commercial appeal of this planet is entirely lost on me.’
‘I'm not speaking of money,’ Sheldukher continued.
‘I'm talking about knowledge.
Ancient secrets.
A lost power.
Perhaps we have something in common.’
The Doctor shook his head.
‘I doubt it.
Absolute power never appealed to me either.
Fine for the first couple of weeks, but then there's all that tedious paperwork.’
Sheldukher smiled approvingly at the Doctor's witticisms.
‘You're a scientist, I'm a scientist.’
The Doctor snarled.
This was all wrong.
People weren't supposed to react like this.
‘You, a scientist?’ he scoffed.
‘I suppose you're kind to dogs and small children as well?’
Sheldukher leaned forward with interest.
‘So, I am remembered?’
The Doctor sighed.
‘Remembered and reviled,’ he said bravely.
‘People always wondered what had happened to you.
In the end, they were just thankful that you'd gone.’
He turned back to Rosheen.
The Doctor recognized the signs of an unstable metabolism that had been forced into accelerated decay.
‘You must have been asleep for a very long time,’ he said.
‘She's pumped full of preservative.’
‘A long journey.
Three hundred years, near enough.’
‘To get here?
In a ship like this, it shouldn't have taken you more than eight from the central hub.’
Sheldukher indicated the Cell.
‘It took that long for the Cell  to find this planet.’
He drew a circle in the air with his free hand.
‘We took a circuitous route.’
The Doctor glanced at the Cell.
Its appearance was shocking, even to a traveller accustomed to many different varieties of life.
‘It's fascinating,’ he admitted.
‘It should never have been created, but it is fascinating.’
‘It is thought, Doctor,’ said Sheldukher excitedly.
‘It thinks for itself.
Its potential is infinite.
Think about it.
A living creature that can solve every riddle in the universe.’
‘You created it?’
Sheldukher shook his head.
‘It wasn't me.
Doctor.
Tell me, did the great galactic public ever find out what was going on on Checkley's World?’
The Doctor sighed.
‘The Horror Planet.
I might have guessed,’ he said sadly.
‘All that costly security for nothing.
I took it from under their noses.
An entire fleet of the most advanced ships was sent to get it back.
They didn't expect this old transporter carrier to be fitted with cellular disrupters.’
‘I only hope the poor creature's effort was worth it.’
‘Oh yes.
Now tell me where to find the Highest Science,’ he said.
He indicated Rosheen.
‘Or I'll kill her and every one of those remedials.’
The Doctor looked at the screen on which the eight twelves and the Chelonians could be seen, still under the watchful glare of Postine.
He knew that Sheldukher would not hesitate to carry out his threat, and also that he was far too intelligent to risk attempting to deceive him as he had Fakrid.
He would just have to play along for a while and wait for an opportunity.
‘Very well,’ he said at last.
‘Where the gas seeped weakly over the rock, ten thousand or so miles from the blasted pits of volcanic ore that blazed with the light of a thousand suns, there I made my abhorred discovery…’’
‘What are you talking about?’
Sheldukher demanded angrily.
The Doctor shrugged.
‘Those are the only directions I have.
From the account of another ‘scientist’ who once passed this way.’
Sheldukher turned eagerly to the Cell.
‘Well?’
‘There are…active volcanos…in only…one area…of the planet…near to the northern…pole…’
The Doctor winced at the sound of the creature's voice.
He recalled the agony it had shared with him.
‘Excellent,’ Sheldukher said tersely.
‘Set a course.
Program the sensor pods to  search for any sign of ancient habitations within a twelve thousand mile radius of the pole.’
He turned his attention back to the screen.
‘Time to recall the rest of my gallant crew, I think.’
Postine was bored.
She had taken to growling menacingly at the more impressionable of the remedials to keep herself occupied.
How she longed for the excitement of blasting away slimy aliens.
Guard duty was not her strong suit.
Her communicator buzzed.
‘Postine, return to the ship,’ Sheldukher ordered.
‘Bring Klift with you.’
‘Master.’
She grunted her assent and shuffled off to collect Klift.
Jinkwa overheard the exchange.
‘They are…leaving…’
‘Good…’
Fakrid growled.
‘As soon as…the signal…is out of range…we shall…follow and…destroy them…’
Rodomonte emerged from the glowing tunnel into a dimly lit passageway.
The source of the light was a tiny phosphorescent ball, hot to the touch, that lay at the foot of the rungs.
Absently, he picked up a blackened spacesuit glove that lay next to it.
Its significance was lost on him and he let it drop, confused.
He continued down the passage.
Every step he took seemed to be resented by the stonework, which creaked and rumbled ominously about him.
Such was his sense of purpose that he didn't notice.
The passageway ended in another small, circular chamber.
The light was much dimmer here, but he could see something, a shape, at its centre.
He edged forward nervously, the rock raised in his hand.
He came closer and recognized the shape as Molassi.
He was sprawled at an unusual angle, arms and legs stuck out in all directions.
Rodomonte leant closer and dropped the rock in shock.
The haft of Molassi's own knife was embedded in his throat.
A rumbling sound was coming from somewhere near.
Rodo glanced confusedly up at the ceiling, half expecting the roof to collapse in on him.
But the sound was coming from behind him.
He turned his head wildly about from side to side.
The light was getting brighter.
The rumbling had become a steady, low roar, that seemed to be coming as much from inside his head as from all about him.
The cavern was illuminated fully for a second.
Molassi, with his long blond hair and still expression, was made to look strangely angelic.
Rodo screamed as the light surged up to a brilliance that stung his eyes.
He screwed them up and sank to the floor.
The noise stopped.
The light faded.
Rodomonte opened his streaming eyes tentatively.
A transparent humanoid figure hovered a few feet away.
A tiny point of light shone from the centre of its forehead.
He felt like it was asking him a question or searching for something in his mind.
He couldn't answer.
Rodomonte saw his father beating his mother.
He heard himself telling a girl that if he hadn't made it in the music business by his twentieth birthday, he would kill himself.
He saw Sendei laughing and joking about an acquaintance one night in the Seminary bar.
He picked up the rock.
There were tears in his eyes.
The Doctor broke open a water pouch.
He sniffed disapprovingly at the scent, and brought it to Rosheen's lips.
She sipped at it gratefully.
They examined each other and drew the conclusions people will on first acquaintance.
‘Relax,’ the Doctor suggested.
Rosheen sprung up from her couch in panic as she remembered what Sheldukher had done to her.
She put a hand to her face.
‘No!’
The Doctor put an arm around her shoulder.
‘Please, rest,’ he urged her.
She shook him off.
‘You can't know what this is like.’
She  looked about, confused.
‘Where is this?’
‘Your cabin,’ he replied.
‘Sheldukher allowed me to bring you here.’
‘I'm surprised,’ she said.
‘He seemed to consider you quite a threat.
You are the Doctor?’
‘When it suits me.’
He leant forward.
‘Sheldukher has the means to kill every one of those people out there if I move against him.’
‘Believe me,’ she said grimly, ‘he'd do it.
He once destroyed an entire constellation just for the sake of it.
The deaths of a few remedials won't shake him.’
She struggled to rise from the couch.
The Doctor pushed her down gently and tried to make her comfortable.
‘Just lie back and relax,’ he said.
He turned to the food container.
‘I'll make you something.
You'll need protein.’
He riffled through the box, selecting and discarding various items.
She asked, ‘Anyway, just who exactly are you?’
‘Never mind about that now,’ he said.
He set one of the packets to boil and walked back to her.
She looked up at him trustingly.
‘Just the Doctor, then?’
‘Just the Doctor, yes.’
She extended a hand weakly.
‘Rosheen.’
An alarm bell rang somewhere in the Doctor's memory.
‘As in Rosheen and Klift?’
She took back her hand.
‘I'm surprised people remember us.’
The Doctor turned his back on her.
‘I've seen entire worlds in ruins because of what you did,’ he said.
‘People starved.
Wars were fought.
Millions of innocent lives…’
He trailed off, lost in appalled thought.
Rosheen seemed to be revived by his words.
Her face hardened.
‘Those things happen every day.
They would have happened had we withdrawn that credit or not.
You obviously don't understand economics, Doctor.’
He stared at her.
‘I understand morality.’
‘It's easy to talk,’ Rosheen replied.
‘We were accused of all those things.
Maybe we were ‘responsible’.
People seemed to forget that the entire fourth zone was in a perpetual state of  starvation anyway.’
She leant forward angrily.
‘The money we lifted was hardly intended for them in the first place, was it?’
The Doctor gave a deep sigh.
It was easy to forget sometimes that the rest of the universe, particularly the human part of it, did not operate on the basis of his own clear-cut standards.
‘I suppose not.
We none of us are innocent.’
She swung herself off the couch.
‘If you're looking for somebody to blame for needless deaths, look no further than Sheldukher.’
‘That does puzzle me,’ he confessed.
‘Why you took up with him on this unlikely enterprise.’
She held up her wrinkled arm.
‘Do you think this was through choice?’
Before he could reply, the cabin started to vibrate.
They clung to each other for support.
‘Pre-ignition warm up sequence,’ said Rosheen.
‘Where can we be heading?’
‘The lost city of Sakkrat,’ said the Doctor.
‘You told him?’
‘Yes,’ he replied despondently.
‘I'm afraid I did.’
Vanessa and Hazel watched the ignition of the F61's mighty furnace engines with a mixture of relief and trepidation.
Hazel cheered.
‘Good riddance!’
Vanessa sighed.
‘But the Doctor's in there.’
There came a sudden metallic commotion.
The Chelonians, inspired by the signs of the F61's imminent departure, were struggling furiously to free themselves.
The rasping and clanking was most unpleasant to the ears of the humans.
Vanessa was reminded of her father sharpening blades over Sunday roast.
‘I think we ought to get out of here,’ she said.
Hazel nodded.
‘Oi!’ she shouted to the crowd of eight twelves.
‘Follow us, come on!’
They stared blankly at her, like a flock of sheep startled by a tractor.
She set off, away from the Chelonians and the spaceship.
Vanessa hung back to count off heads as they followed Hazel.
When the last of the humans had gone, she dashed nimbly over to the nearest Chelonian and swiped the strangely shaped gun  from its unresisting grip.
There would be time to work out the exact nature of its functioning later.
She hurried off after the others.
‘…power indices at factor eight…impulse clamps at vector strength minus four…anchor/ballast ratio nine point four to the…seventh and rising…’
Sheldukher leant lazily back in his chair as the Cell droned on.
A hard copy map of their course was spread out over the console before him.
The sensor pods had succeeded in pinpointing an area of the planet's surface that correlated exactly with the Doctor's mysterious directions.
About eleven thousand miles north north west of the volcanic pits, the atmospheric envelope thickened considerably.
It was a logical place to build a city.
Klift tapped him on the shoulder.
‘Yes?’
She pointed to the screen.
‘It's the Chelonians.’
Sheldukher noted the reptiles' struggles.
‘What about them?’
‘They might follow us,’ said Klift.
Sheldukher stared at him approvingly.
So, a streak of his practical talents remained.
His hands flickered over the console and brought up the weapons display.
Most of the systems, including the spectronic destabilizer (handy for blasting planets), were too large scale in their effects to be of any use in this situation.
Only the hull mounted cellular disrupter was flexible enough in its calibration response for what he had in mind.
A small panel on the hull slid smoothly back.
A slender pointed cellular disrupter swung out on skeletal brackets.
Sheldukher angled the disrupter vaguely in the direction of the huddled mass of Chelonians and fired indiscriminately.
A stream of invisible particles shot from the barrel of the disrupter.
Four Chelonians bubbled inside their shells and then exploded loudly.
Sheldukher returned the console to navigation functions.
He had considered destroying the Chelonians completely, but the ship  was now ready to take off and he didn't want to waste time.
The deaths of a small number should serve well enough as a warning.
‘That was unnecessary,’ said a voice from behind him.
He turned to see that the Doctor had entered the flight deck with Rosheen.
‘You really are beginning to bore me, Doctor,’ he said in disappointment.
The Doctor's reply was forestalled by Klift.
He rushed over to Rosheen in concern.
‘Rosheen…’
She brushed him off impatiently.
‘I'm all right.
Just leave me alone, okay?’
He unsettled her even more than before.
She still felt the same inside.
Why should he be so changed?
Postine's rifle had turned automatically to cover the Doctor.
He edged around the snout nervously.
‘Would you mind pointing that the other way?’
Sheldukher gestured to Postine to comply.
She lowered the weapon reluctantly.
The Doctor peered at her.
‘I hear you had trouble with her earlier?’ he said airily.
‘She seems sharp enough now.’
‘She's one of life's fighters, Doctor,’ said Sheldukher.
He offered the seat next to him on the console.
The Doctor sat.
‘We don't have to be enemies,’ Sheldukher continued.
‘We can help each other.
After all, we are looking for the same thing.’
The Doctor raised an eyebrow.
‘We are?’
‘Answers.’
The Doctor frowned.
‘No.
I'm looking for a way out.
I have enough dark secrets of my own.
I'm not particularly interested in anybody else's,’ he lied.
‘Particularly when there are other matters pressing heavily on my mind.’
‘Which are?’
The Doctor consulted his fobwatch.
‘A previous engagement of long standing.
Of very long standing.’
‘You're not alone here?’
The Doctor shook his head.
‘A friend.
She may have wandered off into some terrible danger or other.’
‘Doctor, you're neurotic.’
The Doctor looked over at him.
‘A neurotic,’ he said, ‘is a man who's just worked out what's going on.’
Sheldukher laughed heartily for the first time since his destruction of the Krondel constellation.
He slapped the Doctor playfully across the shoulders.
‘We are going to have fun together, I can see.’
The Doctor shrank back from the chill of his touch.
The Cell wheezed into life.
‘Systems fully…aligned…
Ignition sequence complete…’
‘Launch,’ ordered Sheldukher.
As the whine of the furnace engines disappeared into the crackling clouds, so the debilitating signal faded slowly away.
Jinkwa extended his front left foot forward experimentally.
He stretched it and then curled it in and out.
Implants locked themselves painfully back into place.
A hinge that had been digging into his stomach freed itself.
His eyes swivelled crazily about one last time before settling back into place.
Facet augmentation returned a few seconds later.
The sudden release after tortured hours of imprisonment was almost too much.
Jinkwa let his mid-plastron sink feebly to the ground in the manner of the aged and infertile.
Restorative chemicals flooded through his system, soothing his aching muscles.
How nice it would be, he thought, to sit collapsed like this forever.
With a line of shrubs before you and a sandy bank behind.
Cool blue water to swim through…
No!
That was not the Chelonian way!
He released a hundred quintols of amyl to remind him of that.
‘First Pilot!’ the General bellowed from behind him.
He turned about.
‘Sir!’
Fakrid's eyes had turned a livid yellow.
‘Reassemble the force!’ he barked.
‘Close down the hospital station!
Our strength must be total.
We will pursue and destroy!
Destroy!
Destroy!
Destroy!’
‘But sir,’ Jinkwa protested.
‘The parasites’ weapon —’
Fakrid kicked his shell.
‘Idiot!’ he roared.
‘Technical stores will set up a cancelling wave.
The parasites will be blasted a hundred times for the indignities they have inflicted on us!’
He pointed to the mangled remains of the four Chelonians  destroyed by the matter disrupter.
‘Their deaths shall be avenged a thousand times!’
‘And the eight twelves?’
Jinkwa queried.
‘We will return for those puny creatures later!
I will supervise the sprinkling of zarathion myself.
They will die in excruciating pain!’
Jinkwa was stirred by the General's words.
But there was something disturbing about the sheer unreasoning rage behind them.
He seemed to have exceeded his own limits.
‘At this moment,’ he continued, ‘I can think of only one thing, picture only that thought in my mind.
I see the Doctor screaming for mercy as I inflict upon it every agony in the infinite skies!’
‘Rodo!’ cried Bernice.
‘Rodomonte!’
There was no reply from the eerily glowing hole at her feet.
She sighed.
She had followed the tracks of Rodomonte and Molassi through the city and into the cone shaped building, her poor physical condition blinding her archaeological curiosity.
The only way forward seemed to be down.
For all she knew, Molassi could be waiting for her at the bottom, his knife drawn, standing over the body of Rodomonte.
She shrugged.
Her head pounded, forcing her to come to some decision.
At last she started to descend the rungs into the hole.
She had no way of telling how deep it was, but it was narrow enough to support her easily if she slipped or lost her hold.
Only ten feet later she touched firm ground again.
As she jumped from the final rung, the structure of the stonework around her seemed to judder.
She decided that it was probably just another disorientating effect of withdrawal.
She looked around.
At her feet was a glowing ball, the source of the light.
It looked hot.
The tunnel she had emerged into led to a circular chamber.
In the light from the ball she could see two shapes inside the bodies of Rodomonte and Molassi.
It seemed logical to suppose they had killed one another.
But when she looked again, she realized that they were too far away from each other for that to have been possible.
She had seen enough.
She turned back to the space through  which she had entered, all the while trying to calm herself.
So she was alone?
She would have to survive.
The exit was gone.
The stonework covered it completely, as if it had never existed.
It was an optical illusion, obviously, probably connected with that deep rushing noise coming from behind her.
She'd read about such things.
She closed her eyes and took a step forward, into solid rock.
She turned about in unashamed panic.
The light was increasing now, blinding her.
The rush became a deep howl, inside and outside her head.
The light faded away.
A ghostly figure hovered at the end of the tunnel.
A point of light shone from the centre of its forehead.
She felt it probing her mind, as if it was asking her a question, searching for something in her mind.
Bernice tore her gaze from the creature.
She turned and pummelled furiously at the rock wall with her fists.
Something brushed her shoulder.
It was a three fingered hand that became more solid and substantial second by second.
Burn Up
Rosheen and Klift ate silently.
The throb of the ship's engines vibrated the cabin.
Rosheen pushed away her empty plate and wiped her fingers absently on a sheet of tissue.
‘The Doctor told me something amusing earlier,’ she said.
Klift looked up, surprised.
This was the first time she had addressed him directly since take off.
She had spent most of the first hour of the journey deep in conversation with the Doctor, who had gone to the flight deck to check up on Sheldukher.
‘Yes?’
Klift prompted her.
‘Apparently they made holovids about us,’ she laughed.
‘You were played by Arrad Swanson.’
He smiled.
‘What about you?’
‘Lithola Baxter, believe it or not.’
His face fell.
‘Not very flattering.’
‘Oh, I don't know,’ said Rosheen.
She turned to catch her fifty year old reflection in the metallic wall of the cabin.
‘I've started to look a bit like her now.’
She stood and crossed over to the food box, searching for something sweet.
‘I must be going senile, you know,’ she said.
‘What do you mean?’
‘This lost civilization business,’ she said, turning to face him.
‘This exploring.
I'm beginning to look forward to it.’
The Doctor shuffled the cards and cut the deck.
He would have preferred chess, but Sheldukher could not provide a board, and they both disliked playing on computer grids.
Besides, the card game reflected his present situation well.
Instead of his usual behind the scenes stage management of pawns and other pieces, he was confronted by an array of unpredictable variables.
What  was worse, he could not be sure of his opponent's moves or what their outcome might be.
His only choice at present was to wait for the right moment to play his hand.
The game continued.
‘I still don't know who you are,’ said Sheldukher.
‘It's not worth worrying about,’ the Doctor replied.
‘My past is so complicated even I get confused occasionally.’
Sheldukher grinned and laid down his suit.
‘First round to me, I think.’
The Doctor grimaced and threw his cards on to the console.
‘I was never very good at this.’
He gathered the cards together again.
‘Just the two of us to play again?’ he asked, indicating Postine and the Cell.
Sheldukher nodded.
‘One of them has no brain at all, the other is all brain.’
‘Ah yes,’ agreed the Doctor.
‘First precept of a successful card game; do not mix guests of uneven ability.
It can be most embarrassing.
’ He showed off several clever shuffles from his extensive repertoire of parlour tricks.
The Cell spoke.
‘Sheldukher…
The sensor pods…register electrical surge…at destination point…’
‘Really?’ he said, reaching for the map.
‘Now that is interesting.’
‘But hardly surprising,’ said the Doctor.
‘We are obviously heading right into the centre of the Fortean flicker.’
Sheldukher looked up.
‘Your freak effect?’
The Doctor nodded.
He stood up and crossed to the Cell.
‘If I may?’
Sheldukher waved a hand in assent.
‘Please, go ahead.
But don't get any funny ideas, will you?’
He winked at Postine.
‘I believed that's what one is supposed to say in these situations.’
The Doctor coughed and addressed the Cell.
‘Excuse me…’
‘Speak…
Doctor…’
The Doctor was touched to hear a note of affection in its voice.
It obviously recognized him as the only being that had ever showed it kindness.
‘I was wondering,’ he said.
‘Have your sensors picked up any similar surges in other areas recently?’
The Cell consulted the computer.
‘No other…traces…
Doctor…’
He sighed.
‘Good.
The flicker seems to be dormant, at least for the moment.’
‘We picked up another surge in orbit, Doctor,’ Sheldukher informed him.
‘Very close to where we picked you up.’
He nodded.
‘Indeed,’ he said.
‘That would have been the arrival of those humans.
It was what brought the Chelonians to their valley.
I do hope they're all right.’
‘There is…’ said the Cell, ‘constant background…electricity…on this side…of the planet…’
Sheldukher nodded.
‘All that is left of the Sakkratians’ science,’he said.
‘Think of it, Doctor.
From what you say, a science that can bend reality any way it wants.’
The Doctor frowned.
‘Reality is bendy enough as it stands,’ he said.
‘At least for me.’
‘Two hours…until touchdown…’ the Cell reported dutifully.
The Doctor looked at it curiously.
Sheldukher, absorbed in his map, seemed not to have noticed its newly acquired air of placid servitude.
What was really going on inside its mutated mind?
Bernice woke to find herself lying outside the temple.
She searched her mind for vague traces of memory.
She remembered the touch of a ghostly hand on her shoulder.
Now suddenly she was back here.
Had she somehow walked here in her sleep?
That she had slept at all was an encouraging sign that the contamination was fading.
Night was falling again.
She stood up.
Across the way she could just glimpse the motorspeeder.
Was there any kind of material around here suitable for fuel conversion?
Her head felt much clearer.
There was a new sense of purpose in her step as she set off for the ‘speeder.
She tried to push the painful memories of her young companions’ deaths to the back of her mind.
She had not walked a hundred metres before she tripped over a loose stone and went crashing over a steep overhang.
Her head was dashed on the rock below and she blacked out.
The night returned.
A luminous shape appeared.
It stood over  her body protectively for several hours, unmoving.
The roar of a furnace engine broke the silence.
The ghost flitted soundlessly away.
‘Clamps down,’ reported the Cell.
‘Anchor/ballast symmetry achieved…anti-grav wave at sine…’
‘All right, all right ,’ Sheldukher snapped.
‘Why can it not just say we've landed?’
Rosheen and Klift had been summoned to the flight deck for touchdown.
Rosheen caught the Doctor's arm.
‘Look.’
The scanner camera had picked out what was almost a straight line of four unusual things.
A mud spattered yellow buggy, beyond it a line of standing stones, an anthill shaped building, and some distance beyond them, the ruins of a huge city, at least two miles wide.
Sheldukher rose to his feet.
‘Yes,’ he said simply.
‘I'm impressed,’ the Doctor was forced to admit.
‘I'd go so far as to say I was very impressed.
Very very impressed.’
‘What's that yellow thing?’ puzzled Klift.
The Doctor frowned.
‘I think it may have something to do with my friend.
I hope she hasn't gone into the city.
’ He sighed, knowing full well that she would have done.
‘Think of it, Doctor,’ said Sheldukher suddenly.
‘In that city, the ultimate secrets of scientific advancement are to be found.
The product of millions of years of progress: the wheel, the combustion engine, the stellar drive…’
‘The fruit corner yoghurt,’ the Doctor murmured disrespectfully.
Sheldukher turned to them briskly.
‘Let's go,’ he said.
‘Remember, you take your orders from me.’
He gestured to Postine to lead the way from the flight deck.
She turned and moved off.
Just as she reached the door, it slid shut in her face.
‘What is this?’ stormed Sheldukher.
He moved over to the door control panel, which now glowed red for locked.
His touch had no effect.
The Doctor glanced over at the carrying case.
‘I think…’ he began, pointing to it with the point of his umbrella.
Sheldukher dashed over to it.
‘Open this door or I'll destroy  you,’ he stormed.
It gurgled smugly up at him.
‘You're forgetting something,’ Rosheen said.
‘That's what it wants you to do.’
‘There's something else,’ said Klift.
‘Haven't any of you noticed?
Listen.’
A moaning noise, rising steadily in pitch, was overlaid on the steady background hum of the life support systems.
The Doctor nodded.
‘Yes, we've landed.
But the furnace reaction has not been damped out.
It's building up to critical.’
In the silence that followed his grim pronouncement, all five of them felt the temperature rise by at least ten degrees.
Sheldukher leapt for the control point attached to the carrying case.
‘Reverse this!’ he yelled.
‘I will not be cheated of my prize!’
Die Sheldukher…’ it rasped.
‘Know my…agony as you…boil away…in tempering…megalanium…’
Sheldukher's hand went for the voltage control.
The Doctor pulled him away.
‘That's not the way,’ he growled.
‘Watch.’
He stood over the Cell.
‘Please,’ he said politely.
‘There is still time to reverse the reaction.’
It stared up at him, smiling.
‘All must…die…
Doctor…’
‘But I was your friend,’ he pointed out, a little desperately.
‘I have interesting plans for the next few centuries.
I want to live!’
‘We will be…united in…peace…
Doctor…’ it groaned.
The moan had by now become a furious screech.
Rosheen and Klift covered their ears.
Even Postine winced.
She raised her weapon to fire at the door.
The Doctor knocked it from her hand.
‘No!’ he yelled.
‘This space is too small for a thing like that, you'd kill us all!’
Sheldukher fumbled for his laser pistol.
Its thin beam barely scratched the surface of the door.
‘Another fifteen years and maybe,’ the Doctor snorted.
‘I don't understand this,’ Sheldukher cried.
He put away the pistol and ran to the controls, none of which responded.
‘There  are failsafes which should have stopped it from doing this!’
‘It's had nearly three hundred years to work out how to override them!’ the Doctor shouted back.
‘I'd say we have three minutes left to do the same!’
Sheldukher turned to Rosheen.
‘Do something!’ he pleaded.
‘It's over!’ she sneered back at him.
‘Can't you see!’
The Doctor crossed to the control panel and knelt to examine the inspection hatch.
He yowled as he touched one of the plates, which took away a layer of his skin.
‘It's white hot!’
Thick, greasy black smoke began to pour from loosened fittings around the flight deck.
The humans doubled up coughing as it invaded their lungs.
The Doctor hooked the handle of his umbrella over his top pocket and pulled his paisley scarf from around his neck.
He used one end to shield his mouth from the smoke and wrapped the other around the fingers of his free hand.
Why had he never got round to building another sonic screwdriver?
The whine of the furnace reaction stepped up yet again.
The knees of the Doctor's trousers were scorched off in an instant.
He gripped the edge of the nearest inspection plate and ripped a quarter of it away.
His eyes were streaming.
He wiped them clear and peered inside the smoking gap.
Two wires were visible.
The heat had burnt away the coloured insulation so he had no way of telling what functions they governed.
‘Sheldukher!’ he called.
There was no reply.
He turned to see that all four of the others had collapsed helplessly on the floor.
Sheldukher raised his head.
‘What system?’ the Doctor mouthed, pointing frantically at the opened panel.
There was no longer any point in even trying to shout.
Sheldukher just shrugged.
‘There must be a way!’ he attempted to shout back.
Flames burst from the panel on which he was resting and he leapt up.
The Doctor turned back to the wires.
‘Eeny, meeny,’ he muttered to himself.
‘After all, I've nothing to lose.’
He reached forward and snapped one of the wires clean through between his fingers.
Nothing happened.
‘Eeny, then,’ he said crossly and broke the other.
The door hissed asthmatically open.
He leapt to his feet.
‘Come on, all of you!
Move!’
He pulled Rosheen and Klift to their feet and shoved them through the door.
Sheldukher grabbed the carrying case and followed with Postine.
The Doctor took a last look around.
With his usual presence of mind he nipped back and picked up Sheldukher's hard copy map of the planet.
He ran out into the companionway.
The heat and the smoke were almost too much for him.
He stumbled through, his mouth still covered by the scarf, using his hat to cover his face.
At last he came to the exit.
His sabotage had opened all the doors around the ship, and the ramp waited for him invitingly.
He threw himself almost sideways through the gap, rolling across the ground as much to put out the fire that was burning him as to lessen the momentum of the fall.
He picked himself up.
Rosheen, Klift and Postine were still dangerously close to the ship.
He caught a glimpse of Sheldukher who, with his usual instinct for self preservation, was scurrying off with the Cell case tucked under his arm.
‘Come on, move!’ cried the Doctor, racing towards the others.
‘We must get out of range!’
He led them off, setting a furious pace.
‘It's too late, Doctor!’ he heard Rosheen say as she slumped to the ground.
‘She's going to blow!’
The Doctor turned back to see the ship glowing bright red.
‘Down!’ he yelled, throwing himself face down.
‘Cover your ears!
Close your eyes!’
He jammed a finger in each ear.
The furnace reaction gave one last bellow.
The ship's middle crumpled inwards.
The infection spread, eating up the hull in a wave of fire.
A second later, the ship imploded with a deafening blast.
The shockwave passed over them, rattling their bones.
The Doctor pressed his nose into the ground and waited for salvation or destruction.
His head popped up a second later.
His ears were ringing.
He brushed molten fragments from his charred coat.
Only a few hundred metres away, the ship was now just a bubbling silver pool.
The heat from the wreck straightened the curls of his hair.
He gave a sigh and let his head fall backwards.
Bernice turned uneasily.
She wasn't sure if the explosion had taken place in the real world or inside her head.
She lifted a hand to her forehead and felt blood and grit.
A dark shape stood silhouetted against the bright morning sky.
As it came nearer she saw that it was a little man in his mid-forties.
His peculiar clothes were covered in green dust and black soot.
Sharp grey eyes peered out from his blackened face.
Standing there with his upturned collar and downturned straw hat, from which wisps of smoke still issued, he looked like a garden gnome that somebody had thrown accidentally on to the barbecue.
He smiled.
‘I've come to take you away from all this.’
‘I'm sorry.
I don't know who you are,’ she said anxiously.
From his position, the Doctor was equally concerned.
Bernice had obviously fallen from the ledge above her.
Unlike some of his old friends, she was not the sort of person to go stumbling helplessly into holes.
The knock on the head alone could not account for the glazed look in her eyes.
The mind was a delicate mechanism that he disliked interfering with at the best of times.
He realized that what he was about to attempt was fraught with dangers, for Bernice and for himself.
In this situation, however, he could see no alternative.
He held out his hand and angled the blue gemstone of his ring to her face.
It caught the smudgy Sakkratian sunlight and refracted it, forming a sparkling glint.
‘Look,’ he said.
‘Look into the blue light.’
Her eyes were drawn by the stone immediately.
It seemed to be the only real thing in the universe; the temple, the city, the motorspeeder, all of these were illusions devised to distract her from the important issues, the real business of life.
No, that wasn't entirely true.
There was something else, something that stood, like her, four square and solid on both sides of the shutter.
It was the dirty stranger in the straw hat.
The stranger?
No.
The Doctor.
The Doctor was spring cleaning her mind, dusting the mantelpiece of her memory and righting the cracked ornaments that had fallen from it.
Every one of them sprang back, mended, into its rightful place in the line.
It was a line that began with  the excavation work at the Heavenite observatory and her first trip in the  TARDIS (how could you forget the TARDIS?), continued with a confused recollection of pointing a gun at the Doctor in a tunnel somewhere, and ended on Sakkrat (Sakkrat?
Zagrat?) with an all too tangible ghost.
The blue glow faded from the ring and it was an ordinary looking gem once again.
Bernice's aura had been restored.
The Doctor breathed a sigh of relief.
‘Listen,’ he told her.
‘You are Professor Bernice Summerfield.’
‘Of course I am,’ she mumbled drowsily.
‘I'm not that far gone.’
He sighed affectionately.
That was more like it.
‘Your brain has been poisoned.
You must ignore the effects of the toxin.
It cannot harm you.’
‘I haven't got the faith required for faith healing, Doctor,’ she replied.
‘You have faith in yourself.
Use it.
On the count of three, you will awake from the trance feeling rested and refreshed.
One, two, three.’
Bernice yawned and stretched.
When next she looked up, her eyes were clear, if a little confused.
‘I'm starving,’ she said innocently.
‘Er, well…’
The Doctor fished inside his pocket and produced a fluff covered dog biscuit.
‘There is this.’
He regarded it with suspicion, as if afraid that it might suddenly sprout legs and run off.
‘Do you know, I thought I'd finished these.’
She sighed, took it from him and took a bite.
He waited for the inevitable question.
‘What have you been doing?
You look as if you've been bickering with a volcano.’
She winced and put a hand to her head.
The Doctor wet his grimy hanky and fussed over the wound.
‘Don't worry, it's not very deep.’
She pushed his hand away.
‘I don't remember how I got it.
What's happened?’
The Doctor fiddled nervously with the handle of his umbrella.
‘You've got rather a lot to catch up on,’ he said.
‘Hold it,’ Bernice interrupted him.
‘You've put the ‘fluence  on me, haven't you?
I feel fine and I'm sure I shouldn't.’
He tapped her on the shoulder and walked away.
‘It's for the best.’
She got up and swung him around.
‘Doctor, what has been going on?’
‘You're ill,’ he said evenly.
‘Very ill.
You may not feel it at the moment because I've blocked your mind from the pain.
The important thing now is to clear all this business up before you get any iller.’
‘What business?’ she demanded angrily.
‘I won't be much use to you if you won't tell me.’
He sighed and took her by the arm.
‘Come with me.
I'll explain on the way.’
‘The way to where?’
‘The city of Sakkrat,’ he said guiltily, pointing to the ruins on the hillside above them.
Sheldukher sat huddled over the Cell case, some distance away from any of the others.
His index finger rested on the inbuilt voltage control.
The creature inside writhed and squirmed.
‘You could have killed me any time you wanted to,’ Sheldukher sneered sadistically down at it, ‘just by shutting down life support.
But no, you really wanted to put me through it, didn't you?’
‘Please, Sheldukher…stop this…
You must stop…’
‘I'll keep you alive forever for this,’ he continued.
‘An amusement for my old age.’
‘The ship is…gone now…
How can I…be of use…to you…?’ it gasped.
Sheldukher took his finger from the control.
‘You have a complete copy of the ship's data core stored in your brain.’
‘No, Sheldukher, I…will not…’
He picked up the case and cast his eyes about.
He could see Rosheen, Klift and Postine examining that curious yellow buggy.
The Doctor turned sadly from his examination of the Zagrat discod.
Bernice had been through a lot in the days they had been separated and he was proud of her.
She deserved an explanation.
‘Another example of Fortean distortion.’
Bernice took it from him and shook her head in amazement.
‘The entire prophecy, a coincidence.
Still, that doesn't stop it from being an accurate prophecy, does it?’
‘No, indeed,’ the Doctor agreed.
‘Down below the rocks fall, hear the sound of the dying’.’
‘And the Wizard King?’
The Doctor shrugged.
‘Crowned with ice.
Death.’
‘You'd have liked Sendei,’ she told him.
‘His death seemed so pointless.’
He nodded and put a consoling arm around her shoulder.
‘Every violent death is a pointless death.’
They had stopped on a small rise, at Bernice's insistence, to compare stories and devise plans.
The Doctor had wanted to run straight back into danger, as was his wont, but she had persuaded him that on this occasion at least, some forethought and preparation would be a better idea than just leaving everything to chance and inspiration, particularly as the former seemed hell bent on giving them a hard time of things.
She still found it hard to believe the Doctor's explanation.
‘It doesn't end properly.
The discod, I mean.
It's Molassi's story.
We don't really come into it.’
‘At least we know something of what we're getting into,’ the Doctor said, optimistic as ever.
‘We have Urnst's account and now this to guide us.’
Bernice stood up.
‘Let's get on with it, then.’
‘If you're feeling up to it.’
‘Watch it, Doctor,’ she joked.
‘It takes more than a poisonous soda to subdue me.’
She walked off.
The Doctor stared after her anxiously.
‘I hope so,’ he said.
Rosheen gave the motorspeeder's controls one last thump and gave up.
‘It's packed up.
No fuel charge.’
‘It's an antique.
Shouldn't work at all,’ agreed Klift.
‘We're stuck here.’
‘We must find Sheldukher,’ said Rosheen.
‘He's got the Cell it could still help us.’
‘Help us?’
Klift exclaimed.
‘It wants to kill us!’
Postine nudged him with the butt of her rifle.
‘He is back,’ she said.
They looked up to see Sheldukher coming towards them, the Cell case under one arm.
He held the black square in his other hand.
‘Postine,’ he said.
Her gun raised automatically to cover Rosheen and Klift.
‘You can't be serious about going on with this,’ Rosheen protested.
‘As far as I'm concerned, nothing has changed,’ he said.
‘There is the small matter of a splattered ship,’ she reminded him.
He came towards her.
‘There is the Doctor's ship.’
‘Sorry, but it's a two seater,’ said a familiar voice.
They turned to see the Doctor and Bernice approaching.
‘That's all right,’ said Sheldukher.
‘I only have one bottom.’
‘There's gratitude,’ said the Doctor.
‘I'm sorry, but this is where we get off.’
Sheldukher raised the black square again.
‘I'll kill them, Doctor.’
‘You've persuaded me,’ he said lightly.
‘Besides, my young friend here is intrigued by the archaeological implications of our situation.’
Sheldukher strode over to her.
‘Another expert?’
She eyed him coolly.
It was an odd sensation, coming face to face with the bogeyman of her childhood.
‘You are Sheldukher, then.’
‘Yes.’
‘My mother used to say you had scaly green skin and terrible halitosis.’
‘Really,’ he chuckled.
‘It seems that reports of my breath have been greatly exaggerated.’
‘This is all very pleasant,’ said the Doctor.
‘But I suggest we move on.’
Sheldukher turned to him.
‘You seem remarkably keen all of a sudden, Doctor.’
He shrugged.
‘Well, I'm curious, you know,’ he said.
‘And there are those, of course.’
He pointed with his umbrella in the direction of the destroyed ship.
The remains of the Chelonian assault force trundled aggressively  into view across the plain.
The Cell laughed wickedly.
‘Nothing to save you…now, Sheldukher.’
‘It's true what they say about pets taking after their owners,’ the Doctor whispered to Bernice.
‘We've no defence against them,’ said Klift in alarm.
‘Indeed not,’ said the Doctor.
‘It's budgerigar time again.’
‘I should have destroyed them,’ said Sheldukher.
‘But the science of Sakkrat will help us.’
‘Then I suggest we find it quickly,’ Bernice urged.
‘They're closing in fast.’
She and the Doctor broke into a stumbling run.
Rosheen and Klift followed.
Sheldukher turned to Postine.
‘Hold them off for as long as you can.’
‘Master.’
She straightened her weapon and turned to stand her ground.
Sheldukher scurried after the others.
Up ahead, Bernice paused to take a deep breath.
‘Are you all right?’ asked the Doctor.
‘Well, I feel fine up here,’ she tapped her head.
‘It's my body that seems sluggish.’
‘You've been through a lot,’ nodded the Doctor.
‘I wish I could say take it easy.’
Rosheen and Klift had caught up with them.
‘Come on, Doctor,’ urged Rosheen.
Bernice glanced back down at Postine.
‘She'll be blasted to pieces,’ she said.
‘You haven't seen her in action,’ said Rosheen.
‘Now move!’
The Environments Officer turned from his console at the rear of the command vehicle.
‘Sensornet confirms that that is the wreckage of the parasites’ spaceship.’
Jinkwa turned to Fakrid.
‘It appears that they have somehow been destroyed, sir.’
The General's stare remained fixed on the forward screen.
‘No, I do not believe it.’
Jinkwa sighed.
The General's behaviour was becoming ever more illogical.
‘But the sensornet, sir —.’
‘To Gaf with the sensornet!’ screamed Fakrid.
‘I sometimes wonder what you'd do without the stupid machine.
You believe  everything it tells you!’
Jinkwa pointed to the screen.
‘My own eyes tell me that their ship is gone, sir.’
‘And my own instincts tell me that they escaped!’ fumed Fakrid.
‘When you've been a soldier as long as I have, I tell you, you can smell a parasite from the other side of a black hole!
We go on.’
‘First Pilot,’ the Environments Officer called urgently.
‘Report.’
‘Sensornet confirms visual sighting of infestation in this area.
Massive electrical energy releases underground have reduced the accuracy of our equipment by seventy one per cent.’
‘There!’ jeered Fakrid.
‘Even your precious sensors, Jinkwa, concur with me!
Forward!
Maximum power!’
Jinkwa shuffled himself about to face the Environments Officer.
‘The detection of the parasites is good news,’ he whispered.
‘We shall crush the spineless fleshies in our mighty claws.’
He glanced about cautiously and lowered his voice even further.
‘But I am concerned for the General.
His shame at the hands of the Doctor parasite seems to have unhinged him.
Never before has he dared to question the sensornet or insult another officer so openly.’
The Environments Officer glanced over at Fakrid's shaking shell.
‘Have you not realized, sir?’
‘What are you speaking of?’
Jinkwa asked.
‘The time is day twenty of the occupation schedule,’ the Environments Officer continued.
‘We were supposed to have returned to Chelonia by now.
The occupation force would have come in to settle Vaagon.’
‘So?’
‘The General should have received another dose of fertizol to stimulate his brood cycle for his next assignment.
He has not.
Neither has his brood cycle been deactivated, like yours or mine, or any other serving soldier's.’
Jinkwa turned with horror to the General.
The unthinkable had happened.
Fakrid had entered the Time of Blood.
City of Ghosts
The Doctor and Bernice had reached the boundary of the city some distance ahead of the others, after a long and exhausting run.
They collapsed gasping to the ground.
The Doctor wiped his brow with his  handkerchief .
‘We've put quite a distance between us and them.’
Bernice looked around at the city.
Her mind was free to appreciate it properly for the first time.
‘I can't believe this place.
It's…’
She shrugged.
‘Well, it's one of the best I've seen.’
The Doctor followed her gaze.
‘Ironic, isn't it?
The Chelonians will probably blast it to pieces.’
‘That side looks older,’ remarked Bernice, pointing out a further quarter of the city.
‘The spires resemble those of the temple.’
The Doctor peered in the direction she had indicated.
‘Yes.
There seem to be a lot of triumphal arches, which would suggest regular ceremonial occasions, possibly victory parades.’
‘And yet,’ Bernice continued, ‘the nearer sections seem much less ordered: the rational street-grid replaced by narrow alleys between various tacked on blocks.’
The Doctor nodded, intrigued.
‘You're suggesting a slow social reversal rather than the legendary toppled empire?’
Bernice shrugged.
‘Could be.
War, disease or climatic change could account for such a throwback.
Although the additional buildings would suggest population growth rather than loss, which argues against those  possibilities .’
The Doctor stared at her silently for a few seconds.
‘Bernice, you're a pleasure to know,’ he said finally.
She smiled.
‘Oh,’ she said, rather surprised.
‘Thank you, Doctor.’
Rosheen and Klift staggered into view, followed by Sheldukher.
‘Those things are still coming after us,’ said Rosheen.
‘Good as she is, Postine won't hold them off for long,’ said Klift.
‘You're finished.
Finished,’ the Cell cackled.
‘There's no alternative,’ said Sheldukher, ignoring it.
‘We must enter the city, find some way to destroy them.’
‘You're presuming rather a lot,’ the Doctor pointed out, ‘from a heap of crumbled ruins.’
‘This is Sakkrat, Doctor,’ he replied.
‘Who can tell what's in there?’
The Doctor raised his eyebrows to Bernice.
Her story of the fate which had overtaken Rodomonte and Molassi had intrigued and alarmed him.
Whatever terrors awaited them in the city, it would be better to take a chance than simply wait for death at the hands of the Chelonians.
‘Very well,’ he said.
‘Professor Summerfield, would you lead the way?’
She looked back at him.
‘You really want me to take you there, Doctor?’
He nodded.
‘Down there seems a better bet than up here at the moment.
As the man said, we may find something useful.
It's our only hope.’
‘Provided we can ever get out again,’ she reminded him.
A loud explosion echoed up the hillside.
‘Let's get moving,’ ordered Sheldukher.
Postine had loved guns from the moment her mother had passed a toy replica through the bars of her playpen.
Other children had developed similar fondnesses for teddy bears or dolls or even blankets.
‘Look at little Marjorie,’ her mother's friends had laughed as she fired aggressively at them during boring plastiware parties.
‘She's going to be a proper little madam when she grows up!’
Parents of other children in their block had dispatched their reluctant offspring to the door of number nine to enquire if Marjorie was coming out to play.
‘But she's creepy,’ they had protested.
‘She's a shy little girl who needs friends to bring her out of herself!’ their elders had protested, shaking their heads in exasperation at the thoughtlessness of the younger generation.
Such charitable gestures had proved fruitless.
Little Marjorie Postine had refused all offers, and seemed content to remain  up in her room all day, with the curtains drawn.
Nobody knew that she really was playing with the local children, in her own way.
She would lift a corner of curtain up now and again, imagine she had a blaster with sights attachment, and use her would be playmates for target practice as they leapfrogged and hopscotched around the courtyard below.
School had simply made matters worse.
Slow to make friends and disappointing academically, Marjorie had developed a perverse popularity by dint of an enterprise nicknamed ‘rent-a-beating’ by her classmates.
For a small fee, usually a week's tuck allowance, she would duff up any victim selected.
The electroshock therapy that followed her hospitalization of one unfortunate schoolboy left Marjorie a dull husk of her former self.
Despairing of ever finding any use for her, her parents sold her to the military, a callous practice common in the commercially minded years of the mid-twenty-fourth century.
And so Postine became a mercenary, developing a reputation second to none.
Sheldukher's choice of bodyguard had been a good one.
But the reason she obeyed him so readily was not financial.
She had no need of money.
She was fond of Sheldukher because he had given her her dream weapon.
A Moosehead repeater.
It could blast a hole in a neutron star and it was all hers.
Now it was time to use it.
The forward screen zeroed in on the figure of a parasite.
Although most parasites looked exactly the same, Jinkwa recognized it as the large female who had snapped the bones of several of his division.
‘There is but one!’ screamed Fakrid to his gunners.
‘Destroy it!’
The gunners aligned the disintegrator with practised ease.
‘Target aligned, gridmark nine by one.’
‘Fire!’ ordered Fakrid frenziedly.
Jinkwa thought he saw the parasite raise its weapon in a puny gesture of defiance.
Much good would it do against a disintegrator!
The command vehicle rocked from side to side.
The crew righted themselves to find that the forward screen had blanked  out.
‘Fire!’
Fakrid shouted again.
The gunners hammered at the controls.
‘Disintegrator will not respond, sir,’ cried the first.
Jinkwa snarled.
‘What parasite trickery is being played on us now?’
The Environments Officer swung about.
‘Our disintegrator cannon has been blasted off!’ he cried incredulously.
‘What?’ spluttered Fakrid.
‘What?’
‘It must have been blasted off at the weak point of the stalk,’ the Environments Officer continued.
He shook his head in reluctant admiration.
‘Amazing marksmanship for a parasite.’
‘And forward vision?’ asked Jinkwa.
The Environments Officer shrugged.
‘The scanner turret must have caught the blast, sir,’ he said meekly.
Another blast rocked the command vehicle.
‘We're running blind, General,’ Jinkwa called over to Fakrid.
‘We must pull back.
We cannot co-ordinate an assault from such a position!’
The second blast had done more damage.
The lights began to flicker on and off.
Reports began to come in of successful strikes on other vehicles.
One had been destroyed.
Fakrid reached for the emergency stop control and pressed it.
The command vehicle ground to a halt.
He began to shake loose from his harness.
‘Sir, what are you doing?’ cried Jinkwa in astonishment.
‘We must turn back!’
Fakrid grabbed a footgun from a nearby wall rack and primed it.
‘The parasite is but one,’ he said.
‘I am but one.
’ He operated the exit control.
Jinkwa straightened himself.
‘General Fakrid, I cannot allow you to leave the command vehicle,’ he stuttered reluctantly.
‘You're a good man, Jinkwa,’ said Fakrid.
‘But hear this.
You'll have to kill me to stop me going out there.
And if you try, I'll make sure I kill you first!’
He disappeared down the exit hatch.
Jinkwa shook his head in bewilderment.
‘Orders, sir?’ prompted the second gunner.
Jinkwa turned to him.
‘Pull back.
All units are to pull back.
The attack will resume shortly.’
He swivelled round to the Environments Officer.
The scientist  shook his head ruefully.
‘The old fool may be the death of us all,’ he said.
‘If the parasites don't get him first.’
Jinkwa nodded.
‘The Time of Blood,’ he sighed, remembering the legends of his people, ‘it was always so.’
Postine watched suspiciously as the Chelonian forces retreated.
Her grip tightened on the butt of her rifle.
The loss of one vehicle and the leading tank's offensive capability was not enough to cause a full scale withdrawal.
She suspected trickery and stood her ground.
She glimpsed the shell of one of the creatures scurrying behind a line of rocks.
It was obviously a scout of some sort.
She aligned the sights of her rifle and loosed a fusillade of bolts that split the rocks apart.
The creature came into vision.
It was a little larger than any of the others and a red stripe had been painted across the length of its shell.
It limped forward unevenly; one of its back legs had been damaged.
One of its front limbs came up.
A pink sparkle shot through the air.
She did not have time to dodge it.
It caught her on the elbow of her right arm and sliced right through the botched teflon sutures that held the forearm below it in place.
She roared with pain and anger, and used her good arm to send a volley of shots in the direction of the Chelonian.
The rockdust prevented her from seeing if she had been successful in her kill.
She grunted fiercely and set off up the slope.
A higher vantage point would give her the advantage in battle if the creatures returned.
Bernice led the way through the ruins.
She stopped for a second to point something out to the Doctor.
‘That artwork suggests a two tiered society,’ she said.
‘The workers toil in the beautiful city that their masters have provided for them.’
‘We've seen no evidence of high technology,’ pointed out Rosheen.
‘Not so,’ the Doctor said.
‘Technologies can develop along very different lines.’
Bernice nodded.
‘Many of the first colonies were built at the  expense of societies the settlers didn't understand because their cultures varied from Earth basic,’ she said.
‘This is all very interesting, I'm sure,’ Sheldukher interrupted.
‘If I'd thought we were going on a lecture tour, I'd have brought a notepad and a lunchbox.
Can we please move on?’
He gestured the way forward with his laser pistol.
They turned a corner and found themselves outside the cone shaped building.
‘That's it,’ said Bernice.
‘There's an entrance inside that leads underground.’
The Doctor whispered to her, ‘And that's where you saw this ghost of yours?’
She nodded.
‘I think so.
It could have been the drug making me hallucinate.’
‘I doubt it,’ he replied.
‘Bubbleshake is an extremely harmful substance, but it's —’
The following words never came.
The whole world seemed to twist and shake about Bernice.
She feared that the contamination had broken through the Doctor's makeshift hypnotic conditioning, but she blinked a couple of times and felt fine again.
The Doctor, however, lay crumpled over the steps outside the building.
She hurried over to him and loosened his collar.
His eyes opened woozily.
‘Is he all right?’
Sheldukher asked.
Bernice felt the Doctor grip her arm urgently.
‘Did you feel that?’
She nodded.
‘Obviously not as badly as you did.’
‘It's not how much it affected you, it's the fact that you were affected at all,’ he said, straightening himself up.
‘What's the matter, Doctor?’ sighed Sheldukher.
‘I'm anxious to continue.’
‘Nothing, nothing, just a sudden dizzy spell.
All this excitement's bad for the liver,’ he said cheerily and got to his feet.
‘On we go, then.’
He strode briskly into the building as if nothing had happened.
Klift spoke for all of them as they looked around the sloping entranceway.
‘It's amazing.’
Rosheen went over to one of the light pillars.
‘This looks more like it,’ she said.
‘Don't get too close,’ warned Bernice.
The Doctor was examining a carving on the far side of the chamber.
‘Come and look at this, Bernice,’ he called.
Sheldukher set the Cell case down and walked slowly about.
‘Yes,’ he breathed contentedly to himself.
‘Yes.’
‘I gave you this…
Sheldukher…don't forget the Cell…’
He ignored it.
‘What was all that palaver about outside?’
Bernice whispered to the Doctor out of the corner of her mouth.
‘I'm a Time Lord, remember?’ he whispered back, keen to make sure none of the others overheard him.
She sighed.
‘How could I ever forget?
Well?’
‘I've crossed the time lines so many times in the TARDIS that I'm extremely sensitive to temporal disturbances.
My head fuzzes up and I want to be sick.’
‘That's what I felt,’ said Bernice.
He nodded.
‘Exactly.
Although you've made far fewer trips, so the effect is not as strong.’
‘So there's some sort of kink in time about here?’ she said.
She snapped her fingers.
‘The Fortean flicker!’
‘Well done,’ the Doctor congratulated her.
‘Throwing out the occasional tendril of unlikeliness.
Somebody, somewhere, has probably just telephoned an old friend by mistake.
The trouble is, we're walking right into the heart of it.’
‘It could knock us flying at any moment,’ she said grimly.
‘Indeed,’ he nodded.
‘Although we can use our reaction to lead us to it.’
‘Great,’ sighed Bernice.
‘I feel like one of those canaries they used to send into mines.’
‘Doctor!’ called Sheldukher.
They hurried over to where he had found a previously unseen exit between two large boulders.
‘That isn't the way you went down,’ the Doctor asked Bernice, ‘is it?’
‘No,’ she replied, pointing through to the space at the far end of the entranceway.
‘There's a tunnel through there.’
‘Rosheen, Klift, you go through,’ Sheldukher ordered.
‘We need to cover as much ground as possible.’
He waved the black square at them.
‘Remember, the range on this thing is quite long  enough for me to dispose of you at any moment should you try to desert me or plot against me.’
Rosheen smiled acidly.
‘Would we?’
He indicated the passage.
‘In you go.
We will follow the route taken by Miss Summerfield.’
The Doctor took Rosheen by the hand.
‘Be careful.’
She smiled and turned to Klift.
‘Come on.’
To Sheldukher she said, ‘We'll report back in an hour, yes?’
He nodded.
Rosheen and Klift passed through the small gap without a backward glance.
Sheldukher levelled his laser pistol at Bernice.
‘Lead the way.’
‘After what happened last time,’ she replied.
‘I've no desire to go back.
There's something very unpleasant down there, and it kills.’
‘I have a weapon,’ he pointed out.
‘Now move.’
‘Do you know,’ she said coolly.
‘I've always thought there was something a bit sad about grown men waving guns about like that.
It makes me wonder if they aren't deficient in some other aspect of their lives.’
The Doctor winced.
Bernice's bluntness had got her into trouble before.
‘Do you?’
Sheldukher replied calmly.
‘Do you indeed?’
His finger tightened on the trigger.
He moved with his usual lightning speed, slapping her brutally across the face.
She reeled back.
‘I should keep your opinions to yourself.’
He waited for them to pass through into the central chamber.
The Doctor picked up the Cell case.
It had quietened itself down to a low, continuous burble.
‘I assume we'll be taking him along?’
‘Just do it, Doctor,’ Sheldukher said impatiently.
He waited for the Doctor to pass in front of him and followed.
‘Don't antagonize him,’ the Doctor warned Bernice
‘We could jump him,’ she whispered.
‘That thing down there could kill us.
So he's got a gun.
There are two of us.’
‘Don't even consider it,’ the Doctor chided her.
‘It isn't for nothing that he was called the most dangerous man in the galaxy.’
Postine waited on the far side of the temple building, her teeth  gritted.
She was accustomed to pain, but had never yet let an opponent strike her and survive.
She smiled as the Chelonian appeared in the valley below her.
Good.
It was right that she should make it suffer for what it had done.
She lined up the sights on her rifle on its empty front foot and fired twice.
Let the contest be equalled!
Fakrid screamed as his right front foot was blown off.
‘No,’ he whispered through gritted teeth.
‘I will not allow one puny parasite to better me!’
He scanned the area above him and caught sight of the parasite.
It had reappeared around the side of some crumbling, unimportant rock structure.
He swiftly adjusted the setting of his footgun.
It began to glow red for overload.
This would be his finest moment.
He brought back his foot as far as it would go and channelled all its hydraulic power into a forceful throw.
The grenade left his grip at almost the same moment as another beam struck him full across the carapace, cracking it.
No matter.
The parasite would not live to see its success.
All the indignities he had suffered since their abduction to this rock of a planet would be avenged.
‘Die!’ he screamed up the hillside.
He saw the footgun, now glowing white hot, head straight for its target in a graceful curve.
‘Die in the name of Nazmir and for the glory of the mighty Chelonian race!’
The temple was blown to pieces, showering the helpless Postine with enormous chunks of rock.
She held the Moosehead repeater to her chest and died with a sentimental smile on her face.
Bernice was blown off her feet by the shockwave from the explosion.
The Doctor struggled to keep himself from slipping down the glowing tunnel, which he had entered first.
‘Are you all right, Doctor?’
Bernice called down after him
‘Just about,’ he called up.
‘Let's get on.’
He gripped the Cell case tightly in his hands and continued the climb down.
Bernice turned to Sheldukher.
‘What do you think it was?’
‘It sounded like Postine at work,’ he said.
He gestured to the tunnel with the pistol.
‘Follow him down.’
Bernice lowered herself into the hole.
Whatever it was down there, the Doctor should be able to find a way round it.
She heard the stonework about her creaking and shifting.
‘I don't like the sound of that at all,’ she whispered to herself.
Klift cocked his head at the distant rumble.
‘What's that?’
Rosheen sighed.
‘Probably nothing.
Go on.’
The route they had taken into the underground passages had led them along a wide, high-ceilinged passageway that was easy to negotiate.
Light pillars were spaced at regular intervals.
They reached what appeared to be the end of the tunnel.
Klift stretched out a hand to the blank wall before them.
‘This is it, then.’
‘Looks like it,’ agreed Rosheen.
‘We'd better get back to the Doctor.’
‘You trust him, don't you?’ he asked curiously.
‘He isn't stupid,’ she replied.
‘He knows how to survive.’
She turned her back on him and walked away.
‘Rosheen,’ she heard him call embarrassingly.
‘Was I stupid?
Stupid to love you?’
She turned.
He stood in the light from the nearest pillar.
Traces of his old personality remained in the lined face.
She was shocked by how much she didn't care.
‘Probably,’ she admitted.
She just didn't understand some people.
The rumbling and creaking returned, much louder this time.
Rosheen looked up automatically.
She saw the stones above her crack across.
Fine powder rained down on her.
‘What's happening?’ asked Klift.
‘What do you think?’ she yelled.
‘Get down!’
She made to run across and pull him away but was knocked down by chunks of falling masonry.
She rolled herself up in a ball and covered her head.
She heard Klift cry out under the shattering din of the falling rock.
The rockfall lasted at least a minute.
When she was confident it was safe to do so, Rosheen pulled up her head.
She could see nothing through the thick clouds of dust that choked her.
She attempted to stand.
To her horror, her left leg was trapped beneath a lump of rock.
She pulled it frantically to no avail, then forced herself to remain calm and sat up.
She wiggled her toes and gave a sigh of relief.
With care she manoeuvred her upper leg from the rock.
Her foot then slipped through easily.
She stood up and clambered clumsily over the fallen rocks towards where Klift had been standing.
He was trapped, face up, under a thick stone slab.
‘Rosheen…don't leave me…
Rosheen…’ he moaned.
She could see that he was concussed.
‘I'll go and get help,’ she said.
‘The Doctor will help you get out.
’ She turned and retraced her steps back along the tunnel.
‘Rosheen, don't leave me on my own…’ she heard him cry pathetically.
‘Just wait a moment,’ she called back angrily and walked on.
That despairing bleat touched a heart she hadn't been sure still existed.
Klift lay beneath the fallen slab, broken in body and mind.
Pain prevented him from thinking clearly.
Under the rock, he could feel himself losing a lot of blood.
The light in the passageway suddenly brightened into a blazing radiance.
So he was going to die again.
A translucent figure appeared before him, its three fingered hand outstretched as if to claim him for death.
Strange thoughts about his recent past were torn from his subconscious mind, as if the thing was asking him questions.
He tried to shield his past from its probing.
He screamed again and again as it came closer, certain that it had been sent to judge him.
The screaming stopped.
His eyes closed.
The ghost sensed the emptiness that follows the death of a mind.
The subject had been responsive and his death unnecessary.
At the foot of the laddered tunnel, the Doctor bent over curiously to examine the glowing ball.
‘Different again,’ he mused, ‘from those pillars.
Could be amplified phosphor emission, I suppose.’
‘Don't touch it, Doctor,’ warned Bernice.
She was now burdened with the unpleasant task of carrying the Cell.
‘Do I look like a half wit?’ he snapped, pulling his hand back hastily.
Something else caught his eye.
‘Hello, what's all this  then…’
‘What is it, Doctor?’ asked Sheldukher anxiously.
The Doctor held up his find.
It was a tattered blue spacesuit glove, charred at the fingertips.
‘Not a Sakkratian artefact.’
‘Urnst,’ said Bernice.
‘He must have passed this way.’
The Doctor nodded.
‘And he obviously was stupid enough to touch that thing.
Didn't mention that in his account, did he?’
Bernice grinned.
‘He probably thought such rash actions would tarnish his reputation as a scholar.’
Sheldukher sighed.
‘Enlighten me, please.’
The Doctor waved the glove at him.
‘This belonged to the gentleman explorer who happened upon this city many years ago,’ he explained.
‘A man whose footsteps we are now retracing.’
‘He came here?
Without finding the secrets?’
Sheldukher demanded.
‘He ran away from them,’ Bernice informed him.
‘Easily intimidated.
Not a hardened pioneer like us, you see.
A novice.’
‘The question remains,’ the Doctor continued, ‘what exactly scared him off?
He gave only vague hints in his account.’
‘That we are about to discover,’ said Sheldukher.
‘Let's move on.’
Bernice looked with dread at the far end of the passage.
She could see the bodies of Molassi and Rodomonte.
The Doctor noted her anxiety.
He tapped her reassuringly on the arm.
‘Whatever happened to them,’ he said, ‘remember, you survived it.’
They walked through into the chamber.
The Doctor looked sadly down at the bodies.
‘Senseless waste of life…’
Bernice pointed to Molassi.
‘He was completely screwed up.
But Rodo was okay.
A bit wild, but okay.’
The Doctor nodded.
‘If only I'd recognized the signs of Bubbleshake contamination when I met him.
I think his system had already been weakened by some other compound, anyway.’
Sheldukher looked about angrily.
‘What is this?
There's no way out!’
The Cell spoke.
Bernice was so shocked she nearly dropped the case.
‘Can't you feel it…
Sheldukher…’ it gasped.
‘Can't you…feel it?’
‘What do you mean?’ he snapped at it.
‘Tell me!’
It laughed up at them.
‘It's telepathic, remember,’ said the Doctor.
‘It can sense something here.
Some sort of presence.’
He concentrated hard but could detect nothing ‘Doctor!’ cried Bernice.
She pointed to the far side of the amber.
Three ghostly shapes were forming gradually out of nothingness.
Exits and Entrances
Jinkwa had left the command vehicle under the control of the Environments Officer and ventured forth in a scouting party with two of his troopers.
‘Now remember, lads,’ he briefed them as they scuttled purposefully over the rough rocky ground, ‘this isn't some parasite we're searching for, it's a Chelonian officer.
A highly respected officer, at that.’
He spoke these words with a heavy heart.
The General had been the emblem of the service, his name synonymous with all that was glorious, right and true.
His eggs had been the first, to hatch on many worlds.
His reduction to insanity would have been unthinkable before the events of this most peculiar of missions.
‘Strikes me, sir,’ said Ozaran, first of the troopers, ‘that although it's a terrible shame and all, we're only risking our own necks going after him.
I didn't like the sound of that big bang earlier.
I mean to say, what with him having gone twisty, like, and those freaky parasites probably still hanging around…’
He trailed off uneasily, having noted Jinkwa's pernicious stare.
‘Never in my career,’ said the First Pilot, ‘have I heard such insolence.
There can be no excuse for such remarks.
Three stars are hereby deducted from your promotion chart!’
There you go, thought Ozaran mutinously.
Typical officer class.
Old Fakrid's hardly been gone two time units and already our clever First Pilot has begun to sound exactly like him.
Linta, second of the troopers, started anxiously.
‘Look, sir,’ he said, pointing ahead with his left front foot.
Only a few hundred metres from them lay Fakrid.
He was slouched pathetically against a boulder, his face turned shamefully to be the ground.
One of his feet had been blown  away and he had lost a lot of blood from a wide crack in his shell.
‘Stay here,’ Jinkwa ordered Ozaran and Linta.
He motored off alone.
He didn't want any of the riff-raff polluting the moment.
‘Look at him,’ Ozaran muttered disrespectfully to Linta.
‘Jumped up little strawberry sucker.
Looking back on it, I think I'd prefer to take my chances with the General.’
Linta averted his gaze.
‘I'd keep such thoughts to yourself, if I were you,’ he said haughtily.
Jinkwa stopped before the General.
‘Sir,’ he said awkwardly.
Fakrid's neck rose just a little.
His eyes turned to Jinkwa.
‘Ah, Jinkwa, my boy…’ he cooed weakly.
‘Sir, your injuries are severe, but the efforts of our best cybersurgeons could replace your foot…’
Fakrid shook his head.
‘Don't humour me, boy.
I destroyed the parasite but it wounded me badly.
I know my time has come.’
‘There may still be hope —’
‘There is no hope,’ interrupted Fakrid.
‘All that I command is yours now.
But…’
A wistful look filled his eyes.
‘Yes, General?’
‘There is something,’ he said falteringly.
‘Something…
I'd like you to know.’
Jinkwa nodded.
‘I'm listening, sir.’
‘It's about your mother, Jinkwa,’ he said.
Jinkwa frowned, puzzled.
‘My mother died when I was very small, in transit to the colony on Mantikroz.
His ship was caught in a rockstorm.’
‘That is not so,’ Fakrid said.
‘That was your adopted mother.
Your real mother was a soldier in the Chelonian army.
Promotion to officer class meant that he no longer had time to care for his own litters.
As you know, the state places such eggs in the care of foster mothers.’
A burning sensation crept across the back of Jinkwa's neck.
He could not believe what he was hearing, but he knew that the General would not deceive him in these, or any other, circumstances.
‘And?’ he prompted.
‘That officer went on to great deeds.
His children were  hatched and grew on many different worlds.
Many years later, he found himself assigned a new First Pilot.
A lad with a name that was somehow familiar.
‘You see, Jinkwa,’ he concluded inevitably, ‘I was that soldier.’
‘No General, it cannot be,’ protested Jinkwa.
‘The state computer does not allow related officers to serve in the same force.
And besides,’ he indicated his shell, ‘my colours…’
‘Oh, Jinkwa,’ breathed Fakrid heavily, ‘if only you'd inherited my common sense.
Computers have been known to make mistakes.
Shells are easily painted.
You really are my daughter.
And all this time, I've known and had to keep it from you.’
A tear fell from the corner of Jinkwa's eye.
‘Mother…’ he croaked in a broken voice.
‘There must be no tears now,’ said Fakrid bravely.
‘But before I join our ancestors on the banks of the sea of the dead, promise me two things.’
Jinkwa leaned forward eagerly.
‘Anything, mother.
Name them.’
Fakrid's heavy eyelids were closing for the last time.
His voice was now barely a whisper.
It seemed that his final revelation had soothed him, prepared him for death.
But there were obviously still more things he had to say.
‘My ashes,’ he wheezed, ‘scatter them over the plains of Narazel, where I was born, and frolicked through the blackberry fields…’
‘And?’
Jinkwa said anxiously.
‘There was something else.’
‘Something else?’ queried Fakrid.
‘Oh, yes…’
His wizened features twisted back into the snarl that had so characterized his time as General.
‘Just one more thing.
You must see to it…that the Doctor…dies…’
He exhaled his terminal breath and his neck flopped down limply.
Jinkwa stifled a sob.
He rested his own head against his mother's shell.
Ozaran and Linta looked on.
They had overheard nothing of their superiors' conversation.
‘A scene that will be immortalized in our history,’ said Linta and began to hum the opening bars of the Chelonian anthem.
‘If you ask me, that's going a bit far,’ said Ozaran as he watched Jinkwa snuggling up to the dead body of the General.
‘I mean, let's face it, he was a good leader, but a right miserable old prune when it took him.’
Linta did not have the chance to reply.
Jinkwa had wheeled about and was now coming back over to them.
‘You will carry the General's body back to the command vehicle,’ he ordered.
‘We will then return to the attack.
It would appear that the parasites have fled underground — their traditional defence.
We will destroy the aged structure on the hill and trap them.’
He shuffled off.
‘Come on, then,’ Ozaran urged Linta.
‘Let's shift the deadweight.’
They crossed over to the General's body.
The Doctor and his party watched warily as the three ghostly figures beckoned with one digit of their three fingered hands.
An exit had appeared magically behind them.
‘What are they?’
Sheldukher whispered in the Doctor's ear His fingers tightened around the trigger of his laser pistol.
‘I'm not entirely sure,’ replied the Doctor.
He stepped forward hesitantly.
The wraiths did not react.
‘The one I saw earlier,’ recalled Bernice.
‘Its head lit up, like it was probing my mind for something.
If felt like somebody's hand inside my head.’
The Doctor nodded.
‘They're not substantial, remember,’ he said.
‘It's probably how they communicate.’
He walked bravely over to the nearest of the shapes.
Even at close hand it remained ill formed and shadowy, rather as a cloud of mist apparently disappears on examination.
The Doctor's hand passed through it.
‘There, you see.
Just like faery gold.’
‘No,’ said Bernice.
‘I remember it touched me on the shoulder.’
The Doctor smiled.
‘I didn't say it couldn't touch you.
I said that you can't touch it.’
She frowned.
‘That's ridiculous.’
His grin spread even further.
‘Isn't it?’
Sheldukher moved to join the Doctor.
‘Then these are programmed projections of some sort?’
‘Nothing so elementary,’ he replied.
‘They have a life of their  own, limited as it may be.
They can open and close doorways.
They also have the power to kill.’
He gestured at the bodies of Rodomonte and Molassi.
‘Surely they killed themselves,’ reasoned Sheldukher.
‘Yes, but why?’ puzzled the Doctor.
‘Those things must have implanted some sort of image in their mind, stimulated the right emotions to make them do it.’
‘Ghosts and guilt trips,’ said Bernice, almost to herself.
‘Exactly,’ said the Doctor.
‘So why did it kill them, but leave all of us, and Urnst presumably, alive?’
‘Intelligence,’ said Sheldukher.
The Doctor pondered a moment.
‘It could be.
’ He looked from the beckoning figures over to the smooth blank walls and tapped the handle of his umbrella against his chin.
‘Yes, it could be,’ he muttered quietly, thinking otherwise.
‘Yes, yes…’
Sheldukher pointed to the still beckoning figures.
‘I suggest we go on.
They seem anxious that we should.’
The Doctor snapped out of his reverie and peered down at the Cell, still clasped in Bernice's grip.
‘What do you think?’ he asked it.
It remained silent, unused as it was to being asked for its opinions.
‘Come on,’ said Sheldukher, gesturing with the pistol.
The Doctor shrugged and was about to lead the way from the chamber when they heard footsteps from behind.
Rosheen stumbled in, coughing.
The Doctor rushed to her side.
‘What happened?’
‘It's Klift,’ she gasped.
‘There's been a rockfall.
He's trapped.’
She started as she caught sight of the ghost shapes.
‘What are they?’
‘We must go on,’ insisted Sheldukher.
‘There's no time for this.’
‘I can save him,’ said the Doctor.
‘He doesn't matter,’ replied Sheldukher.
‘You're to go on with me.’
The Doctor sighed.
‘I'll be as quick as I can,’ he said to Bernice and set off back down the passageway with Rosheen.
‘Doctor,’ shouted Sheldukher.
‘Come back here!’
He let off a warning shot.
The Doctor turned to face him.
‘I've no time to argue,’ he snapped.
‘Watch him,’ he said to Bernice, ‘and watch yourself.’
He hurried off.
Sheldukher raised the weapon and then lowered it with a sigh.
‘No, Doctor.
I've got other plans for you.’
The junior's reedy bugles sounded, as Jinkwa had ordered.
The body of General Fakrid was lowered slowly into the cremation unit.
All the remaining soldiers were gathered in silence.
When the last notes of the anthem had faded away on the moaning wind, Jinkwa shuffled forward.
‘General Fakrid was an officer of unparalleled repute.
He led successful campaigns to clear infestation on over forty worlds and was respected and admired by all of his colleagues in the forces.
More than that, I think I can say he was loved by the public.
Many of you younger boys, I know, were inspired into military life by his example.
‘That his distinguished career should have ended in such tragic and  unforeseen circumstances is regrettable.
But let us not forget that he gave his life in an act of selfless devotion to the race.
He would not rest until every last parasite was cleared from this ball of rock, and,’ his voice began to rise, ‘neither will we.
Our mission is simple.
We shall destroy the parasites that remain as the General would have wished!’
There were cheers and throatily enthusiastic cries for retribution from the crowd.
Even the less bellicose members of the force, Ozaran included, had been stirred by Jinkwa's words and were ready to attack.
This was not surprising.
Jinkwa had used cremation ceremony speech number 401 from the officers' manual to stimulate just that effect.
‘Now,’ Jinkwa shushed them.
‘Now, go back to your vehicles and prepare for the attack.’
Bernice lowered the Cell case gently down and sat next to it.
Her vision seemed clouded and her arms weak and stringy.
It seemed that the Doctor's hypnotic conditioning was wearing off.
She took a few deep breaths to calm her nerves.
The presence of the bodies of Rodo and Molassi did nothing to reassure her.
Sheldukher was hardly the most comforting  companion either.
Secretly, she resented the Doctor leaving her with him.
‘I see you're ill,’ he said, in a voice totally empty of expression.
He could have been giving a traffic broadcast.
She looked up.
‘Health is a state of mind.
Or so I've recently been led to believe.’
He circled the chamber slowly, stopping occasionally to examine the never changing activities of the ghostly figures.
‘They must get frightfully bored, standing there beckoning all day,’ mused Bernice.
‘I wonder if they have a union?
It certainly doesn't need three people to do a job like that.’
Sheldukher stared down at her suddenly, as if registering her presence for the first time.
‘I should like to discover your limits,’ he said suddenly.
He spoke so casually that it took Bernice five seconds to realize the implications of what he had said and another five to fear it.
‘My limits?’ she replied, equally casually.
I have to get out of here, she thought.
‘Yes,’ he said.
He crouched down in front of her.
‘You see, I get bored too, sometimes.
I like to amuse myself.’
‘That's nice,’ she said and tried to stand.
He prevented her, laying a firm hand on her shoulder.
‘You're very cool, very confident.
I should like to see what I would have to do to expose other aspects of your personality.’
Bernice launched herself at him, using all of her weight to throw him off her.
He clung to her like a clammy spider, pulling her down beside him with unexpected strength.
She tried to use aikido moves against him, but he blocked every one with the expertise of a master.
They scrabbled furiously about on the floor.
Several times, Bernice thought she was getting the better of him, only to realise that he was toying with her  expectations and reactions.
He pushed her down beneath him finally, holding her down with a hand around her throat.
Every time she tried to move he squeezed his grip and she felt herself begin to black out.
What made it worse was that his face remained so still, as expressionless as it had been earlier when discussing trivia with the Doctor.
There must be a weakness, Bernice thought frantically.
Every  opponent must have a weakness.
It was one of the Doctor's basic philosophies and had always served him well enough.
‘You've got such beautiful hands,’ she gasped, as calmly as she could.
‘What?’ he said without relaxing his grip.
‘Beautiful hands.
A real man's hands.’
She saw a flicker of expression in his blank eyes.
Confusion?
Anger?
She wasn't waiting to find out.
She brought her arms up and pulled his hands from her throat.
For one terrifying moment she thought he was going to subdue her again but she threw him off with a shove.
His laser pistol clattered from its holster.
She dived for it and levelled it at him.
‘I have no qualms whatever about firing this,’ she warned him.
Her finger tightened on the trigger almost by itself.
How easy it would be to destroy him.
She backed hurriedly from the chamber and along the passageway.
Sheldukher stared after her.
‘Not taken by your…obvious charms eh…
Sheldukher…’
‘Be silent,’ he ordered the wretched beast.
Its suffering would be as nothing compared to what he had in mind for Bernice.
She really should have shot him.
Rosheen led the Doctor over the fallen rocks.
A surfeit of rock dust blocked their vision and irritated their throats.
In the light from the glowing pillars they could see it twist and settle slowly as they disturbed it.
‘He's through here,’ said Rosheen, pointing to the end of the tunnel.
The Doctor hopped nimbly forward, careful not to disturb the fragile balance of what remained of the structure.
He stopped suddenly.
Klift's head was plainly visible.
It poked out from the edge of the fallen slab.
His eyes were closed and his expression blank.
The Doctor turned to Rosheen.
‘I'm afraid he's dead.’
She shook her head.
‘That's not possible, he was talking to me…’
The Doctor clambered over the slab.
He prised Klift's eyes open gently and winced.
He had seen that look so many times.
It never failed to chill him.
‘Something odd is happening here.’
Rosheen remained silent.
The Doctor looked up.
She was staring into nowhere, her face set.
‘I'm sorry,’ he said.
‘Don't be.
Sheldukher killed him a long time ago.’
The Doctor stood up and sighed.
‘You must have had some feeling for him,’ he said a little crossly.
‘He was quite something when he was young,’ she replied.
There was a hollowness in her voice that disturbed the Doctor.
He just didn't understand some people.
‘He wasn't killed by the rockfall,’ the Doctor continued.
‘One of those ghost things?’
Rosheen asked.
The Doctor sat down on a nearby rock.
‘No.
Well yes, probably, though indirectly.
You see, he died of terror.
Something he saw.’
Before Rosheen could react Bernice came blundering in.
The Doctor could see she was not in the best of moods.
‘The little runt tried to kill me!’ she shouted accusingly at him.
‘He's insane.’
The Doctor jumped up and took her by the hand.
She calmed, herself down immediately.
There was something about the look in his eyes that told her this was a time to listen and not argue.
‘Bernice,’ he began, ‘and you, Rosheen.
This is your chance and you must take it.
Get up to the surface.’
‘I'm not about to argue with that,’ said Rosheen and started to move off.
Bernice frowned.
‘What about you, Doctor?’
He sighed.
When he spoke again, Bernice recognized the staccato growl that meant business.
‘Somebody's got to stop Sheldukher.
He's meddling with things he doesn't understand.
Things the universe isn't ready for yet and perhaps never will be.
If he can take control of the Highest Science, the consequences could be cataclysmic.’
‘I want to help you,’ Bernice said loyally.
He shook his head in irritation.
‘There isn't time for a debate.
’ He squeezed her hand even tighter.
‘You must go.
Believe me, I have very good reasons.’
He passed her the TARDIS key from his pocket.
‘Wait for me back at the TARDIS.’
She gulped.
‘The TARDIS is thousands of miles away.’
‘You'll find a way,’ he said steadily.
‘Have confidence.’
‘That's just it,’ she said.
‘I think the conditioning may be slipping.
Can't you give me another shot?’
‘It doesn't work like that,’ he snapped.
‘Now please, just go.’
She smiled bravely.
She could see Klift's body from the corner of her eye.
‘Down below the rocks fall, hear the sound of the dying,’ she quoted.
‘Sorry?’ enquired the Doctor, worried that her condition had worsened suddenly.
‘Nothing,’ she said.
‘More coincidences.
Goodbye.’
She kissed him affectionately on the cheek and dashed off before she could persuade herself not to listen to him.
Left alone, the Doctor dabbed at the wet patch on his cheek with a corner of his handkerchief.
‘Really,’ he sniffed, embarrassed.
Then he straightened up, reminded himself of the import of his task, and set off to find Sheldukher.
Instead of retracing his steps back along the tunnel he walked forwards.
As he expected, this path, newly uncovered by the rockfall, led him impossibly back to the tunnel where Urnst had dropped the glove.
‘All roads,’ he mused, ‘lead to Rome.’
Sheldukher did not believe in wasting time.
He knew the Doctor would return and he made an amusing and, more importantly, an informed companion on his explorations.
He had taken the knife from Molassi's body and was studying its bloody tip with interest when the Doctor entered.
‘Why didn't you leave with your friend?
You didn't have to come back,’ he told the Doctor.
‘That's just it,’ he replied, picking up the Cell case.
‘I did.
I couldn't leave you here with only misery guts for company, could I?’
Sheldukher sneered.
‘We're so alike, Doctor.’
‘I sincerely hope not.’
‘Curious to the last,’ he continued.
‘You can't bear the thought of not knowing, can you?
You have to know.’
The Doctor crossed over to the ghosts.
His face was still but Sheldukher could see that he had been troubled by these words.
‘We could both leave now.
Come back with me to my ship and I'll drop you off somewhere.
We can forget we ever met, that this ever happened, leave this place as it should be.’
Sheldukher chuckled.
‘You know what my answer would be.
And I know you're only offering to make yourself feel better.’
The Doctor scowled.
‘Let's not prolong this.’
He walked right through the ghosts and through the entrance they had opened.
Sheldukher followed.
The ghosts and the entrance disappeared immediately.
Bernice had caught up with Rosheen as she left the city.
They could both tell that in normal social circumstances they would have disliked each other.
In their present situation there was no time to worry about such things.
Survival was all that mattered.
‘Your ship,’ enquired Rosheen as they walked down the hill.
‘What principles does it operate on?’
Bernice smiled.
‘Guesswork, from what I can tell.’
Rosheen stopped.
‘You mean to say you can't pilot it?’
‘Only the Doctor can,’ Bernice explained.
‘And even he has problems.
It's an erratic vessel, to say the least.
Still, it usually gets us where we want to go, near enough.’
‘The Doctor's as good as dead,’ Rosheen said dismissively.
They had now reached the ruins of the temple.
It had collapsed in on itself and only the partially covered base remained to show a glimpse of its former beauty.
The two women walked slowly around it.
Bernice's glance flickered briefly over to Sendei's grave.
‘Bernice,’ said Rosheen.
A patch of blue coverall showed in the rubble.
It looked like Postine had been crushed instantly by the collapsing temple.
‘I think the Chelonians have called.’
Bernice cast her eyes about.
‘She had a gun, didn't she?
We need it.’
Rosheen bent down and pushed aside the rocks that covered Postine's horribly crushed body.
She rescued the rifle from the grip of her one remaining hand and grasped it firmly.
It made her feel a lot better.
‘A Moosehead repeater.
Thank God Sheldukher didn't skimp on this.
It has a constantly recharging fuel source.’
‘I think we're going to need it,’ Bernice said.
‘The Chelonians are back.’
Rosheen looked up.
The few remaining tanks of the Chelonian  assault force were moving rapidly over the rock towards them.
‘We don't stand a chance,’ Rosheen cried despairingly.
Bernice took the repeater from Rosheen and tossed her the laser pistol in exchange.
‘There's always a chance,’ she told Rosheen.
‘Now get under cover.’
They ran for the shelter of a large chunk of dislodged temple that had fallen a few metres away.
Loud blasts echoed up from the valley below.
‘They can't have seen us already,’ said Rosheen.
Bernice popped her head over the rock.
Pink bolts were rattling randomly about the area.
‘I don't think they did,’ she called down to Rosheen.
‘The idea seems to be to blast everything in sight.’
Rosheen slumped down helplessly.
‘This is it, then,’ she said.
‘We might as well face it.’
‘No way,’ Bernice shouted bitterly.
‘I've lived too much to die like this.
Even if they get me, I'll go down fighting.’
‘What's the point?’ screamed Rosheen.
‘A good question,’ shouted Bernice as she examined the firing systems.
‘Philosophers have been pondering it for thousands of years.’
She leapt over the rock with one smooth movement and landed in a cat like crouch, weapon raised.
‘Hanging about waiting to die is not my idea of a good answer!’
‘Visual sighting of parasite at grid mark four by five,’ called the Environments Officer from his new position in the tank designated as the replacement command vehicle.
‘Destroy it!’ ordered Jinkwa.
The forward screen zoomed in on the slight figure of the target.
Jinkwa noted with pleasure that it was the female he and the General had encountered near that strange blue object.
He really was getting better at telling the difference between the ridiculous creatures.