

Social policy and inequality
Inequality has always been a politically contested issue for it is related to the distribution of power and resources in society.
What is theoretically and politically interesting and puzzling is not that it has been defended by the powerful and the better-off sections of the community but that it has been so widely accepted by those who suffer as a result of its continuance.
The concern here is not about inequalities which are natural but about inequalities which are socially determined.
In the past, most inequalities were seen as natural and were defended as such.
Today many inequalities are increasingly seen as socially determined and their defence has become both more difficult and more sophisticated.
The defence of wealth inheritance and of income inequalities, for example, is no longer based on some natural or divine right but on social science theories which explain inequality as the result of a trade-off with efficiency, economic growth and prosperity.
It is this retreat from natural to social justifications of inequality that provides some hope for egalitarians in the future.
As it was pointed out in the previous chapter, the reconstruction and expansion of the social services during the last war were dominated by one central principle: universality.
It was generally believed that if services were made available free to all, then they would be used by everyone who needed them.
Universality became identified with equality.
Indeed, the various government White Papers that preceded the reorganisation of individual social services gave implicit support to this feeling of vague egalitarianism stemming out of universalism.
Thus the impression was created that social services would gradually reduce inequalities in British society.
It was never made clear, however, how  this was to happen or indeed what kind of equality would result from universal social service provision.
Even though both the Labour and the Conservative Parties supported universal social service provision all through the 1950s and 1960s, they were divided on the issue of equality.
Brittan correctly observed in the late 1960s that there were no differences between left and right in British politics on most important domestic issues, except ‘around the concept of ‘equality’.
But even on this issue, party political differences were not absolute, as Beckerman pointed out.
‘Even with respect to the equality issue there will still only be a difference of degree; the Conservatives might not want the income distribution to become far less equal than it is, and the Labour Party might not want complete equality of income distribution.’
In brief, then, the two main parties have adopted rather different philosophical stands in relation to equality though this does not mean that they have translated these into practical policies when in government.
It is a political scenario that has not proved at all helpful to the cause of equality.
The practice of consensus politics has meant no determined action against inequalities by any Labour government.
In one sense, social services inevitably reduce inequalities.
In an influential paper, Marshall argued that social services have brought about
a general enrichment of the concrete substance of civilized life, a general reduction of risk and insecurity, an equalization between the more and the less fortunate at all levels — between the healthy and the sick, the employed and the unemployed, the old and the active, the bachelor and the father of the large family.
Equalization is not so much between classes as between individuals within a population which is now treated for this purpose as though it were one class.
Marshall is referring to the reduction of horizontal rather than vertical inequalities.
There is a great deal of truth in this general argument; inequalities of this kind have been reduced.
The concern of this chapter, however, is with vertical inequalities — between social classes, ethnic groups and the sexes.
More emphasis will be given to social class inequalities, partly because they are more adequately documented and partly because they partially account for ethnic and sex inequalities.
In order to give some structure to the discussion, each of the major social services will be examined under three headings: access, i.e. geographical distribution of social services; use, i.e. the extent to which different groups make use of services; and outcome, i.e. the benefit derived from the use of services.
An attempt will also be made to look at changes in the years since the last war  in order to establish long-term trends, if any.
The difficulties are obvious: lack of adequate data over the period and, more importantly, the thorny issue of cause and effect.
An improvement or deterioration in the health conditions of a group in society may be due to factors other than access to or use of medical services.
Similar problems apply to education and, to a lesser extent, to the other social services.
Education
The degree of access to any social service can be measured in terms of either equality or equity.
An equal distribution takes into account only the size of the population groups that are being compared, while an equitable distribution takes into account the varying needs for the service of the groups as well.
Webster and Stewart had this in mind, even though the terms they used were evenness and fairness, when they pointed out that an ‘uneven distribution…may be regarded as ‘fair’ if the variation is related to need.
Conversely a distribution which is identified as even…may be extremely unfair.’
The same comments apply to the issue of use of the social services, too.
Most of the discussion on variations in access to schooling has concentrated on provision in the inner city areas.
The adverse position of children living in these areas in the 1960s was abundantly documented by major government reports.
Thus the Newsom Report, which examined secondary schooling for children of average or less than average ability, concluded that the proportion of schools in slum areas which were seriously inadequate was twice as high as the proportion of all schools in the sample.
Similarly, the Plowden Report for primary schools concluded that schools in deprived urban areas ‘are quite untypical of schools in the rest of the country’.
They were older, more overcrowded, less well furnished, more depressing, and so on.
In brief, both the quantity and quality of schooling in inner city areas in the 1960s was inferior to that in the rest of the country.
These are, of course, areas of high working class and minority group concentration.
Successive governments have, as expected, deplored this state of affairs but have not done anywhere near enough to remedy it.
The relationship between the socio-economic character of a local authority (L.A.) and its expenditure on education is a crucial issue but it has not received adequate research attention.
Midwinter's examination of government data concluded that the pupil-teacher ratio of rich L.A.s was no better than that of poor L.A.s.
Boaden's examination of L.A. expenditure on education reached the conclusion that ‘it is the poor authorities who spend most, despite their relative poverty,’ because they are run by Labour councils which are more favourably  disposed towards high expenditure on education than Conservative councils.
Byrne and Williamson, however, in their study of eleven L.A.s in the North-East, concluded slightly differently:
Those authorities with a high proportion in low social classes resident within their area both devote a higher proportion of their income to education than do authorities with higher social class constituencies, and spend their money on primary education rather than secondary education; the reverse being true of ‘high social class’ authorities.
Support for this comes from a more recent analysis of local education authority expenditure by Howiek and Hassani.
In relation to primary education, they found considerable variation, with the most generous authority spending 70 per cent more than the lowest authority.
London boroughs spent more than other metropolitan boroughs, which in turn spent more than county authorities.
Moreover, they found ‘that spending does tend to be higher in areas suffering from adverse conditions; and that such high spending is associated with inner city deprivation (immigrants, overcrowding, and one-parent families) rather than with traditional working class areas (unskilled workers and large families)’.
For secondary education, similar variations were found, with the highest spending authority surpassing the expenditure of the lowest by 60 per cent.
They found the same general correlation between socio-economic variables and level of expenditure as in primary education.
There were, however, a number of variables other than positive discrimination policies, which accounted for this relationship.
The result was that ‘only in London is there convincing evidence that educationally disadvantaged pupils are likely to receive slightly higher expenditure.’
They also found a tendency for Labour-controlled councils to spend more on education than Conservative councils but with a number of exceptions to this tendency.
There is no evidence to show what the position was at the end of the last war but in all probability there has been an improvement over the years.
Equalising educational provision for children of different socio-economic backgrounds does not do away with the educational disabilities of working class children vis-à-vis middle class children.
What is required is a policy of allocating resources in such quantity and quality in favour of working class or ethnic minority groups as will enable them to have the same effective equality of opportunity in schools as middle-class children.
In other words, what is needed is not only an equal but an equitable geographical distribution of educational resources.
What then of the use made of schools by the various socio-economic  groups?
The most striking feature of the post-war period has been the increase of use of educational establishments by all socio-economic groups.
This remarkable growth in the use of schools masks some equally remarkable differences between the social classes.
The raising of the compulsory school-leaving age, first to 15 and then to 16, and the expansion of further education account for the growth in education.
This, however, should not be confused with increased equality.
Inequalities of use in the crucial aspects of schooling have changed very little over the years.
Even within the compulsory school age, inequalities have remained.
Thus the proportion of secondary school children going to grammar schools has always been positively related to social class.
The recent introduction of comprehensive schools appears to have made little difference to the kind of schooling that children from different socio-economic backgrounds receive.
Streaming within comprehensive schools is common practice and the evidence available shows that children from professional backgrounds are far more likely to be in the top streams than working class children.
Streaming seems to operate as much on class lines as the old division between grammar schools on one hand and the rest of secondary schools on the other.
Table 3.1 gives a picture of the situation today in relation to social class and school attendance.
It shows that the children of the higher socio-economic groups are more likely than their working-class counterparts to attend nursery schools, as well as independent schools, at both the primary and the secondary school stage.
The vast majority of children, however, are educated in state schools — at least 93 per cent of primary children and 92 per cent of secondary children.
The proportion of young people staying on at school between the crucial ages of 16 and 19 has always been heavily weighted towards the upper classes.
The government reports of the 1950s amply documented the wastage of ability among working-class children.
The first report in 1954 showed how the advantageous position of children from professional family backgrounds increased with age, while the second report in 1959 demonstrated not only that ‘the available resources of men (and presumably also of women) of high ability are not fully used by the system,’ but that this wastage was highest among men of the lower socio-economic groups.
As late as 1975, the proportion of young people in grammar schools between the ages of 16 and 19 was 14 per cent for the professional group and only 1 per cent for the unskilled manual group.
The same picture emerges from the study by Halsey et al., as Table 3.2 shows.
The proportion of young people from classes I and II staying on at school until the age of 18 or later increased by 2.4 times between the first and the last cohort, while the corresponding proportions for the other two groups of classes are 2.3 and 2.1 times.
Classes I and II have taken greater advantage of educational expansion than have Halsey's other social groupings.
These socio-economic differences in school-leaving age are not due entirely to IQ differences.
Thus Douglas found in the early 1960s that even among the most able, working-class pupils were more likely to leave school early than middle-class pupils with the same IQ scores.
Interestingly enough, he found that the wastage of ability was lower in regions like Wales, where the provision of grammar school places was relatively high.
It seems as if the lower the competition for places, the greater the likelihood of working-class children staying on or perhaps not being pushed out.
As mentioned, socio-economic inequalities in the use of private schools are very marked.
What is more unexpected is that such inequalities have increased over the years.
Halsey and his associates show that while about 50 per cent of the pupils in private primary schools were from the professional class in the age cohorts 50–59 and 30–39 years, the corresponding proportion for the youngest age cohort, 20–29 years, was almost 70 per cent.
A similar trend applies to private secondary schools, since 70 per cent of children in HMC secondary schools are recruited from private primary schools.
Looking at all selective schools together — grammar, direct grant and private — little change in inequalities has taken place over the years spanned by Halsey's study.
As Halsey concludes ‘the likelihood of a working class boy receiving a selective education in the mid-fifties and mid-sixties was very little different from that of his parents’ generation thirty years earlier.’
Inequality of use naturally continues and sharpens at the university stage.
Over the years, the picture is one of both remarkable growth and of entrenched class inequalities.
During the forty-year period covered by Halsey's study, the proportion of university students from classes I and II increased 3.7 times, from classes III, IV and V 4.2 times, and for   classes VI, VII and VIII only 3.4 times.
Though Halsey's figures reach only up to the mid-1960s, other data show that the expansion of universities from the late 1960s onwards has not benefited the working class as much as the professional classes.
The reasons for this are difficult to establish but it may well be that the university expansion coincided with an even greater expansion of candidates with A levels, with the result that competition for university places did not ease.
The annual returns of the Universities Central Council for Admissions show that, if anything, a greater proportion of students was recruited from professional backgrounds in 1979 than in 1969, even after taking into account demographic changes, as Table 3.4 shows.
The reductions in university places introduced by the Conservative government in the early 1980s are likely to widen even further the gap between the higher and the lower socio-economic groups among the student population.
We now turn to examine briefly the influence of sex on the use of schools.
The first report on the wastage of ability in the early 1950s provided abundant evidence that girls, particularly those from lower socio-economic backgrounds, left school earlier than boys of similar class position.
The situation has improved substantially since then and girls have achieved parity with boys as far as staying on at school.
The changes in relation to women's use of higher education, however, are less straightforward and perhaps less encouraging for women and egalitarians.
The ratio of girls to boys going to university fluctuated from 70 per cent in 1925; 50 per cent in 1937; 47 per cent in 1950; 50 per cent in 1960; 66 per cent in 1973; and it has remained at that level since.
The position of the two sexes has been the exact opposite in relation to further education, and to teacher training.
In both these areas of higher education women have always outnumbered men.
The ratio of boys to girls going on to further education was 50 per cent in 1925, and 63 per cent in 1978.
The figures for teacher training were   32 per cent and 26 per cent respectively.
In brief, sex inequalities in relation to university education have narrowed far more than socio-economic inequalities.
There are, however, still substantial differences between the subjects followed in universities and polytechnics, with men far outnumbering women in the science subjects.
The position of ethnic minorities with regard to the use of education services is predictable.
Their concentration in the inner city areas where educational provision is generally inferior, as well as the fact that a higher proportion than the British-born is to be found in unskilled and semi-skilled occupations, inevitably mean that their children do less well at schools at all levels.
Thus the government enquiry into the educational achievements of West Indian and Asian children in 1978–9 in six local education authorities with high concentration of ethnic minorities showed that West Indian children were under-achieving in relation to other children.
As Table 3.5 shows, the proportion of West Indian children that passed one or more A levels was at least six times lower than that of other children, while the proportion that went on to university was three times lower.
Asian children performed just as well as other children in the six local education authorities but their admission rate to university was almost half of the corresponding figure for school leavers in all the state schools in England.
How does one measure the outcomes of education?
One can refer, of course, to the intellectual enrichment of individuals and of society but such a criterion is not amenable to quantification.
One is therefore, of necessity, confined to such outcomes as income, type of occupation, reading and writing achievements, and the passing of examinations, all of which are quantifiable to a lesser or greater extent.
Where children attend different types of schools, it is to be expected that their school attainments will differ.
But even where children attend the same type of school, the available evidence shows that school attainments vary by socio-economic group from a very early age.
The National Child Development Study, which looked at the progress of every child born in Great Britain in one week of 1958, found ‘a strong association between social class and reading and arithmetic attainment at seven years of age.
The chances of an unskilled manual worker's child being a poor reader are six times greater than those of a professional worker's child.’
There is no evidence to show whether such differences have changed over the years.
There is evidence, however, to show that these differences in school attainment at age 7 do not decrease, but rather increase as children get older.
As far as passing examinations is concerned, the obvious applies.
The proportion of children passing Ordinary and Advanced level examinations is positively correlated with social class.
Halsey and his associates provide abundant evidence in support of this over the years.
They attribute it to the class differences in staying on at school and they point to the similarity in performance of working-class candidates who do take public examinations with other candidates.
‘The relatively few working  class survivors to O and A level competed on equal terms with their classmates from professional and white collar families.’
But they do not provide detailed evidence about the number and grades of O and A level passes by children of different socio-economic groups.
This is very important for it can decide acceptance or rejection by universities and other higher education establishments.
Byrne makes this same point in relation to the apparent equalisation of examination results between the sexes.
She notes that a more detailed look at the results above shows that boys are more likely to obtain three A level passes than girls, even though the gap between them has narrowed over the years.
The social class bias in university entrance is not matched by a corresponding bias in university performance.
The study by Kelsall, Poole and Kuhn suggests that working-class students perform almost as well as other students.
The main difference is that working-class students are more likely to obtain an ordinary degree than other students, but ordinary degrees are, of course, awarded very rarely.
The human capital theory maintains that increased education raises the earning capacity of the individual and that this is reflected in the higher earnings of people with higher and further education.
The available statistical evidence bears out this crude relationship between years of education and earnings.
Thus government data for men in full time employment in 1977 shows that men with university education have earnings which are 55 per cent higher than those with basic schooling.
Further analysis of data shows that this is not due to either age or hours worked.
A similar picture emerges in the case of women except that women's earnings at all levels are only two-thirds of men's.
For both men and women, of course, the differences in real income between the university and the school group are greater than those shown by money income alone because of the better fringe benefits provided in professional and middle-class occupations.
The differences widen even further when account is taken of the more satisfying nature of professional occupations.
The relationship between education and earnings, however, is complicated by the influence of such other factors as intelligence and social class, and such personal qualities as motivation and perseverance.
Most of the evidence in this area is American and it is contradictory.
Becker's review of American data concluded that further education was significantly correlated with high earnings after taking into account both measured ability and social class background.
Bowles, however, concluded slightly differently from his review of American data: social class background was more important than years of schooling in deciding a person's earnings.
The study by Taubman and Wales of males in the top half of the IQ distribution in the United States concluded that for high school graduates ‘ability is a more important  determinant of the range of income distribution than is education.’
The same study also corroborated the finding of other studies that the status of the college attended, apart from the years of attendance, was closely related to future earnings.
Jencks, referring to income from all sources including work, concluded that when social class background and measured ability were taken into account, schooling had only a small effect on income.
He estimated that ‘an extra year of elementary or secondary schooling really boosts future income less than 4%; an extra year of college boosts it about 7% and a year of graduate school boosts it about 4%, There can be legitimate disagreement whether these figures indicate only a small effect of schooling on income.
Equally disputed is Jencks's other main conclusion that chance factors are crucial to income.
It is tempting to attribute an unwarranted significance to these factors because statistical correlations with the more measurable factors leave a certain proportion of income differences unexplained.
In a subsequent study, Jencks acknowledged that he may have under-estimated the contribution of education to earnings and anyway his conclusions were ‘premature’.
This brings him more in line with the findings of a British study by Psacharopoulos.
Using data from the General Household Survey for 1972 on 6,873 male employees and using a method of analysis similar, but not identical, to that of Jencks, Psacharopoulos found ‘that personal characteristics explain a higher fraction of earnings variance in the U.K. than in the U.S. and that education has a sizeable direct effect on income as well as an indirect effect through occupation’.
The general conclusions that can be drawn from these and other studies are, first, that it is not possible to separate fully the effects of education on earnings from those of other factors, particularly those of such abstract personal qualities as motivation, perseverance, ability to make decisions, etc.
Second, in so far as modern complex statistical studies can separate the influence of some of these factors, education is important, though not dominating.
Whether, of course, the association between education and earnings is due to the improved productivity of individuals or whether education acts simply as a form of credentialism, is an important debate but beyond the scope of this chapter.
Third, the effect of extra education on earnings decreases substantially beyond a certain advanced point.
In other words, after a certain point, education becomes more a form of consumption for the individual than a form of investment for increasing his earnings further.
Finally, has the substantial expansion of educational provision increased the chances of working-class youth, relative to those of other young people, of obtaining positions at the top end of the occupational ladder?
In other words, has it affected favourably their relative chances of upward social mobility?
Goldthorpe's recent study that covers the  social mobility records of the same age cohorts as those covered by Halsey reached conclusions that are strongly discouraging to egalitarians.
The overall rate of social mobility increased during the period but the chances of working-class youths reaching the top positions have not only been always lower than those of young people of higher socio-economic family backgrounds, but these differences have not changed over the years.
The second part of Table 3.6, moreover, shows that the chances of youth of working class backgrounds being found in working class occupations, relative to those of young people from higher socio-economic backgrounds, have increased over the years.
Goldthorpe's crisp conclusion is that ‘relative mobility rates…have remained generally unaltered; and the only trends that may arguably be discerned…are indeed ones that would point to a widening of differences in class chances.’
To summarise this section on education: substantial progress has been made in the last twenty years in relation to the reduction of sex inequalities in education.
Social class inequalities, however, remain as strong as ever despite the enormous growth in education provision and expenditure.
Children from working-class backgrounds have a greater need of education than other children if they are to compete on more equal terms in the labour market.
Yet the schools they attend are, on the whole, not as good in terms of status, teacher input and, sometimes, physical surroundings; they make less use of the educational system beyond the compulsory school stage; they are less likely to pass government examinations and go on to university; and they are far more likely to end up in manual occupations, just like their fathers and mothers.
All the available evidence also shows that these social class inequalities have declined very little or not at all, and, in some instances, they have increased over the years.
This is not unique to this country but it applies also to other advanced industrial societies.
It is for this reason that various commentators from different countries have argued that the path towards a more egalitarian distribution of income lies ‘outside rather than inside schools, in social and economic change, rather than in educational change’.
This is an issue to which we shall return in the final section of this chapter.
Health
The distinction between equity and equality in the distribution and use of social services is crucial to the debate on health inequalities.
The need that different socio-economic groups, age-groups, ethnic groups, males and females have for medical services differs because of their differing susceptibility and experience of morbidity and accidents.
An    equal distribution of medical services does not provide equitable opportunities for medical care to these different groups.
Only an unequal distribution that takes need into account can achieve the goal of effective equality of access to medical care.
The issue is further complicated by the lack of agreement on what constitutes illness and by the inadequacy of data.
The extent of illness has been measured in different ways, each of which has its strengths and weaknesses as an index of morbidity.
First, it has been measured by the extent of use made of the health services.
This approach has the advantage of providing detailed data about the nature and severity of illness in society, but it suffers from the obvious drawback that not everyone who is ill seeks or receives medical treatment and not everyone who seeks medical treatment is necessarily ill.
Second, mortality rates have sometimes been used as a proxy for morbidity rates.
Because this approach highlights the link between morbidity and mortality, it can direct attention to the improvement of the most crucial areas of the health services more than other approaches.
But it is clearly unsatisfactory because illnesses do not always lead to mortality, particularly during childhood and adult life.
Third, work absenteeism on account of illness has been used as an index of morbidity.
The weaknesses of this approach are that work absenteeism is under-reported in professional occupations, different jobs can be performed with different degrees of ill-health, attitudes to work can sometimes override states of ill-health, particularly of the minor type, and above all, a large proportion of the population is not in the labour force, so their illness goes totally unrecorded.
Fourth, the extent of illness in the wider society has sometimes been measured by intensive medical examination of small communities and invariably this approach highlights the iceberg of disease and uncovers far higher rates of illness than the other approaches.
Issues inevitably arise too over the representativeness of the relatively small samples which it is possible to involve in such studies.
Finally, morbidity rates can be calculated on the basis of data provided by national surveys of self-reported illness.
This approach has the advantage of taking into account the individual's perception of health but it suffers from a variety of weaknesses: certain stigmatising illnesses may be under-reported, the threshold of pain can vary between groups as well as between individuals, and the phrasing of questions can affect the outcome of such estimates.
Thus when the General Household Survey changed the wording of its questions in 1977 it uncovered far more self-reported ‘illness’, particularly among the higher socio-economic groups.
Since 1972, the General Household Survey has provided data on self reported morbidity every year and the discussion here is largely based on the evidence resulting from this survey.
The general conclusion that  emerges from the data over the years, apart from 1977–9 when the questions were altered, is that there is a strong correlation between social class and self-reported morbidity — a finding which is supported by the estimates made by studies using other methods.
A more detailed analysis of the General Household Survey data by Le Grand, taking into account age, sex and socio-economic group, found the correlation between socio-economic group and illness still valid, though weakened as Table 3.7 shows.
Thus the proportion of unskilled manual workers reporting longstanding illness or acute sickness was almost three times as great as that of the professional group.
When, however, age and sex are taken into account, the gap is narrowed to 170 per cent.
This correlation between low social class (or poverty) and illness is   neither unexpected nor new.
The causal relationship between the two, however, ‘is not unidirectional’, as Rein points out.
In other words, poverty can cause illness directly and indirectly, and vice-versa.
Nevertheless, in this two-way causal relationship, poverty is primarily a cause of illness and only secondarily its effect.
The way in which poverty causes illness is not merely through the lack of adequate material resources but also through the associated forms of employment and the culture that develops out of the material situation.
The distribution of medical services has always been both unequal and inequitable.
Beginning with the distribution of medical practitioners, a PEP report in 1944 found that it was ‘determined primarily by the income level or the rateable capacity of the locality’, and perceptively concluded that this disparity ‘is even more serious than it appears…because ‘under-doctored’ districts are usually also poor districts with high rates of sickness and mortality’.
The policy adopted by successive governments has been to encourage general practitioners to practise in under-doctored areas through a series of positive and negative measures.
Four types of areas were created for general practice: designated areas where the size of G.P. lists were the highest through to intermediate and restricted areas where G.P. list sizes were the lowest.
Doctors were encouraged through financial incentives to practise in designated areas and they were normally refused permission to start practices in restricted areas.
Butler's examination of this policy from 1952 to the 1970s shows that the differences between the average list size of the four different areas have declined, but only slightly over the years and with a number of upward and downward fluctuations.
He attributes these changes, however, not so much to the positive or negative measures of successive governments, but rather to changes in the total supply of doctors.
‘It would be consistent with the data’, he writes, ‘and defensible on logical grounds to argue that the growth and decline in the designated areas merely reflects, after an appropriate time lapse, the gains or losses to the total stock of G.P.s in the country.’
Moreover, doctors tend to practise in their home area or in the area of the medical school where they trained.
A number of studies have looked at the geographical distribution of doctors both in regions and in smaller districts.
Cartwright's study in the early 1960s showed that doctors practising in middle-class areas not only had smaller lists of patients than their colleagues in working-class areas but they were also better trained and they had better contacts with hospitals.
West and Lowe concluded from their analysis of data in the fourteen hospital board regions in England and Wales that the provision of GPs and health visitors in the region was negatively correlated with such indicators of need as infant mortality rate, stillbirth rate and birth rate to mothers aged 15–19 years.
Hart's   comparison of medical care provision in poor industrial areas and in affluent areas led him to conclude that there was an ‘inverse care law’ in the matching of medical resources with medical needs, i.e. ‘the availability of good medical care tends to vary inversely with the need of the population served.’
What is more important is the distribution of general practitioners within geographical units that are smaller than regional areas.
A study by Skrimshire of three council housing estates of different socio-economic structures concluded that there were differences in medical care provision not only between middle-class and working-class areas but also between solidly working-class and socially mixed areas:
The provision of health care and the subjective experience of seeking that care are all partly determined by the socio-economic structure of society on an area basis, so that a working class person is at a greater disadvantage if he lives in a predominantly working class area than if he lives in a socially mixed area.
Inner city areas and particularly those in London, according to the Acheson Report, have inferior medical care services in terms of both numbers of general practitioners and surgery facilities, despite the fact that these are the areas with the greatest need — higher morbidity, accident and suicide rates.
The picture in relation to class inequalities in the geographical distribution of hospitals is even less encouraging than it is in the case of general practitioners.
Before 1948, the provision of hospitals was the responsibility of various statutory and voluntary bodies, with the result that their geographical distribution reflected a variety of factors  other than need.
As the Minister of Health stated in the House of Commons, when introducing the National Health Services Bill, this maldistribution was one of the main reasons for reform.
Our hospital organisation has grown up with no plan, with no system; it is unevenly distributed over the country and indeed it is one of the tragedies of the situation that very often the best hospital facilities are available where they are least needed.
The formula adopted for financing hospitals after the reorganisation of the health services in 1948, however, was such that existing geographical inequalities inevitably continued.
It was, therefore, not unexpected when Cooper and Culyer found in 1970 that regional hospital inequalities had persisted over the years and in some instances were in fact increasing.
Further studies in the mid-1970s have shown that the situation has not changed.
Thus Noyce et al.found a negative, though not highly significant, correlation between infant mortality on one hand and spending on community health services and hospital services on the other; more important, they found a strong positive correlation between social class and both kinds of spending.
In their words, ‘if one knew no other facts, it would be possible to explain two-thirds of the variation in community health expenditure by a knowledge of what proportion of the population in each region were managers, employers, or professional workers.’
Moreover, ‘hospital expenditure was positively correlated both with the expenditure of executive councils and with that of health authorities.’
In other words, inequalities in hospital provision compounded inequalities in the provision of doctors.
As with the provision of doctors, so with the provision of hospital resources inequalities increase at the local as compared to the regional level.
Buxton and Klein's study found that in the early 1970s local variations within a region were greater than between regions.
Indeed, in some local areas, hospital provision was so low that ‘it is doubtful whether some…can be considered to be offering a comprehensive service,’ and for most people, most of the time, it is provision at the local rather than the regional level which really matters.
During the 1970s, governments have made several attempts to rectify the geographical inequalities of hospital provision.
The report of the Resource Allocation Working Party in 1976 is the latest and boldest attempt so far.
Maynard's and Ludbrook's analysis of hospital revenues during the three years 1977–80 suggest that the most deprived regions ‘have made substantial gains’ at the expense of other regions.
This trend, moreover, has not been halted by the recent government cuts in public expenditure.
Thus the fund allocations for 1982–3 to the  four regions with the best hospital provisions — South-West Thames region, South-East Thames, North-East Thames and North-West Thames — were the lowest among the fourteen hospital regions in the country, while the fund allocations to the regions with the worst hospital provisions — Northern, North-Western, Trent — were among the highest.
Turning now to the use of medical services and beginning with general practitioners, the picture is, as might be expected, fairly complicated.
A crude analysis of the use of doctors by the various socio-economic groups shows, for both males and females, either a similar or a lower use by the semi-skilled and unskilled groups than other groups.
If, however, estimates are made which take into account need for medical care, then the association between use of doctors' services and socio-economic group becomes stronger.
Need is defined as self reported illness and the data are derived from the General Household Survey.
Table 3.9 is indicative of the findings of many other studies.
Two main conclusions can be drawn: the lower socio-economic groups, both males and females, make less use of the general practitioners than the higher socio-economic groups, bearing in mind the need for such services.
Second, women of all socio-economic groups make greater use of general practitioners than men, again relative to need.
Taking into account need for doctors' services does not get round the problem that ‘many of those with restricted activity may not visit a G.P. whereas others may visit a G.P. for reasons other than restricted activity.’
A special analysis of the General Household Survey data for 1973–5, relating to those who reported restricted activity or long-standing illness who went to a GP specifically for that illness, showed  greater socio-economic inequalities among men.
As one would expect, people who consider themselves ill are more likely to visit their doctor than the population in general and hence the consultation rates of Table 3.10 are higher than those of Table 3.9.
In contrast to Table 3.9, Table 3.10 shows higher consultation rates by the lower socio-economic groups, but the Black Report points out that this can only be a tentative conclusion because of the problematic nature of the data on which the table is based.
The complicated nature of this debate is also shown by the fact that analysis of General Household Survey data for 1974 by Klein and Collins reached results which disagree somewhat with the findings reported so far.
They found that of those males who reported acute sickness or chronic sickness without any limiting effect on activity, a larger proportion of the lower than the higher socio-economic groups consulted their doctors; there was no consistent trend in the case of the females.
This finding, however, conceals the fact that working-class males in these two categories of illness are likely to visit their doctor to obtain sickness certificates — a procedure which is not so necessary for professional employees who receive sick pay from their employers.
Thus what appears to be a contradictory finding does not, in fact, negate the consistent findings of other studies.
It is difficult to provide any comparable data over the last thirty years and though the general impression is one of slight reduction in socio-economic inequalities in GP consultation, this should not be  taken for granted.
Thus Walters's analysis of government data for 1949 and 1951 concluded that different conclusions could be reached depending on the measure of morbidity adopted.
When consultation rates are matched against incapacity rates, there is evidence that lower income patients under-utilise G.P. services….
If, on the other hand, we take prevalence rates as the most valid index of morbidity…then consultation rates for both years suggest equality of access, or even an under-utilisation of physicians by middle class patients.
Data on consultation rates conceal as much as they uncover.
They raise questions about the reasons as well as about the quality of such consultations.
For a variety of reasons, working-class employees are more likely to call on their doctors to sign certificates for absence from work than middle-class employees.
In her analysis of such data, Blaxter observed that ‘middle class consultations have a higher clinical content and working class a higher administrative one.’
Cartwright and O'Brien found that doctors spent more time and discussed more problems with middle-class than with working-class patients.
They also tended to know their middle-class patients better and communicated with them better than with their working-class patients.
Backett noted that doctors were more likely to refer upper-class patients than working-class patients to hospital for treatment both for non-terminal and terminal nursing cases.
Cartwright found that G.P.s were more likely to visit their middle-class patients than working-class patients in hospital.
In brief, several studies have shown that, in a variety of ways, the upper socio-economic groups receive a better service than the lower socio-economic groups when they visit their general practitioner.
This is not an unexpected finding: it is merely a reflection of the fact that the higher socio-economic groups have material and cultural circumstances similar to GPs, a fact which makes interaction between them easier and more meaningful.
Before examining the use made of hospitals, it is important to look at the use made of preventive services in the community.
There is abundant evidence from a number of studies which shows that, apart from health visitors, these services are used more by the higher socio-economic groups.
Cartwright found that the lower socio-economic groups made less use of such local health services as ante-natal clinics or family planning clinics.
Inevitably, unintended pregnancies were more prevalent among the same groups.
Brotherston's data for Scotland showed that working-class mothers were not only less likely to attend ante-natal clinics than middle-class mothers, but that when they did they were also less likely to make  early bookings — a fact which he considers relevant to infant mortality.
Equally important are the findings that attendance at post-natal clinics is also associated with social class.
Of particular significance is the implication that vaccinations and immunisations for young children must be affected.
Thus the National Child Development Study which covered all children born during a week in 1958 found that at the age of 7 years there was a far higher proportion of children from the lower socio-economic groups who had not been immunised against smallpox, polio and diphtheria.
Only health visitors appear to visit mothers from different socio-economic groups alike.
The study by Butler and his associates is the most important in this area because they found not only that health visiting favoured no one class but also when a more sensitive analysis of the data was made that took account of over-crowding, house amenities, parental education, as well as father's occupation, they found that the lower socio-economic groups received more health visiting.
As far as the use of hospitals is concerned, a distinction must be made between out-patients and in-patients.
The General Household Survey has been collecting data on out-patient use, though not publishing them.
Analysis of these data for the period 1974–7 ‘suggests that there are no systematic class gradients in outpatient attendance for either males or females.’
Local studies, too, seem to confirm this finding.
Thus Morgan et al.found no association between social class and people attending the accident and emergency department of three hospitals in the Newcastle area.
Data on admission to hospital is not comprehensive but they suggest that admission rates rise with declining social class.
The Scottish data are the most recent and most reliable and they show that the lower socio-economic groups are more likely to be both admitted to hospital and to stay longer than the higher socio-economic groups.
These findings are in line with those of an earlier study for England and Wales which showed that the mean number of days professionals stayed in hospital was about two-thirds that of unskilled workers who also had higher admission rates (see Table 3.11).
There is, on the other hand, evidence which shows that middle-class patients are more likely than working-class patients to be treated in teaching hospitals, where the standards of service are higher than in ordinary hospitals.
More information is needed about the composition of the hospital population in terms of socio-economic background, sex, length of stay, age, quality of care received, and so on.
To sum up the position so far: expenditure on the health services has increased substantially since the last war and with it the volume, range and quality of the health services.
The geographical distribution of both doctors and hospitals has remained in favour of the upper socio-economic groups with only very slight modifications.
The position in relation to the use of medical services by the various socio-economic   groups is as follows: the higher socio-economic groups make more use of most of the preventive local services; the same, also, applies for the use of doctors; the reverse, however, is the case in relation to the use of hospitals.
In brief, social class inequalities in access and use of the health services have remained either unaltered or slightly reduced but they have not increased over the years since the last war.
What, then, is the situation in relation to our third dimension of inequality, i.e. outcome?
The outcomes resulting from the use of health services are many and they include the following: reduction of pain, improvement of health, reduction of illness and reduction of mortality rates.
Pain is difficult to define and measure and the thresholds of pain tolerance have been lowered over the years.
Health is as hazy a concept as pain and, as the Royal Commission on the National Health Service pointed out, ‘the state of health of individuals ranges from the ideal through different degrees of illness and disability to the brink of death.’
Illness is, as already pointed out in this section, more amenable to definition and measurement than either pain or health.
There are, however, no reliable statistics relating to social class and illness over the years.
We are, therefore, left with mortality rates: there are obviously no definitional problems and there are no major problems in relation to data.
Mortality rates, however, are a very weak proxy of the benefit people received from the use of medical services.
Before looking at the relationship between mortality rates and social class over the years, it is worth referring to some evidence which suggest that similar medical care benefits upper-class patients more than their lower-class counterparts.
The study of hospital patients by Ferguson and MacPheal concluded as follows: ‘The ex-patients who showed the heaviest mortality at early ages, the strongest tendency to relapse and the poorest record in point of early return to work were the   group of unskilled labourers.’
The relationship between social class and mortality rates is clearly brought out in Tables 3.12 and 3.13.
For both adult and infant mortality rates, two trends are clearly discernible: there has been a substantial reduction in mortality rates for all socio-economic groups; the reduction, however, has been more substantial for the upper socio-economic groups with the result that socio-economic inequalities have widened over the years.
Sex has also been an important variable because mortality rates for women have declined faster than those for men.
The impact of social class has, however, been the same on the mortality rates of both sexes.
Whatever the reasons for this trend may be, it cannot be anything else but discouraging to egalitarians.
Why, then, have differences in socio-economic mortality rates  widened over the years?
It is helpful to look at this question separately for infants, for children and for adults.
The Black Report produced evidence which showed that during the first year of life, illness, rather than accidents, is the main cause of death.
We need, therefore, to answer two questions for infant mortality rates: why do working-class infants suffer more from ill-health than middle-class infants (assuming that this is correct) and why do more die when ill?
Babies of working class mothers are more likely to suffer from illness than middle-class babies for a variety of reasons: the mother's health and style of living, particularly whether she smokes heavily; the mother's diet; the mother's type of employment during the late stages of pregnancy; housing conditions, particularly heating; the use of ante-natal clinics by the mother during pregnancy.
All these conditions make for a higher incidence of illness among working-class than middle-class babies.
Baby illness does not, of course, always lead to death.
But the likelihood of this happening is higher among the lower socio-economic groups because of their worse housing conditions, their lower use of post-natal clinics, their heavier family responsibilities, and so on.
During early childhood (1–4 years) accidents and illness are about equally important as causes of death.
The Black Report summed up the position as follows: ‘Among 1–4 year olds…almost all the differences in mortality rate between social class I and V are due to: accidents, poisoning and violence; respiratory disease; and congenital abnormalities.,–During late childhood (5–14 years) accidents rather than illness are the major cause of death.
Children of working-class parents are more prone to accidents than other children for a variety of reasons: inadequate housing conditions; tendency to play in the street because of lack of space at home; less parental supervision; and so on.
In adulthood (15–64 years) accidents and illness are equally important as causes of death.
Some types of accidents — industrial — and some types of illness — diseases related to smoking — affect working-class people more than others.
In brief, there is enough evidence to show that the ways in which ill health and accidents arise are such that the lower socio-economic groups suffer more than the higher socio-economic groups.
In addition, the access and use of the medical services reinforce rather than counteract this tendency.
It is, therefore, not unexpected that mortality rates are higher among the lower socio-economic groups.
What is puzzling is why these inequalities have widened over the years.
Whatever the answer to this may be, the general policy conclusion that can be drawn is that making access and use of medical services more equitable will reduce certain aspects of class inequalities in morbidity and mortality but will not do away with them or reduce them substantially.
Housing
Government policies since the last war have never been concerned directly with reducing social class inequalities in housing.
Even during the immediate post-war days, the White Paper on housing made no references to any kind of equality in the way that the White Papers on education and health did.
It simply declared that the government's two aims were, first, ‘to afford a separate dwelling for every family which desires to have one’, and, second, ‘to provide for the rapid completion of the slum clearance and overcrowding programmes’.
The government intended to achieve the first aim primarily through council housing, relegating privately-built housing to a secondary position.
Thus, during the late 1940s, five of every six newly-built dwellings were council houses or flats and they were allocated according to need rather than according to income.
This is not the place to review housing policy since the war, except to note that market criteria asserted themselves again during the 1950s under the Conservative governments and were accepted by the Labour government in the mid-1960s.
Increasingly, privately-built housing for owner-occupation was seen as the norm while council housing was seen as necessary for the low-paid only.
The Labour government's White Paper in 1965 echoed the views of its Conservative predecessor:
The expansion of the public programmes now proposed is to meet exceptional needs; it is born partly of a short-term necessity, partly of the conditions inherent in modern urban life.
The expansion of building for owner-occupation on the other hand is normal; it reflects a long-term social advance which should gradually pervade every region.
The contrast with the Labour government's housing policy in the late 1940s could not have been more striking.
It is not surprising, therefore, that by the 1970s, more of the newly built dwellings were privately built.
The drive by the 1979 Conservative government to sell council houses to sitting tenants at preferential prices was a logical outcome of the assumption that council housing is really for the low-paid only.
Equally predictable is the fact that the vast majority of council tenants who have bought their houses are among the better-paid and live in the better housing estates.
Housing today is a commodity bought and sold primarily on profit considerations.
It differs from the other consumer goods in the private market in four ways.
First, a certain proportion of housing is built, allocated and administered by local authorities.
Even this type of housing, however, is not always allocated solely according to need and council tenants are expected to pay economic rents, i.e. rents that would be charged in the private market.
Second, governments play a more active role in influencing the volume of new housing as well as the quality and quantity of housing than they do in the case of other consumer goods.
Third, unlike most other consumer goods, government has accepted the responsibility of providing financial assistance to house-buyers and tenants through tax concessions, rent and rate rebates, and rent allowances.
Fourth, though the concept of a legal right to decent housing has not been fully accepted by government, local authorities are legally required to provide some type of shelter for most of the homeless.
In these four ways, housing differs from other consumer goods though it remains fundamentally a private market commodity.
Social class inequalities in housing will therefore be greater than they are in health or education.
Moreover, governments will be largely unconcerned with attempts at equalising housing distribution even though their policies will inevitably affect socio-economic and other inequalities in housing.
Social class inequalities in housing take many forms: tenure of housing, density of housing and housing amenities.
As expected, the association between social class and housing tenure is very strong.
While the majority of working-class people live in council or privately rented housing, the overwhelming proportion of the upper classes own or are buying their houses.
House ownership not only confers higher social esteem than council accommodation but it is also a more profitable form of investment, particularly during periods of high inflation.
Social class inequalities of tenure have widened over the years if the comparison is made between the unskilled and the professional groups.
They have remained stable, however, if a more general comparison is made between manual and non-manual groups, as Table 3.14 shows.
Privately-owned housing varies from the detached to the terraced and, for a variety of reasons, detached housing is the most expensive.
Market considerations would, therefore, dictate that among the owner occupiers, the upper socio-economic groups would not only be more likely to occupy detached housing than the lower socio-economic groups but that this disparity would be even wider than the one existing on simple tenure criteria.
Thus, while the professional group was almost four times as likely to own or be buying a house as the unskilled group, it was almost nine times as likely to own or be buying a detached house as the unskilled group in 1971.
Clearly, while an increasing proportion of the population have been buying their houses, working-class people have been buying the cheapest housing on the market.
As one would expect, a higher proportion of non-manual than manual workers buy their houses outright but the difference is small presumably because of the tax advantages involved in buying a house    through loans of various types.
Non-manual groups are more likely than manual groups to have loans from insurance societies and banks which involve greater tax concessions or lower interest rates than loans from building societies.
Local authority loans for house purchase are more likely to be made to manual groups and they tend to concentrate on the purchase of older dwellings.
Discussions which treat the working class as an undifferentiated group inevitably oversimplify what is a complex situation.
Not only are lower paid workers likely to occupy housing that is different in tenure from that of skilled workers but a certain proportion of the latter may occupy housing that is similar to that of the non-manual group adjacent to them.
Lansley's analysis of the housing tenure of the poorest 10 per cent of households shows that the proportion who are owner-occupiers remained the same, i.e. 25 per cent during the period 1953–73; the proportion living in local authority accommodation increased from 13 per cent to 45 per cent, and the proportion living in privately rented and other accommodation was halved from 62 per cent to 31 per cent .
This decline in the proportion living in privately rented accommodation also resulted in an improvement in the living conditions of the poorest section of the community — though it made the housing situation of some groups even more difficult as the pool of the cheapest and poorest accommodation shrank.
The risks of homelessness increased.
As was pointed out in the previous chapter, substantial progress has been made in reducing overcrowding, as of facially defined.
It follows that working-class people have benefited from this, but they are still more   likely to be overcrowded than non-manual groups.
As Table 3.15 shows, the proportion of unskilled workers living in overcrowded conditions is seven times greater than that of the professional group.
Vice versa, the proportion of the professional group living in grossly under-occupied housing is twice as great.
These are, however, general criteria and a more detailed analysis shows that overcrowding is much more common among privately rented, furnished accommodation, particularly in the city centres where lower working-class and ethnic groups congregate.
Official standards of overcrowding have been raised over the years with the result that comparisons become difficult.
Nevertheless, it is more than likely that socio-economic differences in crowding have been reduced since 1948 with the expansion of council housing.
It is clearly one area where government housing policies have had an equalising effect.
Nevertheless, this decline took place during the late 1940s and 1950s when council housing was increasing.
The position seems to have remained unaltered since the mid-1960s.
Thus Donnison provides figures which show that in 1962, 1 per cent of the professional households were living in overcrowded conditions, i.e. 1.50 persons per room, while the corresponding proportion for the unskilled was 7 per cent.
Contemporary official standards of crowding, however, still lag behind what is desirable for satisfactory child-rearing practices.
Children need space to play in the house and in the garden and rooms in which to study.
These housing criteria are far more closely associated with social class than the official housing density standards.
Thus Townsend's study showed that the percentages of households with insufficient internal play space for children was 1 per cent for the professional and managerial groups, 13 per cent for the other non manual groups, 24 per cent for the skilled workers and 31 per cent for the semi-skilled and unskilled workers.
A similar picture emerges when the housing amenities of the various socio-economic groups are examined.
Judged by the official criteria of availability of bath and W.C., the differences between the various socio-economic groups are small.
It is also evident from the available data that these differences have narrowed over the years.
Thus, while the proportion of professional households who had sole use of bath increased from 92 per cent in 1962 to 96 per cent in 1977, the corresponding proportions for the unskilled were 60 per cent and 89 per cent.
This has been due largely to the growth of council housing and perhaps to the improvement grants policy of successive governments particularly since 1969.
The latter, however, may also have had an adverse effect as many housing writers have pointed out.
Balchin's study of this policy in West London in the 1970s draws attention to the fact that though improvement grants raised the housing standard of low socio-economic neighbourhoods generally speaking, they did not only benefit  residents of the lower socio-economic groups.
The conversion of low income dwellings into owner occupied properties or high rent luxury accommodation has forced the poor to consume less housing space, often within the same borough and homelessness and council waiting lists are increasing — in part a consequence of rehabilitation.
This is part of the well-known process of gentrification of inner city working-class areas that improves the quality of housing but leads to the displacement of working-class residents by professional and other high-paid groups.
Differences between socio-economic groups, however, increase substantially when such modern housing amenities as central heating, telephone, freezer and the like are taken into account, as Table 3.16 shows.
The overall relative improvement of working-class housing standards masks the fact that a small proportion of inner city areas inhabited by working-class and immigrant residents contain a high proportion of inadequate housing.
Holtermann's analysis of data from the 1971 census using six indicators of inadequate housing showed that urban conurbations, particularly Clydeside and London, contained a disproportionate amount of inadequate housing.
Moreover, a small proportion of census enumeration districts, mainly in the inner parts of the large cities, contained an even greater proportion of inadequate housing, as   Table 3.17 shows.
These are also the areas with high infant mortality rates, child accidents, morbidity rates and low school attainment rates.
It is also worth remembering that since it is the older type of housing that lacks basic amenities, elderly people are more likely to live in such accommodation.
Thus, government data for England show that almost half of households in England where the head is over 65 lack at least one basic amenity — a figure that is nine times greater than the figure for the whole population.
Since women outlive men in substantial numbers, inadequate housing is more a problem for elderly women than for elderly men.
Furthermore, it is more than likely that it is the elderly of working-class background who are inadequately housed, rather than the elderly in general.
A similar situation exists in relation to one-parent families.
The Finer Report showed not only that housing conditions of one-parent families were worse than those of two-parent families, but also that those one-parent families headed by women were worse off than those headed by a man.
Other studies have shown that social class is as important a factor in the housing conditions of one parent families as it is in the two-parent families.
The adverse housing conditions of ethnic minorities are well known and not unexpected.
It is the result of their lower position in the occupational ladder, the pattern and timing of their migration, their family size and household structure, as well as the result of the discriminatory practices of British society.
Ethnic minorities suffer more than the general population from all the main housing disadvantages — overcrowding, sharing of dwellings, lacking basic amenities, older housing, etc., as Table 3.18 shows.
As expected, they are also less likely to own or to be buying their house, less likely to be living in council    accommodation and more likely to be renting furnished accommodation.
While all these comments are correct as generalisations, it needs to be remembered that, as Table 3.18 shows, there are also substantial differences in the housing conditions of the different ethnic minorities.
Housing is a basic need and it is therefore to be expected that the lower income groups will pay a higher proportion of their income to meet housing costs than the higher income groups, in spite of the fact that they live in less adequate accommodation.
Housing subsidies are far from egalitarian in their effects.
They take two main forms, each of which is designed to promote different goals: income tax relief for mortgage payments designed to promote house ownership, with the result that the higher the mortgage and the higher the salary, the greater the income tax relief received as well.
Rent and rate rebates have the opposite effect, i.e. they benefit more the low-paid.
Council tenants also receive an indirect subsidy as a result of the central government grants to local authorities for housing which enable them to set rents below the level that would otherwise have been needed.
The government's Green Paper on housing provided data which showed that the average amount of subsidy received by all local authority tenants, including rent rebates, was £69 in 1972–3 and £214 in 1975–6; income tax relief per mortgage was £76 and £174 respectively.
As expected, the data show that income tax relief is highly regressive in absolute terms but slightly progressive relative to one's income.
On the other hand, subsidies to local authority tenants are progressive in absolute as well as relative terms.
Clearly changes in interest rates and in government subsidies affect the relative benefit of the two main tenure groups.
Thus for 1981–2, the average tax relief was £335 while the average council house subsidy was £234.78.
Briefly, the available evidence shows that the benefit they confer on the various socio-economic groups changes according to government policies and they do not always give greater benefits to those living in council accommodation, as is often assumed.
In fact, the opposite is correct today.
That housing is unequally distributed today is obvious to all.
What is not so obvious is whether the vast sums of money that have been spent by central government and the local authorities on housing over the years have had much effect on reducing housing inequalities.
The provision of council housing has had an equalising effect both as regards reducing overcrowding and improving housing amenities among working-class people.
This, however, has to be seen in conjunction with the recent widespread public rejection of certain types of council housing — new tower blocks and old slum blocks of flats.
Rent subsidies have also benefited working class people more than non-working class groups in society.
Rate subsidies may be equally beneficial to all socio-economic groups but there is no doubt that mortgage income tax  relief has benefited the upper socio-economic groups far more than the lower socio-economic groups.
The overall effect of all these measures has been a reduction of inequalities in the basic standards of housing enjoyed by the various socio-economic groups.
The same claim, however, cannot be made in relation to the social aspects of housing — central heating, play space, garden, location of housing, garage, etc.
The social standards of housing reflect market criteria far more than the basic physical standards.
Clearly, the most direct way of reducing housing subsidies to the better-off sections of the community is the abolition of income tax relief on mortgages.
This may be a desirable policy from the egalitarian point of view, but it is not likely to lead directly to any substantial reduction of housing inequalities as the evidence from countries such as Canada, without mortgage tax relief, shows.
The basic reason for housing inequalities is income inequalities and as long as the latter exist, the former will do, too.
Employment and income
The way people earn their incomes has important implications for many other aspects of their life.
As Brown observes: ‘'What does he do?’ remains the most illuminating question to ask about someone met for the first time.’
The previous sections of this chapter have shown that the influence of social class on education, health and housing is both strong and lasting.
In this section an attempt is made to examine the impact of social policy on the costs and benefits accruing to different socio-economic groups from work and whether these have changed over the years.
Wherever possible, the relevance of the data to sex and ethnicity will also be discussed.
Unemployment, notice of redundancy, industrial discipline, hours of work and accidents are the main costs to be examined here.
There is abundant evidence from government and private research which shows quite clearly that manual workers, and particularly the unskilled, are more likely to suffer from both short-term and long-term unemployment than the non-manual groups.
There has been no change in this over the years.
The disparities in the rates of unemployment between socio-economic groups widen during periods of high unemployment.
The same applies to women and various ethnic groups.
During the 1970s, when unemployment rose substantially, women suffered relatively more than men, and ethnic minorities have suffered more than other workers.
The various government measures — regional policies, anti-discrimination legislation, etc. — have been far too weak to counter the impact of market forces that affect more adversely the industrially weak groups in society.
Not only are manual workers more threatened by unemployment than non-manual workers, but they are also given less time to find other employment.
Daniel's work in 1974 showed that though 50 per cent of managers and professionals were given at least three months' notice by their employers, the corresponding proportion for the unskilled was a mere 9 per cent.
Vice versa, the proportion given one week or less notice was 54 per cent for the unskilled and only 12 per cent for the professionals and managers.
Though data are not available, it may well be that socio-economic disparities were narrower in 1974 than before as a result partly of the Contract of Employment Act, 1963, which required employers to give their employees notice of one to four weeks according to length of service, and partly of the increased power of trade unions.
Industrial discipline has always been harsher for manual than non-manual workers.
Craig and Wedderburn showed that while almost all industrial workers have to clock in, almost all managers do not have to do so; while 90 per cent of workers had their pay reduced for lateness, none of the management employees suffered in the same way.
As Craig and Wedderburn conclude:
Discipline, therefore, tended to be stricter for manual workers than for staff, immediate penalties more severe, and the amount of discretion allowed both to the employees and their supervisors much more limited.
In the case of discipline, there was a heavy reliance upon the ‘rules’ to control manual workers; for staff there was personal consideration, even in some cases counselling and guidance.
Since no legislation has been passed to reduce socio-economic inequalities in industrial discipline and since trade union activity has not been concerned with such issues either, it is almost certain that little change has taken place in the years since this study.
It is more than likely that any changes in industrial discipline are related to the demand for labour, i.e. stricter discipline for workers during periods of high unemployment, and easier discipline at times of full employment or particular local or industrial labour shortages.
Manual workers have always worked longer hours than non-manual workers — 45.3 hours per week in 1976 compared with 38.5 hours for non-manual workers.
In spite of the decline in the number of average basic hours per week for manual workers from 46 in 1946 to 40 in 1970, the number of average actual hours which include overtime, declined only by one hour from 47½ to 46½ during the same period.
Overtime is very much a manual worker's way of increasing his basic wage.
Shift work is even more a manual group activity and the trend  has increased over the years.
Thus, a government report in 1970 concluded that, for the period 1954–68, ‘the underlying upward trend in the percentage of the manual labour force on shifts in manufacturing has been about 1 per cent per annum.’
Shift-work hours are not merely inconvenient but they can be disturbing to the functioning of the whole family.
As the same government report pointed out: ‘Shift work involves basic and far-reaching changes in the way of life of the individual and his family and the shift worker may also suffer the disadvantages of working considerable amounts of overtime….
Though government data on accidents at work do not distinguish between manual and non-manual workers, they differentiate according to industries.
A closer look at this data supports the obvious view that not only are there different rates of accidents among manual occupations but also that rates of accidents are higher in occupations with high proportions of manual than non-manual workers.
The rates of both fatal and other accidents have fluctuated over the years and it is not possible to reach any conclusions concerning long-term trends in socio-economic differences.
The picture on the costs and deprivations of work is fairly clear: manual workers suffer more than non-manual workers and the differences between the two groups appear to have changed little over the years.
We now turn to the economic benefits derived from work.
For the sake of convenience, these are divided into two groups: benefits derived directly from the workplace and benefits derived indirectly as a result of workplace participation.
The first includes earnings, occupational sick pay and retirement benefits, and holidays.
The second group includes the various social security benefits provided by the government.
The literature on the distribution of earnings is massive and no attempt will be made here either to summarise or evaluate it.
Rather, an attempt will be made to summarise the main trends that are relevant to the discussion.
The first clear trend is that the dispersion of gross earnings among male manual workers has changed very little during the last hundred years.
The wages structure has proved extremely rigid with the lowest decile of the distribution being at around two-thirds of the median wage, as Table 3.19 shows.
A similar picture emerges in relation to the distribution of gross earnings among female manual workers.
The second important trend has been the slight narrowing of the differentials between male and female workers in full-time occupation.
The median gross weekly earnings of women in full-time manual occupations was 50.2 per cent of those of men in manual occupations in 1906, 47.4 per cent in 1938, 53.5 per cent in 1960, 54.0 per cent in 1974 and 63.1 per cent in 1978.
A similar picture emerges from a comparison of the salaries of men and women in non-manual occupations — the   slight narrowing of the gap taking place during the last decade.
Third, the gap between the gross earnings of manual and non-manual workers has also narrowed slightly during recent years.
Thus the median wage of male manual workers as a proportion of the median wage of male non-manual workers was 80.6 per cent in 1968, and 85 per cent in 1978.
For female workers the corresponding proportions were 76.5 per cent and 87.5 per cent respectively.
A similar picture emerges if the gross earnings of the lowest decile of manual workers is compared with those of the highest decile of non-manual workers, i.e. if the two extremes of the earnings distribution are compared.
For male manual workers the proportion was 30.4 per cent in 1968 and 35.9 per cent in 1979; for women the corresponding proportions were 31.0 per cent and 38.3 per cent respectively.
A growing feature of the employment contract over the years has been the provision of occupational pension schemes for retirement and sickness.
Thus the number of employed persons covered by occupational retirement pensions increased from 2.6 million in 1936 to 4.4 million in 1956, 12.2 million in 1967, and fell slightly to 11.5 million in 1975.
The sexual and class inequalities in this form of retirement pension have always been substantial.
Women accounted for 19 per cent of all those covered in 1936 and 24 per cent in 1975.
Social class differences are equally stark: in spite of the fact that manual workers are the majority of the working population, they make up a small proportion of those covered by retirement pensions.
Moreover, their proportion has declined over the years despite an absolute rise in the number of people covered by retirement pensions, as Table 3.20 shows.
It is not, of course, mere coverage of pension schemes that distinguishes manual from non-manual groups.
The amounts that are paid in pension are higher for non-manual groups and the qualifying conditions are still more favourable though the qualifying conditions for manual workers have improved in recent years.
Occupational sick pay schemes have increased very substantially during the last twenty years.
A recent government survey showed that while in 1961 only 57 per cent of the total workforce in full-time employment was covered, the proportion increased to 73 per cent in 1970 and by 1974 it reached 80 per cent of men and 78 per cent of women in full-time employment.
As expected, there were occupational variations as well as social class variations.
Thus, while the proportion of both male and female non-manual workers in full-time employment covered exceeded 90 per cent, the corresponding proportion for male manual workers was about three-quarters and that for female manual workers was less than 60 per cent .
Moreover, manual workers tended to be paid benefits for shorter periods of time and they received smaller amounts than non-manual workers.
Over the years there has, however, been a narrowing of the difference in the coverage of manual and non-manual workers, though not necessarily in the generosity of the schemes.
Holidays with pay are another feature of the employment contract.
Data are not very adequate but they suggest that there has been a reduction of inequalities in this area even though the advantages of the non-manual over the manual groups are still substantial today.
Townsend's data shows that a higher proportion of the non-manual groups — 19 per cent— received paid holidays of five weeks or more compared to a very negligible proportion of the manual groups — 1 per cent .
This brief examination of the main benefits derived directly from  work leaves out the significance of various lesser benefits — cars, interest-free or low interest loans, subsidised lunches, private school fees assistance, expense allowances, etc.
The Royal Commission on the Distribution of Income and Wealth documented all these and showed that the higher an employee's wages or salary, the greater too is the benefit derived from such schemes, not only in absolute amounts but in relative terms as well.
Thus all the fringe benefits derived directly from work constituted an addition of 29 per cent to the top salaries compared with 18 per cent to the average salaries.
This agrees with the estimates arrived at by Townsend who concluded as follows:
Households of professional status had a mean non-asset income of 252% of that of households of unskilled manual status but the percentage rose to 369 when the annuitized value of assets was added and to 382 when the value of employer welfare benefits in kind was further added.
A person's entitlement to insurance benefits as well as the amount of benefit is linked to the person's work history.
Thus the payment of an adequate number of insurance contributions is a necessary prerequisite to both the entitlement to and the amount of benefit.
Though the available data on the contribution record of workers from different socio-economic groups is inadequate in several ways, it can be justifiably claimed that members of the lower socio-economic groups are more likely than members of the higher socio-economic groups to be among the non-qualifiers and, in the years when they existed, to be receiving lower-earnings-related benefits.
The degree to which this   applies varies from one type of benefit to another: it is highest for unemployment benefit followed by disability and retirement pensions in that order.
Table 3.21 gives a picture of the expenditure on the various social security benefits in Great Britain for 1980.
It is clear that expenditure on old people dominates all other items, followed by expenditure on the unemployed.
As Table 3.22 shows, entitlement to unemployment benefit among male workers decreased substantially during the late 1970s when the rate of unemployment was high.
The same table also shows that the proportion of women qualifying for unemployment benefit increased over the years so that it surpassed that of men.
This, however, is a misleading picture because many unemployed married women do not register with the employment exchanges because they do not qualify for any benefit.
Though the table does not differentiate according to social class, it is evident that a higher proportion of unemployed manual than non-manual workers are among those receiving unemployment benefit.
On the other hand, it is more than likely that those who do not qualify for unemployment benefit are disproportionately from the ranks of unskilled manual workers.
The majority of applicants qualify for sickness and disability benefit and it is to be expected that the proportion of manual workers receiving such benefits is higher than their corresponding proportion in the general population.
The opposite is the case for the non-manual groups.
It is simply a reflection of the incidence of disability and is not due to any unduly favourable treatment by the social security system.
Indeed, because of the insurance contribution condition, the opposite is the case, particularly in relation to the unskilled.
Table 3.23 below shows that the unskilled and the semi-skilled manual workers made up a higher proportion of those receiving sickness or invalidity benefit than their size as a population group warranted; the opposite was the case for the non-manual workers; while the skilled manual workers’ position as beneficiaries reflected their size as a group among the general population.
Sickness and disability mean not only varying rates of entitlement to social security benefits for different socio-economic groups but also different possibilities of being able to return to work.
A study of persons who suffered accidents resulting in paraplegia and tetraplegia showed that 75 per cent of the professional group found similar employment two to three years after the onset of disability and the remaining 25 per cent were unemployed.
For the other groups, the chances were almost reversed; only one-quarter to one-third found similar employment with the remainder still not at work.
Half of the total expenditure on social security is on retirement pensions and, apart from 5 per cent of the retired men, the remainder receive a full pension.
The issue of socio-economic inequalities     in relation to benefit from retirement pensions is not so much one of differences in entitlement but rather involves class differences in survival to old age and in the length of time for which a pension is drawn.
There is substantial evidence showing that the chances of surviving to old age are lower among the manual than non-manual groups and that this also applies, though to a lesser extent, to the number of years people live beyond retirement.
Wilensky's conclusion in relation to health services applies equally well to retirement pensions.
The poor die young — before they can contract the chronic diseases that dearly cost national health schemes.
The more affluent citizens live to a riper age, chronically collecting health services paid for by the lifelong taxes of the deceased poor.
Data are not available about changes in socio-economic access to social security benefits over the years.
Since there has been no important relaxation of the qualifying conditions over the years, it is more than likely that social class access to benefit has remained the same.
The introduction of the earnings-related retirement pensions scheme is bound to favour the better-paid sections of the community because it is not financed wholly by employee contributions.
Means-tested benefits, by their very nature, appear to favour the low paid.
Thus supplementary benefit and family income supplement  are more likely to benefit manual than non-manual groups.
There must, however, be some doubt about this in relation to supplementary benefit since two-thirds of those in receipt of this benefit are retirement pensioners.
It is known that the majority of this population group are women, that the likelihood of receiving supplementary benefit increases with advanced age and that those of the elderly living alone are more likely than married couples to receive this benefit.
In other words, a large proportion of the elderly receiving supplementary benefit are elderly women living alone and apart from those belonging to the very top socio-economic group, such women may be in receipt of supplementary benefit irrespective of the socio economic background of themselves or their deceased husbands.
This may, however, change by the end of the century when most married women in employment will be drawing retirement pensions reflecting their previous earnings.
Concluding this section, it can be said that manual workers not only suffer more from the costs and deprivations of the workplace than non-manual workers but they also receive lower compensation and rewards in terms of pay, fringe benefits and, in some instances, even of social security benefits.
These inequalities have changed a little in some aspects as regards both the costs and rewards over the years but the striking feature is their extreme rigidity.
A different approach to estimating the distributive effects of public expenditure has been used by the Central Statistical Office (CSO).
For the last twenty years, it has used the data provided by the Family Expenditure Surveys to estimate the net benefit which different income groups derive from public expenditure.
All the studies have shown that there is a redistribution of income from the higher to the lower income groups.
A number of methodological criticisms have been made of these studies which cast serious doubt on the validity of their findings.
Moreover, the usefulness of the findings of the CSO studies for the present discussion is limited because all the published data refer to income groups and not to socio-economic groups.
Thus the redistribution in favour of the lowest 20 per cent shown in Table 3.24 is mainly but not exclusively for retirement pensioners.
In other words, the studies do not distinguish between horizontal and vertical redistribution of income.
An assessment of the prospects of equality/equity
So far this chapter has attempted first to document the range of inequalities existing today in the areas of education, health, housing, work and income maintenance services after more than thirty years of welfare state policies; and second, to estimate the trends in these inequalities during the same period, and the effects of social policies   upon them.
There can be no disagreement about the fact that inequalities in all four areas are still substantial today, though there can be differences of opinion as to whether these are excessive, just about right, or even too small.
It is in relation to post-war trends that the data are not adequate enough to warrant making definitive conclusions.
Only tentative conclusions can be reached and they are open to challenge and criticism.
In education and health, social class inequalities in the geographical distribution of services have declined slightly over the years, apart from the inner areas of the large cities where these inequalities may have widened.
The use of education services has become more equal during the years of compulsory schooling.
Before and after this, however, inequalities have remained the same.
In other words, pre-school attendance and university education are as unequally distributed today, as they were in the 1940s.
The use of health services by the different socio-economic groups has become slightly less unequal during this period.
In spite of this, however, differences in infant and adult mortality rates between social classes have widened.
In housing, inequalities in basic standards have narrowed but the same cannot be said in relation to the social standards of housing.
Earnings from work of manual and non-manual workers have become slightly less unequal though the same cannot be claimed for the value of such fringe benefits as sick pay, retirement pensions, subsidies for cars, private schooling, house purchase, etc.
The trend in social security benefits is uncertain because of the introduction of several new benefits, the modification of others, and the replacement of flat rate contributions, and, to a lesser extent, flat rate benefits, with earnings-related contributions and earnings-related benefits for retirement and widowhood.
In brief, inequalities have been reduced slightly in some areas, remained the same in others and even widened in some other areas.
It is a conclusion that need not worry supporters of inequality but which should cause concern to those who believed that social services could and would create a more equal society.
In trying to provide answers to the questions why have social policies failed significantly to reduce social class inequalities, it is best to look at each of the three steps in the process separately — access, use and outcome.
What would policy attempting to equalise access be like?
Inevitably it will include strong elements of positive discrimination.
The last forty years have shown that simply increasing the volume of services does not necessarily reduce social or geographical inequalities.
Governments must take measures to ensure that the deprived areas receive more in services than other areas both as regards buildings and equipment as well as staff.
Leaving aside the question of costs for the time being, what kind of problems will a government anxious to promote positive discrimination policies have to face?
In the case of buildings and equipment there do not seem to be any special problems other than space and cost.
The position is more difficult in relation to attracting more professional staff to work in deprived inner city areas or in isolated rural areas.
So far governments have adopted two measures in relation to education and health personnel: incentives, i.e., paying higher salaries, and sanctions, i.e. restricting employment in the desirable areas.
Neither measure has proved very effective partly because governments have been half-hearted.
The additions made to the salaries of teachers or doctors working in undesirable areas have been far too small to have the intended effect.
Similarly, the policy of refusing employment in the desirable areas to general practitioners has not been very effective because even these areas have not had their government quota of general practitioners.
If these twin policies are to have any effect in reducing geographical inequalities, they need to be pursued more vigorously than they have been in the past.
This means not only spending substantially larger amounts of money but also providing the administrative framework for ensuring such policies are pursued uniformly and consistently.
It also requires that working conditions for the staff in such areas are improved, work loads are lessened, research facilities improved and other similar measures adopted that would make working in such areas satisfying and challenging.
Even with a more aggressive policy of positive discrimination, it is doubtful whether geographical inequalities can be overcome.
Some Eastern European countries — the USSR, for example— have attempted to deal with this problem by directing professional staff to work in certain areas for a limited number of years, as well as providing them with incentives in terms of higher salaries, pension rights, housing, etc.
Such a policy would be resisted in this country by some professional bodies and by some other groups on the grounds that it is against individual freedom.
Finally, even if a government was prepared to use positive discrimination measures more vigorously and adopt a policy of staff direction in employment, it will need to make private provision illegal if it is to succeed in equalising the geographical distribution of services.
Without such a measure, professionals in education and health can ignore government plans by setting up in private practice wherever they choose, with the active support of other sections of society.
An alternative approach to the equalisation of the geographical distribution of services is to concentrate on improving the physical and social standard of the ‘undesirable’ neighbourhoods.
Such an approach is not without its difficulties, but it has a great deal of potential, particularly in relation to inner city areas.
It is likely to be a very expensive policy, for it implies the improvement of housing, schools, social amenities, etc.
Even with these environmental improvements, for the policy to succeed it must attract residents of all socio-economic groups — and there is not much that governments can do about this.
Moreover, it is far less of a real alternative in the case of isolated rural areas.
The two policy approaches — attracting staff to deprived areas and improving the standard of deprived areas — are not mutually exclusive.
In fact, they are both necessary and they complement each other.
The task, then, of any government attempting to reduce inequalities in the geographical distribution of services is very difficult.
But these difficulties pale into insignificance when compared to those involved in equalising the use that different socio-economic groups make of the services.
Clearly an equitable geographical distribution of services is a necessary but not a sufficient precondition for an equal, let alone an equitable, use of services.
Other policy measures are needed, both negative involving sanctions and positive involving rewards.
The reasons why the lower socio-economic groups make less use of the education and health services are complex and only a brief comment can be presented here.
They are, however, of three types: cost, culture and service ethos.
Cost is used here in its widest sense involving payment of fees, loss of earnings, loss of time and so on.
Thus any services which involve the payment of fees will be under-used by the lower socio-economic groups — dentists' services is a good example.
Staying on at school beyond the school-leaving age involves loss of earnings or benefit, and the absence of grants to 16–18 year olds at school inevitably means that the lower socio-economic groups will be under-represented in this stage of education.
A mother with three young children, with no car and living a long way from a general practitioner's surgery is almost certain not to consult the doctor as often as she should.
These are a few examples where cost is an important  reason for the under-use of services by the lower socio-economic groups.
No doubt there are many others.
Culture is used here in the sense of sub-culture.
It is the constellation of those beliefs, attitudes and values that influence sub-groups in society to behave differently from the generally expected norms of behaviour.
It is a difficult concept, for it raises questions about the forces that account for its formation, as well as its modification and change.
For the purposes of this discussion, however, several examples can be cited to illustrate the importance of sub-cultural factors to the use of services: attitudes towards education influence the expectations as well as the interest which parents take in the school progress of their children.
Attitudes towards pain and discomfort influence the use one makes of medical services.
A general tradition in a neighbourhood that children leave school as soon as possible affects the decision of individuals to stay on at school beyond the compulsory school leaving age; and so on.
These beliefs, attitudes and values obviously come about as a result of the pressures stemming from material, economic, political and other forces, but, once they are in existence, they exert an influence of their own on people's behaviour.
Service ethos refers to the formal and informal social climate prevailing in a social service agency which influences the extent of use made by different groups of people.
Thus if teachers' expectations in a school or class are low, in relation to the potential educational performance of working-class children, it is quite possible that the latter will respond accordingly.
Professional education and training inevitably create such a social and educational gap between the providers of the services and working-class users that unless efforts are made to narrow it or close it, working-class people will make less adequate use of services.
These three types of reasons are inter-related, which makes any half-hearted attempts by government to deal with specific issues in isolation ineffective.
To take one example: the under-use of ante-natal and postnatal clinics by mothers of the lower socio-economic groups.
A serious government effort to rectify this would involve measures directed at cost, culture and service ethos reasons.
It would mean a more equitable geographical distribution of such clinics; transport facilities provided for those mothers who, because of distance or number of children, find it difficult to get to the clinic; more concerted educational campaigns to inform mothers of the use and role of such clinics; the harsh attitudes of some health visitors and other professionals towards ‘inadequate’ mothers must be changed where they exist; and so on.
Only when these are done, as Graham points out, should policy attempt to improve attendance by lower socio-economic group mothers through such financial sanctions as withholding or paying a reduced amount in  maternity or child benefit to those mothers who do not attend such clinics or attend irregularly.
Clearly, the government policies required to make the use of education and health services equitable are a daunting package.
They are very costly and they are likely to be resisted by various sections of the community, including some of those who stand to benefit from such policies.
Obviously, too, they are policies which will take years of consistent application before they can bear fruit.
Taking the discussion one step further to the reduction of inequalities in outcome, one is faced with even more intractable problems.
As far as health is concerned, it requires not only the equitable distribution and use of medical services, but also the reduction of inequalities in working and living conditions.
The health of individuals is affected not only by the use they make of medical services but by their working conditions, housing, diet, leisure-time activities, and so on.
Clearly no government can legislate for such a wide array of circumstances, let alone attempt to enforce such legislation.
But there are areas where governments could profitably intervene in a more positive and co-ordinated way.
The Black Report, for example, showed that the main explanation for the higher accident rate among children of manual families lies in their residential environment: overcrowding in the house, lack of safe playing facilities in the vicinity of the house and a consequent tendency to play in the streets.
Governments anxious to reduce socio-economic differences in mortality rates among children have therefore to tackle the problems of housing and urban decay, as well as providing better health services to such families.
Similar arguments apply to the equalisation of the outcomes of education.
It is a point made so many times by so many people that it has almost lost its meaning: even if all children went to the same nursery, primary and secondary schools, their examination performance and hence their entry to higher education establishments and eventually to well-paid jobs will still vary according to their family background.
This is obviously not an argument for not equalising the use of schooling.
Far from it — it is an argument for policies extending beyond the school to the areas of work and income, if government attempts to equalise the outcome of education are to stand any serious chance of succeeding.
In brief, government policies to equalise access to services are more feasible, more politically acceptable and less costly than policies designed to equalise use, let alone outcome, of services.
It is not, therefore, unexpected that governments since the last war in this country have confined their efforts largely to this aspect of equality.
The restructuring of the social services in the 1940s aimed primarily at making them universal, i.e. free or low-cost access to all.
As mentioned earlier, it was vaguely hoped that somehow access and use of services  would be equalised.
Nevertheless, apart from the geographical distribution of general practitioners, there were no explicit policies to equalise either access to or use of services.
It was not until the 1960s that governments acknowledged that inequalities of access and use in health, education and housing were as strong as ever.
Thus the various hospital plans, the community care plans, the comprehensive school reorganisations, the positive discrimination policies, the community development projects, the urban aid programmes, etc., were intended in one way or another to reduce inequalities primarily of access to a greater or lesser extent.
Similar policies were pursued in the 1970s, particularly in relation to health services, culminating in the Report of the Resource Allocation Working Party in the mid-1970s.
In all these, policies were directed at geographical inequalities not at socio-economic inequalities.
The concept of social class is markedly absent from government white papers and legislation.
Apart from these various policies of positive discrimination for deprived areas, a series of Acts of Parliament during the 1960s and 1970s sought to strengthen the rights of workers against unfair dismissal, the rights of tenants against unfair eviction, and the rights of immigrants and women against discrimination in the areas of employment, finance, housing, etc.
Both sets of policies were weakly enforced and, as far as the positive discrimination policies were concerned, very small amounts of money were spent.
The economic recession of the late 1970s has meant not only that government funds have become even more scarce for such policies but also that government and public concern has shifted away from issues of inequality to concentrate on the problems of productivity and economic growth.
Emphasis has been placed on increasing income inequalities as a means of boosting incentives for more work effort on an individual and corporate level.
In brief, policies towards equality have been directed mainly towards geographical inequalities, they have been haphazardly applied, they have involved very small amounts of money and, during the present economic depression, they have, to all intents and purposes, been abandoned.
What conclusions can be drawn from the failure of social services to reduce substantially socio-economic inequalities of access, use and outcome?
The first conclusion must be that this failure is not unexpected because social services were not designed to reduce such inequalities.
Conservative governments have never been concerned with reducing such inequalities, while Labour governments have been, at best, unclear and lukewarm and, at worst , as hostile or indifferent as Conservative governments.
Our second tentative conclusion is that social services may have reduced people's subjective sense of inequality.
The existence of substantially one education and one health service for the whole country reduces the obvious and blatant forms of inequality  even if social class differences in opportunity survive substantially within it.
The third conclusion is that the reduction of socio-economic inequalities of use and outcome depends as much on government policies relating to the areas of work, the environment, income, etc., as on social policies.
The importance of the inequalities in the work environment and in the incomes of people has been under-estimated in social policy debates.
Such inequalities have a pervasive effect on the power, attitudes and lifestyles of people, which have a strong bearing on their use of the social services.
As Goldthorpe expressed it, any attempt to reduce inequalities via social policy reforms alone ‘grossly misjudges the resistance that the class structure can offer to attempts to change it’.
The fourth conclusion is that any government which is anxious to reduce the socio-economic inequalities discussed in this chapter will inevitably meet with resistance from the powerful groups in society whose economic and social privileges will be threatened.
It will also meet with resistance from some of the groups that stand to gain from such policies because of the grip that the ideology of inequality has on British society.
Le Grand, for example, insists that for egalitarian policies to succeed, ‘it is necessary to reduce the hold of the ideology of inequality on people's values and beliefs and this can only be done by challenging the factual underpinnings of that ideology.’
He hopes that in the ensuing battle of ideas, the weakness of the arguments for inequality will be exposed and young people in particular will be converted to the idea of equality.
While there is a great deal of merit in this argument, it over-estimates the importance of what individuals say or write on the shaping of ideology.
People's values and attitudes arise out of their material environment and daily experiences as much as out of what they hear or read.
The fifth and final conclusion, is that, left to itself, capitalism has an inherent tendency to exacerbate inequalities of condition.
The road to an egalitarian society, therefore, lies not so much through the social services, even broadly defined and purposefully designed, but through changes in the economic and political institutions of the country which generate and shape inequality.
This line of attack on inequality is not any easier than the social services approach.
It is, indeed, politically more difficult for it threatens the very essence of capitalism.
It is not a panacea either — it simply provides an economic and political framework, where co-operation between the various groups in society is less conflict-ridden, a fact which makes the possibility of government egalitarian measures more possible.
In the last analysis, egalitarian policies will only succeed if they are desired and supported by the general public.
Without such public support, egalitarian governments have to resort to excessive authoritarianism which can destroy the very notion of true equality that it hopes to achieve.’
Social policy and the encouragement of economic growth
Social services are a form of both consumption and investment at the individual as well as at the aggregate level.
They contribute to the enrichment of the quality of life of individuals and contribute to the general economic development of society.
It is not a very fruitful exercise to indulge in a long debate as to which of these two functions is the more important.
Without increased economic growth, the funds available for the provision of social services inevitably suffer; ultimately, however, the main reason for increased economic growth is to raise the level of personal consumption.
In this chapter, the discussion focuses on the contribution social policy can make to economic growth.
This contribution takes several forms, all of which are complex and contested.
They can be grouped under three headings: improvement of the quality of labour; promotion of the mobility of industry and labour; encouragement of production and employment through increased consumption.
Since the third function has often been presented as a negative contribution to economic growth, it is also discussed in the following chapter.
Improvement of the quality of labour: the human capital theory
The ‘human capital’ theory as applied to education epitomises this aspect of the relationship between social policy and economic growth.
But it is not only education but all the social services that may help to improve the quality of labour in varying ways and degrees.
A well-housed, adequately fed, healthy and educated labour force is a necessary  — if not a sufficient — prerequisite for industrial advance.
Most of the literature, however, has concentrated on the potential of education and health services and it is on these that this section will focus.
Supporters of the human capital theory are to be found among both Marxist and non-Marxist schools of thought.
Most of the detailed exposition and verification of the theory, however, has come from non-Marxists, and this is reflected in the discussion in this chapter.
Following Marx, many contemporary Marxists maintain that one of two main functions of public expenditure is to enable and assist private capital to remain profitable.
Such government services as transport and aid to industry directly help to increase profitability of capital while other services such as education, health and housing lower the reproduction costs of labour to private capitalists and hence increase profitability.
O'Connor refers to the first group of services as social investment and to the second as social consumption — a classification adopted by many other contemporary Marxists.
Historical overview
Important concepts in the social sciences are largely the product of their political and socio-economic environment and the human capital theory is no exception.
As an economic concept, its fortunes have waxed and waned in response largely to the demand for labour by industry and the availability of labour reserves in the general population.
At times of high demand for labour and low population reserves to meet this demand, the human capital theory was at its strongest.
Vice versa, at times of high rates of unemployment, or at times of low rates of unemployment but with abundant population reserves, the human capital theory was on the sidelines of mainstream economic thought.
The human capital concept is not new, even though it reached its apotheosis in the 1960s.
Economists and others who have considered the human capital notion over the years can be divided into two groups: those who have argued that human beings increase national wealth; and those who went a step further to argue that improving the quality of human beings through health, education and other services increases their productivity as labourers and hence adds to the national wealth.
According to the first, and the largest group, all labourers are part of the capital; according to the second group, it is, as Kiker points out, ‘the skilled individual who is the capital’.
More broadly, it is the educated, skilled and healthy individual who is the human capital.
It is with this second group of writers that we are primarily concerned here.
Sir William Petty, writing at the end of the seventeenth century, argued that excessive morbidity and mortality rates were not only a human but an economic tragedy.
For this reason, government-provided services which reduced such high rates would contribute to raising the  national wealth.
There would, in other words, be more workers as well as healthier workers, adding to the wealth of the country through their labour.
Petty's writings were influenced, on the one hand, by the prevailing high death rates and infant mortality rates and, on the other, by the rising economic prospects of the country as a trading nation.
It was a period of increasing demand for labour and declining or stagnant population.
The eighteenth century witnessed a substantial rise in population which accelerated even further at the beginning of the nineteenth century.
‘In Great Britain, the growth of numbers over the whole century’, wrote the Royal Commission on Population, ‘was of the order of 50 per cent.
Moreover, by the beginning of the 19th century, the rate of growth had become really fast — well over 10 per cent in ten years.’
During the nineteenth century, the population of the country grew by three and a half times.
This was also a period of rapid industrialisation, and hence a period of high labour demand.
It was, therefore, not surprising that the great economists of this period either ignored or made only brief and passing references to the quality or quantity of labour as an important factor in economic growth.
Adam Smith made the most explicit statements in support of the idea that education improves the quality of labour and hence raises economic growth.
Even this, however, was neither central to his thinking nor set out in any detail.
He merely postulated that an educated and skilled worker was more productive than an illiterate and unskilled labourer and that this explained the difference in their wages.
Several other economists of the nineteenth century shared this view to a greater or lesser extent.
Most, however, did not even refer to education as relevant to economic growth.
Ginzberg points out, in relation to Ricardo, for example, that since labour was plentiful, there was no objective pressure for economists to place too much value on human capital.
‘There was a great number of rural workers at the doors of the new factories looking for employment.
The mills of that day had no difficulty in absorbing illiterate, unskilled workers so long as they were able and willing to submit to discipline.’
The epidemics of the mid-nineteenth century, with their high mortality rates, revived the interest in the potential of health services to contribute to economic growth.
In his report as a Poor Law Commissioner, Chadwick estimated that inadequate sanitation leading to excessively high death rates was costing the country £14 million a year in lost production, apart from the social costs in terms of crime, delinquency, and the like.
Like Petty, he reckoned that health services were a paying proposition in economic terms.
It was, however, the work of William Farr in the latter part of the nineteenth century that added statistical precision to estimates of the importance of the health  services to human capital.
Farr calculated the contribution of workers to economic growth by estimating the future net earnings of labourers dying at different ages.
The neo-classical economists and, particularly Alfred Marshall, took a more positive view of education's contribution to economic growth than the classical economists, including Adam Smith.
Marshall referred to education' as a national investment' and supported technical education in particular as a means of training the specialists in industry.
His view that ‘the most valuable of all capital is that invested in human beings’ has been quoted as evidence that his support of human capital was stronger than that of any other economist.
Nevertheless, the fact still remains that education was not built into his analysis of economic growth in any more substantial way than it appeared in Adam Smith's work.
The same half-hearted recognition of the concept of human capital can be detected in government education policies during the nineteenth century.
It was not until 1880 that elementary education became compulsory and the main drive behind the legislation, according to Landes, was not so much the desire to instruct and educate but rather ‘to discipline a growing mass of disaffected proletarians and integrate them into British society.
Its objective was to civilise the barbarians.’
Introducing his elementary education bill to the House of Commons in 1870, W.E.
Forster, too, acknowledged both the economic and the political reasons for elementary education: ‘Upon the speedy provision of elementary education depends our industrial prosperity.
It is no use trying to give technical teaching to our artisans without elementary education….
Upon this speedy provision depends also, I fully believe, the good, the safe working of our constitutional system.’
Technical and scientific education beyond the elementary stage was seen with even more scepticism.
The country had done quite well without it — it had industrialised and prospered with the use of self-made men of minimum education.
To quote Landes again, ‘Here was a nation that had built its economic strength on practical tinkerers — on a barber like Arkwright, a clergyman like Cartwright, an instrument-maker like Watt, a professional ‘amateur inventor’ like Bessner, and thousands of nameless mechanics….’
The first half of the twentieth century brought no important changes in thinking on education or health as forms of national investment, apart from the public concern about the health of children and young people at the beginning of the century and the implication of this to both the industrial and military strength of the country.
‘Health services’, writes Hay in his discussion of social reforms during this period, ‘would ensure that the worker was returned to the labour force as soon as possible after illness.
More generally, by raising the standard  of health of the community, especially among children, such services would yield an economic return outweighing their cost.’
Significantly, the National Health Insurance scheme of 1911 only covered insured workers.
The health of their families was clearly seen as less important to society.
For most of the period up to the beginning of the Second World War, labour was plentiful and unemployment rates varied from moderate to the very high rates of the depression.
Keynes saw the contribution of government-provided services to economic growth as lying in their influence on consumption.
It was increased consumption, not the improvement in the quality of labour, that was the prime mechanism for invigorating a stagnant economy.
Government reports made few important references to the human capital concept and on the rare occasion that they did, there was division of opinion.
The Minority Report of the Royal Commission on National Health Insurance, 1926, stressed the economic returns to the country of a satisfactory system of health services:
The whole question of national health is bound up with that of efficiency and output and it is impossible to rank as a ‘burden’ on industry or on the community an outlay which safeguards wellbeing and (to put it no higher) conduces to the efficiency of the machine.
In a Note of Reservation, however, two members of the Majority Report took the opposite view:
The case for expenditure on health is not in fact furthered by what we are convinced, is the fallacious suggestion that expenditure on health may indirectly help to rehabilitate the finances of the country….
Everyone who is sick and recovers lives to be sick later on.
The various White Papers of the early 1940s argued for the reorganisation of social services on ethical, egalitarian and humanitarian grounds.
There were passing references to social services as investment but primarily they were seen in consumption terms.
It was not until the 1950s that the investment role of the services began to play a greater part in government debates while the 1960s are the period par excellence of the human capital theory and theorists.
Social, political and economic factors account for this new development.
These were the years when unemployment rates in all advanced industrial societies were low, demands for labour were high, economic prospects were bright and the belief in science and technology was strong.
Added to these socio-economic factors was the general feeling in advanced capitalist societies, and particularly in the USA, that the successful  space programme of the Soviet Union, as well as its rising economic standards, were related to its improved education system.
Investing in people through the social services became both a respectable and a popular policy among governments.
Thus the Report of the Guillebaud Committee acknowledged that ‘the National Health Service is a wealth producing, as well as a health producing service.’
The first major government report on wastage of ability in education after the war referred to ‘the general shortage of trained scientists and technologists’ in the country and urged the expansion of secondary education to meet this ‘most pressing need.’
The second government report on the same issue drew attention to the wastage of very able working-class school-leavers who did not proceed to higher education.
It acknowledged that education was both a consumption and investment.
Primacy must be given to the human rights of the individual boy or girl.
But we do not believe that the pursuit of national efficiency can be ranked much lower — not least because without it the human rights themselves will not be secure.
This sentiment was repeated a few years later by the Newsom Report in relation to average ability working-class adolescents.
The Report declared that ‘the country cannot afford this wastage, humanly or economically speaking,’ and therefore ‘in human justice and in economic self-interest we ought as a country to give that help’to working-class youngsters who under-achieve at school.
It was, however, the Robbins Report in 1963 on higher education that made the strongest case for investment in education to aid economic growth.
The report acknowledged that education performs many functions and the facilitation of economic growth was only one of these functions.
To devote resources to the training of young people may be,au fond , as much entitled to be considered a process of investment as devoting resources to directly productive capital goods.
Judged solely by the test of future productivity, a community that neglects education is as imprudent as a community that neglects material accumulation.
The Committee's arguments and recommendations were accepted by the government and higher education was expanded considerably in the 1960s and early 1970s.
It was also this same period — primarily the 1960s — that witnessed the academic upsurge in the human capital theory.
Though several  economists in the late 1950s began to look at the economics of education, it was Schultz's presidential address to the American Economic Association in 1960 that heralded the arrival of the human capital theory on the international academic scene.
His main thesis was that the rapid rise in earnings in advanced industrial societies was due to a large extent to improvements in the education and skills of workers.
It followed that further improvements would result in even higher earnings.
Increased expenditure on education was sound economic investment for both the individual and the country.
Moreover, reductions in inequalities of earnings could be brought about by additional expenditure on the education and health of children from poor families:
No small part of the low earnings of many Negroes, Puerto Ricans, Mexican nationals, indigenous migrating farm workers, poor farm people and some of our older workers reflects the failure to have invested in their health and education.
Past mistakes are, of course, bygone, but for the sake of the next generation, we can ill afford to continue making the same mistakes over again.
He prescribed the same remedy for the inequalities between developed and developing societies.
Inevitably, his thesis appealed to a wide spectrum of the academic and political community; to both the conservatives who valued economic growth and to the progressives who emphasised reductions of inequality at home and abroad.
Education, in particular, was the avenue to both greater economic growth and greater income equality.
If Schultz set the scene for the acceptability of the human capital theory, Denison provided the detailed, methodological framework for empirical studies to test the claim that the development of education or health services promotes economic growth.
Denison's work became extremely influential and was adopted by scholars in other countries and by such international bodies as UNESCO, OECD and others.
Alongside the Denison-type study, there were many other studies providing evidence on the statistical correlation between educational standards and economic development on an historical comparative basis.
The fortunes of the human capital theory began to decline as the growth in the economies of the advanced industrial societies began to slow down or stagnate in the mid-1970s.
A more detailed appraisal of the human capital theory is presented in the following section.
Suffice it to say here that unemployment rates in all advanced industrial societies rose substantially during this period; the optimism of the 1950s and 1960s was replaced by general pessimism about future economic prospects in individual countries and in the world in general; and all this after a period of unprecedented growth in public expenditure on education and health in all advanced industrial countries.
Not only was the value of education and health to economic growth seriously questioned but fears were being expressed that high public expenditure in these areas was acting rather as an obstacle to economic growth.
These services were taking much-needed capital away from industrial investment and they were, some claimed, creating attitudes and styles of living that were inimical to hard work and increased productivity — a claim discussed in the following chapter.
Appraisal of the human capital theory
Before examining the statistical evidence linking education and health to economic growth, it is useful to review briefly the ways in which these two services are said to facilitate economic growth.
Beginning with education, there is general agreement that it is not just any kind of education which will encourage economic growth.
As Miller puts it: ‘Education is a source of economic growth if it is anti-traditional to the extent that it liberates and stimulates as well as informs the individual and teaches him how and why to make demands upon himself.’
He then gives four ‘growth developing capacities’ of education which overlap with the four ways in which Denison suggests education increases labour productivity.
First, on average, a better-educated person is likely to do the same job better than one who is less educated.
Second, education reduces resistance to new ideas and new ways of doing things.
Third, additional education makes for a more rational labour market by improving information and choice of occupation.
Fourth, advanced industrialisation and automation have shifted ‘the occupational structure of the labour force, a shift predominantly from occupations requiring little education to those requiring more’.
All these four reasons are subject to varying degrees of criticism: Unskilled manual jobs may well be done just as well, if not better, by the less educated; resistance to change in employment can be affected more by the alternative job opportunities that are available than by levels of education; advanced industrialisation has so atomised and de-skilled the production process that for many workers further or higher education is not necessary in their jobs, etc., etc.
Berg's summary of the evidence on the contribution of education to individual productivity in the USA is pertinent.
More highly educated employees were not more productive than others and this applied to a variety of employees — factory workers, white collar workers, and managers.
It must, however, be remembered that in all the studies he reviewed, all the employees had completed at least primary education.
Writing from a similar perspective, Collins attributes the higher salaries of the  more educated employees to the certification process rather than to their higher productivity, i.e., the increasing tendency by employers to select and promote employees according to the education credentials they hold.
Yet it is difficult to see why employers in all countries would behave in this way if it was not to their advantage.
Education and health services are related in several obvious ways that have implications for economic growth.
Children who suffer from prolonged ill-health inevitably benefit less from education than healthy children.
Vice-versa, an educated general public is likely to make better use of health services than an illiterate public.
Professional training of medical personnel is impossible without a sound general education system.
High death rates among children reduce the value that parents place on education; and so on.
There are, however, several important differences between education and health in relation to economic growth which Mushkin narrows down to four.
First, while education influences the quality of labour only, health services affect both the quality and the quantity of labour, particularly in developing societies.
Second, quality improvement is far more difficult to define and measure in health than it is in education.
Years of schooling, types of schooling, are the indices of quality change in education.
The indices for health are negative — death rates, life expectancy rates, morbidity rates — and they refer mainly to quantitative rather than to qualitative changes of the labour force.
Third, it is far more difficult to calculate the economic return to the individual on investment in health services than is the case with education.
There is ample data relating earnings to years of schooling with and without consideration of such factors as IQ, family background, sex, race, etc.
This is not the case in relation to health.
‘We now have no similar indexes’, writes Mushkin, ‘of differences in income associated with gradations in health.
More particularly, we have no indexes of differences in earnings reflecting such gradations’.
Fourth, education brings out and develops a person's abilities.
All children are compelled to attend school and young people are encouraged to stay on at school in order to maximize this process of self-fulfillment.
Health programmes, on the other hand, are concerned, in the main, with reducing the impact of ill-health on individuals.
Education can make people more productive while health can only prevent them from becoming less productive.
The general effect of these four differences between health and education in relation to economic growth is that it has proved far more difficult and controversial to measure the impact of health on economic growth and where it has been attempted the effects have been estimated to be lower than those resulting from education.
The situation is further complicated by the fact that improvements in health are as much the result of better diet, cleaner air, more sanitary conditions, etc., as of the health services.
With all these qualifications in mind, how do health services influence economic growth?
Weisbrod and his associates list three direct and four indirect effects, all of which are questionable, particularly the indirect effects.
The direct effects are:(i) increases in ‘outputs’ due to the decline in absenteeism from work and school because of illness;(ii) output increases associated with the rise in efficiency because of greater physical and mental ability of children and adults; and (iii) output increments due to extension of working lives.
Indirect effects include:(i) reductions in the goods and services required to care for the sick;(ii) increases in output resulting from freeing of resources previously used by healthy people to avoid sickness;(iii) the output resulting from any population increase due to a rise in the birth rate, as might result from better health conditions;(iv) any net output resulting from changes in attitudes and in social and political organisation that might be a consequence of better health conditions.
Apart from the dubious nature of several of these claims, no mention is made of the possible ill effects of health services on economic growth.
Increased longevity results in increased dependency in old age, while on the other hand, increased investment in health has been accompanied not by falling but by rising rates of sickness absenteeism from work.
The complexity and uncertainty of these trends is well summarised by the Jewkes in their study of the NHS:
Absence from work due to sickness has certainly not been falling; on the other hand, but for the increased spending on medicine, it is conceivable that it might have risen.
Longer life for the individual has probably brought some gains to the community, although perhaps less than is often believed; yet improvements in longevity in very recent years have been small and the prospects of further improvements do not, at the moment, appear very promising.
The various studies attempting to measure the link between education and economic development can be divided into two groups: the statistical correlation studies and the production function studies.
The statistical correlation studies have been many and varied and they have been examined in detail by both Blaug and Bowman and there is no need to repeat the discussion here.
Most studies have shown that there is a strong, though not perfect, correlation between levels of education and level of economic development.
Economic growth is usually measured in terms of GNP and though this presents some  problems they pale into insignificance when compared with the problems involved in the definitions of education which have included literacy rates, school enrolment rates, university attendance rates, expenditure on education, and so on.
The study by Anderson and Bowman which examined literacy rates in 1950 and GNP per head in 1955 in eighty-three countries is typical of many similar studies.
It found that countries could be divided into three groups: First, those countries (thirty-two in number) with adult literacy rates below 40 per cent had per capita income below $300; second, those countries (twenty-seven) where literacy rates ranged from 30 per cent to 70 per cent and in which no correlation could be established between literacy and income; third, the rich countries (twenty-four) with literacy rates above 70 per cent and per capita incomes of $500.
Anderson and Bowman, though careful not to speak of causal relationships, tentatively suggest that a literacy rate of 40 per cent was a necessary, but not a sufficient, condition for economic development.
They also acknowledge the possibility that high education levels may well be the result of economic affluence but they still feel that a certain minimum level of education is a necessary prerequisite to the take-off stage of industrialisation.
The implication of this study is that developing societies need to improve their elementary school system before their economies can hope to have a secure foundation for industrialisation.
If this is the case, can it be substantiated by evidence from the history of developed societies?
If it is assumed that this country had achieved the minimum level of industrial development by 1850, then the available circumstantial evidence suggests that by then about 70 per cent of the working class had achieved basic literacy rates.
It is this evidence that led West to the cautious conclusion that ‘it is reasonable to assume that in the nineteenth century education played some part in economic growth.’
Similarly, using historical data from several advanced industrial European countries, Anderson confirmed the finding that a 40 per cent literacy rate is the threshold for economic development.
Similar statistical correlations have been found to exist also between GNP per head and school enrolment rates.
In an often-quoted and much-criticised comparison of seventy-five countries in 1960, Harbison and Myers found a high statistical correlation between GNP per head and what they called the Index of Human Resources which was based primarily on school enrolment rates.
Finally, Bennett's study is a step forward from previous studies because it differentiates between general secondary education and vocational secondary education.
He collected data from sixty-nine countries (but excluded all countries in Africa) on such economic variables as GNP per head, calories consumed per head, and gross energy  consumed per head and compared these to years of secondary schooling — general and vocational.
As expected, he found a higher correlation between the economic indicators and vocational schooling than general secondary schooling — but only in the developing and not in the affluent countries.
From these and many other similar studies, it can be concluded that there is a strong but by no means uniform statistical correlation between educational indicators and economic growth.
What cannot be claimed is that education is always the cause and economic growth the effect.
The relationship between the two is a two-way process, an illustration of the common sense view that education is both a consumption and an investment good.
In developing societies, primary education appears to be more of a social investment than individual consumption, while in affluent societies the demand for education may not come so much from the needs of the economy as from the demands of individual people.
In an effort to clarify the direction of the causality between education and economic development, Peaslee looked at historical trends in education for developed countries.
Using 1920 as the base year for education and 1958 as the corresponding year for economic development, he found that ‘sustained growth generally starts when primary enrolment is in the neighbourhood of 30% to 50% of the school-aged population.’
Of the richest thirty-five countries in 1958, all but six had the required level of primary education in 1920; vice versa, of the fifty countries that had not achieved the minimum level of primary education in 1920, only one was among the developed countries in 1958.
This finding was not supported by Walter's study, in which she estimated the effects of increases in national primary and secondary education during 1950–60 on economic growth during 1960–70.
Her general conclusion was that ‘neither primary nor secondary educational expansion from 1950–1960 is positively related to 1960–70 economic development.’
One of the crucial issues in such studies is whether the time-lag allowed is the right one and had Walters allowed twenty instead of ten years, she might have reached different conclusions.
A more useful, but by no means non-problematic, analysis of the relationship between education or health and economic growth is the aggregate production function studies.
A number of such studies have shown that economic growth rates cannot be explained completely by changes in capital and labour inputs.
A certain proportion remains unaccounted for and it is part of this that is claimed to be the product of investment in education and health.
Neither education nor health is an independent factor of production as capital and labour are.
Rather, they affect production through their influence on labour quality and, to a lesser extent, labour quantity.
Because of the importance of Denison's work, it is described here in some detail.
Many other studies have been conducted, either in exactly the same or a very similar way.
Denison examined the growth rates in real national income of the US during two periods 1909–29 and 1929–57.
The overall growth rates for the two periods were 2.82 per cent and 2.93 per cent per annum respectively.
Of these overall rates, growth of capital stocks accounted for 0.73 per cent and 0.43 per cent respectively.
Changes in the labour force accounted for 1.53 per cent and 1.57 per cent respectively.
The remaining 0.56 per cent and 0.93 per cent were attributed to a variety of residual factors.
Where does the contribution of education come in?
It emerges in relation to the contribution made by labour and the variety of residual factors.
The 1.53 per cent and 1.57 per cent growth rates attributed to labour during the two periods consisted of quantitative changes (increase in the size of the labour force and decrease in working hours per week) and qualitative changes of labour of which education was the most important, an estimate of 0.35 per cent and 0.67 per cent respectively.
As far as the contribution of the residual factors is concerned, Denison estimated that for the period 1929–57, economies of scale at the national and local level accounted for 0.35 per cent and advances in knowledge for 0.58 per cent.
Obviously, one cannot add the two figures of 0.67 per cent and 0.58 per cent to arrive at the total contribution of education, since there is an overlap between the two, i.e. advances in knowledge must have affected advances in the education of the labour force and vice versa.
The conclusion then must be that the minimum contribution of education to economic growth during the two periods was 0.35 per cent and 0.67 per cent respectively.
In other words, education accounted for at least 12 per cent of the total economic growth during the first period and 23 per cent during the second; if the overlap between educational improvements in labour and advances in knowledge is not complete, then the contribution of education to economic growth is higher for both periods.
This was a higher contribution to economic growth than that made by capital stocks.
In a later study of economic growth in the USA, and Western European countries during the period 1950–62, Denison found the minimum contribution of education to economic growth to have been of far less importance: 15 per cent for USA, 13 per cent for UK and Belgium, and the rates for the remaining six countries varied from 7 per cent for Norway and Italy, to 2 per cent for West Germany.
Denison's work on education covered also the contribution of reduced death rates and disability to economic growth.
Taking the period 1960–80 for the United States, he estimated that if during these twenty years no-one died (a most extreme assumption) before reaching the retirement age of 65, then the labour force would be 4.8 per cent bigger than projected and the growth rate of national product would be 0.20 per cent higher per annum.
If death rates declined by 10 per cent during the same period (a more realistic assumption) then the growth rate would be only 0.02 per cent higher per annum.
He also estimated that if the number of working days lost through illness and injury was reduced by a quarter during the same period, another 0.05 per cent in growth rate per annum could be added, representing a rise of 1.1 per cent in the size of the labour force.
Denison refrained from any estimates of the impact of health status on economic growth for the period 1900–60, the period he used for his education estimates.
Mushkin attempted this by using the same methodology that Denison used in relation to education and in relation to health for the period 1960–80.
She estimated what the size of the labour force in the United States would have been in 1960 by making two assumptions:(a) if death rates had not declined since 1900, the labour force would have been over 13 million less in 1960;(b) if death rates had declined from 1900–1920 but remained the same level after that, the labour force would have been 6 million smaller in 1960.
Reduction in death rates during the sixty-year period meant a larger labour force and hence a higher rate of economic growth.
National income [she concludes]was increased by an amount equivalent to 0.3% per annum due to the decline in mortality rates, from the 1900 level (assuming, as does Denison that a 1% rise in the number of workers, other factors held constant, yields a 0.73% rise in national income for this period).
The decline in death rates in the past sixty years thus accounts for 10% of the overall 3% growth rate in the economy.
Though the production function approach was subjected to a great deal of criticism from the start, this criticism increased very substantially in the 1970s as the economies of the world began to stagnate.
The criticisms have been both technical and ideological and some of them apply just as much to the statistical correlation studies.
First, there are the methodological and conceptual criticisms.
A point of general agreement among the critics has been the arbitrary allocation of the influence of the unaccounted residual factors to education.
Ambramovitz aptly termed the residual factors as ‘a measure of our ignorance’.
Though one can question the exact proportion allocated to education, it is impossible to argue that a certain proportion should not be so allocated.
Disagreements, therefore, centre round the exact proportion of the residual factors that is accounted for by education.
Such factors as incentives, motivation, perseverance, and the like may account for some of the proportion allocated to education; and these  factors may be partly the effects of education and partly its causes.
In abstract areas like these, statistical calculations, however sophisticated they may be, do not do justice to the complex web of inter-relationships.
In a sense, this criticism is an extension of the issue of causation discussed earlier in relation to the statistical correlation studies.
Second, none of the studies takes account of any possible ill-effects of education and health expenditure on economic growth.
Particularly controversial has been the argument of human capital theorists that a number of economic variables must be held constant in calculating the economic effects of education and health services.
Thus, the effects of reduced mortality rates and of improved life expectancy rates on unemployment rates or hours of work are ignored on the grounds that the effects of such factors on economic growth must be considered separately.
It is difficult to accept such an argument, however, much as one admires the zeal of human capital theorists.
This is particularly the case in developing countries and Malenbaum's comment on this is a correct, if rather harsh, appraisal of the situation.
However much the supply of labor [he writes]may gain in numbers or in quality from improved health and reduced death rates, there may be no corresponding gain in output.
Thus, improved health in poor societies can lead to larger population, greater poverty, and eventually deterioration in health.
Third, there has been substantial criticism of the implication of the human capital theory that income inequalities both within nations and between nations are reduced through increased investment in education.
Several writers, including Jencks and his associates have provided ample evidence showing that increased education provision does not abolish poverty or reduce income inequalities substantially.
It must be pointed out, however, that rejection of this aspect of the human capital theory does not necessarily imply rejection of its main claims, i.e. that education or health contribute to economic growth.
The same applies to the situation between nations: inequalities between developed countries have not declined but this does not necessarily mean wholesale rejection of the basic claims that a certain level of education is a necessary prerequisite to industrialisation.
What can be added, however, is that structural aspects of the world capitalist economy make for the dependency of developing on developed countries — a fact which tends to perpetuate inequalities.
Fourth, there has been criticism of the failure of the human capital theory to distinguish sufficiently between the contribution made to economic growth by different levels of education or by different subjects which, it has been claimed, has meant an unwarranted expansion  of university education and of non-technical subjects.
This is particularly relevant to developing countries, where higher education has led to graduate unemployment and to the ‘brain drain' of qualified staff to developed countries.
This criticism was valid in the early days of the human capital theory but not later when attempts were made to be more specific.
The failure to arrive at any detailed results is a reflection of the complexity of the issues involved rather than of the failure of the protagonists of the human capital theory to recognise the problem.
Fifth, there is a mixture of theoretical and ideological objections from some Marxist writers.
Bowles and Gintis criticise the human capital theory as providing ‘a good ideology for the status quo’ and for the fact that ‘the contribution of schooling to growth over the last half century may on balance have been negative.’
And yet, in a separate discussion of education in Cuba since the revolution, Bowles claims the exact opposite: ‘There is every indication’, he writes, ‘that the allocation of a sizeable fraction of the nation's resources to education has made a major contribution to the forces of production.’
There seem to be two reasons for this differential response to the human capital theory: education in Cuba extends beyond the classroom to the fields and the factories, while in capitalist countries it is restricted to the classroom.
Moreover, the socialist ideology of Cuba meant a different motivation for pupils and workers from that existing in capitalist countries —‘to work for collective rather than personal objectives’— with the result that education in Cuba became both a technical and an ideological force for greater productivity.
This is in contrast to the situation in capitalist countries where education reflects the authoritarian and exploitative values of the factory system with the result that it helps to reproduce the capitalist system of production which is inherently inefficient.
The first argument has some merit for it is akin to the argument of non-Marxists that education should be related to the needs of the economy.
It may, however, result in a less interesting and self-fulfilling system of education from the individual's point of view.
The second argument is more complex and more difficult to evaluate.
It is true that the capitalist system of production with its inherent conflicts between workers and management makes for inefficiency but it is not necessarily true, as they claim, that collectivism is a more powerful force for productivity than individualism.
It is not surprising that in view of all these criticisms and, more important, at a time of economic recession, the human capital theory is on the retreat.
Even its long-standing strong supporters are cautious in their appraisals today.
Thus Sorel in an interesting historical evaluation of the theory concludes that ‘The human capital engine of analysis is performing most adequately, albeit not spectacularly, and the movement is alive and well.’
It is rare, indeed, to find today the original  zealous approach though it is not altogether lacking.
In a recent defence of investment in education, Stonier brought back memories of the early 1960s.
Knowledge now is more important [he wrote]than the traditional land, labour, and capital, and even inputs of materials and energy.
This reflects the fact that with enough technological and/or organisational expertise, you can either greatly reduce the requirements for these inputs, find substitutes, or actually create them de novo .
What then can be concluded from this debate?
In the first place, no-one has claimed that education is the only factor making for economic growth, and vice versa, no-one has argued that education makes no impact whatsoever on economic growth.
Even Illich's onslaught is directed at formal schooling and not at education as such.
Second there is general agreement that a minimum level of literacy is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for the process of industrialisation.
This level, however, has been achieved by many of the developing countries today and expansion of their secondary and further education sectors will not by itself solve their economic problems.
Third, there is substantial evidence showing that economic growth and education in advanced industrial societies are correlated, though there is equally substantial disagreement about the direction of the causality.
It appears that post-primary education is both a cause and a result of economic prosperity but most circumstantial evidence points to primary education being more of a cause than a result in this relationship.
Fourth, scientific and technical education is more conducive to economic development than other types of education though there are problems of identifying the appropriate mix between these different forms.
Education performs political, social, as well as economic functions and it is thus too important to be made the slave to the needs of the economy even though it has no option but to be its servant.
Finally, in their ceaseless pursuit of economic growth, advanced industrial societies have to rely on their scientific know-how for most of them have no vast untapped natural resources left.
Thus, in spite of the problems involved in clearly identifying and measuring the contribution which education makes to economic growth, the balance of the available evidence suggests that an advanced industrial society which neglects its educational system does so at its own economic peril.
The present economic recession has highlighted the growing problems of financing an expanding education system and it has revived the debate on the contribution of education, and particularly higher education, to economic growth.
There is government concern in all  advanced industrial societies of how to restructure higher education so that it is made more directly relevant to the needs of the economy.
There are also more vigorous attempts to relate education to industrial training, particularly for school-leavers.
In a sense it is an acknowledgement of the potential of education to economic growth, but a questioning of the liberal tradition.
It remains to be seen how successful this drive will prove because governments have to convince young people of the attractions of scientific and industrial education vis-à-vis the humanities and the social sciences as well as of the advantages of employment in industry and trade rather than in other sectors of the labour market.
The danger in this new drive that is a feature of many advanced industrial societies lies not only in raising unrealistic expectations from these areas of study but also in denigrating the contribution of the social sciences to economic growth and in neglecting the non-economic functions of education which are just as important to the well-being of individuals and of society at large.
Social policy and mobility of work and labour
Though this section looks only at government regional policies and labour mobility policies, it is worth mentioning that these represent only a small proportion of government expenditure on aid to industry.
Denton has classified the various forms of aid to industry under three headings: general incentives provided under various programmes to all industrial firms in all parts of the country; industrial restructuring which again is universal in scope and geographical area and which is intended to encourage industrial efficiency; and regional aid which is limited to firms in the deprived regions of the country.
Labour mobility programmes are in an important sense different for they provide aid to labour rather than to industry.
In another sense, however, they are part of the same package for they are part of government attempts to bring employment and labour together irrespective of whether the aid is given to industry or to labour.
We begin the discussion with regional policies for they have featured more prominently in government initiatives than labour mobility programmes, both as regards expenditure and public debate.
The arguments for and against a government regional policy in industry are old and well-rehearsed.
On the economic front, there are two pro-regional arguments.
Regional unemployment and regional recession are an economic loss to the whole nation and they will not rectify themselves on their own.
Government aid is necessary to counter market forces which operate in favour of the affluent regions where maximum profits can be made quickly, irrespective of long-term national considerations.
Thus the first important government report on depressed areas in the early 1930s concluded that such areas ‘can only escape from the vicious cycle, where depression created unemployment and unemployment intensified depression by means of some positive external assistance’.
This became both the cornerstone of future government policy and the unquestioned assumption of subsequent government reports, including the Barlow Report in 1940 which made the strongest and most comprehensive case for regional development.
The second pro-regional policy argument emerged in the 1960s.
Aid to depressed regions should be seen in regional as well as national terms: regional recovery is part of, and it assists national recovery, for it utilises the reserves of idle labour.
A government report in 1963 concluded on this issue: ‘A national policy of expansion would improve the regional picture; and, in turn, a successful regional development programme would make it easier to achieve a national growth programme.’
Monetarist opponents of these views point out that the fact that industries in certain regions are unprofitable is evidence enough of either the fact that such industries are not in line with modern production methods or with demands in the international market; or that their location imposes additional costs on production compared with similar industries elsewhere in the country; or both factors may apply.
Thus Burton concludes from his discussion of employment subsidies in general that they are
likely to increase rather than reduce the rate of inflation.
The jobs that they are claimed to save or create will be at the cost of labour under-utilisation or unemployment elsewhere in the economy.
Furthermore, from a long-term viewpoint, they are likely to distort and hinder economic progress, and to induce changes in labour market behaviour that raise the natural rate of unemployment in the economy and the costs attaching thereto.
For government to pursue a regional policy either by offering incentives to industries to move into depressed areas or by not allowing them to expand in the affluent parts of the country is tantamount to impeding economic growth and wasting resources.
Social reasons have also been important in the debate on regional policies.
Without government aid, argue the pro-regionalists, depressed areas disintegrate socially, with the young and the skilled moving away and leaving the old and the unskilled behind; families and communities thus suffer socially.
Vice versa, substantial immigration into growth areas causes social problems of crime, mental illness, etc., at least during the initial period of settling down.
This social dislocation at both the depressed and the growth area is costly in economic terms too: schools  are abandoned in the depressed areas and new schools are needed in the growth areas; housing suffers in similar ways; and so on.
Monetarist opponents of regional policies are sceptical of how true many of these fears are.
After all, they argue, there have been massive population movements within the country over the last two centuries with no apparent long-term ill-effect.
They may concede that there may be frictional teething problems lasting a few years or even a few decades but argue that these are overcome eventually.
Finally, there are political reasons: people do not, on the whole, enjoy moving away from their communities and politicians find it hard to ignore these feelings.
As McCrone put it: ‘whatever government is in power in the United Kingdom, it ignores the regional problem at its own peril.’
This is particularly the case for Labour governments, for, if for no other reason, depressed areas contain more Labour than Conservative voters.
The anti-regionalists have no real answer to this apart from arguing that governments must put the long-term economic interests of the country above short-term expedient considerations.
The weakness of this argument is that there is no agreement, as mentioned above, about the economic implications of regional policy.
Marxists, too, have been critical of regional policies but for different reasons.
Unlike monetarists, Marxists favour government regional policy in principle but they are sceptical of its effectiveness and anxious of its political consequences.
They make three main criticisms: Regional policy has been too weak to counteract the tendency of large capitalist enterprises to move where it is most profitable from the immediate point of view and irrespective of social consequences on the local community.
Only substantial government control and ownership of industry can hope to deal with regional inequalities of employment.
Second, regional policies play an ideological role favourable to private capital: they present the economic recession as a problem of geographical distribution of jobs rather than what it is — a problem of simply insufficient jobs on a national level.
By doing this, ‘they have helped to set one area and one group of workers against another in the struggle to obtain a higher share of the inadequate number of jobs available.’
Third, regional policies have eased the process of restructuring old industries by promising new jobs.
The result, however, has been that the number of jobs created has been far smaller than the number of jobs lost.
For these reasons, ‘the task of the left, in relation to the ‘regional question’, should be to demonstrate the class nature of regional problems and state policy and institutions, and expose the use of spatial ideology as a dominant class strategy to split the labour movement.’
McCallum divides the development of regional policy since the war into five periods: 1945–7 was a period of substantial growth; 1947–58  was the ‘lull’ in regional policy; 1958–64 was the re-activation; 1964–70 represented the boom; 1970–4 witnessed the unsuccessful counterrevolution; and 1974–8 was an age of uncertainty.
To these a sixth can be added: 1979–82, which signalled the demise of regional policy both in ideological and economic terms.
The favourable labour conditions and the strong commitment of the Attlee government to regional policy resulted in substantial progress in this field: development areas gained 51 per cent of the total new industrial building during the two-year period 1945–7.
The public expenditure cuts forced on the government in 1947 and the false sense of security that enough had been done led to less vigorous reinforcement of regional policy programmes.
What the Labour government considered unfortunate, the Conservative government welcomed, and regional policy remained in decline all through the 1950s.
This was a period of steady economic growth with demand for labour almost everywhere in the country.
For regionally balanced economic growth, this neglect of regional policies was most unfortunate because regional policies are more effective when pursued during periods of labour demand than during periods of high unemployment.
Yet it was the relatively high unemployment rates of 1958 and the worsening national economic situation that prodded the Conservative government in 1958 to re-activate regional policy.
The Labour governments of 1964 and 1966 expanded the scope of regional policy, both as regards the areas covered, the number of programmes designed to promote regional policy and the administrative machinery needed to implement it.
The return of a Conservative government in 1970 signalled a reversal of policies: the new government was anxious to disengage from both national and regional economic policies.
Minimum government intervention was the new ideology.
The economic recession and the sharp rise in unemployment of that year forced the Conservative government to change its policies before they had got off the ground.
Regional policy was once again espoused and promoted.
The Labour government of 1974 continued and expanded regional policies by establishing a multiplicity of job creation schemes in an effort to stem the rising tide of unemployment.
As the economic recession continued to worsen, however, the government, in 1976, reduced very substantially its regional programmes and began to give more emphasis to encouraging economic growth in the prosperous regions.
The return of the Conservative Party to power in 1979 simply accelerated the collapse of regional policies; they were now seen as unhelpful both in theoretical as well as pragmatic terms.
Regional measures under the then Conservative government, wrote the Cambridge Economic Policy Review in 1980, ‘are increasingly limited to areas with the worst social problems, implying greater reliance on the operation of market forces to produce ‘convergence’
Table 4.1 gives an indication of government expenditure under the various changing schemes of regional policy.
The most striking feature is that expenditure in the 1970s was at a far higher level than during the 1950s and 1960s.
The significant changes initiated in 1976 have led to a reduction in government expenditure.
Before looking at the outcomes of regional policy, it is worth stating again that financial incentives are only one of the two strands of regional policy — the other is the industrial development certificate system through which the government can refuse applications for industrial expansion in prosperous areas thus encouraging firms to move into development areas.
Evaluating the effects of regional policy bristles with the same difficulties as the evaluation of any other large-scale government policy.
It is never possible to be certain what the situation would have been in the absence of any such policy nor is it possible to know what the outcome of a different policy might have been.
Nevertheless, attempts have been made to get as near the truth as possible as the brief account given here indicates.
Various criteria evaluating the outcome of regional policies have been used.
None is perfect, but they are useful indicators.
Four such criteria are examined here.
First, the number of firms which moved during the post-war period.
Table 4.2 shows that both the total number of moves as well as the proportion of moves to development areas were at their highest during the two most pro-regional policy periods discussed above.
Second, growth rates.
Table 4.3 shows that during pro-regional policy periods, the development areas performed quite well vis-à-vis other areas in relation to manufacturing industries, which are the main beneficiaries of regional policies.
Referring to their statistical findings, Moore and Rhodes conclude:
The most striking feature, however, is the very favourable differential performance of manufacturing industries in the active policy period — accounting for over two-thirds of the overall relative improvement in Development Areas.
This is an important result because it is to these industries that regional policy has been primarily applied.
There was also some relative improvement in the growth of construction and service industries in the more active policy period but this was smaller than that in manufacturing industries: it is consistent with a priori expectations about the multiplier effects of increased manufacturing activity, the increasing differential government expenditure in Developing Areas on health, education, and items of infrastructure and the adverse effect of continued decline in the declining industries sector.
Third, there is the number of jobs created directly and indirectly as a result of regional policies.
The direct effect is the number of jobs created as a result of the growth in employment in those firms assisted by the government.
The indirect effect is the number of jobs created in other enterprises as a result of the growth of employment in the manufacturing sector — what is known as the multiplier effect.
The generally accepted view is that, in the short-term effect, the multiplier is 1.2; in the medium term, it is 1.4; and in the long-term it is 1.7.
A number of estimates have been made of the effects of regional policy in terms of new jobs created directly and indirectly.
Table 4.4, which   summarises the main studies, shows that they all agree that regional policy has had an important effect on job creation though they disagree on how important it has been.
The differences are small, varying between 32,000 jobs a year being the lowest estimate, to 38,000 being the highest estimate.
These differences are due partly to the different periods covered by the various studies, to the different areas covered and to the importance attached to the indirect effects on employment in the non-manufacturing sector that new jobs in the manufacturing sector have.
Fourth, reduction in unemployment.
The use of unemployment rates as a criterion of the effectiveness of regional policies is of limited value.
During the periods of active regional policy, emigration from development areas declines and there is also the possibility that during such periods firms may make more people redundant, in the knowledge that the chances of finding employment are greater.
Moreover, during such periods, new sources of labour — particularly women — may be tapped.
Thus Moore, Rhodes and Tyler conclude that ‘for every 100 jobs created by regional policy, unemployment in Development Areas may only be reduced by perhaps 30.’
With these qualifications in mind, it can be said that regional policies have moderated the relative but not the absolute differences in the unemployment rates of development and non-development areas, as Table 4.5 suggests.
Clearly the improvement of the unemployment situation in Scotland during the 1970s owes a great deal to the new employment opportunities created by the discovery of North Sea oil, whereas the political troubles in Ireland have had an adverse effect on the local employment situation there.
More recent work has concentrated on the impact of regional policy on investment in the areas.
Rees and Miall examined investment data in industry which was assisted in the various regions for the period 1959–78 and concluded that the three regions — Scotland, Wales and the North — which received most government assistance under regional policy initiatives also experienced a noticeable shift of investment in their favour.
‘Moreover, the amount of the shift’, they conclude, ‘appears to have been fairly responsive to the different phases of regional policy.’
This positive shift in investment occurred not only in one or two large industries but for all industries — a fact which strengthens the view that the shift was due to regional policy rather than to other factors.
Thus the evidence concerning the impact of regional policy on industrial investment reinforces the evidence in relation to employment.
The general conclusion that can be drawn from the evidence presented here is that regional policy has an improving effect on the employment and investment situation of development areas.
Monetarist critics of regional policy, however, will find this evidence unconvincing.
They will argue that such job creation as may have taken place is temporary and artificial, that the cost of achieving even this was too high and that it would have been cheaper and industrially more advantageous if people from development areas had been forced or encouraged to move to the prosperous areas.
We do not yet have any significant evidence regarding the permanence of the jobs created by regional policy and we will look at labour mobility programmes below.
As far as the efficiency argument is concerned, there are serious conceptual and empirical problems in evaluating it.
If, however, one uses output per employee, the picture is encouraging for development areas.
Comparing the assisted and non-assisted areas, Cameron concluded that
the assisted areas do not appear to operate at a disadvantage.
Indeed, they tend to have a higher net output per employee than two of the major non-assisted areas (the east Midlands and the West Midlands) though the South-East and also East Anglia had higher productivity than all the assisted areas in 1971.
The claims for regional policy, however, should not be pressed too far to avoid giving the impression that regional policies are the answer to the country's current need for more jobs.
Under the present conditions of economic recession, regional policies are fighting a losing battle.
They are more effective when the national economy is expanding fast and when national rates of unemployment are low.
Labour mobility policies have not featured very prominently in this country.
They have been criticised by both those who accept active government intervention in economic affairs and by those who do not.
A large-scale labour mobility programme, it is argued, would result in the economic and social degeneration of the out-migration areas and would create economic and social costs to the in-migration areas.
This is simply an argument for regional policies.
Moreover, a labour mobility policy will not achieve a different result from the one achieved by unassisted labour mobility.
In other words, the same people who would have emigrated on their own will be assisted by government programmes.
In addition, there is no guarantee that the assisted emigrants will not return to their communities after a short period.
This is an argument for governments leaving migration to the pressures of the market.
The introduction of the Resettlement Transfer Scheme in 1948 was the beginning of post-war labour mobility policies.
The scheme was intended to provide financial help to unemployed workers in depressed areas who were prepared to move to other areas.
As with regional policy, labour mobility policy was left to decline during the 1950s and improved in the late 1950s, when the economic situation  was beginning to worsen.
During the 1960s the scheme was widened to include more categories of workers and the financial assistance it provided was also considerably raised.
Nevertheless, the scheme still affected a small number of workers only — almost 3,500 grants were made in 1960 rising gradually to 8,500 in 1971.
The rise in unemployment in the early 1970s brought about even more improvements in the scheme which was renamed the Employment Transfer Scheme in 1972.
The coverage of the scheme was widened further and new incentives were provided including a rehousing grant.
The number of grants awarded increased rapidly so that by 1977 the number stood at 27,500.
The economic recession of the late 1970s brought about a decline in the scheme similar to that in regional policy.
Clearly the labour mobility programmes have transferred fewer workers than the number of jobs created by regional policies.
The cost of the two programmes, however, indicates clearly that labour mobility policy is far cheaper than regional policy both in absolute terms and, more important, per job created or worker transferred.
Moreover, there is no reason to believe that, with improvements, particularly in relation to housing, labour mobility programmes could not affect a larger number of workers.
In a survey of 551 labour migrants in four very different areas of England in 1971, Salt emphasises the severity of the housing problems facing migrants.
Reviewing the difficulties facing migrants seeking entry to the public or private rented sectors, he concludes that:
it is in those sectors of the housing market where government has taken most control and which provide cheap accommodation, that there is most restriction on entry for migrants.
Yet, at the same time, these are the sectors that are most likely to provide for those workers (the lower paid and the unemployed) at whom the government's migration policies, operating through the Employment Transfer and Job Search Schemes, are aimed.
As against this, however, it has to be remembered that a great deal of assisted labour mobility takes place within regions and, as Johnson and Salt point out, it is difficult to know ‘how many transferees occupy jobs created as a result of regional policy’.
This is another indication that regional and labour mobility policies are not always in conflict with each other.
The question still remains, however, as to whether the assisted migrant workers would have moved anyhow without the financial aid of labour mobility programmes.
Beaumont's study of assisted migrants in Scotland in 1976 showed that 88 per cent of his sample said they would have wanted to move in the absence of government assistance  and, even more important, 69 per cent of the sample said they would have been able to move without government assistance.
The main effect of government aid, according to his respondents, was to bring about an earlier move for 25 per cent of the group.
In another study in Scotland, Beaumont attempted to calculate the success of the Employment Training Scheme by finding out the proportion of migrants who remained employed in the destination areas for at least twelve months.
His main findings were that 51 per cent had left employment in the destination area at some stage during the twelve-month period, most of these had returned to their area of origin and that 75 per cent of those who left the destination area had done so within the first ten weeks.
A study by Parker, however, using a national sample, reached conclusions which were slightly more supportive of labour mobility programmes: Only 13 per cent of his sample said they would not have moved without a grant but 56 per cent said they would have found it difficult to move without a grant.
These studies lend support to the thesis that labour mobility policies as presently constituted do little more than act as a mild incentive to a very small proportion of migrant workers.
Social policy and the encouragement of consumption
Until recently there would have been little dispute with the Keynesian view that the maintenance of demand in the economy was one of the central responsibilities of governments.
In recent years, however, monetarist and related theories have questioned this with claims that government attempts to manage the economy and the consequent high levels of public expenditure are counter-productive — they are responsible for the economic decline of the country.
We shall be discussing these views at length in the following chapter.
In this section we merely want to put forward briefly the three main ways in which social policy has made and can make a contribution to increased consumption, investment, employment and hence to economic growth.
The payment of social security benefits to millions of people, most of whom would otherwise have little or no income, injects massive amounts of money into the economy.
It is generally accepted that most of this is, of necessity, spent rather than saved, and hence the consumption of household goods is either increased or prevented from falling.
The contribution of this to full employment is obvious, particularly at times when demand in the economy is generally low.
This was clearly understood by both Keynes and Beveridge and it was one of the main considerations for the reorganisation of the social security system at the end of the last war.
‘The placing of adequate purchasing power in  the hands of the citizens so that they will spend more’, wrote Beveridge in 1944, ‘should be the main instrument of a full employment policy.’
In such a policy, the social security system was to play a major role since ‘the income provided by the scheme to persons who are sick, unemployed, injured or past work will almost invariably be spent to the full.’
The social security system is the most obvious mechanism through which governments inject more money into the economy but there are, of course, other ways.
Rent and rate rebates, tax relief to owner-occupiers, and exchequer subsidies to local authorities for housing purposes all make a contribution.
Table 4.6 shows that government expenditure on the social services increased from  one-fifth of GNP in 1970 to one-quarter in 1980.
The largest single item as well as the one with the largest growth was expenditure on social security which absorbed one-tenth of GNP in 1980.
Table 4.7 shows the number of recipients of the main social security benefits and gives some idea of the large number of people who rely almost totally on social security benefits for their livelihood.
If double counting is discounted, but the number of dependents of recipients of benefits is taken into account, then at least one-quarter of the population in Britain relies almost totally on social security benefits.
It gives an indication of the effects this has on the volume of consumption and hence on employment rates in the country.
Second, the prosperity and even the survival of many private enterprises depends largely on the workings of the social services.
Schools are major consumers of books, the National Health Services is the major   consumer of drugs of all kinds, the personal social services are important clients of aids for the physically handicapped, and so on.
In 1979–80, for example, the total expenditure on pharmaceutical services by the National Health Service was £989 million, while the total expenditure by universities and local education authorities in England and Wales on books and educational equipment was £314 million.
New houses, new schools, new hospitals, new local authority residential establishments help to keep the building and furnishing industries going.
When current and capital expenditure in these areas is substantially reduced, private enterprise inevitably suffers, for it cannot make up the loss by diverting its activities to other private sectors.
These are just a few examples where public expenditure in the social services has direct implications for a number of private enterprises and, through them, for the entire national economy.
What applies to social service expenditure applies equally well to such forms of public expenditure as road building, railway modernisation programmes, and so on.
Third, social services provide jobs for a large section of the labour force of all socio-economic groupings.
The argument that public sector employment has expanded so much that it has absorbed too much labour and it has thus had an adverse effect on the national economy will be examined in the next chapter.
Here the modest claim is made that without the social services, a section of the population will be permanently unemployed because in advanced industrial societies ‘we cannot expect industry to create many extra jobs because of the speed of technical change and job-saving investment.’
Jobs have to be created in both the private and public sectors of the economy if full employment is to be maintained.
In these three main ways expenditure in the social services helps to maintain full employment, private profit and economic growth.
This  argument is a necessary corrective to the nowadays fashionable view which ‘many Labour leaders share with the Conservatives…that the private sector produces and the public sector consumes.’
If, by some political catastrophe, government social services were abolished, they would soon have to be recreated in private form.
They are simply essential to the economy.
The crux of the debate, therefore, is not whether social service expenditure encourages consumption and hence economic growth but rather at what stage and under what economic conditions it uses up so much labour, capital and other resources that it ‘crowds out’ the manufacturing industries.
There must be a limit beyond which expenditure on the social and public services is detrimental to economic growth; there is, however, a corresponding point below which social service expenditure is equally damaging to economic development.
We return to these issues in the following chapter.
Conclusion
In this chapter we have discussed the main ways in which social services encouraged economic growth.
The list is not exhaustive.
We have not, for example, looked at government training schemes because until very recently they did not feature very prominently in government policies.
The general conclusion that emerges from this chapter is that social policy has been a positive force in economic growth though not as powerful a force as some of its protagonists have claimed over the years.
There is no doubt that both education and health services improve the quality of labour and in doing so they assist economic growth.
Government regional and labour mobility policies have also proved their economic worth even though they have not been pursued vigorously and at the most appropriate periods.
Government expenditure also encourages consumption and hence economic growth even though they may also have detrimental effects if they exceed certain high levels — a claim that will be discussed in the following chapter.
Apart from these very specific ways, there are also the more general and non-quantifiable ways through which social policy may assist economic growth.
It is quite possible that by taking care of the old, the very young, the sick and others ‘public services replace the old fashioned enlarged family and make the adults more available for employment, particularly the women who were traditionally responsible for household work and bringing up children.’
It is also likely that by providing minimum standards of living, social services reduce public apathy and dejection and thus maintain the will to work.
In a more positive way, by raising public expectations, social services may, for better or for worse, reinforce the general belief that economic  growth is and must remain the paramount objective of any government.
These are mere speculations but they are, in fact, no more so than some of the anti-welfare state ‘theses’ referred to in the next chapter.
Does social policy undermine economic growth?
Public expenditure in general and social expenditure in particular are said to undermine economic growth in a variety of major and minor inter-related ways.
‘Public expenditure’, declared a government White Paper in 1979, ‘is at the heart of Britain's economic difficulties.’
It is a view held not only by expert bodies and individuals but also by a substantial proportion of the general public who are not necessarily able to explain why and how this process takes place.
As far as social policy is concerned, four main ways of different importance and popularity have been cited: expenditure on the social services has used up labour and capital which would have otherwise been employed in the wealth-creating manufacturing industries — this is the de-industrialisation thesis.
Second, the payment of social security benefits to workers on strike has both encouraged more and longer strikes and it has enabled trade unions to exact excessive wage rises which have damaged the economy.
This is the state subsidy theory of strikes.
Third, high social service expenditure has resulted in high taxation rates which, in turn, have undermined both work incentives and business initiative and fuelled inflation.
Fourth, social security benefits are so generous that many people are financially better off out of work than at work.
Incentives for work have, therefore, suffered.
We shall examine each of these four claims separately though recognising that they are inter-related and that there are also other claims for the undermining effects of social policy on economic growth — the poverty trap and its damage to incentives, the encouragement of a general attitude favouring leisure and pleasure rather than work and saving, the lack of enthusiasm generated for profit in a welfare state, and so on.
The de-industrialisation thesis
The term de-industrialisation has several meanings but in this section it refers to the argument that public expenditure pulls human and capital resources out of the manufacturing sector of the economy.
It is the meaning attributed to the de-industrialisation process by the influential work of Bacon and Eltis in the mid-1970s.
They begin their analysis by producing evidence which shows that
Britain's growth rate has been one of the lowest of any major Western economy since 1961, that Britain's share of investment has been one of the two lowest, that Britain's share of world trade has been falling while others have had rising shares and that Britain's rate of inflation has been one of the fastest in the Western world.
Though this process had started long ago, it had accelerated recently.
During the decade 1965–75, industrial production in Britain increased by less than half the level achieved in the previous decade 1955–65, i.e. a rise of 17 per cent, compared with 35 per cent .
Yet the position was exactly the reverse in relation to productivity during the same two decades: productivity, i.e. output per man hour in manufacturing industry, increased by 4 per cent per annum during 1965–75 compared to only 3 per cent per annum during the decade 1955–65.
In other words, during the decade 1965–75, industrial production should have increased by 40 per cent, rather than 17 per cent had the same man hours been worked.
Since the overall size of the labour force was similar during the whole period, the conclusion seems inescapable that
it is not the rate of growth of productivity that has let Britain down.
What has let Britain down is that this has been allowed to produce growing numbers of redundancies instead of the increase in employment, and growth in the availability of real resources that should have resulted.
In other words, firms prodded and assisted by governments, were becoming more productive and were making many of their workers redundant with the result that the numbers employed in manufacturing industry fell by 14 per cent between 1965 and 1975.
What, then, happened to the redundant workers?
The answer is that they were simply being absorbed by the non-industrial sector of the economy, i.e. services and public services.
It is true that all advanced industrial societies have witnessed this shift but none to the same extent as this country.
During the period 1961–74, according to Bacon and Eltis, the ratio of non-industrial to industrial  employment changed by 33.9 per cent in favour of the non-industrial sector in the UK, and by only 18.6 per cent in France, with the other industrial countries showing lower percentage changes.
Further analysis showed that during 1961–74, employment by local authorities increased by 53.7 per cent, central government employment rose by 9.4 per cent and employment in private services, such as retail distribution, banking, leisure and so on , by 13.2 per cent .
Why were so many workers absorbed by public services in such a short period?
Three reasons are given by Bacon and Eltis: both Conservative and Labour governments, because of their adherence to Keynesian economics, were anxious to deal with unemployment quickly by tinkering with the economy; because of the public demand for improved social services; and because extra jobs in the public services could be provided cheaply and quickly since no extra capital investment was necessary as would be the case in industry.
The situation was made more serious by the fact that public employees, during this period, demanded and were granted substantial rises in their wages and salaries.
The result was that what had been a small-sized cheap labour force became a large well-paid labour force.
Thus a shrinking industrial sector had to produce enough to finance an expanding non-industrial sector.
It is true that other countries managed this, but the situation in Britain was different in two important ways: productivity per man hour was lower in Britain than in other industrial countries and the shift to non-industrial employment was greatest in Britain.
The assumption behind the Bacon and Eltis thesis is that only industrial production can maintain and improve the standard of living in the country.
The private sector service industries make only a small contribution while the public services make none.
They divide economic activities ‘between those that produce marketed outputs and those which do not.
Almost everything that industry produces is marketed , that is, it is sold to someone.
The private sector services are sold, so they are marketed.’
Non-marketed services include all those public services which are provided free of charge at the point of consumption — health, defence, civil service, most schools, police, etc.
Public services which are sold — electricity, coal, etc. — are, however, marketed.
Vice versa, private industries which are heavily subsidised by governments have only partially marketed outputs.
They highlight the importance of the marketed sectors by pointing out that ‘the marketed output of industry and services taken together must supply the total private consumption, investment and export needs of the whole nation.’
As the shift to the non-marketed sector took place and since productivity in the shrinking marketed sector did not increase substantially, it  meant that a smaller proportion of the net output of the marketed sector was left to be used by industrialists and their workers.
A situation like this could have been resolved by either the workers in the marketed sector accepting lower wages, or the employers accepting lower profits or a combination of the two.
The power of trade unions ensured that it was not the workers' wages that suffered but the employers' profits.
Employers could not pass on the extra costs to the consumers either at home or abroad because of international competition — British goods would have been even more expensive than foreign goods.
The British public was not prepared either to pay for the higher cost of the non-marketed sector through higher taxation rates.
When taxes were increased, wages and benefits were also increased accordingly.
The ball was, so to speak, back in the industrialists' court — the cost of the public services had to be disproportionately born by private capital which resulted in a reduction in business profitability.
A lower profit margin meant that industrialists could not afford to invest enough either to expand or to modernise their plant.
It also meant that there was little incentive for them to invest in Britain since it was more profitable for them to invest in countries where profit margins were higher.
The implications of this are increased unemployment, since the government cannot continue indefinitely expanding the non-marketed sector.
If it does, it will mean increased taxation and even lower profits leading to less and less investment in industry.
This spiral effect or vicious circle can best be broken by reducing public expenditure on a permanent basis.
This can only be done by massive redundancies in the public sector and reductions in the level of benefits and services.
Bacon and Eltis reject the neo-Keynesian solution that relies heavily on incomes policies because they think such policies do not work.
They also reject left-wing solutions involving greater nationalisation of industries and import controls because, again, they do not feel they will be effective.
Criticisms of the Bacon and Eltis thesis are of two types: theoretical and empirical.
Thirlwall, writing from a Keynesian standpoint, rejects the basic argument that the growth of the non-marketed sector was the cause of the decline of the marketed sector.
He maintains that both these changes — expansion of the non-marketed sector and contraction of the marketed sector — are symptoms
of a much more basic malaise and structural phenomenon, namely the inability of the marketable output (largely industrial) sector to grow as fast as productivity growth without the economy coming up against a balance of payments constraint, due to a high U.K. income elasticity of demand for imports, coupled with a much lower world income elasticity of demand for U.K exports.
He agrees that if public services expand then something in the industrial sector must decrease — profits or investment — but ‘it does not follow that the former is the cause of the latter’; rather they are both the joint results of the non-competitiveness of British goods in the international market.
In a subsequent article he sums up the reasons for de-industrialisation as follows: ‘The most convincing explanation’, he writes, ‘of progressive de-industrialisation in the U.K. is the weakening of the foreign trade sector with a slow growth of exports relative to other countries, and in relation to the propensity to import.’
Sleeman, again from a Keynesian standpoint, adopts an equally critical position.
He points out, first, that Bacon and Eltis underestimate the effects of demographic changes on public expenditure — the rise in the proportion of old people in the community, the increased demand for places in higher education, and so on.
He feels that the Bacon and Eltis thesis
does not explain why the rate of investment and innovation in British industry were so low to begin with.
Why was it that British industrialists took advantage of rising labour productivity to reduce their labour force, rather than to develop new forms of production using more sophisticated techniques and making improved products to sell at home and abroad?
The problem of Britain's relatively slow rate of growth in the post-war period, compared with other industrial countries and in particular its failure to diversify and innovate competitively, is a very deep rooted one, about which there has been much controversy.
Government policy in the late 1960s and early 1970s in diverting labour and other resources into the public sector may have exacerbated this, but it did not create it.
Gough, writing from a Marxist perspective, finds the de-industrialisation thesis wanting on two counts.
First, the reasons for the expansion of the social services are not simply the desire and anxiety of successive governments to reduce unemployment, cheaply and speedily, as Bacon and Eltis claim.
Rather the expansion of the social services is the result of two major factors: ‘(i) the requirement of the capitalist economy as mediated by the state structure and state policies;(ii) the class balance of forces within capitalist society’.
In other words, working-class pressure and the needs of private capital, jointly and separately, account for the growth of both public and social service  expenditure .
Second, not all social services are unproductive.
He follows O'Connor — as mentioned in the previous chapter — in dividing government services into ‘social consumption’ and ‘social expenses’, and concludes that 
the effect of growing social expenditure depends on its type (whether transfers, purchases or state produced services), its nature (the department or production or, in the case of transfers, the class to which it is directed), the manner in which it is financed and the final incidence of taxes.
In other words, the effects of government expenditure on private profit is a far more complicated process than Bacon and Eltis imply and it does not always work to the detriment of private capital and private profit.
In brief, the economic crisis of capitalism in Britain is not due to the extension of social welfare but to far deeper contradictions of British and international capital.
It is acknowledged, however, that in its efforts to support the capitalist system, politically and economically, the capitalist state creates and expands public and social services only to find that it does not have the required resources to meet the growing cost of the public sector.
The root of the problem, however, lies in the capitalist form of production which generates these conflicting tendencies.
The empirical criticisms of Bacon and Eltis are twofold, as far as the supply of labour is concerned.
First, all the evidence that is available shows that the expansion of the social services did not so much rely on the workers made redundant from the industrial sector but rather it drew on new sources of labour — mainly women.
Klein et al.showed that the number of full-time male employees of local authorities increased by only 13 per cent during the critical period of 1964–74 while the number of part-time women in local authority employment rose by 86 per cent during the same period.
Similarly, Thatcher provides abundant evidence which shows that while most of the workers made redundant in the industrial sector were men, most of the expansion in the public services was in female employment.
Table 5.1 makes this abundantly clear, while Table 5.2 shows that while full-time employment declined overall, part-time employment increased substantially, particularly among women.
The second criticism is that though public expenditure and public employment have been reduced during the last five years, this has not resulted in any upsurge of employment in the marketed sector.
Far from it: rising unemployment in one sector has been accompanied by rising unemployment in the other sector.
It can therefore be argued that not only do social services not pull labour out of the manufacturing sector, but also if they are not expanded the redundant labour from the manufacturing sector simply remains unused and joins the existing long-term reserve army of labour.
Looking back at the decade of 1965–75, which Bacon and Eltis consider critical for the economic health of the country, one can see that there was no shortage of labour   because unemployment increased during this period.
It can, however, be claimed that though the expansion of employment in the public sector was not directly responsible for the decline in the number of people employed in the manufacturing sector because it did not use the same labour sources and because there was no labour shortage anyhow, it was, nevertheless, indirectly responsible because it led to a decline in private profit and hence to a shortage of capital for investment in the manufacturing industries.
The question of business profitability is both crucial and difficult.
A distinction must be made between pre-tax and post-tax profits as well as between the two main methods of measuring profitability.
These are profit share, i.e. profit income as a proportion of the total income of an enterprise and profit return, i.e. profit as a proportion of the capital invested in the enterprise.
There is general, though not unanimous, agreement that profitability in British industry has declined since the early 1950s.
In a review article of the findings of Marxist, Keynesian and monetarist scholars, Burgess  and Webb concluded in 1974 that, first, ‘there has been a marked and persistent decline in pre-tax profit shares since the mid-1950s.
However, the acceleration in the rate of decline which appears to have occurred in the second half of the 1960s has been lessened by the payment of investment grants.’
Second, that ‘post-tax figures indicate that the share of profit was fairly constant up until the mid-1960s but there was a decline during the latter 1960s.’
Similar conclusions applied if the rate of return on capital was used as the yardstick of profitability.
A more recent summary of profit trends arrived at similar conclusions and also showed that the decline in profitability in the UK was sharper than that in other countries, as Table 5.3 indicates.
Thus the conclusion must be that profitability of British industry declined, though not on the pattern suggested by Bacon and Eltis.
The decline of profitability started in the 1950s, when the public sector was small.
In other words, the decline in profits preceded rather than followed the expansion of the public sector as regards both employment and expenditure.
The reasons for the decline in profitability are lucidly and cogently analysed in an influential Marxist work by Glyn and Sutcliffe in 1972.
‘We conclude’, they wrote, ‘that the basic reason for the decline in the profit share was the squeezing of profit margins between money wage increases on the one hand and progressively more severe international competition on the other.’
The full employment situation of the 1950s provided trades unions with the power to extract wage rises from employers which were higher than increased productivity.
Employers could not pass on in full these extra costs to the consumers because of the competitive international situation, with the result that profitability fell.
These two tendencies may have been exacerbated by the rise in public expenditure in the 1960s, as Bacon and Eltis suggest, but they were not the cause of it, since they preceded it.
The decline in profitability may have resulted in an unwillingness of British business to invest in industry in this country, but it did not lead to any scarcity of capital for investment.
Thus the Treasury in its evidence to the Wilson Committee stated that ‘there is no evidence that there have been real constraints on the supply of funds to industry.’
Similarly, the evidence of the London Clearing Banks to the same committee stated: ‘There is certainly no evidence to suggest that the availability of bank finance has been even a remotely significant factor holding investment back.’
The Wilson Committee itself summarised the evidence it received on this issue as follows:
Few in industry or the institutions believe that the way the financial institutions operate has deprived firms of funds they should have had, or has constrained investment.
Low productivity, low    profitability, low demand and problems caused by government policies are regarded as far more important factors behind our industrial performance.
In brief then, there was no shortage of capital nor were there any institutional barriers to its being invested in the manufacturing industries in Britain.
The point should not be missed either that a great deal of capital for investment comes not from profits in industry but from the vast and growing capital of pension funds and other financial institutions relying on personal savings, which, as we shall show below, have shown an upward trend in recent years.
What was therefore happening during the period reviewed by Bacon and Eltis was that British capital was being invested either abroad, where profit returns were higher and easier to achieve, or in finance companies in this country where again profitability was higher than in industry.
To sum up this section: the Bacon and Eltis thesis that the public sector crowded out the manufacturing sector cannot be substantiated.
The expansion of the public sector, as Harris points out, merely filled the gap left by the private sector and, what is more, ‘there is no evidence that private sector output would have been substantially higher than it actually was if the output of the public sector had been lower.’
It is quite possible that the expansion of the social services may have used up some of the labour that could have been absorbed by the manufacturing sector but there was no scarcity of labour as such in the 1960s and 1970s.
It is also quite likely that the social services consumed some of the capital that could have been invested in industry, but again there was no scarcity of capital during this period.
Finally, the expansion of the social services may have contributed slightly to the unprofitability of capital but the roots of the decline in profitability lie elsewhere whether one adopts one of the various Keynesian or Marxist perspectives.
The state subsidy theory of strikes
We are not concerned here with the various theories attempting to identify the causes of strike activity.
This literature is very substantial and far more sophisticated than the state subsidy theory of strikes.
What we are concerned with in this section is to examine the claim that government financial assistance to strikers both encourages the propensity to strike and prolongs strikes.
No-one has claimed that this is the only cause of strike activity — merely that it is one of many factors that have a bearing on strike activity.
Gennard sets out six propositions which make up the theory in its  strongest version.
They are as follows: first, the system of government financial assistance to strikers reduces ‘the financial cost of striking in terms of income forgone’ and it therefore reduces ‘the incentive for workers to resist calls for strike action’.
Second, because of the rules governing the payment of supplementary benefit to strikers (to be discussed below) the present system results ‘in short strikes developing into long strikes’.
Third, since supplementary benefit can be paid indefinitely, long strikes are prolonged into longer strikes.
Fourth, until 1981, trade unions could evade having to make any payments to their members on strike since they were in receipt of supplementary benefit.
The result is that ‘there is no economic incentive for the union to act as a moderating influence on its members and so induce a settlement.’
Fifth, since the amount a striker can receive in income tax rebate is greatest during the end of the financial year, i.e. March, the incidence of strikes is highest during that period.
Sixth, the employer's will to resist trade union demands is weakened and he therefore ‘settles closer to the union's minimum acceptable increase than to his own maximum acceptable offer’.
Before looking at the different propositions of the theory, it is necessary to describe briefly the two forms of government financial assistance: income tax rebates and supplementary benefit.
The amount of income tax rebate depends on the person's previous income and the time of the year when it is paid.
It increases with income and with the passage of months during the tax year.
It is paid irrespective of any other income coming to the striker or his family.
Supplementary benefit is a means-tested weekly allowance which is not normally paid for the striker himself, but for his family only.
A number of observations follow from this: the number of single strikers who receive supplementary benefit is very small — during the five-year period 1970–5 it ranged from 100 to 400, or an average 240 per annum.
Single strikers receive supplementary benefit at the discretion of the supplementary benefit officer only in very exceptional circumstances.
Payment of supplementary benefit to the family of a married striker will depend on any other income the family may have.
Thus if the wife is in employment her earnings will be taken into account and the family will normally be disqualified.
Similarly, any amount of income tax rebate or trade union strike pay will be considered and may have a similar result.
A disregard of £4 per week is granted after which any other income is taken fully into account.
Finally, any wages payable to the striker by the employer during the strike are fully taken into account.
The result of this is that most strikers are disqualified from receiving supplementary benefit during the first two weeks of a strike.
There are, of course, many who are disqualified for shorter or longer periods depending on their employer's method of paying them.
Attempts to test the state subsidy theory of strikes have been of two kinds: studies attempting to show the correlation, if any, between levels of benefits and strike activity over the years; and studies exploring the views of strikers in relation to benefits and strike activity.
We begin with the first type of study.
From the long-term point of view, there does not seem to be any relationship between strike volume, on the one hand, and the level or terms of provision of government financial assistance to strikers.
The payment of means-tested benefits to the families of strikers was part of the poor law system from the end of the nineteenth century, but it was not until after the National Assistance Act, 1948, that the conditions for the payment as well as the level of the benefit were improved.
Yet various studies have shown that the volume of strikes was far higher before than after 1950.
Table 5.4 covers the post-war period and provides detailed data concerning strike activity and payment of supplementary benefit.
The number of strikers receiving supplementary benefit has always constituted a very insignificant proportion of the total number of persons on strike the lowest figure was 0.12 per cent in 1962 and the highest was 14.46 per cent in 1972 which was the year of the miners' strike.
Even as a proportion of the number of workers on strike for two weeks or more, the figures are still very small — 4.4 per cent in 1965 and 36.8 per cent in 1971, the year of the post office workers' strike.
During that year, 70 per cent of all supplementary benefit paid to strikers went to post office workers, partly because of their greater knowledge of the workings of the supplementary benefit scheme.
Two main conclusions can be drawn from Table 5.4 in relation to the state subsidy theory of strikes.
First, there is no consistent trend in the number of strikers who receive supplementary benefit as a proportion of either those who are ‘eligible’, or as a proportion of the total number of strikers in any one year.
Second, there is no consistent pattern over the period covered by the table between, on the one hand, the level of supplementary benefit, and the proportion of ‘eligible’ strikers, i.e. those involved in strikes lasting for more than two weeks when supplementary benefit is normally payable.
The amount of supplementary benefit for a wife and two children constituted 47 per cent of net average earnings of male manual workers in 1957; it was 53 per cent in 1964; and 65 per cent in 1975.
In spite of this improvement in the level of the benefit, the percentages of ‘eligible’ strikers were lower in the 1960s than the 1950s.
It is, however, correct that these percentages were at their highest in the 1970s when the number of strikers was also at its highest.
The amount of the tax rebate is at its highest during the last quarter of the tax year and it is obviously at its lowest during the first quarter.
Duncan and McCarthy examined data for the period 1956–70 and    found that ‘strike activity peaked, as expected, during the last quarter of the financial year but it was also at a very high level (not expected) during the first quarter.’
It is, however, generally known that many trade unions choose the winter months for strikes because they can exert more pressure on employers than during other periods of the year and not so much because their members can claim tax rebates.
Perhaps what is interesting and puzzling is not why a minority of ‘eligible’ strikers' families receive supplementary benefit, but why the majority do not.
Wives' earnings from work must be one reason and ignorance or reluctance to apply is another.
In a study of strikes during 1970–2 lasting for more than two weeks, Gennard and Lasko found that the number of people involved in a strike, the duration of the strike and whether it was official or unofficial affected the payment of supplementary benefit.
Strikes that are more likely to attract supplementary benefit are those involving large numbers, which last long and which are official.
The most important criterion, however, was the official status of the strike.
‘In every case, whatever the length or size, benefit was about twice as likely to be paid out in official strikes as in unofficial strikes.’
The backing of the union is not only important because of the information and clerical services it provides to strikers applying for supplementary benefit, but also, perhaps, because it evokes a more sympathetic treatment from the supplementary benefit officers.
The second approach to verifying the state subsidy theory is through interviews with strikers.
If supplementary benefit is an inducement to strike activity, then knowledge of how the system operates and reliance on it as a source of livelihood must enter into workers' plans before embarking on strikes.
In another study, Gennard and Lasko interviewed fifty workers from each of two long and large strikes in 1971 and 1973.
They also supplemented the personal interviews with over 500 postal questionnaires making a total of just over 600.
In both strikes, a great deal of confusion prevailed: most people had no clear idea when they would be entitled to supplementary benefit or how much they could claim.
Indeed, in one of the strikes, the union paid the strikers so much strike pay that most strikers became ineligible for supplementary benefit.
Moreover, most strikers did not see themselves relying on supplementary benefit during the strike — rather they envisaged getting by on their savings and their spouses' wages.
Most strikers also underestimated the length of the strike, anticipating it to last for a far shorter period and the continuation of the strike was not something they enjoyed.
They also provide evidence of the various sources of income of the strikers: spouses' job and savings were the two most important sources; tax rebates were an important source for both strikes, but supplementary benefit was insignificant for one strike because of their union's practice of providing strike pay.
All strikers had to resort to  some extent to borrowing, credit, casual work and other ways and means of managing.
A similar picture emerges from Cole's study of a small number of strikers in the building industry in the Midlands.
The main sources of their average weekly income during the strike were personal savings constituting 45 per cent of all income, wives' earnings 17 per cent, supplementary benefit 16 per cent and tax rebates 10 per cent .
In conclusion, the evidence from both the statistical correlation and the personal interview studies does not substantiate the state subsidy theory of strikes but it does not refute it either.
The only tentative conclusion that can be drawn from all these studies is that government financial assistance to strikers may play some minor part, not so much in starting, but in prolonging a strike, but it is an insignificant factor compared to the complex web of economic and political reasons that generate and sustain strike action.
Social policy, however, is not usually shaped by research evidence.
The view that state subsidies encourage strike activity in a variety of ways is strongly held in advanced industrial societies, and it is part of the Conservative Party folklore on industrial relations.
It was not therefore unexpected that the Thatcher government introduced legislation which reduced the amount of supplementary benefit payable to strikers and which made their trade union responsible for paying a higher amount of strike pay.
Taxation and incentives to work, to save and to invest
In any examination of the supposed detrimental effects of social policy on economic growth, the tax system must be included if for no other reason than that social policy consumes around half of all public expenditure today and therefore substantially affects rates of taxation.
Concern with the disincentive effects of taxation has, however, been a continual theme during the whole period covered by this study irrespective of the prevalent rates of taxation or the level of public expenditure.
Writing in 1947, Hogg (later Lord Hailsham), presenting the Conservative Party case against the reforms introduced by the Labour government, felt that the rate of income tax ‘has become a potent cause of social harm as well as a source of revenue’.
Twenty years later, in an article in The Times , Treasure was even more categorical: ‘I believe the tax system is the single most important cause of the lack of desire to improve efficiency that exists in our economy today.’
Just over ten years after that, the Conservative government's Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir Geoffrey Howe, repeated the same sentiment in his budget speech on 12 June 1979.
‘Excessive rates of income tax’, he told the House of Commons, ‘bear a heavy responsibility for the lack lustre  performance of the British economy.’
The tax system of any country has to perform several functions which are not always compatible.
It has to provide the financial resources for at least a minimum number of services — defence, roads, education, income support, etc. — which are generally deemed to be necessary for the survival of any modern society.
Most governments, too, have used the taxation system in their efforts to influence the growth of the economy — either to control inflation or to encourage consumption.
An egalitarian government may also wish to use the tax system as a means of redistributing resources from the rich to the poor.
All governments, to a lesser or greater extent, will also be anxious that the rates of taxation do not undermine work incentives.
Inevitably there are conflicts between these various functions: a highly progressive tax system may well undermine work effort among the small minority of large wealth-owners; a strong anti-inflation policy may well mean high levels of taxation which can have effects — positive and negative — on work incentives; and so on.
Finally governments have also to bear in mind taxation rates in other countries when framing their own policies.
In the language of the economists, taxes have an ‘income effect’ and a ‘substitution effect’.
On the twin assumptions that workers act rationally and that time is divided between work and leisure, it follows that if taxation encourages more leisure then it discourages more work and vice versa.
Thus when direct taxes are increased, they reduce people's net incomes — the income effect — with the result that people have to work harder if they want to maintain, let alone improve, their standard of living.
At the same time, however, increased taxes on income mean that people derive less income for each hour they work and they may therefore decide to prefer leisure to work, i.e. work less — the substitution effect.
There is, therefore, no reason why taxation always encourages people to work less hard rather than harder, as so many have claimed.
It depends on the individual's attitudes, needs and priorities which clearly vary from person to person and from time to time.
There are, obviously, a multitude of factors that affect people's work effort apart from taxation rates.
The individual's personal circumstances, the demand for labour in the economy, restrictive practices, the opportunities offered by employers for more work effort, and so on.
Some of these factors are beyond the control of the individual worker; others are his own to decide; and others represent situations where the individual can exert only a minor influence.
It is thus important to see the influence of the taxation system on work incentives in this wider perspective.
When the issue is examined in this way, one cannot but agree with Brown's conclusion that ‘at best(or worst) taxation should have a relatively minor impact on the supply of labour, or work effort.’
Moreover, whatever methodological approach is adopted, there will be serious difficulties in separating the effect of taxation on work effort from that of other factors.
The incentive/disincentive effects of taxation can be direct and indirect and they can be seen in either broad or narrow terms.
In their broadest terms they refer to the whole issue of the supply of labour: do taxes affect the choice of occupation, the individual's drive for promotion, the number of hours worked, the rate of productivity, labour mobility, the decision to retire from work, to emigrate, and so on?
More narrowly defined they refer to work effort, i.e. the number of hours worked and the effort per hour worked.
These are the direct effects of taxation; indirect effects go beyond the area of possible measurement into the realm of sheer speculation.
Thus a worker who increases his hours of work, as a result of higher taxation (direct effect), may use the extra income to buy consumer items, the manufacture and use of which increase pollution of the environment (indirect effect).
In this section we are concerned with the direct effects rather narrowly defined.
We begin with studies base on personal interviews and we distinguish between working-class and professional samples.
The first study during the period covered by this study was conducted in 1952 by the Government Social Survey for the Royal Commission on Taxation.
It covered 1,429 industrial workers and supervisors in England and Wales who could vary their work effort either through working overtime or by producing more in piece work.
Unfortunately the way in which the issues were formulated and the phrasing of the questions were such that no credence can be given to the findings of the survey or to the general conclusion of the Royal Commission that ‘there was no evidence from this enquiry of productive effort being inhibited by the income tax structure within its present limits.’
The second main study of industrial workers' attitudes was carried out by Brown and Levin in the early 1970s, with a national sample of over 2,000 weekly-paid workers.
Table 5.5 provides a summary of the results.
It shows that about three-quarters of the male respondents replied that the tax system had no influence on their work effort, 15 per cent replied that it made them work more and 11 per cent that it made them work less.
Over 90 per cent of the women in the sample felt that tax rates did not influence their work behaviour, with the remainder being about equally divided between the other two options.
Married men with children were the group most likely to reply that taxation made them work more hours.
After a more detailed and refined analysis of their results, Brown and Levin concluded as follows: ‘The evidence clearly suggests, therefore, that the aggregate effect of tax on overtime is small; it may perhaps add about 1% to the total   hours worked, since, on balance, tax has made people work more rather than less overtime.’
Turning now to the views of professional employees on taxation, we confine ourselves again to British studies.
The first such study was conducted by Break in 1956 and covered 306 self-employed lawyers and accountants in England — two groups of professionals who are in a position to vary their work effort, and who are also liable to high rates of taxation because of their high incomes.
Again, the vast majority, 77 per cent, felt that their work effort had not been affected by taxation rates; 13.1 per cent reported disincentive effects and 10.1 per cent reported the opposite.
Break's conclusion was that the net effect of taxation rates ‘be it disincentive or incentive, is not large enough to be of great economic or sociological significance’.
As expected, personal circumstances influenced respondents' views with the result that disincentive effects were greatest among the single, those married without children, those living in rural areas, and among those with high incomes from property.
Thirteen years later, Fields and Stansbury did a follow-up study of Break's work but with some changes in the research methodology which were likely to increase the proportion of those reporting disincentive effects.
Their findings were that 18.9 per cent of the sample reported disincentive effects and 11.2 per cent experienced incentive effects — a difference which was statistically significant.
Moreover, the rise in the proportion of respondents experiencing disincentive effects from 13.1 per cent in Break's study to 18.9 per cent was statistically significant.
What is puzzling, however, is that this increase occurred in spite of the fact, as Beenstock points out, that ‘marginal tax rates were lower in 1968 than they were in 1956.’
It is likely that the methodological differences account for this.
Opinion surveys suffer from various drawbacks, the most important  of which is that they reflect opinion and not necessarily behaviour.
What people say and what people do is not always one and the same thing.
For this reason, econometric studies have been used to explore actual behaviour.
These studies collect statistical data on a number of items considered important to the hours worked by employees who are free to vary their work effort — wage rates, family size, unearned income, type of employment, etc., etc.
They then analyse the interrelationship of these data using various statistical techniques in an effort to isolate the importance of the various factors for the number of hours worked.
Clearly there are numerous technical and conceptual problems involved in such studies, and the general applicability of the findings of such studies ‘will depend on how far these numerous factors have been incorporated in the original economic theory and how representative are the data used’.
Most of these studies refer to the United States and the major British study refers to the situation in 1971.
In a national study of weekly-paid married male workers in Britain who could vary their work effort, Brown, Levin and Ulph found that higher rates of taxation tended to have an incentive effect on the hours worked.
The authoritative review of the theoretical and empirical literature from a number of countries conducted by Godfrey for the OECD concluded that all the various methods used to measure the incentive/disincentive effects ‘indicate that taxation does not have a large and significant effect in the total supply of work effort and that, in particular, the net effect on the labour supply of male family heads is likely to be very small’.
The general conclusion, therefore must be that the overall effect, whether negative or positive, of existing taxation rates on the work effort, and hence on economic growth, is negligible in spite of the apocalyptic assertions and rhetoric from various quarters.
It may well be, however, that for the very small minority of very high income-earners where the maximum rates of direct taxation apply, taxation may have disincentive effects.
It was with this in mind that in 1979 the government reduced the maximum rate of income tax from 83 per cent to 60 per cent.
It may also be equally true that disincentive effects operate for the very low and the low income-earners where any increase in earnings is counter-balanced — sometimes more than counter-balanced — by a corresponding loss of benefits.
This is the phenomenon generally known as the poverty trap.
Unless low income-earners can achieve, at a stroke, a very large rise in earnings and jump right out of the trap, it is virtually impossible for them significantly to improve their situation.
One of the main reasons for the poverty trap is the decline of tax thresholds over the years, as well as the relatively heavy rates of direct taxation on low incomes.
Thus, while a two child family would have begun paying income tax at about average  earnings in the mid-1950s, its liability to income tax began at about half average earnings by the mid-1970s.
The same government that reduced substantially the taxation rates for the very rich did very little, apart from reducing the basic rate of tax from 33 per cent to 30 per cent, for the low-income groups.
Moreover, the increasing emphasis on indirect taxation may have little impact on work incentives, but indirect taxes inevitably weigh more heavily on the low income groups.
The excessive concern with disincentive effects has resulted in a less equitable system of taxation.
Another aspect of the debate on taxation and labour participation is the claim that taxation rates in the UK are higher in relation to those prevailing in other industrial countries, with the result that they encourage the professional and the well-paid to emigrate to other lower taxed countries.
There are always severe difficulties in comparing the tax systems of different countries because taxes and tax allowances take various forms in different countries.
Nevertheless, most studies suggest that these fears are largely groundless.
A recent government study showed that out of twelve advanced industrial countries, the UK was fourth in 1971 and seventh in 1978, on a table estimating taxes and social security contributions as a percentage of GNP.
Looking at the same issue from another angle — percentage of total taxation (including social security contributions) derived from taxes on household incomes — the UK was joint second in 1971 and fifth in 1978 out of ten countries.
The recent shift towards indirect taxation would have lowered even further the position of this country in the comparative scene.
The Meade Report provided data which showed that in 1975 the maximum rate of taxation on earned income in this country was the highest among ten advanced industrial countries.
Again, the recent reduction of the maximum rate of 83 per cent to 60 per cent has changed the situation substantially.
The issue of emigration of professionals and management executives was examined by a government working group in 1967 and its report concluded as follows: ‘It is popularly believed that income tax plays a dominant part in the decision to emigrate from Britain.
This is a half-truth.’
It went on to add that ‘the effect of taxation (if properly understood) is unlikely to sway a decision to emigrate.’
The major financial reason for emigration was the higher salaries, pre-tax as well as post-tax, that could be earned by professionals in some other countries.
The last issue to be discussed in this section concerns the effects of taxation on personal savings.
It is claimed that high taxation rates reduce personal savings which are an essential ingredient in the moral character of a nation and which are also an important source of funding for investment in private industry.
The Beveridge Report referred to both of these consequences when it argued that social security benefits  should be of subsistence level only, allowing the individual, if he so wished, to make his own provision for higher benefits through voluntary insurance — which should also be positively encouraged by the government through tax allowances.
Before examining the evidence it is important to point out the political assumptions of such claims.
The argument that high taxes reduce the flow of private savings for investment in industry is only important if one believes that the ownership of industry should be in private hands.
If one believes that industries should be owned by the government then one will argue that the level of taxation should be such that, taken with the government's other financial resources, it should provide capital for investment wherever the government considers it necessary.
Nevertheless, even taking the argument as it stands, there does not seem to be much evidence to support it.
As we showed earlier in this section, there has not been any serious shortage of capital for investment during the period covered by this study.
Moreover, the available data on personal savings show that there has been a rise rather than a fall during the 1970s when taxation rates were higher than at any time before.
As Falush points out, there are various reasons for this, but the taxation system does not feature among them.
Table 5.6 shows that the personal saving ratio, i.e. personal saving as a percentage  of total personal disposable income, was above 10 per cent for most of the decade in the 1970s — well above the rates prevailing in the 1960s.
Even if, however there had been a decline in the personal savings ratio, it would have been difficult to attribute it to taxation rates.
Advanced industrial societies are consumer-oriented societies.
The mass media and  the financial institutions encourage maximum consumption of goods which are often so manufactured that they have a very limited life.
Consumption rather than saving has become the central feature of contemporary societies.
Substantial personal saving is not only difficult but can be disfunctional to production and economic growth.
In this social and economic climate it is idle to attribute the decline of personal saving, when it occurs, to the taxation system.