

Martia
Martia was aged twenty-two at the time we spoke to her and had two children: Sasha, sixteen months and Tanya, two months.
She had spent a total of twenty-two months in prison for a series of different offences, mainly theft and ‘dipping’(pickpocketing).
She had been living in a hostel for women in North London for the past year and was waiting to be re-housed.
The first time I went to prison I was nineteen.
It was a forgery charge — cheques.
I left home in Birmingham when I was fourteen.
From then on I've just been going around from city to city causing trouble, more or less.
I didn't get on too well at home.
There was three of us — the twins Angela and Lorraine, and me.
We are not from the same father and there was always that ice which never was broken.
The atmosphere was really bad.
Things didn't go right in the house so I left and ran away.
Time and time again I went back, but one day, I said, ‘Right I've had enough.’
I was fifteen when I actually left home for good.
When I was sixteen I was put in a home for bad children.
I ran away from that and went to Glasgow, caused trouble down there.
I was wanted so I ran away again and came down to London.
I met this guy named Desmond.
I was really goody-goody until I met him!
He got me into pickpocketing, doing  cheques and all them kind of things.
I was living with Desmond and I used to have to give him every goddamn penny.
Well, one day I got arrested.
I just couldn't get away from the police.
I gave them false names, they checked my fingerprints and found out who I was.
I went to court and got nine months.
I had been in trouble before, but then I'd been given probation and community work.
This one was for £500 cheque fraud.
That wasn't counting what I had in my pockets when I was arrested.
I was just greedy, you see.
I never used to go in the shops, I used to go in the banks.
[Most shops won't accept a cheque for goods costing more than £50.
A food processor costing, say, £48 will not fetch more than £35 on resale.
Although the transaction is a great deal riskier, a bank will pay out £50 with a £50 cheque card.]
I was in Holloway on remand when I got my sentence.
I was there for another month, then they sent me to Bullwood Hall.
That was easy compared to Holloway.
I didn't have too many hassles.
But the time I done in Holloway really turned my head.
When I first arrived I felt lost, I was wary of everything.
I just kept my mouth shut and watched what was going on.
I was really, really frightened — more of the girls than of anything else.
My idea of prison was that it was somewhere where you were locked up and picked on all the time — that was my impression.
I knew people who had been to prison and they told me, ‘It's really bad in there, it's hard.
They'll crack you up, you know, you feel like killing yourself.
’ All them kind of things.
In fact, the reception was the worst, when they stripped me.
I didn't know what to do.
I kept thinking to myself, ‘They're going to rape me now.‘
For the first three sentences I done, I was still with Desmond.
He never got sent to prison.
I done his bird for him: I think it's what you call love or something!
I wasn't scared of him, he was only a skinny little thing; I suppose I must've loved him.
He used to come and visit me all the time, he brought money and a radio and them kind of luxuries.
They make a difference inside.
It was the radio which used to keep me going in Holloway.
Being Black wasn't a problem.
Some of the girls were bitchy, some of  them were National Front, some of them were skinheads, but you knew who to mix with and who not to mix with.
The Black girls tended to stick together, but me, I mix with everyone, I don't care.
Colour's got nothing to do with it as far as I'm concerned.
But even I used to get a lot of hassle with the Black girls who'd go, ‘Ooh, you white man lover, you pagan!’ and all these kinds of things, and I'd go, ‘Yes, I know that, I love it.’
I had nowhere to go when I left Bullwood.
I was of no fixed abode, but I'd finished my time so they still let me go.
I gave them a bogus address but they didn't check it out.
It never existed.
I went back to Desmond and got myself into more trouble because as soon as I got out I wanted money.
I went on the game this time and earned a bit of money there, and I did chequebooks and cards.
It was Desmond who put me on the game — that lasted for a few months, then I got fed up with it.
I just felt dirty all the time.
I'm a professional chequebook girl and pickpocket.
I think I was born to do that kind of thing, it's terrible.
As for cards, I can clean them myself as well, and put my own signature on them, no problem.
[Remove the original signature with solvent and replace it with the legitimate owner's name in her own handwriting.
This makes forgery far less risky.]
I used to duplicate chequebooks at times; I was thorough.
But being out there loitering, that wasn't my line at all.
Anyway, I left him.
One night I was out making some money.
I met this guy and made a grand, so I thought, ‘Right, this is it.
I'm going my own way now.’
I haven't seen him since — well, not to talk to.
I lived in a squat in Battersea.
I went out of a daytime working, chequebooks and all that kind of thing, but it gets boring after a while.
Then I got arrested for some petty thing, shoplifting.
It was Marks and Spencer.
I tried to clean it out with a trolley.
I filled it up and I was walking out the door as if nothing was happening and got arrested.
I gave a fake name, they let me out on bail.
Then I went out again, chequebooking in the West End, got arrested again and this time I got a six-month sentence.
I done all of that one in Holloway.
I found that sentence easier because I knew what I was getting into.
I knew what the score was, let's put it that way.
From day  one it was easier.
But it's a dirty dump, it just depresses you.
I reckon the prison staff are just as bad as the police, in their own way.
Once you go through reception they don't know what you're like, or what your background is, but they tend to be rough with you and push you and see how far they can go — and most of the girls crack.
In reception they put you in a little cubicle like a wardrobe and you have to sit there for hours.
That second time I went in they left me there for two hours, and I was really cracking up.
I had sweat all over my face and as soon as they opened the door I just went for one of them.
I was taken down to the block [punishment wing]and they left me there for two days.
They threw my meals in at me.
The food went on the floor and everything.
They do it to test people, to see how far they can push you.
I crack at those kind of things.
I get all frustrated.
All you want is revenge.
I don't know what anyone else says, you've only got to be in prison a week — no, a day — and all you want when you get out is revenge, to go and get drunk and do something really stupid like break a shop window or something.
The anger inside fills up.
It's the way they treat you.
Some of them are fair, some of them treat you reasonably good, but others say you're just a criminal, a nothing, don't know what you were born for, that sort of thing.
Impatience builds up and you just want to lash out and get them.
I used to be quiet until I went to prison.
Now I'm a loud-mouth, a bully, I retaliate to everything.
That's what I had in my heart: revenge.
I used to sit down and plan the day when they'd open the gate.
I mean, you're just in a cell, you're locked up, it makes you think, ‘Right, that was my mistake, but next time I'm going to get further, I'm going to get the better of them.
When I get out there, I'm going to make sure I do something worthwhile — you know, like a robbery or something.’
I was sitting in there planning robberies.
There should be something else, not prison.
Prison hasn't solved my problems.
If someone had sat me down when I was young and said, ‘All right, tell us your problems,’ I don't think I would have got into the trouble I did.
I would have been a bit more calm, I would have thought, ‘There's someone out there 1 6  who cares.’
My family have all gone to America now; left me and my kids in England.
I've got no one else.
They packed their bags, sold the house and left me: I got that news in prison.
I mean, if someone's in prison, they shouldn't tell people news like that.
I want to know that someone out there cares for me, not that I've got no one or nothing.
I'd been in there four months and they came and told me they'd gone to America.
I said, ‘How do you know?’
They said that they left a message with my solicitor and I just cracked.
It was so bad.
Instead of getting someone to calm me down and talk to me, a whole bunch of them came and jumped on me and rushed me down to the block and left me there.
No one to talk to me or nothing.
I asked for a priest.
They said, ‘Yeah we'll get one.’
I still haven't seen the priest to this day.
I was so unhappy.
That made me just want revenge.
On everything and everybody.
I didn't care about nobody.
I had nothing to lose.
So as soon as I was released from prison I done more crimes.
I went back in and out again, done more crimes and back in again.
I was always wanted for something, and I was never in one place for too long.
I didn't sign on or claim money or nothing, so I had to go out there and steal to get money in my pocket and clothes on my back.
I wasn't interested in education or any sort of training.
When I was in Holloway I used to go to education but that was just to get out of my cell.
I wasn't interested in anything, I just didn't care.
It was just me, it still is now, even though I've got kids.
It's just me against that big thing out there.
It's very hard, I tell you.
There's times I want to talk to someone who belongs to me.
There's nobody there.
If it wasn't for the kids, I'd probably be out there now doing something silly.
Prisons aren't good for no one.
People come out and commit more crimes.
Tension just builds up and it builds up, and when you come out you say, ‘Right, I've got nothing to lose anyway, I've been to prison so I know what it's like.
So what?’
When I went to Drake Hall on one sentence I was waiting for another court case as well, a conspiracy case, a big one.
The conspiracy was to defraud giro cheques.
That was me and Desmond, we duplicated them and he printed them out for  something like £150 each.
I knew I would get a big sentence.
I thought to myself, ‘I'll go mad in that prison.
I'm not ready to go there yet.
I want to see a little bit of life.’
So I just took off.
I'd been in Drake Hall a week.
They've got this book which you have to sign in the morning.
I signed myself in and then I just went.
I ran through the fields, laid low for about two hours, then I made my way to the motorway and hitched it to Birmingham.
I took a wallet from Birmingham New Street Station and got a train to London.
I knew where I was going.
I'd planned it all out, not the day, just got up one morning and thought, ‘This is it, I've had enough.
I'm going.’
I'd nothing to lose.
D'you know what I mean?
I'd no responsibilities, no home.
I just wanted to get out and live my life.
If they catch me, they catch me.
It's a chance I took.
I felt good when I woke up in the morning and I thought, ‘Yeah this is it, I'm going.’
I was out for four and a half months, then I gave myself up because I was carrying my daughter, Sasha.
You can't run with a baby, and I'm not going to drag my kids into the sort of life I've been living.
They sent me to Holloway and then to Styal.
I came out just before the baby was born.
Prison is much better when you're pregnant.
The problems of being in prison and getting out of prison are still there, but it's easier.
Everyone says like, ‘Leave her alone because she's pregnant’, or you can get off some of the work.
You still have to do scrubbing and cleaning, though.
And the medical treatment in Holloway wasn't very good.
In Holloway they don't take you out to the ante-natal clinic or get you a scan or nothing; Styal they do.
All you get in Holloway is vitamin tablets or iron tablets.
You had to be on your deathbed before someone would come and see you.
There was one pregnant girl in there, we knew she was losing her baby.
We told them she was losing the baby, but they thought it was just a scam for her to get out of the cell.
We were saying, ‘The girl is bleeding’, but no one would listen and she lost the baby.
She was about three months gone.
It caused a lot of tension, riots, and they barricaded the cells.
There was fights and lots of trouble.
Holloway mother and baby unit is disgusting.
You get virtually 1 8  no fresh air, nothing, you're just in the cells.
There was eight girls, all pregnant, all locked up in one big dormitory, smoking.
You can't tell a girl not to smoke a roll-up; they need their smoke.
Everyone was getting on each other 's nerves, and there was tension all the time.
We only got off the unit for exercise about twice a week.
There was times when people were saying nothing to nobody.
It used to crack me up.
I just used to read.
I never used to be able to read good before I went into prison: I used to get into the book and think, ‘What's that word?’ and then cut the word down to size until I made up what it was.
My reading's brilliant now.
The food was terrible.
Best was Styal; Holloway food was always cold.
I lost so much weight in there, although most of it was down to worry, stress: ‘My baby's going to come out this and that.’
Funny things go through your mind when you're pregnant.
In prison they get worse.
We had fifteen minutes association a day — or sometimes just three times a week.
All we did was go down the corridor, nothing whatsoever to do.
Some girls used to knit, the Africans would do people's hair, but that was it.
It was so blooming depressing.
I used to stand by the window and look out.
Boredom, boredom, boredom.
It was so bad.
Styal was much better.
Every night you had association, every day exercise.
At Christmas some of the girls nicked some apples and made apple wine.
The staff knew what was going on but they turned a blind eye.
I was on Fox House, then on Mellanby.
Fox is for all pregnant women and Mellanby for women over six months pregnant and mothers and babies.
We used to go out every two weeks for ante-natal checks and mix with the people.
When they seen us they knew we'd come from the prison and used to sit back and grab their handbags sort of thing.
Two officers came with us.
Some of them used to wear normal clothes if they were going home afterwards, some would come in uniform but without their keys.
But people just knew.
We were coming in, white, black, Indian, they knew exactly what was going on.
The nurses and doctors were lovely.
All my best laughs have been in prison.
Sometimes when we 19  were feeling low someone might say, ‘I've had a visit, look what I've got,’ sort of thing, and we'd all have a nice time.
We're in prison — so what?
It's no big thing.
They can't keep us here for ever, one day we'll get out and then we'll let them know about it.
I'm a big-mouth person, I love trouble.
If I'm not getting what I'm supposed to, I'll start.
Oh I'll start.
I always stand up for myself.
I wouldn't take no shit from nobody.
‘Screws, I don't care what you are, just leave me alone.
I want to do my bird and get out’ sort of attitude.
Some of the staff were wary of me.
Some of them said, ‘We've met worse than you, you're nothing.
’ I suppose I didn't get in too much trouble in prison though.
I was mouthy but that was about it.
I only got into a couple of fights.
After I left Styal I came here.
Sasha is sixteen months, and Tanya is two months.
I had them both here.
If it weren't for my kids now I'd be doing untold things.
I'm a thinker and when I think everything is bottled up and tension comes, I just want to lash out.
Even this house is like prison sometimes.
You see what happens here, people just don't seem to care.
They're just out of prison and they want to get high all the time and enjoy themselves.
But you can't do that all the time.
You've got to come down to reality and plan out your life, look at where you're coming from and where you're going.
No one seems to want to do that.
They just want to stay on cloud nine.
Me and a girl had a fight last night.
I really regret it now, but at the time everything was right up to there, you know.
I thought, ‘I'm going to burst, I know I'm going to burst.’
I came upstairs and shut my door, and then the door went ‘Bang, bang’ and the kids woke up — this was one o'clock in the morning — and I go, ‘That's it’, went down and there was this big fight.
I can take so much.
When I was in prison I used to grip my fingers and bite my tongue and think, ‘Right, don't do anything.’
I used to have to go to the toilet if I thought I was going to fight anyone, or just go to bed and close my eyes and think, ‘Not long, not long, not long to go’, to keep myself down there.
I don't know what the point of prison is.
I think it's to make us realise that you get punished for what you do, but it doesn't 20  work like that.
You don't get treated right.
How can I put it?
They don't do the right things.
If they want to punish us, right, punish us, but don't torture us, get it over and done with.
Don't just prolong the issue, don't pick on us and lock us in a room thinking that when we come out we're going to be as good as gold, because we're not.
In that space of time you're going to build up hatred.
All you want is vengeance.
Another thing is, in prison you mix with everyone, and I think that made me worse as well.
The people who had more experience used to teach me lots of things.
I always wanted to get out and practise, to see how far I could go.
I just learnt some more badness in there.
To come somewhere like this would have been better, somewhere where I had to be in at a certain time, where I couldn't have certain people come in.
That would have helped me more than going to prison and mixing with all them people and just getting depressed and fed up and full of hatred.
I would have been a better person than I am today.
I'm a nice person, but when I get going I'm like a madwoman.
It's all from the prison.
You realise that this world is not easy and you have to fight if you want to survive in it, like all the way, non-stop.
As soon as you stop you're going down.
So I just keep going.
If I have no money today I'm just going to go out and get some money for me and my kids.
I'll not go without for no one, even if I go to prison for life.
Nobody ever gave me a chance.
If I'd had just one chance I wouldn't be where I am today.
Going back to my family now, I've always been the black one of the family.
They used to call me Blackie sometimes.
I was the darkest one.
I didn't have a chance to prove that I'm somebody as well, that I'm not nothing.
I'm a human being, with my own mind, my own thoughts, my own ideas.
I've got a lot of resentment that needs to come out, not on my kids nor on me, or on anybody.
It needs to come out and go away.
Sometimes I get so frustrated, I say to someone, ‘Listen, just take the kids.
I have to go out or else I'm going to crack.’
There are days when I sit down and my mind goes back to prison, when I'd be looking out the window, thinking, I wish I was out there, you know, doing something.
I haven't seen my family for three years, not since they left.
I mean, Angela, one of the twins, we used to be close.
I think she understood me, probably more than anyone else, more than my mum.
Then me mum went to America and took Angela with her, left no address or nothing, and so it's just me — no father, no nothing.
I can't tell you how lonely it feels, it really does.
I just feel, ‘God, hurry up and grow up, kids, and talk to me and be my friend.’
If only I had someone to talk to.
I feel lost sometimes, like I ain't got no one.
I think people who go to prison must have had a reason for whatever they did.
It may not be a good reason to us, but they must have had a good reason to do it, either family-wise or tension-wise, or because of life in general.
Some people like prison because they make more friends in there.
I've been going for so long I can do everything.
I never refuse help, don't get me wrong, but not all the time.
Sometimes I just want to be left alone to do it my way, whether it's right or wrong.
It's just bloody, life is a rotten thing, just horrible.
Through all my sentences, and if you add them together, I've done twenty-one, twenty-two months in all, there's never been one day when I've kept my mouth shut, without an argument or something.
The tension's there and it comes out in bits and bobs, either on one of the girls or one of the staff.
Being told to do things like not run in the corridor, or stand up when the governor comes in.
I never used to stand up.
‘Why should I stand up to you?
Who are you, you're not the Queen’, and I used to sit down, get pulled up by the girls: ‘Come on.’
‘No why should I stand up?
They can't do nothing worse to me, I'm already locked up.
What else can they do?
Put me down the block?
So what?
I'll be out in two days, I don't care.’
Holloway is the worst prison.
It deserves to be closed down.
I mean C1 [the psychiatric unit]is the worst.
We used to pass sweets and things to some of the girls down there if we passed the windows.
You can hear them screaming and banging their heads, crying that they want to go home.
You felt it, you really felt it.
I was in a wing just above it.
At night I used to put the pillow on my head and just hold it so as I couldn't hear.
If you're not really strong in your mind and find things to occupy yourself  you can go mad in there, get taken down to C1 and then to the madhouse.
In the block they put you in a gown — a strip dress, no knickers or bra, and your clothes and shoes outside the door.
Then they just leave you.
No furniture, just one chair and a mattress on the floor, and nothing to do at all.
It was dirty and smelly and you used to get spiders and cockroaches: it makes me feel ‘ergh’ just to think about it.
Sometimes they'd forget about you and just leave you down there.
It used to be for really petty things like not standing up, or shouting out the window, running up the dinner queue and pushing it.
Petty things like that.
One girl had a fight and she was down there for weeks.
We did a protest to get her up again.
There was going to be a riot so they brought her up.
Prison's not the right place for most people.
Some find that they get better treated in there than they do outside, but for the others it's just rubbish.
Some officers think it's their duty to go around, you know, ‘Right, we've got the keys and you ain't going nowhere.’
They're not that good themselves.
I could tell you some things about them!
I like fancy living.
I like nice things and good things for my kids.
I just have to have them.
I knew that from day one, and wouldn't take the trouble of working and saving for them.
I'd just go out there and get what I wanted.
When you've got good clothes and things you feel better.
You have more power, you feel more confident, and people don't look down on you.
Of course I'll be out there doing my chequebooks again.
It's so bloody easy.
Only my present boyfriend stops me.
I wanted to go out last week, but he said, ‘No way, you're not going out there’, and he made me stay in the whole week.
I'm greedy.
Once I get on to a good thing I keep it going until I run out of luck.
I either come out on top or I get unstuck and get caught.
I have to find something to do to keep me out of trouble.
I'd like to be a community worker, something like that — a social worker.
Like in here everyone who has problems comes to me.
I've put a note on my door saying, ‘If you've got problems, please don't come today because I'm not in the mood.’
Sometimes, three o'clock in the morning: knock, knock, knock —‘Martia, do you know what's happened?’
But no one listens to my problems.
It's not as if I haven't got any.
Like right now I'm feeling lonely.
I just wish my mum was here, someone who belongs to me.
I wish I could contact her.
If I had an address I'd be happier, I'd write to them and they'd write to me.
I don't know where they are.
No relations, nothing.
It's hard.
One day perhaps we'll all meet up.
I hope it's not too late.
I believe I hurt them when I ran away, and with my way of life.
But I've come down a bit now.
I've got more patience than I used to have, and now I've got responsibilities with the kids.
I've just got to wait my time and think, ‘Well, my day will come.
’ My nerves are no good no more.
They used to be brilliant.
I'm always shaking.
I know I've only got to make one mistake and I'll go straight back in.
My record's as long as my arm — even longer.
Still, if I thought my difficulties were bad enough, some have had it worse than me.
Sometimes I'd sit down and look at somebody and hear their problems and think, ‘I'm lucky.
She don't know where she's coming from or where she's going.’
I may have no one, but I know where I'm going in life, I've got a goal.
I'm strong in mind, too, though it's only since the kids that I've got more patient and confident.
Some good things might come out of me now.
Sometimes when I'm in a mood I do untold things, I just pick on people.
It's not fair, I haven't come off that ladder yet.
But in many ways I think I'm okay.
I've produced two lovely girls, maybe someday I'll be able to give them what they want.
I won't leave my kids without a bloody good fight.
I don't want them doing what I've done.
I think there's someone else in me which I haven't given a chance to get out.
I always used to go round mouthing to everyone: ‘Who are you looking at, you white bitch and you black cow’ and things like that.
But that's not really me, because I can't defend it.
I'd just like to get off my ladder and stop pretending to be somebody else, just be ordinary and not get away with doing this or that — and get away with it laughing.
I'm not that kind of person.
It's a relief, because now I can just be myself.
People can look at me and talk to me.
I even changed my name.
Everyone used to know me as Sheena Rawlinson, but now I've got my name back: Martia  Miller.
Maybe in some ways prison has helped me, but it's still not the answer.
When I came out of prison, I was wary.
I wasn't scared, I was ready for anything.
Now I've got a flat that I'll be moving in to soon.
I feel really good about it.
I'm on my own.
I'm well scared.
But mind over matter, I can do it if I really want to, and I will.
If only for them I'll do it.
This place has given me my first identity really.
I've always been doing what this man told me or that man told me; now I'm doing things for myself.
It feels good.
It feels really good.
When I first came to this room, I didn't like it, then I thought, ‘Well at least it's mine.
I've got the key to it, nobody else has’ and I felt good.
I'm ready for life.
I want to get somewhere, I don't want to be a crook or thief all my life.
Martia was arrested for assault three months after this interview and was held in custody for several weeks until she was granted bail.
The children were put temporarily into the care of the local authority.
At her trial she pleaded guilty, and was given a two-year prison sentence suspended for two years.
If she is arrested for anything, however trivial, during that time, she is likely to have to serve two years in prison plus whatever sentence her new offence would attract.
She has since married and is living in South London with her husband and her two children.
Janet
Janet was thirty-one when she was arrested for possession of drugs.
She was sentenced to two years in prison.
A single parent, she lived with her daughter Karen, then aged ten, with whom she had a particularly close relationship.
Janet has suffered various forms of ill health throughout most of her life, including asthma and a serious thyroid deficiency.
I was sentenced to two years in prison.
My charge was supplying cocaine and I was given two years for that and one year each concurrent for possession of small amounts of cannabis, cannabis resin, amphetamines and LSD.
I think they wanted to make an example of me.
The fact that I had people to speak for me at the trial and that I was doing community work didn't appear to mean much to them.
I think the judge's mind had been made up before I even stepped into the dock.
It was almost as if he was doing me a favour by not sentencing me for more, even though it was only one specimen charge of supplying.
There was no ‘intent to supply’ or anything like that.
I had two previous charges of possession in ‘78, which technically should have been spent.
I had a conditional discharge for one and an absolute discharge for the other.
They were brought up in court and I think that influenced his decision.
I had been dealing in coke to a very small circle of friends, not more than half a dozen.
It wasn't really dealing; it was an arrangement whereby being a single parent on supplementary benefit I was able to get a little for myself.
I made very little money, just enough to run my car.
I've supplied dope since I was fifteen because I've never had any money.
I wasn't dependent on coke, any more than it was nice to have a line after a heavy day — just like someone might have a glass of wine.
It was certainly no more important to me and I could quite happily go for weeks without any.
I only took it in social situations.
It was like giving myself a little treat, like say buying a bottle of wine.
I've never drunk, possibly because my mother, my grandmother and my daughter's father are heavy drinkers.
I grew up with a thing about alcohol — I think that's got a lot to do with why I preferred a line of coke rather than a drink.
I was able to take it or leave it.
My mother grassed me up, she went to the police.
She searched my house and got information from my daughter, telling her that I was sick, that I needed help and that she wouldn't go to the police.
My mother obviously found something in the house.
She'd been trying to prove that I was on drugs since I was fourteen.
The expression ‘on drugs’ turns my stomach.
I had never presented myself like that to anybody.
I had such a horrific adolescence and childhood, it's not surprising I found a way out, an escape from the pain.
I was getting through by starting to smoke dope and take acid.
I had no self-confidence at all until I was twenty-five.
I had some very, very difficult years because of my childhood and adolescence.
I am positive the only reason I'm still here is because I did take drugs.
I found it impossible to make relationships, I was one hell of a mess.
I had two nervous breakdowns when I was a teenager.
Dope was my only means of escape.
If it hadn't been dope it would have been valium: what's the difference?
My mother sat my daughter down and said something like, ‘Look, I know your mother's up to something, she's sick, she needs help, we've got to help her.
You tell me.’
My daughter was then ten and a half.
What an awful thing to do to her.
I'm confident enough in my ability as a mother to know my daughter had never been pressurised by knowing there was a part of my life that was illegal.
She'd grown up knowing that.
She also knew that it meant that we could have a car when otherwise we couldn't.
She had always been completely sensible and  completely cool about it.
There has been a close bond between us all her life.
We grew up together, I've looked after her by myself from when she was two, which was when I split up from her father.
I could always tell if she was under pressure, and she was always able to talk to me.
I am absolutely convinced that if she was at all worried about my ‘drug activities’ it would have manifested itself, like in difficulties at school or something.
One thing that I did tell her was that if I ever got arrested she would not be involved.
That was another reason why I feel I let her down so much.
My mother was always very jealous of the close relationship that my daughter and I had, and did all she could to come between us.
I'm a pretty perceptive person, I understand people quite well, but I never dreamt that my mother could do anything that would damage my daughter so greatly.
She did it because she wanted to get custody of my daughter, that was her motive.
She went to my daughter's school and told them, which resulted in my daughter's teacher making her a ward of court.
My daughter was then in her last year at primary school.
I had had nothing but glowing reports from her teacher.
She'd always done very well, had lots of friends, been very settled, nothing to make me believe in any way that she was disturbed.
My mother happened to see the woman who'd been my daughter's form teacher for the previous two years, who was known to interfere.
In conversation with my mother it appears that she realised my mother was too unbalanced to have custody of my daughter, so therefore she made wardship proceedings herself.
She didn't go to the Social Services or anything like that, she acted completely beyond the jurisdiction of any teacher.
Her justification was that we were personal friends, which is absolute bullshit.
I'd never even been to her house.
Also I think it is very relevant that at this point my daughter's father was not involved.
Nobody thought of asking him if he'd like custody.
He'd been so disinterested in her progress during six years of primary school that he'd only ever visited the school once.
You would have thought that the natural reaction of the teacher would have been that we ought to contact the father — better him than the nutty grandmother.
I was arrested on a Wednesday and kept overnight at the police station and questioned.
The only reason the police got anything out of me was because they threatened to question my daughter.
I didn't know that they could, but I'd always sworn to her that I would never involve her in any way and I've never broken my word.
I would have admitted to murder to keep her out of it.
I didn't know then that she had already been well questioned, by my mother, by her teacher, Uncle Tom Cobbleigh and all.
She'd even been taken to the police station by the teacher to see if they, the police, wanted to speak to her.
Luckily they hit on a nice policewoman who more or less had to throw the teacher out, she was so insistent and heavy.
The teacher turned up at the police station at eight the next morning to tell me she was taking responsibility for my daughter.
I said, thank you very much but I haven't even been charged yet, let alone convicted.
I asked the police to ring her father and ask him to come and collect her from school.
I was horrified to find out later that in fact he had not collected her from school but from the police station.
I don't know what she was doing there.
I can only think that the teacher wanted to get as much mileage from the whole thing as she could.
They held me one night on a holding charge because they had to analyse the pharmaceuticals.
They charged me with possession of cannabis.
I was then granted unconditional bail, in spite of the fact that the magistrates knew all about the cocaine, which was one of the reasons I thought I'd never get a sentence.
I just had to sign on at the police station once a week — no surety, unopposed bail, no problem at all.
I spent all the next seven months waiting for my case to come up and fighting to keep my daughter.
I wasn't corrupting anybody.
I wasn't exactly selling drugs to teenagers: most of my friends were in the music business in London, and you can't find a business which goes more hand in hand with it.
I didn't supply to anyone in my home town.
I kept my two lives very separate.
I was that content with being a mother I'd decided I didn't want a job until my daughter went to secondary school.
I was offered this amazing job in London, but I felt no, I've got plenty of time, I'd rather be with her until she  goes to secondary school.
I was brought up by au pairs, there's no way I'd do that to my child.
It was my responsibility I brought that child into the world, and there was no way I was going to thrust her off onto other people.
I didn't see it as a choice between that and continuing an illegal existence.
I saw it as a choice of what I believed to be my obligations, how I see motherhood.
Karen stayed with her father.
I had to apply for access — access to my own daughter who I'd lived with all her life.
We'd never been apart from each other for more than two weeks when I was arrested.
I don't know how I coped with it.
It was like a raving nightmare.
I couldn't believe that it wouldn't resolve itself.
I thought that someone would say, ‘Hang on, this is all ridiculous.
We know Karen, we know Janet, this is all mad.’
My daughter's welfare seemed far more important, and it was really all I thought about.
So I put very little energy into my criminal case partly because I didn't think I would go to prison, and certainly not for more than a month or two.
The police didn't want me to be sentenced, which I was stunned about.
They seemed to be of the opinion that there should be a new form of charge for two levels of supplying, like what they call social supplying and big supplying.
Technically, if you hand someone a joint you're supplying, but it means a lot of work for them and doesn't catch the people who are the big fish.
And anyway, what you do among consenting adults is really your own business.
When I was sentenced I didn't even know what two years meant.
I didn't know about parole.
My doctor had also prepared a report for the judge, about various medical problems which I hoped might be taken into consideration, along with the fact that I had for some time been re-building my life and now had very little to do with the lifestyle that brought me into contact with drugs.
I wasn't very happy with my legal representation; in fact, I think I could have done a better job myself.
The whole thing seemed to be over with in five minutes — I'd hardly sat down before I was being taken down the steps to the police cells.
It all seemed very unreal.
My solicitor and barrister came and saw me, and explained about parole and remission, and told me there was no point in appealing.
I was absolutely stunned, I hardly knew what was going on.
After a lot of pestering I was allowed to speak to two friends who had come to court with me, and I was appalled by having to speak to them through a glass and metal grille thing.
I wasn't allowed to go anywhere near them at a time when I most needed reassuring.
It was very frightening.
A very young prison officer from Holloway was with me at the court.
My solicitor's secretary had rung Holloway to find out what I was allowed to take, and was told three changes of clothes, flannel, books and basic things.
I had taken very little, but this screw took great pleasure in going through all my things and saying I couldn't take most of it.
When I got to Holloway I found I would have been entitled to take most of the things she wouldn't let me take, like a hairbrush.
With hair as long as mine it's just impossible without one — I didn't have one for three weeks.
I suppose that was my introduction to a totally dehumanising process.
She seemed to get such delight in removing all those objects from me.
I ended up with a couple of pairs of trousers, a couple of T-shirts, a jumper and a pair of shoes.
After a fight, I was able to take three books.
I was taken down to Holloway by car, with me on the back seat and her on one side and a male officer on the other side.
I was very worried I was going to be sick.
The reception at Holloway was so confusing and everyone was so aggressive.
I had to keep on signing bits of paper which were meant to list my property, but I had no opportunity to read anything.
It was ‘Sign this’ and if you questioned anything you got shouted at.
I'd taken a box of medication I was on at the time — drops I needed for my eyes, my asthma inhalant and things like that.
This caused great consternation and a lot of mirth.
They seemed to think I was a professional hypochondriac.
I had a tremendous struggle to keep my medication the whole time I was in Holloway, and it started again when I went to Styal.
I saw two nurses who also thought my medicines were very amusing.
They thought I ought to see the doctor.
Nobody seemed to accept that I'd been in charge of my own body and my own  medication for the best part of my life; they seemed to think that was a very strange idea.
I saw the doctor who said I'd better go on the hospital wing, which seemed ludicrous simply because I needed to use eye drops and an asthma inhalant and asthma pills.
I don't know whether it was because I was in there for drugs.
I couldn't believe their attitude.
I wasn't prepared for it.
I was strip searched and told to have a bath.
They didn't make me wash my hair which I was very grateful for as I hate having to wash my hair in the bath.
For three hours I was sitting in a dressing gown.
I wasn't given anything to eat until six o'clock, I hadn't had anything all day.
The officer at the court had taken my jewellery off me.
I'd left a couple of rings on which were really hard to get off.
They eventually got them off me with baby oil, and almost took my fingers with them.
It was so unnecessary; they weren't sharp or dangerous or big.
They couldn't get my bracelet off.
It became very important to me, like my only mark of identity.
I'm very sentimental about my jewellery.
I found having it taken away worse than the strip search.
It really made me feel naked.
The strip search seemed fairly pointless, inasmuch as they didn't go through my pockets.
It would have been quite possible to put something into the pockets of my dressing gown and then put it back into my clothes when I took the dressing gown off.
Because I was going to the hospital wing I didn't get taken up until about nine o'clock, so I was the last one.
All the other girls had gone and I was left by myself — no books, magazines or anything — wondering what was going to happen to me.
They seemed to be making a point on reception of continually stressing, ‘This is prison so you'd better get used to it.
’ There seemed to be an awful lot of officers making a tremendous noise, and they were all so heavy.
They could see by my record that I hadn't been to prison before, didn't know the procedure.
Nobody explained anything at all.
You were expected by some telepathic way to know where to go, what to do.
If you didn't, you were bawled out, and that took an awful lot of getting used to.
It was really horrific.
When I finally got up onto the wing it was dark.
I couldn't  believe how dirty it was.
I thought prisons would be immaculate, and that in the hospital wing they'd be particularly fussy.
It was really filthy.
In the first cell they took me to, which was single, there was blood everywhere.
That was the last straw as far as I was concerned.
Then they decided perhaps I didn't have to stay in that one after all, so put me into another single cell, which was equally disgusting.
There was a pile of really filthy-looking blankets on the bed, they got me some sheets and a towel, and I managed to get an extra pillow because of my asthma.
There was a girl in the next cell who I was to see again later in Styal.
She's very, very disturbed, and should never have been in prison.
She screamed and screamed and screamed all night long.
My first twenty-four hours in prison were difficult, very difficult.
The assistant governor [AG]who I saw four days after I got into prison told me I'd be going to Cookham Wood or Bullwood Hall in two to three weeks.
I couldn't stay in Holloway because there wasn't room for sentenced women.
There's only sixty places and they were all full.
I'd also seen a probation person.
He told me to try to go to Cookham Wood: in his words, ‘There's a better class of prisoner there.
’ I didn't know any better.
About eight o'clock on the eighth day I was told to pack my stuff up, because at seven o'clock the next morning I was going to Styal.
I didn't even know where Styal was!
When I found out I really kicked up.
For a start, Styal had never been mentioned.
I'd been hoping my daughter would be brought to see me at Holloway and was frightened of her turning up and finding me not there.
I also knew I was very unlikely to get visitors as far away as Styal.
Although Holloway was awful at least it was central and most of my friends were in London.
Obviously, looking back, I'm overjoyed I only spent eight days there.
The contrast between it and Styal couldn't be more marked.
Six of us went to Styal.
The journey took ages.
We were told we were going to stop at Coventry on the way for lunch.
We all perked up.
Nice one!
We pulled into Coventry police station and instead of going to a cafe, as we had hoped, we got shut in one cell and left there for about two hours with the most  revolting sandwiches you've ever seen in your life.
It was a tiny cell, so we had to take it in turns to sit down.
Three on a bench, three on the stone floor, usual cell toilet, no door on it or anything.
All this came as such a shock.
I must have been very naive.
Like with the conditions at Holloway, I knew it would be no picnic, but I just didn't think they would treat human beings like that, anywhere.
We got to Styal mid-afternoon.
Two of the women who were moved up with me had already been in prison, one for about a year, one for about eight months, so they knew what to expect.
We were left in the waiting room for about three hours before anyone started dealing with us.
We were just locked in, no food or anything.
I finally got out of reception at around half-past seven, after going through the whole procedure, marking off all my stuff again (which was checked before leaving Holloway), and a strip search.
Even though we'd come from another prison, we still had to be searched.
It was summer and Styal looked very attractive.
The grounds are very nicely kept.
From reception we could see girls walking around, although we were told by a very heavy officer that we were not to get any ideas that we could walk around freely.
You had to have a reason for going from A to B, or else you were in trouble.
To my utter horror I was put on Fry House, which was the house for pregnant women at that time.
The last thing I wanted when I was so worried about what was happening with my own daughter was to spend my sentence surrounded by pregnant women.
When I got to the house, I found a far more relaxed atmosphere than at Holloway.
I was amazed at the size of it, it felt vast, and I was put in a two-bedded room which I had to myself as the house wasn't full.
It was really dilapidated and tacky.
Again I was expecting military style spick and span.
In the common room all the chairs were slashed and scratched, old curtains hung off their hooks, really dilapidated and depressing.
No effort had been made to make it look homely at all.
It seemed sad for the pregnant women, especially, to be in such a depressing house.
The house officer was very young.
I got to know her quite  well eventually, very sort of‘jolly hockey sticks’ and friendly.
There was none of the constant supervision that you got in Holloway, just one officer on the house for twenty-two women, and no screw on at night, which absolutely amazed me.
On the pregnants' house, though, a nurse stayed overnight, in case anyone went into labour.
It was a lot friendlier and altogether more human than Holloway.
One officer, a really nice screw, a senior officer called Mrs [R], understood why I wanted to be moved off the pregnant house and got me moved the next day.
I was moved to Martin, the most rowdy house in the prison.
Whether that was down to the powers that be I don't know; perhaps they were teaching me a lesson for daring to complain about where I was put.
Because I was older and a bit more staid I was going to have a hard time.
Most of the women on Martin were Youth Custody trainees [YCs]and they could be a real pain.
There was always girls in trouble and lots of fights and chaos.
But you had to remember the circumstances they were there under — they should never have been there at all.
It was age, youthful high spirits, they were very young, like puppies really.
They were incredibly noisy and boisterous.
No malice or anything.
The YCs got punished more than anybody else and had a really hard time.
Most of them went out and re-offended.
I learnt very quickly that prison solved nothing.
A very large proportion had been there before and would be there again.
You're allowed more things in Styal: one more set of clothes, more photographs, more books.
But everything is so arbitrary; every screw interprets the rules differently, and there seems to be no rhyme or reason for anything.
The first month this was very hard to understand.
After you'd come to terms with everything and knew what was expected, life became easier.
You had to learn each officer's quirks personally, because they not only interpreted the rules and regulations so very differently, they also made up their own as they went along.
I spent a good while asking for something written down so that I could see what I was and wasn't supposed to do, but that was a forlorn hope.
In fact it was treated as a joke.
There's the green  Instructions for Prisoners book [information book], but it has virtually no relevance to anything to do with life in prison.
I smuggled a copy out when I left because I thought it was so funny.
I had the same problem with the doctor and nurses in Styal over what I could and couldn't have in the way of eye drops, etc.
Even though I'd eventually been allowed my inhaler and eye ointment in Holloway, it had all been taken off me again.
The doctor's attitude was complete contempt.
When I had my medical interview he said to me, ‘You know what I think you should be in here for?
Life.’
Which was pretty heartening, considering it was down to him to do one of my parole reports and that most of the people in Styal were there for drugs, or drug-related crimes, like kiting cheques [passing stolen cheques]to buy drugs or shoplifting to buy drugs.
Probably about 70 per cent of the women were in there because of drugs — a phenomenal proportion.
It would have been much better if they had been getting some therapy to help them understand why they needed to take drugs in the first place.
Some of them seemed to view it as a sort of health cure.
They'd get a short sentence for shoplifting, clean themselves up, get out and then be in again within six months — young women.
Soon after your arrival you're interviewed and put on what's called ‘house assessment’— house cleaning for the first five weeks — whilst the screws work out what would be the best work for you.
You don't have much choice: cook (every house has its own cook), on the gardens, workroom, works, etc.
Some jobs are more popular than others.
The job that everyone considered bad was in the workroom, which was my absolute dread.
I mean, I can't sew at all!
It would have driven me mad to have been stuck behind a sewing machine all day, which some of my friends were.
All the girls who were any sort of discipline problem and virtually all the older women ended up in the workroom.
I felt bloody sorry for them.
The money was good if you worked hard, really hard, but it took a while to get good enough on the machines to do that.
The top wage in the prison was around £2.60 a week and £3 in the workroom, and the  woman who ran it — a civilian instructor, not a screw — was a real old dragon who put people on report at the drop of a hat.
You can easily lose a job or be moved as a sort of back-handed discipline.
It's never proved or said that's why you lose a job, but it's a constant threat.
It was unusual if you got the job you wanted because that isn't how prison works.
I was lucky, because instead of being on house assessment I was called and told I was going to be on the works party next day, only my second day at Styal.
It caused a tremendous stink among the other women because that was a prized job, what's called a ‘trusty's’ job.
Only those who they think are pretty responsible go on the works.
I don't think anyone realised how strange it all was for me.
I had only been in prison eight days.
I still didn't know what was going on, and was still desperately worried about what was happening at home.
Virtually everybody there had been held on remand or had been to prison before, so knew how the prison ran.
I was pretty unusual in that respect.
It transpired the reason why I was put on the works was because there was another woman on the works with the same surname who'd gone to Holloway for her appeal and they thought she'd come back and had got us mixed up.
I got on well.
I enjoyed working with the outside tradesmen.
It was a bit like being a general builder's apprentice.
A number of men were employed to do up the houses one by one — they're slowly being modernised and decorated.
You're apprenticed to a different tradesman each week, so no ties are formed.
They were all over fifty at least.
I should imagine it was a condition of employment: ‘only geriatrics need apply!’
I was very worried, because I had never done anything like it in my life and I'm not at all handy, but I got a reputation for being a worker.
The best thing about it was the solitude.
You're normally never alone in prison, especially being in a dorm with eight people, and if you're not used to it, the constant noise of people around you all the time is awful.
My first day on the works I was sent off to whitewash a shed all by myself.
It was bliss.
Time passed by quite quickly.
I worked really hard which meant I got tired and  could sleep better at night.
I didn't sleep for the first week in prison, I couldn't get used to the noise.
I learnt how to paint a window properly, and tile a loo.
There were twelve on the party, quite a small number.
I got to know women from other houses.
I was lucky I went straight into a trusty's job, and I could work at weekends as well, and I earned good money: £2.63 a week.
Every morning, even Saturday and Sunday, we were woken at seven.
We had to be washed, dressed, have our hair immaculate (which was difficult because I had to plait mine), strip all the bedclothes off our beds (which seemed totally a pointless exercise and got right up my nose the entire time I was at Styal), and fold them to a complicated and immaculate design — sheet, blanket, sheet all wrapped round with the counterpane and put at the end of your bed.
All that and down to sign the time book by 7.20.
You had to queue to sign the book, as only one inmate was allowed in the office at a time.
If you're late twice you're put on report, and girls often lost remission because of that.
Twenty-two women, eight washbasins, two toilets, it's just impossible; twenty minutes to do all that and bunk your bed as well, and if you're sleeping in a bunk in a crowded room you're falling over each other trying to fold your sheets and blankets at the same time.
I got it down to a fine art, but it was all additional pressure.
Some screws were more lenient than others and you learned when you saw who came round to wake you up how much you had to hurry — whether it was one who'd put you on report if you were one minute late or if they would give you five minutes' grace.
Some were really heavy.
Then you went into the common room, Radio One was put on, and breakfast was called at 7.30.
Radio One was on all day, absolutely everywhere.
It didn't bother me, but it used to bother some of the other women terribly, especially the older ones.
You only had 20 minutes in the dining room and that included queuing up.
Everyone used to fight to get to the front of the queue, as that way you usually got better portions.
If you were last the food would be cold, because it all used to be laid out waiting for you to collect.
Getting a hot meal was an art in itself!
Breakfast was usually porridge, and Monday you got bacon, a  big event: one half-starved rasher.
You got your sugar ration in the morning which had to last all day: one egg cup full, a red plastic egg cup with ER on the bottom.
It depended entirely on the screw as to how full they filled it; it could be anything from half-full to full.
I soon learned to hide it because if you left it in the dining room or by your place somebody else would take it.
Meals only used to take about five minutes to eat in there, everyone would eat really quickly.
If you were near the front, it was nice to be able to have a roll-up and drink your tea slowly and wake up a bit.
After breakfast you'd have until 8.25 to make your bed again, tidy your space and make sure it was absolutely immaculate.
You had to leave for work at 8.25.
The house screws would stand out on the avenue to make sure that you didn't stop and talk.
I worked from 8.30 to ten past twelve.
We had a tea break which was only supposed to be for ten minutes, but the men took exception to this so we usually got a bit longer.
Dinner was at 12.30.
Before we left for dinner we had to be rubbed down [a body search], have our pockets checked, etc.
All meals were in the house.
How good the meal was depended entirely on what the cook was like, you couldn't believe the difference.
Sometimes the food was totally inedible.
If you were unfortunate enough to get a bad cook it took a while before the powers that be realised it, so you had to put up with inedible food for weeks.
Sometimes it was completely burnt.
We nearly always had milk pudding, rice pudding, semolina or some other stodge.
I found that before long I was eating everything — most people did out of boredom.
Also meals are an event, and measured out the days: the end of the morning, the end of the afternoon.
You also got your mail at dinnertime, opened, read and censored by the screws during the morning.
You went back to work at half-past one.
We weren't allowed to go upstairs to our rooms without permission, that was a real blow for me.
So we were all herded in the common room together.
It was pretty small and there was never enough chairs for everybody.
(A screw told me that a prison regulation stated that there should only be two chairs for every three women.)
On the works, I worked until ten to five which was a lot later than most other people, and this caused problems.
Tea was at five and before tea you were meant to have changed out of your work clothes.
If you didn't finish until ten minutes before, there was no way you could change and have a bath.
Baths were something which caused continual problems.
There were never enough to go around, especially on the house where I was, where there were two other girls on the works and four girls on the gardens all coming in filthy dirty and wanting a bath.
There was always arguments.
The screws eventually brought in a booking system but refused to put the bath book out until three o'clock.
So if you happened to be out of the house working it was too bad, unless you got a house cleaner to put your name down for you.
Tea was at five, evening classes were at 5.50.
I went to as many classes as I could, although as they worked college terms they didn't start until September and I arrived in July.
Evenings without classes were dreadful.
They really dragged just watching telly, and everyone wanted to watch the soap operas and sit coms.
We had supper at eight which was usually a rock cake or a scone, or sometimes we had toast, and a cup of tea.
We got coffee once a week.
You had to be in bed and washed by nine o'clock at the latest; the house screw only left after she'd seen everyone in bed.
If you were on a house that was causing problems, you got what was called babysitters, which meant two screws on the house all night.
Howard, which was the ‘muppet house’[house for women who were disturbed or particularly distressed], also had screws on all night.
Then there were the screws they called night patrol.
There were two sets of them.
They went from house to house checking all night long.
If you were caught out of bed or in bed with anyone else, you were instantly put on report.
On Martin, where I was, someone would go to the washroom which looks over the pathways to act as lookout, so hardly anyone did stay in bed once the screw had gone off.
The night patrol was meant to come and turn the lights off at a quarter to ten, but sometimes they wouldn't turn up until eleven or half eleven.
They couldn't tell you off for not turning off the lights but you weren't meant to be out of your  dorm or even out of bed.
It was like reverting to childhood.
When I was in the eight-bed dorm it was terribly noisy, but I just had to get used to it.
Later on I managed to move to a quiet dorm which was really great and very essential to saving my sanity.
In prison your whole level of tolerance to noise has to adjust.
A lot of the senior officers didn't like the houses being unattended.
I heard before my release that they were thinking of having screws on the houses all night.
I think that would be a great shame, especially for the younger ones.
It was the only chance they had to let off any steam.
It was difficult for the older people, they should have been a lot more thoughtful how they separated people for the houses.
Not middle-class ghettos or anything like that, but simply by age.
Every house had one or two people who were over forty-five and it was misery for them.
In prison you're always rushing and worrying.
The first month was absolute hell, especially as I didn't have a watch.
They'd shout ‘Classes’ and you might be in the bath!
But you got used to it.
You start to work like clockwork, doing it all automatically.
From continually chasing my tail in the first month and being late for everything, and always being in trouble in varying degrees, punctuality became second nature.
Once you knew what the routine was, it was much easier to fit in.
It was dreadful while you couldn't remember what time tea break was, or what time breakfast was, or what time you were meant to line up for this, that or the other, or what time doses [handing out medication]was.
That was the other thing, it took me a long fight to get my eye drops.
I had to go to the hospital every four hours for my eye drops and asthma inhaler, and even though I didn't need them that often, I was still expected to go.
The screw would shout ‘Doses’ and expect you to be waiting by the front door.
For some obscure reason you had to be taken over.
You went to work by yourself but you had to be taken to the hospital, and when I was on Martin it was right next door.
So that was another thing to fit in.
I never thought I'd be able to remember it all.
It was very hectic.
Whilst I was in prison I only saw my daughter twice.
I asked the probation department if they could arrange a visit as it didn't  look like anyone else was going to.
My probation officer outside told me she'd try to bring her up, but then she said it was too far and she couldn't get the funds, so I only saw her twice in eight months.
On both occasions friends brought her.
I asked the governor whether I could have a visit in the probation department so that Karen didn't have to see me in the gym with everyone else and I could talk to her a bit more intimately.
I hadn't seen her since before the trial, I really wanted to reassure her and talk to her on her own, to help my relationship with her continue.
I thought it would be much easier to see her in those sort of surroundings.
But they weren't having any of it.
It was mean, especially after all she'd been through.
What the visits were like depended on how full the gym was.
We were allowed a visit every fortnight.
On Wednesdays or Saturdays you got two hours (other days it was only thirty minutes) so obviously everyone came on those days.
The fuller the gym was, the more isolated you were with your visitors, because you were in a crowd.
You were allowed up to three visitors at a time and had to sit opposite them at individual tables.
If the gym wasn't very full you were really conscious of the number of screws; they'd be all round the back, all round the perimeter, and there was apparently a spy hole over the basketball net which they watched through.
They'd be going up and down between the aisles as well.
There was a table at one end where a principal officer and a couple of others sat overseeing the whole lot.
Wednesdays was the only day ex-inmates were allowed to visit friends in prison.
If you saw someone you knew and you shouted out to them, you were in dead trouble, even if you shouted hello, or if you asked someone at the next table for a cigarette.
If anything had been brought in for you it had to be handed in at the screws' table, and they had to sign the property book.
There were always great arguments about whether it was something you were allowed or not, and that always seemed to take up half the visit.
Your poor visitors had come miles, had to wait to be taken from the prison gate to the gym, and then had to queue up waiting to hand in a bunch of flowers or something  trivial, and then it all had to be signed for, then the screws came over to your table and you had to sign for it.
On one occasion I had some winter clothes brought in and it did take up literally half the visit, sorting all that out, and arguing about what I could and couldn't have.
Everything brought or sent in has first to go through ‘property’ and spend a few days (which usually become weeks) there before you eventually get it.
All this ridiculous red tape!
It's not surprising nobody has any respect for it.
All these totally ludicrous things just make work for everyone, and the screws put pressure on the inmates with such pointless regulations as well as causing lots of paperwork for themselves.
I didn't get many visits.
If you didn't have your fortnightly visit you were allowed a letter in lieu or sometimes a phone call.
Only three people were allowed to make a phone call each week, which meant sometimes you had to wait your turn for weeks.
Those phone calls could be very distressing, especially as there was always a screw hovering nearby listening to what you were saying and there was pressure to say everything in your allotted ten minutes.
It just wasn't worth it, so I didn't bother to apply.
Prison is so petty.
All the rules and regulations: I'm sure it's much worse for women than for men.
Men wouldn't stand for it.
One classic example was of a girl getting a pound fine and losing three days' remission for giving another girl a cigarette paper.
(You are not allowed to give or lend anything at all: technically you're not even allowed to read each other 's books!)
She was only earning about £1.30 a week, so that was almost her entire wage.
Lots of girls got put on report for wearing each other 's clothes — usually for visits, when they'd want to borrow something that looked good.
You were allowed so few clothes that it was nice to be able to wear something different.
On houses where the screws were really strict about these things you had a locker check each week and if every single item wasn't in your locker you'd had it.
Punishments generally seemed to get a lot more severe whilst I was there.
People started losing weeks' rather than days' remission.
Three girls lost two weeks for talking in the medicine queue whilst waiting for doses.
Some screws would let you talk and some wouldn't. it was all very  arbitrary.
I remember when I'd been there only two weeks I almost got put on report for smoking in the avenue.
I'd no idea you weren't allowed to until this huge screw bears down on me throwing a wobbler, going blue with rage.
A lot of the younger officers tended to be very career orientated, and far heavier and aggressive.
Some were ex-police or ex-army or whatever.
The older ones were more maternal, and far more reasonable on the whole, with exceptions.
There was a really heavy little clique, the same ones that ousted the governor.
I felt the screws who didn't belong to this clique and didn't subscribe to it were given almost as hard a time by them as the inmates.
The tough ones were certainly the dominant force within the prison.
The older screws were dropping like flies.
One particularly lovely lady called Mrs [S]who I used to talk to a lot had had enough, she was going.
She couldn't stand it any more.
Mrs [A]was another one.
They were local women and had joined for a job, but they were grandmotherly in a way, just the sort of people the younger girls needed.
Not these tough, heavy, very often butch young women who were incredibly disciplinarian and so uncaring and unbothered.
They were incredibly sarcastic and mocking, and their general treatment of you was so demeaning.
They'd delight in things like withholding the mail, or telling the cook off for making the food look too attractive or for giving people too much.
Whatever they could stick their noses into they would, like telling you off if you had more than eight photos on your pin board.
Why should it matter how many photos you had?
Totally ridiculous things.
They'd stir things up with lots of nasty sly remarks, especially to someone like me who wasn't doing anything tangible they could punish.
I think they found women like me really hard to cope with.
Being quite educated and articulate I wasn't the sort of prisoner they expected, even though as there are more drug offenders there are more and more women like me.
There were about thirty  Black or non-English-speaking women, out of a population of about three hundred.
They were mostly LTIs [long-term inmates]so I didn't see much of them.
But those I did see seemed to have a harder time.
There was only one Black officer.
There was one awful incident towards the end of my sentence.
It had been a very hard and bitterly cold winter.
The heating was woefully inadequate — upstairs there were just pipes running round the rooms, and downstairs a few scattered radiators.
The houses had antiquated boiler systems, which constantly went wrong.
They were in desperate need of repair, and there was never enough hot water to heat the pipes.
Martin house was notoriously bad for often having no hot water.
One day in February the boiler broke down; there'd been no heat or hot water all day.
The women were told it would soon be mended, but by the time it came for bed it still wasn't repaired, although probably all it needed was a new fuse.
There was always a couple of works men on call, so it could easily have been done.
The screws had electric fires in their office, so it didn't bother them.
At 9 p.m. the women sat down in the common room and said they weren't going to bed until the heating was fixed.
A few minutes later they were given a direct order to go to bed — and if you disobey a direct order you're instantly put on report.
It's quite a serious charge.
Out of the twenty-eight women on the house, three went to bed, and they were in fact to lose two weeks' remission each for being in bed a few minutes late.
The rest linked arms and said they were staying there until the heating was fixed.
Various high-ranking people, ending up with the governor himself, turned up, asking them to go to bed, but they wouldn't go.
After a while they were left alone for a bit and then a Black Maria turned up.
A substantial number of police came out with truncheons, went into the house and very forcibly removed eight women and drove them off to Risley.
One was seen being carried out, head down, legs back, bleeding copiously from the head.
All the screws were there.
One was handing out straps and the girls' hands and feet were strapped together before they were thrown in the van.
There were police waiting for them in the van and they got another good beating.
All the screws were joining in, the girls were horribly out-numbered.
They were just having a peaceful protest, sitting there and linking arms: no threats or fear of violence.
The screws, it seemed, had picked out the eight most troublesome in the house, most of which were YCs.
Out of them two eventually went to Durham.
Only one came back to Styal, a few days after it all happened, and I bumped into her on my way to work.
I said to her, ‘Look I'm going out in a couple of weeks, you must tell me exactly what happened so I can tell the papers about it.’
She was walking with a girl who was quite a problematic and attention-seeking sort of person.
Anyway, she said she'd give me something about it on Sunday at NA [the Narcotics Anonymous Group which meets weekly at Styal].
The next day I was walking to work and I'd just got as far as the hospital.
There's always screws standing outside there, like there's always screws lining the routes to work making sure you don't stop to talk to anyone.
Anyway this woman, the problematic one, stopped me in full view of everyone and handed me this folded piece of paper.
I stood and looked at her aghast, as there were at least half a dozen screws watching, and writing notes or letters to another prisoner is absolutely forbidden.
I wasn't really thinking at the time.
I was listening engrossed to the woman I was walking to work with, who the night before had found two night-screws stretched out on the desk in a passionate embrace when she'd gone downstairs to the office to ask for a Tampax.
So I was miles away!
I just looked at this piece of paper in horror and was pounced on.
I never saw what it was, it was still folded.
The screws were apoplectic with rage.
‘What's the meaning of this?’
‘I don't know.’
I had no idea what it was.
I was told to go off to work.
I'd only been there about five minutes when they came to escort me off down to Bleak House, where I was stripped naked and given a blanket and put into a cell.
Bleak House is sub-human.
It's absolutely horrifying — makes Holloway look like a holiday camp.
The cells are completely bare, some with an iron bedframe bolted to the floor, others with only a mattress and plastic bowl, pot, and that's it.
It was freezing cold.
I was eventually given my clothes back, but they were all muddy and  damp because I'd been on gardens.
I didn't get my proper clothes, or any sheets, for over twenty-four hours.
The screws who worked down on the block were absolute monsters.
I suppose it takes a pretty special sort of screw to be able to work in those conditions, to choose to work down there, but they were totally inhuman.
And it was like being new to prison all over again, the rules and regulations were quite different.
You were let out four times a day for slop-out, when they came round with the trolley and collected the plates.
There was no toilet paper in the cell, so you had to ask for it.
You're allowed very little of your own stuff down there, just a set of clothes, but it all goes down just in case you don't return to your house.
All the contents of my locker had been tipped into a blanket.
Some women were kept down there for weeks, some in the special cells, with strip dress, paper plates, paper pot.
It could drive you mad.
I'm sure it's not allowed to keep people in solitary for long periods.
I'm sure they are breaking the rules.
I was hauled off in front of the assistant governor for adjudication.
He sits behind a desk and you stand a few feet away with a screw facing you really close on either side.
‘You realise what this is?’
I hadn't realised what it was at all, presumably a note.
I said, ‘It was put in my hand.
I don't know.
Do you think I'd be stupid enough to do something like that in full view of everyone?
I'm going home in a couple of weeks.’
‘Oh no you're not, we're going to get your parole revoked.
This is a very serious case.’
If I'd less sense than I have, I'd have believed them.
I'd have been suicidal.
I knew it was just idle threats, but a lot wouldn't have — they'd have been distraught.
I think I was set up.
The screws knew I was vocal and articulate and had by then got my own way to a fair extent by being incredibly polite and incredibly persistent but not actually stepping out of line.
I'm sure I was set up and this girl was exactly the sort of person they'd be able to get to do it, because there was no sense in it otherwise.
Maybe the note said something about my going to the newspapers.
I don't know, as I never saw it.
But there was no sense in her giving it to me in full view of everyone.
To cut a long story short, I was given an additional three days behind the  door, with a £1 fine for being in receipt of an illegal letter, even though it was put into my hand.
I didn't know what it was and I certainly hadn't asked for it.
Prison teaches you a lot of new tricks.
It teaches you a severe disregard for the entire system.
I saw people who came in pretty straight but who changed their attitudes and opinions drastically.
It did nothing but harm and didn't help anyone.
There doesn't seem to be any emphasis on rehabilitation or help in any respect.
It was okay painting window frames, but it wasn't going to help me get a job when I got outside.
My daughter still lives with her father.
She had settled there to some extent by the time I was released and I didn't think it was good to disrupt her again.
I decided to put all these experiences to positive use and managed to get a job with a charitable trust in London which works with women ex-prisoners.
I go back to Chelmsford most weekends and manage to see my daughter quite regularly, though our relationship is still nothing like as close as it was before my arrest.
I have to remember we spent her first ten years together and hope that this will be what matters in the long run.
To be honest, though, this separation has broken my heart.
I don't think it's something I'll ever really get over.
Margy
Margy was twenty-seven when we spoke with her and was living in a one-bedroomed flat in Newcastle-upon-Tyne with her three-year-old daughter Donna, her second child.
Although she felt she had settled down a lot since her last release from prison, she was still having difficulties coping with the day-to-day strain and isolation of being a single parent.
She had been out of prison for four years but was on two suspended sentences for shoplifting, and had recently been arrested for shoplifting again.
It looked almost certain she would face another prison sentence in the near future.
Margy comes from Newcastle and speaks with a Geordie accent.
We didn't want to change her words, but should perhaps explain that Geordies often use ‘us’ instead of‘me’.
I can remember being taken into care when I was three.
I can remember being in the back of a car and I was screaming.
The social worker was driving.
Me dad had hit us with a belt, that's why I ended up in a home.
I can't remember seeing me dad till I was five.
They'd sent us home to see if I could live with me mam and dad, but it didn't last long.
Me dad still used to batter us, so me and me brothers and sisters all got put back into care.
They put us all in different homes and I can't remember the whole family being together, ever.
It used to make me really mad because some of me brothers and sisters used to get put in the same homes together, but I was always on my own.
They used to move us round from one home to another all the time.
I don't know why.
I was in one home for three years when I was at junior school.
It was a family group home and we used to call the staff ‘mam’ and ‘dad’.
I was dead happy there and then, all of a sudden, they came one day and just moved me to another home.
They never told me why and that really hurt.
That's when I started running away and getting into trouble.
They never put us in foster care.
I don't know why.
When I was running away they put me in an approved school for girls run by nuns.
I was there three years.
They were dead strict.
I ran away loads of times but they kept taking us back.
I hated it.
You were supposed to get home leaves but every time I was due for mine they used to stop it.
I felt as though they were picking on me, trying to cause trouble so they'd have a reason for stopping me home leave.
One Christmas I hit one of the nuns and they expelled me.
I went home to me mam, who had left me dad by then.
That was when I was fifteen.
Me and me mam didn't get on, we started fighting and then I started shoplifting.
That was how I got remanded in custody when I was only fifteen.
I reckon most of the kids I knew in care ended up in trouble.
When I was put in the police cells after getting remanded, the police were trying to scare us, telling us about lesbians and all that at Low Newton remand centre.
They said that if I was cheeky at Low Newton the screws would just hit me.
When I got there I thought it was all right.
It wasn't really that different from the approved school.
In a place like that it all depends how you get on with the screws: some lasses did take hell.
When I went to court I pleaded guilty, and I didn't get a sentence, so I was out again.
I was still under a care order so the Social Services put me in a hostel.
I only stayed a couple of days and then I ran away to London.
I thought it would be great down there, but I started having a bad time so I went back to Newcastle.
I had nowhere to go and I kept getting thrown out of places.
They even hoyed [threw]us out of the Salvation Army hostel.
It wasn't long before I got caught shoplifting again so I was back on remand at Low Newton — I think I must have been  on remand there about eight times.
I walked out of court after that one too.
I got my first borstal when I was about eighteen for assault on another girl.
There were some young lasses in the Chilli [Chillingham Arms], they were talking about my tattoos and that and staring at me, so I had a fight with one of them.
I got six months to two years borstal, and I was at Bullwood Hall for about nine months.
Bullwood Hall is in Essex so I was three hundred miles away from Newcastle.
When I first went in, I was on like an assessment unit.
I was there a few days and then me and me friends barricaded ourselves in a cell and we wouldn't come out because there was nowt to do.
The screws kept coming to try and get us out, sweet-talking us all nice and that, but we wouldn't come out.
Then they got the bloke screws in.
The blokes tried to get us out with water — the firehoses.
They put water through the window and then got the door down, just knocked it down.
Then they put us in the block.
It was horrible.
We were just locked up all the time, with half an hour exercise a day and no books to read.
We just had to sit there all day on our own, and I was in for a couple of weeks.
Then I was put back onto the house.
I can't remember very much about that.
They were nearly all young ones where I was.
The older ones used to like bully the young ones if you were soft and that, and like take your tabs [cigarettes]and threaten you, things like that.
I was in with them, you know, the bullies.
At first I was scared, but after a while I got used to it.
One lass, she tried to hang herself because of the bullying.
She got picked on 'cause she was soft and she was daft.
They used to pinch her tabs and everything, so she tried to hang herself.
During the day there was a factory and you used to have to make boxes, or if you were a cleaner you used to have to scrub the landings and everything, or there was a farm and you could work there — but you used to have to be really trusted to work on that.
I was in the factory making boxes and it was dead boring.
I made a lot of friends at Bullwood Hall.
After I came out I was going to write to them, but I never bothered.
One of them wrote to me, but I never wrote back.
Some of the screws  were all right, but it all depends on how you got on with them.
I was on report another time too.
I refused to go in my cell and they put us down the block.
They put us in the padded room overnight.
Then another time I smashed my cell up and slashed my arms and that, because I didn't get any letters or anything like that, so one of the screws came in and they put us down the block.
I was there for two weeks.
No one really bothered that I didn't get any letters or visits.
I didn't expect my family to visit me because it was too far, but they could have wrote.
There was quite a lot on drugs — a lot on tranquillisers.
On the hospital they were all doped up.
If you got a headache or anything, the nurse would just give you daft little tablets for it.
When I was at Bullwood Hall I was on Triptazol [a tranquilliser]for me temper.
When they give you it, they have to watch you swallow it, but I used to keep it in the back of my throat and save it up.
Then I took the tablets all at once.
I wasn't trying to kill myself.
I don't know why I did it.
I was just trying to get a buzz.
I was bad for about a week.
I was padded up with me mate and she says I just went weird.
She was dead frightened and was pressing on the bell and everything, but nobody came that night.
I was bad for ages.
It happens a lot that you ring the bell and they just don't come.
They never found out I'd done it.
I got out of Bullwood Hall on a Tuesday and I was picked up on the Thursday, two days later, for robbery.
It was robbery with violence.
I robbed a bloke in the park with two of me mates, a lad and a lass.
They got picked up as well.
We were kept in the police station for a couple of days and then we got remanded to Low Newton.
While I was there they found out I'd fallen pregnant while I was on my home leave from Bullwood Hall.
We were on remand for about three months and then we were up at the Crown court.
I got a fresh whack of borstal, the lad got borstal and the other lass got fifteen months' prison.
When I got sent down the judge said, ‘You should be out for the baby's birth’, but I wasn't.
After I was at court I had to go back to Low Newton to wait for a few weeks before I could go to Styal prison.
If I hadn't been pregnant I would have been sent back to Bullwood, but they  haven't got a mother and baby unit there, though in those days Styal was only for women over twenty-one, apart from the pregnant borstal girls.
I was terrified because I had never been in a proper prison before, and I had heard about Styal.
I had heard that the lasses used to beat you up when you first got in and that the lesbians used to grab hold of you and that there was loads of violence and everything.
I was really scared.
It was true for some people, because if you act soft when you go in, they do pick on you, but when I got there I knew how to act from being in Bullwood Hall and other places.
I was on the assessment house to start with, waiting to go on another house.
The lesbians didn't bother me.
You can easily get done for lesbian activities.
People used to lose a lot of time for that.
If you've got a mate, a best mate, and she's on a different house, you'll write her a note because you hardly ever see her, and if you get caught for that you lose a couple of weeks.
I got done for that.
I don't know why they are so strict, because a lot of the screws are lesbians.
If they knew you were friendly with someone, they would try their hardest to separate you.
They would put you on different jobs so you'd hardly see one another.
I had to go to Fox House, the pregnant house.
I didn't like that.
There were far too many of us and I kept getting depression and that, with being pregnant.
We went to the outside hospital for the ante-natal clinic.
They took us a few at a time and there were always prison officers with us.
We had to sit in the waiting room with everyone else.
Everyone knew we were from the prison, they stared at us.
The doctors and nurses knew too and just treated you any old way.
We had to go to classes as well.
It was just like being back at school.
We had sewing classes and cookery.
They never taught you nowt.
You knew with being pregnant, if you were sick or anything, you still had to go to classes.
One time I refused to go 'cause I was bad.
It was before I had the bairn, and I wouldn't go and they put us down the block for being cheeky.
I was down there two days.
When I came up they put us in the detention room on the house for pregnant women.
It was my  first night back and I was getting pains and everything.
There's a nurse who sleeps in the house, and one of the lasses knocked for her to come and look at us.
She came and examined us and she says, ‘Oh, you're all right.’
I was screaming, I was saying, ‘I'm in labour’, and she says, ‘You'll be okay — if it gets any worse give us another knock.’
I knocked again and she was going off it, going really crazy at me.
She thought I was carrying on, and she didn't think I was in labour.
In the end they got an ambulance and rushed us to hospital and they said it was a good job they did.
I had the bairn straight away.
If I had gone into labour a couple of days earlier, I would have been on my own, down the block, with no nurse, nobody.
They knew I was ready to drop the bairn.
When I had the baby, Stephen, the screws left me in the outside hospital but they took my clothes.
They take everything away.
I was in a big ward all on my own.
Everyone knew I was from prison.
When I had the bairn, they wanted us back to the prison the day after, but I was haemorrhaging and the doctor says, ‘There's no way she can go back now.
’ So they kept us in a few days.
When I got back I had bed rest for a couple of days and then they had me scrubbing the houses and that.
They made us scrub all the way through pregnancy as well, right up to the end.
They used to say it was good for you.
The doctor was really bad.
He didn't care.
I had post-natal depression, and I was tired and everything.
I was breastfeeding and the bloke screws used to walk in the room.
There was a big, fat screw there, and he was always walking in and out.
The way they treated me in the mother and baby unit, it didn't seem as though it was my baby.
They used to tell me what to do with it.
I could only see him when they said I could, and they would be stood right next to me, watching me all the time.
I had to do what they told me to do.
We had to put the babies down at a certain time and leave them — it was horrible.
The bairn started bringing his milk back up all the time when he was just a few days old.
This was going on for a couple of days, so I was getting worried and I took him to the prison  doctor and he says, ‘It might be with you breastfeeding, try him on the bottle.’
So I tried the bottle and he was still vomiting all the time.
By this time I was really getting worried, so I took him back and the doctor said, ‘Oh, it's all right, there's nothing the matter with him.’
I said I wanted him to go to an outside hospital, so they took him.
I was eating my tea that afternoon — they wouldn't let me go too — and I got called over to the Centre [the prison officers' operational centre within the prison].
That's where they give you good news or bad news.
The priest was there and everything, and he told us to sit down.
He says, ‘Stephen's got to have an emergency operation, so you've got to go to the hospital to sign the forms.’
They had no sympathy or nowt.
So I just cracked up.
They didn't tell us what the operation was for.
They took us to the hospital and I had to sign the paper and that was it.
They let us see him for a couple of minutes, and then they took us back to the prison.
He had the operation the next day and they took us for a couple of minutes and that was it — they just didn't care.
I lost a lot of time [lost remission as a punishment for breaking the rules], what with the bairn and everything.
I just cracked up, and they put us down the block.
I was smashing everything up and setting about people, 'cause I didn't know what was going on or nothing.
They gave us some time back afterwards, because of the bairn having an operation.
[Lost remission can be restored later, following a period of good behaviour.]
I think the only reason they gave us time back was because I was going to report the prison doctor to the Board of Visitors.
When Stephen was in hospital they kept us on the same house with all the mothers and babies, even though I had asked to be off it.
That really did upset us.
He was in hospital for nearly a month, and I never saw him until the day I got out.
No one talked to us about him.
The only person who ever explained what the operation was for was the nurse at the hospital, or I would never have known.
It wasn't a very dangerous operation, but they never told me that.
On the day I got out they picked us up in a taxi at the prison and then we went to the hospital to pick him up.
Then they put  us in the Fleming Hospital in Newcastle, me and the bairn, because I had nowhere else to go.
I didn't like it there, so my mother came to see me and when she seen the bairn she just says, ‘Come home.’
So I went home with her.
After a couple of days, me and me mother weren't getting on, so she hoyed me out.
She was after keeping the bairn.
I took him, though, and I went to live with some friends.
Our Mickey [Margy's brother]came looking for us and he kicked me and took the bairn away.
He said it would just be until I got myself sorted out, and then I would get him back straight away.
The next thing I knew Stephen was with foster parents.
Mickey had rang up the social worker and he had taken the bairn.
A couple of days later I was that fed up I got myself in trouble.
I started shoplifting again and then I was on remand.
I was at Low Newton a couple of weeks and then I got out on bail and went to see Stephen, but then I got lifted again, back to Low Newton.
While I was on bail and Stephen was still with foster parents, they promised I could have Stephen for Christmas.
I had bought him loads of toys.
I was living at my friend's down at Forest Hall [in Newcastle].
She had done all the house out and got all the presents and everything, but then they says I couldn't have him or see him.
The same social worker wanted Donna taken off us at birth.
They never gave us a chance with Stephen.
They knew what I was like with me mother.
They knew we didn't get on, and they never tried to get us a flat or nowt, so when I got out of prison with him I was just on my own.
I reckon if I had had a flat and everything I could have given it a try.
Stephen might have made me settle down like Donna has.
I got a sentence and was sent back to Styal.
I only saw Stephen a few times before I went back to prison.
It used to upset me.
The social worker I had at the time kept coming to see me in Low Newton and saying, ‘Do you not think it's best if you get him adopted?’
When I got sent down, all through my sentence, the social worker kept coming to see us.
When I got out of prison again I went to a hostel in Manchester and he was coming up there all the time.
I was getting that sick I ended up signing the papers and Stephen was adopted.
I signed the papers in  Manchester and after that I never seen the social worker again.
He was saying he would come up and tell us how Stephen was and everything.
The social worker never talked about me getting Stephen back.
I don't think he wanted me to have him back, with us being in prison and that.
He used to write to me about how it was best for Stephen if he got adopted, 'cause I didn't know what I was going to do with me life, I wasn't settled and I'd probably end up back in prison.
I think I was pressured into signing the papers.
As soon as I signed them, I never heard from him anymore.
He promised us photos of the bairn because I said that was the condition for signing, and I got one and that was that.
I heard nowt more.
I was never given the chance to write Stephen a letter explaining why I gave him up for when he is older or anything.
During that last sentence I was at Styal again and then at Askham Grange.
I had been in Styal for a few months and I kept putting in for an open prison, but they kept saying no.
In the end, they shipped us out because I was going to complain about the doctor.
I was working on the gardens and we had to sweep all the grounds.
I had conjunctivitis and I was trying to get off work because my eyes were really bad.
I shouldn't have been where there was dust and that.
The doctor sent us back to work even though my eyes were really bad.
The Board of Visitors were coming round and I was going to tell them, so that's why they shipped us out to Askham Grange open prison.
That's twice they done that sort of thing.
I'd done nearly all me time in Styal, you know, and then the last thing they sent us out.
Askham Grange wasn't like a prison.
The first day me and me friend got inside the doors we didn't know where to go.
Nobody told us.
You hardly ever seen the screws or nowt.
The first day we just hated it, but when we got used to it, it was nowt like a prison.
In some ways it was better and in some ways it was worse.
If you wanted to, you could have just went, the doors were just open.
There was a lot of temptation.
There was no screws to stop violence and fighting and all that, you could have just killed somebody.
There was a lot of fights and bullying of the soft lasses.
In other ways it was really petty and you could get  nicked for daft little things.
I wasn't at Askham Grange for very long, just to finish off my sentence.
There are lots of really bad things about prison.
It's really degrading — they go out of their way to upset you.
In Styal we used to get searched, sometimes strip searched.
Strip searching made me feel terrible — I was dead embarrassed.
You just have to stand there.
Then you have to go and have a bath and see the nurse, and she checks your hair and they check you for VD.
At Bullwood Hall the doctor checks you for VD after home leaves, too.
It's an internal examination, and you've got to have it.
If you don't, you're locked in until you will.
You just have to have it.
It's bad when you get your period in prison.
You've got to tell them when you're on and ask for sanitary towels.
It's dead embarrassing.
They give you one at a time.
If you ask for Tampax they have to write down how many, because you can use the wrapping paper for roll-ups.
If you are on heavy and you need more, they just say, ‘What do you need all those for?’
It was really embarrassing.
If you needed a new sanitary towel in the night you couldn't get one.
You couldn't ring the bell or they would go mad.
We used to have a bath once a week.
That's another thing.
If you're on really heavy, you need a bath or you'll smell and that, but you couldn't — one a week.
When we did get a bath it was really quick — just in and out.
In Low Newton, in the new part, there was wash-basins in the cell, but it's still embarrassing if you're sharing a cell and you want a strip wash.
Slopping-out is disgusting.
I used to have bad pains because I wouldn't go on the bucket at night.
You were only allowed to wash your clothes once a week.
You had to wash your underwear in your cell at night.
In the old cells you had to take a bucket of water in, get a wash, and then wash your underwear in it, in the same bucket.
The sheets got changed once a week, but you could change more often if you got blood on them or something.
But some of the lasses were too embarrassed to say.
You had to book to get your hair cut, your toenails cut and your fingernails cut, and a screw had to stand and watch you with the scissors.
You had to go on  Governor's app [put in an application to the Governor]to ask to get your toenails cut.
The food was disgusting as well.
I just couldn't eat it.
If you didn't like it, that was it.
You would just starve.
I never felt I had enough food when I was pregnant.
One of the worst places is Bleak House at Styal, the punishment block.
It's scruffy and rotten.
One lass went down and she had some glass or something, and she was threatening to slash her wrists and there was a screw shouting, ‘Well do it.
’ She did like, she cut herself.
They don't care.
A lass in Low Newton hanged herself the second time I was in there.
I was only two cells away from her.
She was just in for a fine and it was her first time.
I did most of my tattoos in prison.
I did a few while I was out, but most of them in prison.
I got nicked for it at Low Newton.
A lot of the girls put tattoos on.
I did it out of boredom, it was something to do, and for status.
If you were good friends with another lass, you would get each other 's names put on.
I was in Styal prison over Christmas once and it was dead depressing.
They gave us a lollipop, off the screws, one each.
I think they were just taking the piss.
It's worse for the lasses with kids at Christmas.
There's more fights then, everyone loses their tempers.
There were a lot of fights anyway, most of them were over jealousy about friendships, also over tobacco.
Some of the lasses would kill for tab-ends and that.
The screws half the time would leave tab-ends on purpose and there were fights over who would have them.
It's degrading.
We rolled up tea leaves, leaves, everything.
It's really boring being in prison as well.
I didn't read much, but I tried to read the Bible in Bullwood Hall.
There was one in the cell.
I didn't get very far with it.
You are only allowed ten photographs and if you want any more you have to put some in your property [stored property inaccessible to the prisoner]or hand them out.
That was really bad for people with kids.
It was worse all round for people with kids: they can't back-answer anybody.
They can't afford to lose time because they've got to be out for the bairns.
But if you don't do what the other lasses tell you to, you're called a softie or a shit or something like that.
You just cannot win.
I don't really keep in touch with anyone from prison now.
I used to write a bit, but not now.
I feel embarrassed about people knowing I was in prison.
A couple of years ago I wasn't bothered who knew.
It's embarrassing when you get out, too.
In Newcastle most of the people know us and all the lads would say, ‘Oh, you lesbian’ and all that.
My brothers all said that.
I'm the only girl in the family that's been in prison.
They never used to come and see us much.
They come once to Styal, they didn't come to Bullwood Hall, and I think they came to Askham Grange once.
I think it would have been better to get community work instead of prison — something to do.
That was the problem — boredom.
So I used to drink and get into trouble.
I've been in prison for assault, robbery, shoplifting and burglary.
When I was in prison I wasn't hard to start with, but I soon got that way.
I used to pick on some of the soft ones to survive.
I just try to forget it all now, but I might have to go back.
I would hate that 'cause I would lose Donna.
The women in prison who had kids were always dead upset.
People who were going in for fines and just daft shoplifting and that were getting their bairns taken away.
It's not only them that suffer — it's the bairns as well.
Prison just made me worse; it did nowt else.
I mean you learn things off the others.
I wasn't frightened of it.
Sometimes, in a sort of way, I was glad to be in, when I couldn't cope on the outside.
I was used to it.
I didn't have to make any decisions.
It's when you get out that the problems really start.
It's just since I had Donna that things have been different for me.
When Margy eventually went to court for her new shoplifting charge the judge gave her a probation order.
She freely admitted that when she was shoplifting she was, in a way, hoping to go to prison.
Because of the enormous disruptions she had suffered in her life she was finding it difficult to manage on a day-to-day basis, and prison  represented a way of ‘escaping’ from her immediate problems.
But as soon as she was arrested the potential consequences really came home to her.
Donna was taken into foster care at the end of 1986, and there seems little prospect of her returning to live with Margy in the near future.
Adaku
Adaku was living alone on the seventeenth floor of a tower block in South London when we spoke to her.
I was born in this country in 1964.
In 1974 I went back to Nigeria with my parents.
I lived with my father, then when my father died I came back to this country.
I had an argument with my mother and I just ran away from home and came here without telling her.
I knew one person in London.
I thought she was a friend but when I got here she had changed.
She said I couldn't stay with her, that her aunty was in the house, things like that, so I had nowhere to go.
The night I arrived I was walking around the streets on my own looking for work.
I found work but I didn't tell them I had nowhere to stay, that when it was night time, I got on the night buses and stayed there until morning and then went back to work.
Sometimes I was sacked because I was late, sometimes because I was so tired.
I worked in kitchen jobs, Pizza Huts.
I never stayed in one job for longer than a month.
I started riding on the buses in August and did it until November.
I got on the buses at Trafalgar Square, it took me to the other end and brought me back again, and I got down and got on another one.
I didn't know where I was going.
No one stopped me to ask me what I was doing.
I was afraid at first, but then I got used to it.
But the cold was too much.
Then I lost all my things, someone stole them.
I went to a hostel in  Hampstead.
They said I could only stay one week, but I stayed there for two, and they didn't know.
Then I had a boyfriend and I went to stay with him.
I'd met him in Nigeria.
His father was staying in the same house, and didn't know I was staying there, so I used to creep in at night.
I was sleeping with my boyfriend, and after a few months I found I was pregnant and I had to stop going there.
So I went to the council, I didn't know anything about social security, even that there was such a thing, so I was given benefit and a hostel to stay in at Elephant and Castle.
I have a Nigerian passport and a British passport.
But because I didn't tell my mother I was coming here, I couldn't get my British passport.
When they asked me why I didn't have a British passport that's when the immigration problems started.
They asked me to report to them every week, but I didn't go, and they stopped my benefit.
I started getting into trouble.
I went to Marks and Spencer and stole some clothes, and then I stole some other things — I was short of money.
For the first offence I was given a fine.
On the second offence I was given a suspended sentence.
The third offence, that was after the immigration problems, I was sent to prison.
I was on remand for three weeks.
My fourth offence I spent another three weeks on remand, and my fifth offence I spent one month.
They were all for stealing from shops.
I was sent to Holloway prison.
The first time I went to prison I had already had the baby, but he was taken away from me in hospital.
I'd told them I had immigration problems and that they'd stopped my benefit.
My social worker who gave me advice asked if I wanted adoption or fostering, and I said fostering (it was a white family).
Then I went to prison and they made the baby a ward of court without telling me.
My solicitor got some papers for me to sign, but I was so depressed I didn't know what it was about.
When I came out, they told me the court dates of when he was going to be adopted.
It was against my will but I felt there was no use fighting it, because the social worker had many things against me, like my not going to see the baby, and my being in prison — there were many things against me.
When I first went to Holloway, I was frightened by the look of the screws: some are fat and tall.
Some look at you as if , well, you're not important.
When you go in, they search you and look at your files, in front of you.
If you're in for drugs, they pull your clothes off, tell you to turn round and do all sorts of things to you.
I wasn't in for drugs, so I didn't get that treatment.
I was told to sit down for about five hours in a hall, to wait for them to call my name out, to go to see the doctor.
He doesn't even ask what's wrong with you, he doesn't want to know.
He just tries to shut you down.
If you tell him you have a pain in your chest, he just says, ‘Well it's because you came to prison, that's why you have the pain.’
He doesn't give you medication, nothing at all.
Every time I get caught or arrested I get asthma.
I took my inhaler with me, and they took it off me, telling me I used it to make myself high.
I was afraid I'd have an attack.
There were other girls there who were on drugs, who were unhappy or sick, but still they didn't do anything.
Even if you're dying in prison, the screws don't want to know.
If you press the bell because of a headache, they say, ‘Don't ring the bell unless you're dying.’
Things like that.
If there's a fight, they tie your hands, pull your head sideways and put you down the block.
A person can spend about five days there, just in the dark.
I went down there once when I had a fight with a girl, a white girl.
She called me a Black bitch.
Something happened and she just said it, then she hit me and I had to hit her back.
They took both of us down the block, and we were there for two days — no blankets, no bed, nothing, just a mattress on the floor.
They took all my own clothes and gave me a nightgown.
You're not allowed tobacco in there either.
You're not allowed anything to make you happy, not even books.
You're given what they want to give you.
On the morning of the third day we went to the prison court where the governor sits.
That was the governor of Holloway — a man.
Two screws stand right in front of you.
Sometimes he will punish you.
You might be locked up for a long time, or you might be given a fine, which is taken out of your weekly allowance.
Sometimes they might just give you a caution.
I got a  caution, and told not to do it again.
After that, you're taken back upstairs, but to a different wing and a different room.
You're not taken to the same wing because they think you might fight again.
Some of the other women were good, some of them bad.
They didn't like newcomers, and didn't behave well towards them.
I was afraid when I first went because I thought that people who go to prison, they're bad.
But some of them are nice.
After three weeks, I went to court and was put on probation.
About two or three months after that, I got into trouble again and was taken back to prison.
I was on remand all the time.
I've never been sentenced.
When you plead guilty and you get sent in on remand, then you get treated like a sentenced prisoner, because you're guilty.
But when the judge doesn't ask you to plead, and you're not guilty, you're treated like a person who's sent to prison for a crime that she hasn't committed.
I knew when I got into trouble I might get sent back, because when you've been to prison once, you can be sent back every time you get into trouble.
The police don't let you go, once you've been to prison.
I was sent to prison for five weeks.
That was the time I started to get used to the place, to the screws and things like that, because some had seen me before.
Some of the screws try to annoy you.
Once you've done something wrong, they try to get you to do something wrong again and lose your remission.
That's what they want.
I didn't want that to happen.
I didn't want to get into trouble.
Some of the screws are normal people, though.
I was talking to a screw one day and she was telling me that when she'd wanted to get work in prison she thought she'd be there to help prisoners.
But when she got to prison all her mates were telling her, ‘No, no, you don't talk to a prisoner like that, you talk to her sharp.’
They told her you don't respect the prisoners, you must always be strict, so any time she wanted to talk to a girl and one of her mates was there she had to pretend.
But when nobody was there she changed to her normal self again.
I am a Christian.
I like the church in prison.
But the prisoners themselves don't use the church as it should be used.
They crack  jokes, laughing and shouting.
The screws don't use it properly either.
They're not supposed to beat people or judge people in church.
They should let us get out of church and then get the people they want instead of grabbing the person they want right in the middle of the church and carrying them out.
I don't like anything to do with drugs.
If I see a person is charged and sentenced because of drugs, I don't really like them because I think that's why there is more crime in this country.
People who say they sell drugs because they don't have enough money, I think they're lying.
I think they want fast money.
If you do a crime and get about thirty pounds, that's about enough for one week.
But they want thousands of pounds in a week.
What's bad about this is that they don't take drugs — they've never touched them — but they want to sell them.
I've asked many people I've met who sell drugs if they take them and they say, ‘No, no’.
So I say, ‘Why do you bring drugs for other people to take?’
It's bad.
In prison you have to get up by seven o'clock, and make your bed before breakfast.
You have to clean your rooms out, scrub, polish.
If you don't do that, you get put on report.
After breakfast, we go back to our rooms and get locked up until it's time for dinner.
Sometimes, if the screws are happy, they let us out for a while, and sometimes we have exercise after dinner.
But most of the time you don't have exercise.
Then you get locked up again — that might be till the end of the day.
I got books from the library to read.
Sometimes I got a radio put on.
If you're with five other women, at least two will complain.
But if it's a room with one girl, it's okay.
I didn't have education.
They told me that the people they want for education are the people who are sentenced for about six months, not the ones who are only there for one month.
If you're lucky you can work — like clean the floors of the passage, cook, wash pillowcases and clothes.
There isn't work for everybody, so people who work are mostly the lucky ones.
They don't get locked up.
I worked in the kitchen scrubbing the pans.
We used to get about £3 a week.
The people who don't work get £1 a week.
You buy  cigarettes with that — they sell anything in ones.
They sell sugar, twenty-five pence or ten pence.
People who are on remand are allowed a visit every day, for fifteen minutes.
You can ask for the visits to be extended, but before you get that you're taken to the governor and asked why you want it longer and who is coming to visit you.
If it's your boyfriend, it's ‘Why do you want to spend more than fifteen minutes with your boyfriend?’
But say it's your mother, or your probation officer or someone like that, it's all right.
I wasn't afraid of losing my boyfriend while I was in prison, because I've seen people who've been in for two years and their boyfriends still come and see them.
So why should it happen to me?
I wasn't afraid of that.
But we don't have any privacy.
They read your letters, and if you write in your own language they bring back your letter and ask you to write it in English.
If you can't write in English it's just too bad.
If you have a letter come in with information that's wrong, they don't give it to you.
They tell you you've got a letter but they've sent it back.
And if you write a letter they don't like, they bring it back and want to know why you've written certain things.
They don't want you to say anything about prison.
You can't write names, or mention people you've met in prison — you can write about your friends, but not any names.
And if someone writes in another language, you won't get it for a long time.
They don't trust anybody in prison.
I think I was treated differently because I'm Black.
Like, if you ask for a bath, they'll say, ‘No, you can't have a bath.’
You ask why, and they say, ‘Don't ask me why, I said you can't have a bath.’
A white woman asks for a bath, and they go and give her the key to the bathroom, things like that.
If a Black woman is on a visit, they tend to search her more, watch her more, because they believe Blacks are too bad.
It's difficult for Black people to get the things they need in prison.
Some Black women use bleaching creams.
Sometimes you can get it, but they make it too expensive so you can't afford to buy it.
I have to have something to put on my legs — I have very dry skin — but I couldn't get that either.
When I came out I was an awful colour.
White people are given things straight when they come in — shampoo, comb, brush.
The shampoo and combs are for white people's hair; they don't have Black combs.
I think there were about three Black officers.
Most of the nurses are Black, though.
The young ones were all right but the older ones were horrible.
Some of the Black girls are pretty powerful.
There are a lot of Black people in prison.
It's because of racism.
Store detectives will watch a Black person more than a white person.
I've been to Oxford Circus, stayed there from one o'clock to four o'clock, wandering about.
A policeman comes and says, ‘I've seen you wandering about from one o'clock to four o'clock, can we search your handbag, please?’
What does he think I'm doing, selling drugs?
I said, ‘No.’
I said he had no right.
He said could I come to the station.
I said ‘No.’
Then he called a policewoman, and a policewoman came, and I went to the station, and they searched me, and let me go.
No apology, nothing.
It's frightening.
Even if a Black girl has nothing on her, it frightens her to death.
It's difficult for a Black girl to get a credit card.
If you want to get money out it's harder than it is for white people — they always check you and go away and phone.
I tried to apply for a credit card, but they refused me.
And I tried to open a Giro bank account, and I put Mrs —[Nigerian surname].
When the letter came back, they put: ‘We are sorry, we can't do it.’
They don't tell you why they refuse you, but I think it was because they knew I was Black from my name.
You have to be rich to get a card when you're Black.
My father, before he died, he had an account in this country.
He had about £1,000 in it.
I went and said, ‘I'm the daughter of Mr —.
Before he died he gave me his statements to look after.’
I showed them my birth certificate, but they still didn't believe me.
I didn't go back.
I couldn't do anything about it.
I think many Black people turn bitter because of all this.
I've always wished that I never came back to this country.
When my father died there were a lot of quarrels between my mother and I. I'd always lived with my father, so I didn't know  her, or how she wanted me to be.
There was a lot of quarrels about me going out, and not coming back till late.
She locked me out, things like that, said I shouldn't go out, I should do this and that, all that kind of rubbish.
I've got five sisters; she wasn't the same with them.
Then I thought it was important not being allowed to go out and things.
How I wished I'd stayed there!
I should have been back at school in Nigeria.
I passed my A levels, I did well.
If I was back there I would have done something.
I can't go back now because in Africa you can't go back without any qualifications.
That's why I've applied for school in September.
I want to go to school and get qualifications.
People look down on you, once you've been to prison.
You can't do the course you want to do.
They say, ‘Have you been in trouble before?’
‘Yes, I've been in trouble.’
And you get a letter two days later: ‘I'm sorry, we can't take you because you've been to prison.’
This is why people who have committed crimes don't want to study: they can't do this, they can't do that.
But I want to study.
I couldn't adapt to conditions in this country.
I think that's what got me into crime.
I never thought about going into shops and stealing other people's things before I came here; that never crossed my mind.
But when I came to this country…
Like here you go in the bank, and sign.
You get the statement, the balance.
It's not yours, but because you've got the signature right, you might withdraw everything.
In Africa you can't do that.
There when you go to the bank, you have to sit down for about two hours before they even think you're there.
And if there's any slight mistake in the signature, they tell you, ‘No, we can't give you this.’
I think that's why people here do more crime.
Things are made too easy for them.
I've got friends who have done banks, but I don't do them.
What I might do is steal credit cards and use them.
That's what I got prison for the last time.
A credit card came through my door.
Not mine.
I opened it and found it wasn't signed, so I signed it and used it.
The way to crime here is easy.
In Africa life is hard, but you can't go to crime.
You can't go into a shop and steal.
The shops are so small that the person in the shop sees every corner, though there are  no cameras.
I think if I went back to Africa I wouldn't even think of stealing.
I also think prison makes you better at crime.
When I was in prison I learnt many things about cheques and cards.
People talk about it and you learn, and you might do it when you get out.
When I came out, one time, they didn't give me any money because I was on remand.
So I was without money for about three weeks.
The DHSS reckoned someone was signing on for me while I was in prison.
I don't know who it was.
They thought I sent them.
So they didn't pay me.
The last time when I went to court I got an order to go to the day training centre at Camberwell for offenders who keep on getting into trouble.
So I go there every day now, except Wednesday, my day off.
That's for twelve weeks.
I've done three weeks.
Nine more weeks left.
It's quite nice.
People talk about their problems, and the probation officers are very good.
Meals are good.
I'm very worried, though, about when the twelve weeks is up, because I want to change, you see.
I can see that I am changing, right, but I don't know what will happen when it's finished.
That's worrying.
In the day centre, they help you to get into college, or to get work, things like that.
The Wednesdays off, they expect you to go and find work.
They're training us now, to get up in the morning, to go to the centre.
If you're late, the first time it's a director's warning, then two other warnings.
After that, you go back to court.
So people have to be there every day.
If you're sick you have to get a medical certificate.
I think it is like a prison, but it's better.
People tell you to do this, but they're very friendly.
I just hope I can get into college.
I am very worried now because I was on a deportation order, the immigration hadn't been settled.
But when the immigration people came I got a letter, and they said that I could stay while they finished their inquiries.
I'm not really worried about that, seeing as I was born in this country, but what I don't understand is why they should doubt me.
If I wanted to sue the immigration people I would.
I would make them pay for what they've done.
They're still giving me hassles that I'm not British and they're  going to deport me.
They're just being difficult.
What they told me was that people come to this country impersonating other people, get a passport and then pretend they're British.
I don't feel awkward with friends, because I only tell people who I think will understand.
My boyfriend understands.
He meets people who've been to prison, but not all of them are criminals.
Two days after I met him I went to prison.
Some people do tend to run away from you, they're afraid of you because they think you're wild.
But not everybody is wild.
To tell you the truth, before I went to prison I used to meet people who had been to prison and I didn't want to talk to them because I thought they were funny.
But now I think, just because I've been to prison there's nothing wrong with me.
I don't think I'm a criminal.
I think it's worse for a woman than a man.
I think people should try and help women, not just send them to prison.
Women have much more problems — money problems, all sorts of problems.
It's not a good place, prison.
People should be given opportunities to see whether they can change.
Not locked up twenty-four hours a day.
Since we spoke to Adaku she has moved away.
We have not been able to trace her.
Jean
Jean was aged thirty-seven when we saw her.
She was a single parent and had a nine-year-old son, Darren, who was in a home for mentally handicapped children.
With a long history of severe depression and alcoholism, Jean was arrested for arson and spent seven months on remand on C1, the psychiatric unit of Holloway prison.
At the time we saw her, Jean was living in a hostel in North London and attending a psychiatric day centre.
At any one time there are a significant number of women who are particularly distressed and disturbed serving prison sentences, mostly for very trivial offences.
Many are kept in prison for several weeks, sometimes months, as was the case for Jean, whilst psychiatric and medical reports are prepared for the courts.
Holloway prison's C1 unit has for some time been the subject of public concern and outrage.
Situated on the ground floor of the prison, it is dark, depressing and claustrophobic.
It is staffed by prison officers and nurses and the discipline and medical roles often conflict.
It operates on the same lines as the rest of the prison, with the same rules and system of privileges and punishments.
Whilst Jean was there, the women were spending anything up to twenty-three hours a day locked in their cells.
Self-mutilation is not uncommon on the wing.
Women have' in their distress, been known repeatedly to bang their heads on the walls and floor to cut and injure themselves.
In 1984 there was considerable publicity concerning a woman who gouged out her eye and another who slashed her breast in order to get out of her cell for a few minutes.
Since then, there has been continual pressure from ex-prisoners and from penal reform and mental health organisations for the closure of the wing.
Whilst Jean was a prisoner on C1, Marc Sancto (born Anne Franklin) a female transsexual, died there in December 1985.
The coroner's verdict was ‘Accidental death due to lack of care’.
I am what is commonly known as a loner.
I was born in Buckinghamshire, my father was a farm worker, so we moved round quite a bit.
I went to eleven different schools.
I've got two sisters: one's disappeared, the other's married.
Both my parents are dead.
Mum died in ‘74, two weeks after Terry, my first boy, was born.
Dad died a few years before that — I'm not sure when.
I was antagonised a lot when I was little.
The boys at school used to make fun of me because I have a crooked spine.
The older girls used to stand me in a corner of the playground and throw stones at me.
I stopped going to school when I was thirteen getting on fourteen, and it was then that I started getting into trouble, running away from home and thieving.
I was considered out of care and control.
I had a dirty great chip on my shoulder.
I thought everybody was against me and I didn't feel loved by anybody.
I couldn't make friends so I went around by myself, did things by myself.
It was when I was fifteen or sixteen that I committed my first big offence.
I committed arson.
I set fire to a barn, not realising that there was a sick cow in there that perished, and I got three years’ approved school.
I found the school hard at first because I hated being shut in.
I ran away two or three times, but each time I got brought back.
I made a friend, though.
Her name was Doris and I settled down and ended up working in the kitchen which I enjoyed.
When I was eighteen and a half I was let out, but I think I got institutionalised being there three and a half years, and I wanted to stay there.
I felt safe.
But I was sent back home anyway.
Mum was given a choice: either to stay in the caravan they were living in and not have me home, or move into a flat so I could live with them.
So my Mum had to move into a flat.
She blamed me for that.
I went to the flat and I got myself a job working in Woolworth's in Reading.
It was then I started making hoax calls.
I used to ring up the ambulance people: ‘There's a fight and somebody's got hurt at the Queen's Head.’
And I wouldn't give them my name.
I used to hang around until the ambulance came.
It was excitement, I suppose, I just felt excited by it.
One time, though, they caught me.
It was then I had my first taste of prison.
I spent three days in Holloway on remand.
I got out on bail, I think it was my probation officer who rang up.
He said I should never have been sent there.
I ended up on three years' probation.
I settled down again with my Mum and Dad.
We moved to another flat and then to a maisonette on the same estate.
Then Mum had cancer and Dad was taken ill at work.
After some time he died, coronary thrombosis.
Although I used to enjoy a drink, I started really drinking heavily after he died.
I loved my father, and when he died I felt something I loved had been taken away from me.
A little while after that my Mum went to live with my sister and her family, so I had to go into a bedsit.
I'd go out, go to the social club, have a few drinks.
I'd almost always be on my own.
Occasionally I'd meet up with others, but not often.
I didn't get difficult when I drank but I often couldn't remember where I'd been or what I'd done or even how I'd got back home.
I managed to stay out of trouble, though.
In 1974 my first boy was born.
I wanted the baby.
I was on the pill at the time, but I deliberately left it off because I wanted someone to love.
Two weeks after Terry was born, my Mum died of cancer.
It was expected.
It didn't hurt so much as it did with my Dad passing away.
Anyway, I looked after Terry for two and a half years.
He was born with a heart complaint, and in November ‘76 he went up to Hammersmith Hospital, and on 2 December he had an operation.
He pulled through, but then his kidneys failed and he died.
Although I'd rung on the Thursday and they said his kidneys were failing, it still came as a shock when they rang on the Saturday at 9.30 in the morning to say he'd died.
Then I really started drinking heavily.
I knew I had a drink  problem.
I went to my doctor and can't remember what I said to him or what he said to me, but he put me on valium.
So I was drinking and taking valium.
I was in a bad way at that time, I felt really depressed, so I went round causing criminal damage.
I broke a window at the new police station in Reading.
I threw a brick through the window, ran away and then came back and did it again.
I wanted them to take me in, I wanted to get arrested.
Mind you, in another way I didn't want to get arrested.
I got caught and it took six policemen to hold me down.
I got remanded twice, then I got probation on condition that I attended the Winterborn Unit, a mental hospital near Oxford, as a day patient.
They have a coach which picked us up.
I didn't like it there at first— sometimes it was traumatic, sometimes it was boring — but I wanted help, especially with my drink problem.
I didn't get a lot of help from them.
Then I fell for Darren, my second son.
I left the unit in ‘78 because I was so big with him.
I couldn't stand the journey.
After Darren was born, he had to stay in hospital an extra ten days because he suffered from epileptic fits.
For the first two and a half years of his life he was in and out of hospital until they found the right medication.
Then there was a six months period without fits and everything was going fine, and then he started up again.
He had them one after another after another.
I found it quite frightening.
I moved again to Whitley near Reading.
I stayed there for five years and was still drinking.
I knew I had a drink problem — even my sister said I was an alcoholic.
Then I contracted hepatitis, through drink, and my son went to a special hospital for mentally handicapped children.
My sister looked after me for a week.
I managed to stop drinking for four months: I kept a bottle in the house but I never touched it.
I just looked at it and then shut the door.
I wasn't even tempted, until Darren came home for a while and started having a lot of fits.
One night I was up all night with him and I started back on the bottle.
It was partly that, and partly through boredom and loneliness.
I didn't really want it.
Darren started going to a special school, but in ‘84 my drinking did start getting out of hand and I was pushing Darren from pillar to post.
It was in  October of that year that I got into trouble again, the first time since ‘78.
They classed it as attempted robbery, because I never hurt anybody.
I tried to hold this woman up in a car park underneath the council offices.
I'd gone into Woolworth's in Reading and stolen a couple of things from there, and I was hanging around the car park.
I saw this woman, and she looked well off.
I didn't really need the money but I tried to hold her up.
She told me not to be silly and went and reported me.
Then I gave the police a run around the car park.
Mind you, I was quite belligerent, but I wasn't violent.
Also, before I did that I'd made a hoax call saying that Boots’ chemist was on fire.
I got charged with that and the attempted theft.
I got remanded to Holloway, which I didn't like.
When I first went in, it felt strange.
Going through reception they have to check everything you're bringing in, what money you have, or what have you.
Then they frisk you and give you a dressing-gown and tell you to go into a cubicle and strip off and wait.
I had to wait a long time shut in.
It was a few feet by a few feet with a bench to sit on.
After that you go into a big room and they look through your clothes and they ask you questions, then you have to pull your knickers down to your knees and do a twizzle, twist round, pull your pants up and put your dressing-gown back on.
There were several officers, you felt every eye was on you.
It's humiliating, degrading, having different women seeing you; I can't stand that.
Then you have a bath and they give you a towel and soap.
If you haven't seen the doctor before you have your bath you have to stay undressed until you have, and then he takes a few details.
I told him I was an alcoholic.
I was put on Heminephrin — it helps to stop the shakes and the sweats.
It helps a bit, but it makes you tired.
I was also on vitamin injections, because alcohol takes the vitamins out of your body.
First of all I was put in a two-person cell with bunk beds.
I shared it with a coloured girl who I got on with and we had a good laugh.
And then she went and another one came who was very of fish.
Anyway, one day I was messing about playing hide  and seek, hiding from the officers, and they put me on report.
The following morning at eight o'clock they said, ‘You're on report, strip your bed, get your things together.
’ I said, ‘What?’
I was shocked.
I was marched down to A block [punishment].
I was on at the time, I had my period.
They said, ‘Strip off and pull your pants down.’
I said, ‘I can't because I'm on.’
They said, ‘We'll give you a clean sanitary towel.’
So they took the dirty one.
Then they let me get dressed, gave me a pair of slippers, because we weren't allowed to wear shoes, and said I had to wait to see the Governess.
I saw her and she said fourteen days' loss of privileges.
I tried to speak.
I tried to explain.
I started moving forward, so the screws started closing in on me.
I felt really claustrophobic.
I was going to lash out, I wanted to strangle her, I was really getting uptight and my head was spinning.
I was taken back to the cell, where I started throwing the furniture about.
I was crying.
I thought fourteen days was a ridiculous sentence just for messing about.
I was just having a game.
They turned round and said I was wasting the officers' time, looking around searching for me, but I couldn't go anywhere with all the doors locked.
Eventually, I was taken back up to my wing.
The officer who took me back, she's a right bitch.
She said, ‘Come on, get your stuff together, you're going.’
So I went like a little lamb following a mother sheep, back to the same room.
In the end I got moved into a single cell: apparently a lot of this girl's stuff went missing and she practically accused me.
I never took it.
Anyway, it was better being in a cell on my own.
I was in prison on remand for three weeks, then I went to court and got three years' probation.
I went back home to Burford and settled in.
Darren was in this privately run home for mentally handicapped children near Basingstoke.
After Christmas, in February, I was allowed to go and see him.
I wanted him to be home with me, but I needed to get myself sorted out.
Things, though, went from bad to worse, and the following January I tried to commit suicide because I felt I couldn't go on.
I had a bottle of VP Rich Ruby wine, and Darren's tablets were in the house, and I had some pain killers.
I took all of them, then I phoned up a couple of people I knew.
How I managed to do that I do not know.
They got in touch with my sister, who got in touch with Mortimer police — I can't remember letting them in.
I had to keep walking round and round and I wanted to go to sleep.
They took me to the hospital, and then took me back home.
After that I tried to settle down.
I tried the AA; that didn't work.
The probation found a little stray dog called Benjy for me and I looked after him for a little while, but my money kept on going down and down and down.
Social security were paying my bills for me, but the more they paid the more they took off me.
I had to try and live on less than £18 a week.
In the end I had to let Benjy go because I couldn't afford the dog food.
That was something else that was taken away from me.
I had Darren home for weekends once a month.
Things started working out a bit better, but towards the end of ‘85 everything started getting too much; the pressures, trying to pay my bills and trying to get extra money in.
I wasn't drinking an awful lot so I decided that even with the difficulties I was going to have Darren home for good.
I thought I could cope, but deep down a little nagging voice said to me, leave him where he is, he's happy, he's settled, have him home for the holiday.
But I felt I'd let him down.
I'd said I wanted him back, but I was frightened and I felt I couldn't face telling the social workers.
In October, on 3 October 1985, I was feeling so depressed I thought the walls were caving in on me.
I wanted to stay in but I wanted to go out, and vice versa.
Latish that night I got a box of matches and my torch and went across the back field and set fire to this Dutch barn.
I didn't think it had ignited and I was walking away from it when all of a sudden I heard all this crackling and banging.
I was half way up the road when I saw the fire engine come.
This woman said to me, ‘See the fire engine?’ and I said, ‘What fire engine?
I don't live round here’, and my mind sort of blacked out and I can't remember getting home, though I did get back, changed my clothes and had a bath.
I thought I was cracking up.
I didn't feel nothing: I didn't feel remorse, I didn't feel guilty, I felt as though my mind and body were dead inside.
Then I phoned up the police — I phoned  them up two or three times — and told them I'd done it, but they wouldn't believe me.
In the end they said they'd come round.
I went out for a walk because I couldn't stand being indoors.
When I came back they were waiting for me.
They asked me a few questions and they said, ‘You'd better come along to the police station.’
They took away my jacket and trousers, which I was going to wash, and also my shoes.
I didn't have any others so I went to the police station in stocking feet.
At the police station, they kept on asking me questions until the early hours of the morning, but they were nice and I was allowed to phone my solicitor.
On 4 October 1985 I was charged with arson.
I ended up in Holloway.
Again I went through the same reception, being sort of frisked, getting undressed, doing a twizzle, seeing the doctor, having a bath.
As soon as they realised my charge was arson I was left to sit in the cubicle: everybody else disappeared.
They went up to their separate wings and I was left to last.
I ended up on D1 [the reception wing]and stayed there until Saturday afternoon.
Then a nurse and officer came and said, ‘Come along, dear, we're taking you to another wing.’
They took me along and they put me into this dormitory.
It wasn't until half an hour later that I realised I was on C1.
I just felt dead.
I was sleeping most of the time, I didn't want to eat, I wasn't hungry.
Then I was put on some sort of medication to help me calm down because I kept on getting knotted up, getting uptight.
All I wanted to do was throw things, get this feeling out of me.
I felt like smashing up.
The doctor who gave me the medication asked me, ‘Why did you do it?’ and I couldn't answer because I didn't know.
A lot of things just didn't sink in.
When I was there I heard a lot of screaming and banging.
People would yell or shout out, put excreta through the door hatch or throw their dinner out.
We didn't get out of the cells very often.
Now and again we had association or exercise, but most of the time we were locked up twenty-two and twenty-three hours a day.
Often you'd hear somebody playing up, or you heard the screws zooming around because someone had cut up [injured themselves].
I cut up once.
I scratched ‘Darren’ on  my arm with a pin.
I just felt like doing it.
It was when I hadn't seen him for a long time and I was all wound up.
I'd been there a few months when me and a girl called Sue and a girl called Monica started playing silly devils, throwing things out of the hatch.
We done it for a laugh and because we were bored and it got out of hand.
Then we barricaded ourselves in, piled our mattresses against the cell door.
The screws made up promises, like if we took the barricade down they'd leave us alone, they wouldn't punish us.
I knew something was going to happen because Miss [E]took off her jacket and rolled up her sleeves.
I said to her ‘Are you coming in?’ and she said, ‘No we're not.’
I thought, ‘You lying bitch.’
It's very rare that I swear.
We were shouting at them through the hatch.
They did come in, and it took seven of them to get me down to a single cell.
I didn't struggle a lot, but one of them pushed my head right down, my arms were pulled right back.
If they had left us, things would have been all right.
They didn't need to do that, charging in the way they did.
I was frogmarched down to a single cell.
I was so worked up, I kept slamming my bed against the wall, banging on windows, turning the taps on.
So they cut my water off.
And I just kept banging my bed against the door, just to get rid of my angry, violent feelings.
That night I kept on and on — bang, bang, bang.
I was tired but I kept on doing it and doing it; they asked me to stop but I wouldn't.
In the end they opened the door and forced their way in.
Again they pushed my head right down.
They said, ‘Get on the floor.’
I refused.
I said to them, ‘I won't kneel to any of you bastards.
’ I wouldn't, especially to them.
So my head was pushed down and my arms pulled behind my back.
Anyway, they dismantled the bed and I was left with a strip blanket [a sheet of heavy material designed to be almost impossible to tear]and a mattress, one heavy black mattress.
After I'd quietened down they left me alone.
You're not allowed matches on C1, but you're allowed baccy.
Some women can't make it last the week so theirs is kept in the office.
We had one roll-up an hour and you had to roll them so thin to make the tobacco last: jaw-achers they were.
Make your  jaw ache drawing on them.
If your cigarette went out the screws would come back and light it if they was in the right frame of mind: all depends who was on.
If they didn't feel like coming back you'd have to wait till the next hour.
That's when a lot of the girls started banging on the door, screaming and shouting.
The only time we was allowed to smoke more was on association, but we were banged up most of the time.
When we had association we'd stand around and talk, or sit and watch telly or have a bath and wash our hair.
A lot of girls just had one bath a week.
They only let us out for baths if there was enough staff, otherwise you had to have a strip wash.
There was no privacy, no curtain round the sink, so you had to do your top first, keep your nightdress on, wash your bottom part and hope people weren't looking.
It was embarrassing.
There was only one toilet and you just had to hope no one came in with any diseases or anything.
Their excuse for not letting us out more often was that there wasn't enough staff.
That's lies: there was enough staff.
We needed more freedom, more room to move.
That's what made us play up, people just sitting there, not able to go up to the STU [occupational therapy]because there wasn't enough officers or staff to take us.
They just couldn't be bothered half the time.
After I'd been there a few months I was asked if I wanted to help out in the kitchen, which I did.
I was a wing worker.
I was let out between eight and half-past in the morning, locked back in at dinner time, let out to do the washing up and scrub the kitchen floor in the afternoon, and then locked up again.
First of all I thought the nursing staff was nice, but there was a couple who were right bitches.
They used to wind people up.
They'd stand there and laugh at you, or say things to get you going, and when they felt they'd wound you up they'd walk away laughing.
A lot of them were slow, and didn't know what they were doing half the time: they'd give you the wrong medicine.
I was offered the wrong medicine twice.
While I was in a single room, what I used to do was get hold of sani towels and put my dog ends in and let them smoulder and wave them out the hatch.
And they used to say, sniff, sniff, ‘What's that burning?
I can smell something burning.
It's coming from your room.’
‘No it's not.’
And then I chucked it out the window.
I done that twice, and got put on report for it.
This woman, an assistant governor, I think, asked me why I did it.
I didn't tell her.
I wrote it down.
I mentioned that I missed my son and how I couldn't see him.
I only saw him twice.
They arranged for Darren to come up before Christmas.
It was a journey I wouldn't have wished on him.
I was told I could see him for an hour but they got held up on the way and I was rushed through the visit.
Darren was very distressed, which hurt.
I only saw him for half an hour.
That choked me up.
I kissed him goodbye and said, ‘See you soon.’
The other time I was taken to see him, which was better.
I didn't have much other visitors.
A neighbour came to see me twice.
I was allowed to see her in the visiting room, but if some of the girls knew you were from C1 they'd call you muppet.
We weren't the muppets, they were.
Whilst I was there on C1 a woman died.
It gave us all a terrible shock.
She/he was ever so nice but a lot of the staff and nursing staff were right bastards to him.
They kept on saying to him that he could do more for himself, that he was putting a lot on.
He had a bad leg and they kept on at him to hurry up.
He was handicapped and I've got a handicapped son: I can't stand people who take the mickey out of those sort of people.
Some of the officers kept on to him to pull himself together and that sort of thing.
He was always on his own and you'd hear him crying out.
I knew something had happened because the governor came down.
We very rarely saw the governor — especially late afternoon or evening — and there was a lot of hustle and bustle.
Then I found out he hung himself.
I think he done it because he was picked on a lot and most likely thought he hadn't got a lot going for him.
I felt choked, but I couldn't cry.
I felt very sorry for him, but there again, the way he was and the way he felt, he's better off out of it.
But they shouldn't have shut him up on his own.
They could have looked after him more.
He was well liked, even on the other wings.
He did look mannish.
He should never have been in prison.
It was very upsetting.
I was also on C1 when the BBC came round to do that  programme: ‘Forty Minutes’, I think it was called.
A lot of the staff didn't want their faces on TV or names mentioned, which was understandable.
But as soon as the television come round there was a helluva change in the screws, being falsely nice.
There's one kept saying, ‘If there's anything wrong, dear, you know you can always come to me to talk about it.’
This was in front of the cameras, and I thought, ‘You two-faced bitch’, because if I ever tried to talk to her she'd either be sarcastic or looked through you, looked away or didn't want to know.
The only time I spoke to the cameras was when me and another woman were in the kitchen and we had to sort of make a conversation.
It's quite hard really.
I felt that was false.
I don't think they got a true picture, especially not of C1, because the staff reacted in a helluva different way to when the cameras weren't there.
A lot of the staff were all right, but they didn't understand.
They'd say, ‘We're here to help you, that's what we're here for, to listen to your problems.’
But then they'd say, ‘I can't stand here listening to you all day’, and go off and do something else.
As far as I was concerned, a lot of them didn't really want to know.
I wouldn't really talk to them anyway, but sometimes you needed to talk to somebody, or to sort something out.
Half the time they didn't understand what you was trying to tell them, and you could feel yourself working up, through frustration.
During the seven and a half months I was on C1 I went to Crown Court twice, and each time I got remanded back into Holloway.
I had a circuit judge so everywhere he went I had to follow.
One night, a Wednesday, I was told that I was leaving Holloway the next day to go up to Risley remand centre because my judge was at Sheffield.
When I got there they moaned about all the clothes and stuff I had, because you have to take everything with you when they move you about.
At Risley, when they say ‘Strip’ you have to really strip: take off everything.
I had a bath, then had to wait to see this officer in charge, and because they read on my notes that I'd barricaded, I was put on this wing like C1.
The person that was in my cell before me had urinated in it, so I had to clear it up before I could sleep and  that wasn't nice.
You're lucky if you have a roll-up in Risley.
They have this little peephole where you have to shove your cigarette so it sticks out on the other side for them to light it.
I went to bed early: I felt numb from head to foot, didn't have no feelings.
Whilst I was in Holloway, my probation officer sorted out something to try and stop me getting a prison sentence.
Someone from a hostel in London came to see me and said they would have me, so when I went to court in Sheffield the judge decided to put me on bail for four weeks, on condition that I stayed at the hostel and that I didn't drink, and also if I attended the Jules Thorn psychiatric unit, which is part of St Pancras Hospital, for a ten-day assessment.
So I stayed at the hostel for four weeks.
When I went to the Royal Courts of Justice, the judge knew what he was going to give me, and I got three years' probation, on condition that I stay at the hostel for a year and that I attend a day centre.
I started at the Jules Thorn unit on 13 July.
It's nice.
I like it there.
I attend different groups, and I've got a key worker who I see once a week.
Most people said I should get probation, but I was looking on the black side and thought I would get a sentence of three to five years.
I've had to give my home up.
The council want my flat.
I'm now waiting to hear from the DHSS to see if they will spend so much money a week for storing my furniture.
I can go home now and again to stay with my sister, and Newbury Council have said that when I come back into circulation they'd be willing to find me another place, and hopefully I'll find a little job.
I've been told when I do get settled into my new home, maybe that I'll be able to have Darren home once a month.
In the meantime I'll just carry on going to visit him.
I'm not giving that up.
I don't think I could ever go back to Bedford to live, and I couldn't never live in that flat anyway because it's been desecrated.
I thought the woman I left my key with, a neighbour, was a friend.
But it's either her or the caretaker who've taken a lot of stuff out of my place: radio cassette, bedside radio, camera, alarm clock, my son's chair and table.
I think she must  have had that for her little boy.
All my tools which I had underneath the kitchen sink, my washing powder: all gone.
Tinned food and other stuff: disappeared.
I don't know what to do about it.
I don't want it to upset me.
There again, I don't know whether to confront her about it, write her a letter or what.
I could ask my probation officer to try and sort things out, but I know she'll deny it.
I did seven and a half months in prison: that was more than enough.
I don't think I could have handled it if I'd been given a sentence.
Otherwise I got on pretty well, had a laugh: you had to.
I don't think a lot of the staff liked you laughing and joking about.
It's not what they said, it's the looks you got from some of the screws, as if to say, ‘You shouldn't be laughing, what have you got to be happy about?’
I can't see the future very clear at the moment.
I've been feeling so depressed and tearful and choked up.
It started coming back after a weekend seeing Darren.
I didn't want to come back.
I cried on Monday night and cried again Tuesday and yesterday.
And today I've been feeling down.
I've got to look towards the future, but I can't really see anything, not the way I feel.
And this is how I started off before I got into trouble.
I don't know what I want to do, besides going home.
I was asked if I had ever thought about finding a flat and living up here.
No way.
Too much of a rat race.
I could never live in London.
Rushing, rushing, traffic from morning to night: it goes on twenty-four hours a day.
I like being with people, but there's times when I want to be on my own.
I know if I feel depressed I shouldn't just sit on my own, you just dwell on it: ‘Why did I do this, why did I do that?’
I start thinking about Darren.
I know he's happy where he is but I miss him.
There isn't a day that goes past without my missing him.
And I miss my family.
I've only been out of prison three months.
It takes it out of you.
So I'm bound to feel a bit low, aren't I?
I know if I get into trouble again I'll be done for the arson charge and breach of probation, and that means a few years in jail and I couldn't handle it.
I've learnt my lesson.
I'm thirty-six years old.
I've been in and out of places, I've had to learn the hard way.
They couldn't  make head or tail of me, couldn't think what was wrong with me.
I can't remember what was the name they put on it.
But I wasn't insane.
Jean's son Darren died from a major epileptic fit three months after this interview.
Jean remained at the hostel and continued to attend the Jules Thorn Unit.
Several months later she was arrested for climbing the scaffolding and smashing a window at the National Gallery in Trafalgar Square.
At the time of going to press she is back in the C1 psychiatric unit at Holloway as a convicted remand prisoner waiting to go to court.
Sharon
When we met Sharon she was living in a London hostel for women recently released from prison.
She had been out of prison for two months and was in the process of re-establishing herself in the outside world.
She had one daughter, aged two and a half years, who was living with her mother.
The prison officers' dispute Sharon refers to is the Prison Officers Association overtime ban started at the end of April 1986.
It was called off within twenty-four hours after extensive rioting at a number of men–s prisons.
If he was to walk in here today and I knew he was my stepfather, I would not think twice about putting a knife through him.
My mum is now registered blind: that's through the severe beatings to the head she had from him.
My brother Sean is very slow, and I feel my stepfather had something to do with that too.
I'm not using him as an excuse or anything, but I do feel he's got a lot to do with the way my life's been.
As a child I was sexually assaulted by my stepfather.
That was an experience I went through for many months, not saying anything.
My stepfather was saying to me, ‘This is my way of showing you how much I love you and care for you.
’ I was only young, about eight years old.
It's always been on my mind — I suppose it always will — and I've always said that if I got the opportunity to kill the man I'd do it, and I would take the consequences.
He has very, very deeply scarred me.
When I became a prostitute I used to think, ‘Men are paying me .
They're not getting anything out of me, they're having to pay me for my body.’
I hated them, I used to laugh at them.
I really detested them, and I think my stepfather had a lot to do with that as well.
Nothing ever happened to him.
He never went to court because they said I was too young to give evidence.
As far as I was concerned, he got away with it.
The only thing that really happened was that my mum got a divorce in 1972 on the grounds that he had sexually assaulted me and there was mental cruelty to her.
If I do something stupid, like if I do a chequebook and card, I go to prison.
He nearly kills people and nothing happens to him.
This is what I can't understand.
The relationship between me and my mother was bad because my mother suffered a nervous breakdown and everything, and she blamed her children for a lot of things that went wrong with her.
My stepfather was a very violent man.
If she put an ashtray in the wrong place, she'd get beaten up; if she never put his paper in the right place, she'd get beaten up; if he came in from work and his dinner wasn't on the table, she'd get beaten up.
It was terrible the things that used to happen.
I think it was that which made her frightened to accept the truth when he was sexually assaulting me.
As a child you don't know what to do: a child should be able to trust its mother 100 per cent.
I was truanting from school when I was about nine, and to be truthful my mother said I was totally out of hand.
So they took me into care and put me in an assessment centre in Sydenham Hill for six months.
After that I was put with foster parents, staying with them in the country for about nine months.
Then I was taken back home to my mother's and tried to build up the relationship again.
By this time I was in secondary school.
I never got on very well and ended up getting thrown out of my classes.
As a last resort I was put into a special centre for people who won't adjust to school.
One day my mum rang up and said she didn't want me to come home again and that I should go to Social Services because she was sick and tired of all the bother and everything.
So I was taken into care again, went to an  assessment centre and ended up in an approved school for girls in Hertfordshire.
My first offence was round about the age of eleven — shoplifting.
I think every child goes through a stage where they go into a shop and nick something: they just want to see whether they can get away with it.
But that was really my first encounter with the police.
When you're a child they say, ‘You know you shouldn't do that’, and they give you a bloody good rollicking and leave it at that — they try to terrify you.
But then I started getting into trouble in approved school — running away, things like that, ending up in Brighton and Margate and being arrested for being an absconder from council care.
I was always taken back.
The approved school was bloody disgusting.
If you got into trouble you were made to sit on a chair and look at a wall for twenty-four hours a day.
You wasn't allowed to talk to anybody else.
You wasn't allowed to smoke — that was one privilege they did normally let you have: if you were over fourteen you were allowed up to four cigarettes a day.
If you did get in any trouble there was this man, Joe, and he was a really big hard man, he was a black-belt in karate and everything, and he really did mentally and physically terrify the girls.
One time me and my friend Yasmin, we were both in there.
We used to go out on these walks in the country near the school, and we were accused of going with two lorry drivers behind a bush to have sex with them in exchange for a watch.
Letters went home to our parents about it, our weekend leave was stopped and we wasn't allowed to associate with any of the other girls.
They had this little room, half the size of a prison cell, and if you did anything wrong you were put in there with just a mattress, and you was left there locked in, to stew really.
You had your meals brought to you — it was just disgusting.
They used to beat us up, literally beat us up and terrorise us.
I mean, for a child to have to sit and look at a wall for twenty-four hours a day — it's totally out of order, you know.
I used to tell my mum everything that went on, but nobody would believe us.
When parents or social workers went up to see us, obviously they had to see the staff, and the woman in charge  was so nice, she had this big front —‘My girls, my girls’— it was totally a load of shit.
About three years ago I was reading a newspaper and there was this big article about my approved school.
I don't know whether it closed down or not but there was a big inquiry into it.
I was just thankful that I got out when I did.
Time after time I ran away and my social worker could see that I wasn't happy.
I'd made it clear that by the time I reached sixteen I wanted out — I couldn't get out any sooner because no school in London would have me.
When I left there I thought it was the happiest day of my life, but it wasn't.
I couldn't go home to my mother because the relationship was still very iffy, so I ended up going to a hostel.
I didn't get on very well there either.
I was moved to another hostel which was worse.
I had just turned sixteen and they put me in this place that was really for dossers.
I couldn't stick it and they couldn't find me anywhere else, so I took off.
Obviously if you're on your own, single, with nowhere to live, you have to have money and you have to get somewhere to live, so I turned to prostitution.
I met this man and I thought he was wonderful — so nice to me and everything when I first met him.
I thought, ‘Oh my God, I've found someone at last that really does care for me.’
At first I didn't mind doing it, but after two months I found out he had quite a few women.
He didn't really care for me at all: it was my money he was interested in.
He started knocking me about and telling me that I had to bring in this or that amount of money.
After a while I thought, ‘Hold on a minute, this isn't right.
I shouldn't be doing this.
’ I just stood up to him one day — don't ask me where I got the nerve from, because he was a bloody big geezer.
I said to him, ‘If you want money, go out there and fucking get it yourself.
I'm nobody's slave.’
He battered me — and when I say battered, I mean battered.
He ended up breaking my nose, I had four broken ribs, a broken arm and my shoulder was dislocated.
I went to the hospital and they asked me how I done it.
Obviously you don't say, ‘Oh my pimp beat me up’, do you?
If you did, the police would get involved, and that's the last thin– anyone wants 'cause the  pimps terrify you as far as the police are concerned.
So I said I fell down a flight of stairs.
I still needed money so I had to carry on working the streets.
I was going round in circles because it's a very small world — pimps and prostitutes.
There's only a certain number of places a prostitute can go and earn money, so all a pimp needs to do is drive round in his car until he sees you.
When he gets you he beats you up for leaving him; you go back and start working for him again; then you try to get away from him; he finds you again and you just go on like this all the time.
I decided, ‘Right this isn't it’, so I left and set up on my own.
By that time I'd heard my pimp was in custody, and I started renting a flat.
I had to do something to keep my flat going and everything, so I got in with these girls, working girls.
I said, ‘If you want somewhere to use, you can use my flat, just as long as there's only one of you in there at a time.’
You see, with things like that you can start getting done with living off immoral earnings, brothel-keeping and whatever, and at that age — nearly seventeen — I really didn't want those type of charges.
There was me and two other girls working in one flat.
Everything was going fine for about four months.
I had sorted out the flat really nicely, and had some money put away.
One day one of the girls who came from Birmingham (she used to come down, work the week and go back up), she just got up and said, really unexpectedly, ‘I'm going back.’
So me and the other girl left that evening to go to work.
I came back to the flat with one of my regular clients who I had planned to meet.
I hadn't been back longer than ten minutes when I got a sledgehammer through my street door.
I thought, ‘My God, what's happening?’
At first I thought it was some pimps, the door literally came off its hinges.
Then in walked all these men.
I seen one woman and she had a police uniform on, so obviously I knew it was the police.
I'll always remember it.
Chief Inspector [E]was there and he turned round and said, ‘Sharon Mills?’ and I said, ‘That's right,’and he said, ‘I'm charging you with running a brothel and living off immoral earnings.’
So I says, ‘You've got to be joking.’
He said, ‘No, I have statements, I have witnesses  and we've been surveying you for the last four months.’
I went totally mad because there was an officer there that I knew — an officer that had picked me up and everything — he had arrested me before, but had also done business with me.
I felt he'd sort of taken the piss out of me, through doing business with me.
He knew about them investigations, that I was being watched, and he could have told me to slow down a bit.
But he never, and I went really mad.
I grabbed at him and went totally berserk.
I ended up getting carried to the station with my feet handcuffed, my hands handcuffed, lain in the bottom of the van.
They stopped my client, asked him what he was there for, his name and address, the usual routine.
The poor sod must have been terrified because he was married with children.
That was the last I seen of him.
They searched my whole flat before they took me, looking for things like Durex, and to see whether I kept any books of accounts, of girls giving me money, all this sort of thing.
When I got to the station they read the charge against me, charged me with it and I asked whether I was getting bail.
They kept me in custody overnight.
I went to court the next morning, was refused bail and was remanded to Holloway.
I was just seventeen.
Seven days later I went to court and still got refused bail.
I went back to court seven days after that, there was a bail application put forward and the magistrate said he would grant bail with a surety of £500.
So my solicitor said to me, ‘Who do you know that can stand surety for £500?’.
I said, ‘To be quite truthful, nobody’— because I had no contact with my family.
All I knew were prostitutes or pimps, and just about everyone had a criminal record.
Nobody would stand surety, so bail wasn't granted again.
Then I remembered someone who could: the person could not stand cash, but was maybe prepared to put something up of the value of £500.
I was taken back to Holloway while they made inquiries.
I thought, ‘That's it — I'm not getting out, I'm staying.’
It must have been about 9.30 one evening when the cell hatch opened and they said, ‘Mills, you've got bail.
Do you want to go now or in the morning?’
I said, ‘What do you mean?
Let me out now!’
Who's going to stay in prison longer than they have to?
The next day I went down to where I used to work.
I had been to my flat and there was nothing there — it had been totally cleared out.
So I wanted to see the girl I had worked with because she must have known what happened to my stuff.
I was walking along the road and all of a sudden this police car drew up beside me.
They said, ‘Hello Sharon.’
I looked and said, ‘Yes?’
They said, ‘Would you get in the car please?’
I said, ‘What for?’
They said, ‘We're arresting you for loitering with the intent of prostitution.’
I said, ‘Do me a favour.’
Now I'm known to the police as a ‘common prostitute’— why ‘common’ I don't know.
Prostitute — well, I can accept that, but common I will not accept.
I said, ‘Look, you know I've just come out of Holloway after being on remand.’
They were the same officers that had arrested me for the charge I was on.
‘You know I'm not working, I'm down here trying to find out where my stuff's gone to.’
Anyway, this woman grabbed hold of me, and she just done it wrong.
The judge who gave me bail had said that if I got into trouble that was it, I wouldn't get bail again, so obviously I thought, ‘If I'm going to go back, I'll go for something worth going for.’
Me and the woman police officer started fighting and then the other two men come out.
I'll always remember it — I can see it and laugh about it now.
It was raining and there was this walkie-talkie twisting around my head, there was police hats rolling in the road, and they radioed in for assistance.
There must have been about nine or ten of them — all men except for one woman — and they tried to say it took all of them to restrain me.
Now I was a lot skinnier then than I am now, about seven and a half stone, and they tried to say that!
They had handcuffs on me and I've still got marks on my hands — you can see — where the handcuffs were put on so tight that when I got to the station they couldn't get them off me.
I was back in court the next day and I ended up getting twelve months for GBH [grievous bodily harm]on a police officer.
I think it should have been the other way round because I was black and blue from head to toe.
When I got into Holloway they  have them little forms and they've got pictures of a body with all arrows and everything, and where I had any bruises the doctor put these marks.
It was like from head to toe there was these marks on my body where I had bruises, and I got done for police assault — I couldn't believe it!
While I was doing that sentence my other case for running a brothel and living off immoral earnings came up.
I was only in court for about fifteen minutes and the judge dismissed the case for lack of evidence.
It was all for nothing.
I did both my sentences at Cookham Wood: I was only on remand at Holloway.
I will never understand why I went to Cookham on my first sentence — I got a YP [young prisoner's sentence]and don't know why I never went to borstal — they still had them then.
I was the youngest prisoner ever to go to Cookham Wood: now they don't take anyone under twenty-one.
Going to a new prison, you don't know what to expect.
Walking along the corridor, there are all these eyes looking at you, and you think, ‘Oh my God.’
For someone to understand the way you feel when you go into any prison you'd have to experience it.
When I went into prison I had mixed feelings for people outside — I hated them, I felt they had rejected me, they'd left me alone to just get on with it.
‘Not to worry, she's only got a short sentence, she'll be out soon’: that's what people were saying.
I can remember being in a cell, locked in, with nobody else but myself, crying, and a screw opening the hatch on the door and saying, ‘What's the matter with you?
You're in here because you did wrong, no tears are going to help you.’
I did nine months of that sentence.
If you come out to nothing like I did and you've been a prostitute and know it's easy money — well you're going to go straight to it again.
I started working straight away and started getting arrested — I mean, not once: I was getting arrested three times a day.
Once I got arrested one morning for soliciting, but they let me out of the police station; I got arrested the same afternoon, they let me out again; I got arrested in the evening and they kept me in and took me to court the next day.
I got a £50 fine.
Then I thought, ‘Well, blow this.’
I wasn't really  getting anywhere, so I started doing chequebooks and cards (amongst other things).
The first time I got charged with chequebooks and cards I got two years' probation.
I mean, I've had totally everything you can get from a court.
I've had probation, conditional discharge, deferred sentences, suspended sentences — everything.
I think I was about nineteen when I started taking drugs.
I got caught with all these drugs in a car by the same police (I don't know what I do, but it's the same police every time I get arrested) and I got charged with possession.
They had to go away to be analysed, and I went back to court and ended up getting a £150 fine or seven days in prison — I paid the fine.
Some people would say they'd do the seven days, but I don't like prison.
I think I took drugs to escape my problems, because I thought I had the world on my shoulders for a number of reasons.
I had recently had my little girl, her dad had walked out on me, and I thought he was just another man who had what he wanted and then left me.
I had a house to maintain, my daughter and no job.
They expected me to live on supplementary benefit so I was having to work the street, trying to get my house together.
I started off smoking hash; from that I went to acid, LSD, speed, things like that.
Then I started dabbling in cocaine.
I'd seen somebody taking it so I tried it and liked it.
I obviously wanted some more but it was very expensive: coke sells for between £80 and £120 per gram, and a gram's not a lot at all.
So, I was back working the streets to buy my drugs.
Before I knew it, I was very very bad on it.
For example— I feel disgusted and ashamed — I took my little girl down to my mum's and I swear to God I remember dressing her — it was winter — but when she got to my mum's house I took her out of the buggy and all she had on was her nappy and her socks and a blanket wrapped round her.
I've never done anything to hurt my little girl, I've never hit her or anything like that, but I felt in myself that her being with me was endangering her.
I just couldn't cope with myself, let alone her.
I reached the stage where I didn't do the washing or the washing up, I didn't clean the house: it looked  like a pigsty.
Then I lost all pride in my appearance: I stopped changing my clothes, I stopped washing.
People that knew me were asking what was wrong with me, they were shocked at the state of me.
I had some arguments: ‘Who do you think you are, trying to bring me down?’
One day my mum said to me, ‘You're going to be in trouble before long.
’ I said, ‘What are you talking about?
You're always throwing in my face that I'm going to get in trouble.
Every minute of the day, all I hear is that I'm going to get in trouble.’
‘Just mark my words, Sharon,’ she says, ‘within six months you'll be in prison again.’
I thought, ‘Fuck it, she don't even know what she's talking about.’
One day I was out working the streets, I went with this punter and I went back to his place.
I ended up having a fight with him, he broke my arm and I got hit on the head.
I was kept in hospital overnight and then I discharged myself.
My little girl Natasha was with a friend at the time and because my mum hadn't seen me for some time she was concerned.
My mum knows I'm a prostitute, I was very straight with her about it.
I can't say she was pleased or overjoyed, but she said, ‘You're at the age where I can't tell you not to do it.’
I rang my mum and she wanted to know where I was and where Natasha was.
I told her I was in hospital and why.
She said she had something to tell me when I got home.
When I got back, my daughter was at my mother's and my mother said that I should be ashamed of myself because Natasha had been filthy and starving hungry.
I said, ‘Don't give me that.
I know where she was and I know the woman looks after her well.’
I paid my friend for having her.
I told her that what she said was a load of bollocks, and one thing led to another and my mum told me she wasn't allowing me to take Natasha with me.
Natasha's father was there and was siding with my mother, saying how I couldn't take Natasha, I was an unfit mother and how he was going to get me done.
He said, ‘You aren't fit to have the child, you only know how to look after yourself.
You spend your time whoring and getting money.’
I was going mad: my mum was swearing at me, I was swearing at her; finally I just lost my temper and said.
‘Right, you've got everything else.
Everything I've loved, everything I've ever wanted in life you've taken away from me, so you have Natasha.
You keep her.’
I said, ‘I hope you'll all be fucking happy’, and I walked out.
I was very upset.
I wanted to see Natasha, but my mother said ‘No’ and threatened to call in the police.
I couldn't afford to get in bother with the police, so I didn't see her.
I was really hard on drugs.
I was doing chequebooks and cards, and I had a very good run on them for about four months, but what with taking drugs and that I collapsed one time when I was working out on the street.
I was rushed into hospital — I'd OD'd [overdosed].
When I came out, I never had a care in the world.
I thought, ‘Well, I haven't got my daughter, so why the fuck should I bother?’
I got to the stage where I just thought, well, something's got to happen, you know?
It was either OD, suicide, or something else.
Then one day — I'll always remember — I was staying at a friend's house and I was sweeping this carpet and I had this vision.
I seen myself and two police officers.
It was really weird, it frightened me, in fact.
I looked at my friend and I said, ‘I'm going to get arrested today.
’ My friend looked at me and said, ‘Don't be so bloody stupid’, but I knew I was right.
She said, ‘Well don't go out then.’
Me being Miss Know-it-all did go out, and lo and behold I got arrested.
They kept me in the police station for two weeks: nobody knew where I was, not even my solicitor.
I was withdrawing from drugs and in a terrible state.
After two weeks they had enough evidence and they charged me.
I had eighty-nine charges and forty-four more taken into consideration, so there was a hell of a lot involved.
I think the amount of money came to about £42,000 worth of fraud and deception.
I went to court and was remanded into custody.
I tried for bail time and time again, but it just wasn't on.
By this time my mother and me were getting on just a little bit better.
She was prepared to stand surety for me, but they just wasn't having it.
She was at court every time with me, and she came and visited me at Holloway.
I must admit that even though we don't get on — I mean, we still have our ups and downs — all through my remand and prison sentence she visited me.
She made sure I  had money in prison, she made sure that everything I needed I had.
I was on remand for twenty-two weeks.
My solicitor told me to expect at least four years because of my previous convictions: I've got deception, deception, fraud, grievous bodily harm, assault, malicious wounding, drugs, deception and then again deception.
I had literally had everything possible that a judge can give you.
So I knew I was going away this time.
There was no way I was going to walk out at the end of all that.
But I also had charges that was nothing to do with me.
When I actually got to court there was more charges than there should have been.
There was no point in saying they were nothing to do with me, because I'd got so many — just over a hundred charges of fraud and deception.
Who was going to believe me if I said ten of those weren't mine?
Nobody, really, were they?
And it wouldn't have made no difference to my sentence anyway, so what was the point?
I mean, if the police can get the paperwork through the likes of me, why not?
I ended up with a two-year prison sentence with another nine months suspended.
So I suppose I was lucky.
Going through prison — it's an experience.
It's as if you go back into your childhood again.
Everyone is treated like children, it's unbelievable: everybody, young girls, old women, the whole prison.
It's one big approved school, that's what it's like.
I mean, there's so much that goes on in prison that people don't know about, which they should.
It's the humiliation they make you feel.
You go to prison for something you've done wrong, that's your punishment, but they don't need to humiliate you in the way they do.
The way they treat women with drug problems in prison is disgusting.
If I was outside I would have got a lot better treatment.
I went through the reception, and I was shaking; I mean I didn't need to tell them I was on drugs, they could tell the drugs were on me.
When I finally saw the doctor and I said, ‘Can I have something?’ he said, ‘What for?’
I said, ‘Are you blind or just stupid?
I'm a cocaine addict and I need something, 'cause I've not had none for so many hours now.
When I was in police custody the doctor came in to see me and gave me some  tablets and I'm asking you for some now.’
‘Oh yes, I suppose so’, he said, and he gave me some tablets.
I was on tablets for two days and then taken off, just like that.
They were sleeping tablets to help me sleep.
I was getting DF118s — painkillers but they knock you out at the same time.
You're like a zombie, to tell the truth.
No, a drug addict doesn't get any help.
The only one who spoke to me about it was a police officer when I was in the police station: ‘Why is a young girl like you destroying yourself on this stuff.’
I said, ‘Oh for Chris'sakes, shut up I know you're trying to be nice to me and help me, but please don't because you're just giving me a headache.’
Suicide and self-injury is an everyday occurrence in prison.
You can never say who is going to try it and who isn't — I mean, I even tried it myself.
People would look at me and think, ‘No, she's not the type, she would never try to top herself’, but I tried to do it when I was in Cookham Wood.
I never saw my daughter Natasha all the time I was in prison.
I had her made a ward of court to my mum because the social services — they are terrible people.
As soon as they knew I was in prison they were trying to get involved and everything.
The last thing I wanted on my mind was my daughter being taken into care.
One day the screw came up and told me I had a visit down in the solicitor's; I went down and this man presented himself as a court welfare officer.
‘I've got to write a report on you and your daughter, how your relationship is,’ he said.
I said, ‘How are you expected to do a report?’
This was March and I wasn't due out until August.
He said, ‘I want to bring your daughter up to the prison.
’ I said, ‘On your bike!
She's not coming up to the prison, it's as simple as that.’
So he said I was being very stubborn and that I'd be lucky to get my daughter back through drug addiction and one thing and another.
So I told him he'd better go, because by this time I was bubbling a bit and I wanted to kill the man: I wasn't really prepared to lose any time over hitting a court welfare officer.
As I was going up to my cell it all hit me — am I ever going to get my daughter back?
I couldn't get out to go and see the people and ask questions, see my solicitor or anything.
All I could do was write a letter, and by the time I'd written a letter and it got  where it was going and a reply got back, a week or two weeks could have gone by.
So I got very, very depressed about it all and I just said to the officers, ‘Put me in my cell and leave me alone.
’ They brought the nurse round because they'd never seen me like this before.
The nurse came down and gave me some medicine which totally knocked me out.
I woke up in the early hours of the morning and it was still there — the first thing that come into my head.
I had pictures of my little girl in the cell.
Before I knew what I was doing I was slitting my wrists.
It's very frustrating being in prison.
I think it's more so for women than for men.
The majority of women have children, homes, financial commitments.
I don't know how many people know this, but if you're in custody and you have council accommodation, the council will only pay your rent up to a year.
So where does that leave a woman that gets a two-, three-, or four-year sentence?
I lost my flat and practically all my belongings.
Everyone's worried: am I going to get squatters?
Am I going to get burgled?
Are they going to take my flat away from me?
Am I going to have to live on the street when I get out?
What's happening to my little girl?
She's growing up and I'm not there.
I thought it was the most important time in Natasha's life and I wasn't there.
At the same time, I was refusing for her to be brought to the prison because although I wanted to see her more than anything, I was damn sure she wasn't going to come to prison and see me.
I think those types of things stick in children's minds, so I didn't want her there.
It's really frustrating, all the problems you have.
When I cut my wrists it was night and I made no attempt to get the staff.
I'm just lucky really that I never cut myself to any extent, because if I had tried to ring my bell, they would have said, ‘Tough, wait until the morning.’
That's how it is in prison.
Every prison is the same, or every prison I've been in anyway.
Once the door's been locked at night and the medicine's been round, you're not out until the morning.
It's as simple as that.
Only a prisoner and the nurse had spoken to me the night before I cut myself.
The nurse was lovely, Sister [E], practically every woman that has problems will go to her.
You can sit down  and talk to her; you can say anything, and no matter what you say, it's confidential between you and her.
She's not going to sit down and laugh and joke over you with anyone else.
I've seen a woman talking to an officer and then overheard officers discussing what she's said.
As far as I'm concerned it's not on — if a woman's got a problem and she confides in you, that is a trust that shouldn't be broken.
The sister was okay, you could sit and talk to her.
Obviously the officers had to be told what I'd done, because injury forms and everything had to be filled in.
They asked me why I tried to do it — whether I was attention-seeking!
I said, ‘You small-minded people make me fucking sick.
Every time anyone tries to do something to themselves it's ‘attention-seeking’.
You don't stop to realise the problems women have got.’
They just say, ‘Well you should think of those things before you get into trouble.
If you thought anything of your children you wouldn't get into trouble.’
It's the same story — everyone falls back on it.
So you just don't bother with them.
Fuck them.
I was patched up, had to see the doctor, was given some tablets and that was it.
Nothing more said.
My mum come up to see me and asked me what the bandage was for and I told her I'd burnt myself.
She's not stupid.
She knew.
She told me when I come out of prison.
She asked me why I tried to commit suicide.
She'd come every two weeks to see me, she used to tell me everything that was going on with Natasha, and we built a very strong relationship up.
I hope it will continue.
We got over quite a lot of old problems.
Being close to people in prison and being close to people on the street outside are two completely different things.
The people in prison are the only people you have — whatever problems you've got, you know the only people you can talk to are the women in prison.
So obviously that throws you closer.
And there's a lot of women in the same situation as you, what with children and one thing and another, so you discuss it and you find you're not the only one in there with those problems — there are others the same.
If you're close to another woman — I'm bisexual — you can't let anyone else see that, for the fear of being split up.
They victimise you if they know two women are  going together; they really play on it.
I don't know why they do it, the screws, because half of them are bent as butchers' hooks anyway.
In Cookham Wood, especially, there are so many lesbian officers it's not true.
You just have to look at them and you can tell.
I was particularly close to one girl in there, very close indeed, and we were having a relationship during the sentence I've just finished.
They really did pick on her and the only reason was that she wouldn't stick up for herself.
What they said went, and I'm sorry but while I was there they weren't going to get away with that.
This resulted in fights and arguments — I was put on report so many times you wouldn't believe it.
I had reports for disobeying orders, getting involved, stopping an officer doing what she should be doing, just through sticking up for my girlfriend.
They used to see us and say, ‘Here they are, the lovebirds, are we talking today or have we had a lovers’ tiff?’
If I was in a bad mood or something and I wanted to be on my own it would be, ‘Ah, have you had an argument with the girlfriend?
Is that what it is–’ Or if I was to see the doctor and my girlfriend happened to be seeing the doctor as well, this was just an excuse, according to them, for us to be together.
We weren't hurting anyone or upsetting anyone, it wasn't as if we stood in the corridor kissing and cuddling.
Whatever we did, we did in private.
It was all really stupid.
So one day my girlfriend just had enough and told them to fuck off.
The next day I was told to pack my stuff up because I was going on the other side [to another wing].
I was told I was getting a direct order, but I refused to pack and asked to see the governor.
I was told I couldn't, but I knew if I didn't obey the order I would be put on report and would see the governor anyway.
So I ended up going on report.
My girlfriend was going mad and I went in front of the governor.
He said to me that he doesn't agree with lesbians, thinks they are absolutely disgusting people, etc., and how two women can find sexual satisfaction with each other he will never know.
I said, ‘I'm not being disrespectful, sir, but it's mainly men that turn women to seek their affection from women.
’ He just looked at me.
He said he would leave me on the wing as long as me and my girlfriend didn't twos-up with each other[visit one another 's cells during the association period].
There's bent officers in there, but they think the lesbians are disgusting.
How one lesbian can put another lesbian on report I will never know, because as far as I'm concerned that's hypocritical, totally and utterly.
I think they should just leave women if they're having a relationship, as long as they don't interfere with anybody else.
Women doing long sentences are obviously going to try and find someone to be close to.
Everyone thinks lesbians are only in prison, but I know loads of women from the outside who haven't even been to prison who are lesbians.
People also seem to get this impression that if you're released from prison the first thing you want is sex.
Well, sex was the last thing on my mind when I got out.
I didn't need it.
I was getting it while I was in there, so it didn't really bother me.
I had more important things to do than jump into bed with someone.
But that's the impression people get: that you're like a dog on heat when you're released.
It's not true.
Women who have done things to children get a bad time inside if the other women know and can get hold of them.
It's the same in every prison, men's or women's.
Anything you do is accepted as long as it's not interfering with children.
It's just the way it's been for years.
You can imagine what it's like with a 140 other women all against them.
As they walk down the landing all you hear is, ‘Nonce, nonce, nonce, nonce.’
I've done it myself 'cause I don't like people who hurt children.
But I must admit I really had a go at one nonce and felt so guilty afterwards, after she explained to me what had happened.
And ever since then I've thought, ‘Well, you don't know the situation, circumstances or anything, so who am I to say anything about that person?
They could think what I done was totally out of order.I mean it was only forgery, but they could think it was, you know…
They could of looked on it that I was depriving somebody.
I mean the chequebooks I was doing, they could have had children couldn't they, those people?
I don't know whose chequebooks I had.
Whilst I was there, there was the prison officers’ dispute and  the governor came into the dining room one breakfast-time and said, ‘I'm sorry, girls, but there will be no visits this weekend due to lack of staff.
’ What governor in his right mind is going to go into a dining room of 150 prisoners and say that?
You don't do that!
I mean there was total chaos.
I don't know how no one never got killed.
Someone, I don't remember who it was, said, ‘What do you mean we're having no visits?’ and then everyone was off.
All the doors were locked, all the prison officers were inside, and there were plates going here and plates going there and everything just went off.
We all got locked in our rooms afterwards and allowed out for meals three at a time.
It took them from breakfast to dinnertime to teatime to get everybody.
It was really pointless.
Three of you are unlocked and you come down and there are prison officers standing everywhere — to me that was stupid, because if the women wanted to riot they would have done it in the dining hall there and then.
Obviously the only connections women or men in prison have are their letters and their visits.
That's the only thing anyone has in prison, the only thing they have to look forward to.
So to bloody tell 150 women, ‘Oh, I'm sorry, but you're not having your visits’— you're asking for trouble.
There wasn't any violence between prisoners in the dining hall — it was mainly smashing up prison property — but there was some violence towards the officers.
There was always violence towards officers in Cookham: it happened all the time.
The only way they dealt with it was to throw people down the punishment block.
It's really hard to explain how it feels to be locked in a cell.
Someone has to experience it to know to the full how you feel.
I'll explain what I used to do, locked up in my cell.
You sit there, then you get up and you walk to one end of your cell, which isn't very far, stand there for a little while, then you walk back, look out the window, and all the thoughts go through your mind — I could be out there, your children, friends, what you'd be doing if you was out there.
It's really depressing and you've got to stop thinking about it, 'cause if you don't then the emotions will come and you start crying, and you sort of think to yourself, ‘No I've got to stop thinking, I've got to do something.’
So you  have a wash, and when you've had your wash you do a bit of your clothes washing, like your knickers and bra, then you tidy up your cell.
You've done it a thousand times already, but you do it again, just for something to do.
Then you start reading a book, but you can't get into it, so you get up and you tidy your cell again, and you read the book again, tidy your cell again, you know, just to keep your mind occupied because if you don't…
I can't put it into words.
I don't know how lifers cope with it, but they do.
Myra Hindley has been in prison for my whole life: I'm twenty-two now and she's been in for twenty-two years.
I don't know if she'll ever get out.
While I was in Cookham she got knocked back on her parole, she got a five-year review.
Other people have got out and they've done similar things to her.
It was so long ago that it happened — it's an everyday occurrence now, people battering and killing children.
To talk to her you wouldn't believe what she'd done.
She'll talk to you and give you advice and say, ‘Now behave yourself, don't get into no trouble.’
You wouldn't believe it.
She's had some pastings while she's been away.
Terrible.
The way the newspapers keep writing about her just brings it all back into people's minds.
Just as everyone's forgetting about Myra Hindley, there's something in the newspaper again about her.
I keep in touch with some people who are still inside — most of the people that were in with me are still there.
But I met one girl by accident when I walked into the hostel one night and she was visiting another girl there.
The other girl said, ‘Meet my friend, this is Sophie.’
She didn't recognise me.
I said, ‘I don't believe it’, and she looked and said, ‘My God, it's you, isn't it?’ and I said, ‘Yes it's me, Sharon.’
We sat down and spoke about things that had happened.
We had a good laugh, and the warmth that was there when I was in prison was still there — do you know what I mean?
Nothing was different.
It was as if we hadn't even parted really.
I hadn't seen her since when we were on remand, and then we both got sentenced and got sent to different prisons, so I hadn't seen her for nearly a year.
It was just like we were back in the cell, sitting down, having a chat and  a roll-up.
This time we were sitting there drinking wine and having straights [packet cigarettes].
That was quite nice, to see somebody that I'd been in prison with and still be able to sit down and talk the same old way.
I applied for parole, and usually you get your answer a couple of weeks before the date you could be going out.
When you're waiting for parole you go all funny — it's like having a baby all over again.
When I heard I'd got it, I was stunned — I didn't think I'd got it.
But I was told about it the night before I was released!
We was out on association that night and I just walked around saying, ‘I've got my parole.’
Everyone thought I was mucking about.
I kept saying, ‘Well, I've got to say goodbye, I'm going home tomorrow’, and they said, ‘Shut up, you're mad.’
I persisted and persisted and nobody believed me.
The next day came and I was running round the wing like a mad thing, up and down the stairs saying goodbye to everyone, and people were saying, ‘The bastard, she's got her parole.’
And I went out and that was that.
Never to be seen again, hopefully.
I'd still be in now without my parole — I wasn't due for release until the thirteenth of this month.
I'd be counting the days now, if I hadn't got parole.
My parole finishes in nine days and then I start a nine months' suspended sentence.
As for coming out: you are very wary.
I always think that if someone tries to get close to me they must want something from me.
My immediate reaction, whether it be a man or a woman, is to think the worst of them.
They might be the nicest person, but prison has made me that way.
I am very, very wary of people.
I don't trust anyone as far as I could throw them: it's as simple as that.
I don't think prison really teaches you anything, though it has made me realise I'm as good as any prison officer, if not better.
They always throw at you, ‘You're no good’, and they don't give a woman any encouragement when she's coming out.
The day before I was released it was, ‘Oh well, see you when you come back’, not ‘Good luck, don't come back.’
Because I'd done two prison sentences they obviously expected me to go back again.
They give you a complex about yourself.
The attitude they have  towards you is terrible, like you're lower than the dirt they tread on.
My mother told me when I come out of prison that I'm very paranoid.
Well, I don't blame any woman being paranoid when she comes out.
If a woman wasn't paranoid I'd think there was something wrong with her.
But one thing prison's taught me is to be very strong, and that I am a worthwhile person.
Nobody likes to have their freedom taken away from them, but all the abuse and everything they threw at me — it just made me stronger each time.
It made me sit down and think, ‘I don't give a damn what they're saying.
I know I've got a life out there and I know there are people out there that care for me.
I know that when I get out I'll make something of myself this time.’
Obviously I can't do anything dramatic overnight, due to circumstances, what with my little girl being a ward of court, and me not having a home.
But in time I'll have a home, my daughter will be back with me, and I'll be able to live as normal a life as anyone else.
That is my main aim the moment.
A year later Sharon was still living at the hostel and had managed to stay clear of drugs.
She was looking forward to getting a flat of her own and was about to go to court in an attempt to regain custody of her daughter.
Her main fear was that the court would regard her as an unfit mother because of her sexuality.
The warden of the hostel, also a single parent, clearly had no doubts about Sharon's ability to look after children.
Sharon was employed on a part-time basis to care for the warden's two-year-old daughter.