

GOVERNING THROUGH PARLIAMENT
The role of Parliament
The old nineteenth-century role of Parliament as a body which chose the government, maintained it and could reject it, which operated as an intermediary between the electorate and the executive, has gone.
In a political system dominated by the direct relations between the leadership of the country and the voters, the major function of Parliament has altered.
Now Parliament is one of the agencies through which the government operates and it is the place where the struggle for power continues in a restricted form between elections.
Those who were brought up on the older theories of the Westminster model in which, despite party loyalties, there was a balance between the executive and the legislature as a whole, expect that the House of Commons will still regard its main functions as being to consider and amend legislative proposals from the government (and from private members), to scrutinize public expenditure and to expose government policies to continual questioning and debate.
In practice, there are shadows of the first two functions remaining and the third has been incorporated into the power struggle aspect of the Commons.
But for ministers, shadow ministers and most MPs on both sides of the House, the division that comes to mind is not between the executive and the House but between the government and the Opposition.
The main function of MPs is to support their leaders, to attack the other side and to score the maximum points with the electorate in preparation for the next general election.
In 1964 and 1966 a number of Labour backbenchers who believed in the older, more historical functions of the House were elected.
They wanted to restore, to some small extent, the House's powers to scrutinize and, on occasion, to resist the executive over items of legislation, finance and general policy but their attitude was greeted with genuine surprise by many older members and by others in their own ‘intake’.
For these more orthodox members, the machinery of the House had to be used to  protect Labour ministers and to project their achievements.
They thought that it might be excusable to exploit situations to promote the individual MP's career within his own party or to look after constituency interests, but it was quite inexcusable to open up opportunities for the Opposition to criticize the government.
For the Prime Minister and his colleagues, the House can be useful in providing a forum in which they can explain their policies and it is, in any case, necessary to legalize government actions and to vote money.
But many ministers regard the House as a drag.
Question time has become increasingly taken up with party claims and counter claims or with constituency points, while debates often strike ministers as largely a waste of time.
The ministers who like the House either do so because, in their opposition days, they enjoyed its fellowship and had few other contacts in London, or they feel so confident of their capacity to score off the Opposition that they like revealing their talents.
They are conscious that their strength with the Prime Minister and chances of promotion bear some relation to their performance in the House and to their popularity in the parliamentary party.
But the House may well seem a curious, wayward, ill-informed, trying body to ministers with busy departments to run and managing the House may constitute a distraction from their chief and more interesting task of governing the country.
Turning from ministers to backbenchers, for the younger, more ambitious members the task is to defend their party and to make a reputation for themselves so that they will, in due course, be promoted to a junior office or, on the other side, to a shadow post.
The object in this case is not money or prestige.
A junior minister in one of the less important departments has no very glamorous task.
He cannot speak in or out of the House on subjects outside his department.
He cannot write for the papers or take part in television programmes and his sole opportunities in public are sharing the replies at question time and answering for the government in adjournment and sometimes in wider debates which concern his ministry.
The motives for seeking office are partly that the life of a backbench MP soon becomes unsatisfactory and offers so little scope for achievement, for registering even the smallest impact on a restricted area of.public life, that the average MP looks with envy on any minister who has a positive job to perform, however limited the field.
One quality of backbench life which is distracting for those with a professional or commercial training is  that it lacks coherence, and there is an aimlessness which is debilitating.
Constituency work takes some time and leads to a multiplicity of minor preoccupations but it by no means occupies the entire day.
Then the questions arise; should the MP speak in a debate?— he may not be called.
Should he sit on a select committee or will the work go unnoticed?
Should he try to write a newspaper column?
An article is more likely to be accepted if it says something new but this might annoy some of his party leaders.
All the time he is encouraged to dabble in this or that to no lasting effect and the relief that such an MP feels when given an actual job, a place to go from 9 a.m. onwards with a definite task to perform, something to do which stretches his capacity more than drinking tea, gossiping and writing letters, is enormous.
For the man who enters the House at a later age who does not expect to get and perhaps does not want office, there is no point in continual exertions to catch the limelight and this is the kind of member who is particularly prone to regard his function as supporting his leaders.
On the Labour side, there is a solid body of such members who inhabit the Tearoom.
On the Conservative side this element is based in the Smoking Room, and is composed of the men with estates or directorships who do not see the House as their primary source of prestige or income.
They, likewise, would find it most unusual and uncongenial if they were expected to devote themselves to constraining and criticizing a Conservative Government.
There are groups who take a different view.
The Left in the Labour Party use the House to register their protests against Right-wing members and measures, whichever party is in power, though many of them consider that once this is done on the floor of the House and the outside public has been informed of their dissent, they will support their leaders in committee and in the division lobbies.
Only a few, largely of the younger members, consider that at least for the first few years after an election, the House as a whole should keep a wary eye on the government and seek to support or influence its policy irrespective of the line taken by the official Opposition.
These members are interested in the issues, in extracting information from the government, in finding out precisely what is being planned, how policies are to be applied and whether the machinery of government is working well.
A limited view of the role of the Commons has been put forward by Mr Henry Fairlie in his book The Life of Politics .
Fairlie  argues, in the same fashion as that employed above, that Britain has an executive-dominated legislature, that the House of Commons can do little to stop a government and that its traditional functions are largely meaningless.
But he adds the value judgement that this is desirable because it exists and cannot be undone.
Fairlie emphasizes that the House has no corporate feeling, it cannot stand apart from the government, and the parliamentary reformers' idea that the House can recover some of its former powers is both impracticable and, in his judgement, undesirable.
It will not happen because the House cannot reform itself; it can only act with the permission of the executive.
In other words, the executive has to propose to the House that reforms should be instituted and why should any executive wish to make rods for its own back?
For Fairlie, the task of the House is as it is, to keep the party battle going.
The accountability of the government arises simply from the ministers' desire to win the next election and, as individuals, to have the minimum of embarrassment and the maximum of political credit.
These motives can be exploited to good effect by skilful MPs who understand the system and work with it rather than try to change it.
In the past the controversy about the nature of the role of the Commons has been reflected in arguments about the proper level of MPs' pay.
Conservatives sometimes asserted that it was good for MPs to continue with other part-time occupations so that they could gain wider experience of society's problems.
But the range of vocations compatible with parliamentary duties is restricted — namely the law, journalism, public relations, company directorships and the management of personal wealth.
A miner, a factory worker or a teacher cannot continue his normal living.
So while outside jobs may give MPs a broader outlook, that outlook will be in particular directions.
Meanwhile there is increasing acceptance that the task of representing a constituency can fairly be considered to constitute a full-time job.
There has been for some years a basic agreement that the parliamentary salary should be sufficient to prevent MPs feeling the need to seek supplementary income.
Even so, fixing the level of the salary creates an awkward problem.
MPs are in the unique position of being able to vote themselves unlimited money from public funds: the dominant view among MPs has always been that this power must be exercised with restraint.
Further, both Conservative and Labour Governments have sought to restrict increases in MPs' pay so that Parliament  does not give a bad example to the country and encourage more inflation.
Consequently, their salaries have risen infrequently, perhaps once in each Parliament, so each rise has been much higher than the typical annual pay increase.
The size of the amount has aggravated the embarrassment.
In 1988 the salary reached £22,548 and in future it will be linked to civil service pay, being 89 per cent of the salary of a Principal.
MPs also receive allowances to meet the cost of travel between their constituencies and Westminster.
There has also been a growing recognition that MPs need help to enable them to carry out their duties effectively.
Since 1970 they have been given an allowance for secretarial and research assistance.
The original grant of £500 p.a. (then enough to pay for a part-time secretary) has been steadily increased to a sum of £20,140 p.a. in 1988.
This figure is now to be index-linked.
It should be stressed that the pay and allowances provided at Westminster are low when compared with those at other legislatures of similar status.
How the executive gained control of Parliament
Before joining battle on the value judgements in the theses of Fairlie and Butt, both of which agree basically with the assessment given here of the powers and role of the House of Commons today, it is worth establishing the facts, both historical and contemporary.
In the period from 1832 to the 1880s, the number of party issues (nine-tenths of one party voting together) fell to 25 per cent of all divisions under a Liberal Government in 1860 and 31 per cent under the Conservatives, this low level of party cohesion being much the same from the 1830s to the early 1880s.
The House could and did sack governments (such as Russell's first Cabinet in 1852, Aberdeen's ministry in 1885, Lord Palmerston in 1858, Russell again in 1866 and Gladstone in 1885) without having to face a general election.
It could and did reject, revise and remake legislation on the floor of the House (such as the 1858 India Act or the 1867 Reform Act).
Individual ministers were censured and driven from office by the House, examples being Russell in 1855 and Ellenborough in 1858.
The House controlled a large part of its own timetable, it had a corporate spirit and it could force information out of the government, the best example being the stream of diplomatic Blue Books in which the Foreign Office had to reveal the course of its negotiations with foreign powers almost  as soon as the events had occurred.
Select committees were set up by the House with full powers of investigation.
Sometimes they did more than just report, and drafted legislation which could be adopted and introduced either by the government or by a private member.
There can be no doubt, then, that the loose nature of party discipline, the small electorates, the relative security of the private MP against the executive, all gave the House not merely much greater power than it enjoys nowadays but powers which altered its entire role and position in the system of government.
Under these circumstances the House had an independence and authority which would be utterly alien and unfamiliar to MPs accustomed to contemporary conditions.
During the Victorian period, in order to exercise these functions of controlling, scrutinizing, appointing and removing the executive, the procedure of the House was adapted to suit these tasks.
It is generally accepted that in order to watch over an executive, the system of supervision has to be constructed in parallel so that information about the salient issues is extracted at the right time and the process of scrutiny is based on this information and takes place when the decision is still open.
In the nineteenth century, the first step in legislation was a motion asking leave to introduce a bill.
At this stage the bill was not printed but the sponsors explained why they felt legislation was necessary and the lines on which they were planning to draft the measure.
This gave warning to the outside interests and to members and gave them time to gather their thoughts and explain their views before the first reading, which was purely formal but provided for the printing of the bill.
The second reading debate then dealt with the principle of the measure and could go on as long as members wished to speak, the government soon sensing whether it could proceed or whether modifications were needed.
Once past this hurdle, there came the committee stage taken on the floor of the House, when detailed amendments could be moved clause by clause, and again all amendments had to be taken and this stage went on until each had been dealt with.
Finally, there was the third reading debate when the House had to look at what it had done to the draft bill during the committee stage and decided whether to pass the measure.
So long as the House was not bound by strict party ties and so long as it had control of the major part of its own timetable, the general task of commenting on and questioning government policy was relatively simple.
There was no need for a question time, since a member could intervene in business by moving a motion on a number of pretexts and raise any subject in an immediate debate.
If the House was worried, the government could not refuse a full explanation nor could it return to its other business till members were satisfied.
The House might decide to act on its own by appointing a committee to inquire into the matter or a private member might move resolutions or introduce his own measure.
This pattern of parliamentary activity was rapidly altered (though much of the descriptive language remained the same) in the twenty-five years before the First World War.
The electorate increased, party battles became much more intense and the vast majority of divisions in the House became party divisions in that over nine-tenths of the party voted as the whips indicated.
With these changes came a different attitude to legislation.
For radicals such as Randolph Churchill (Conservative) and Joseph Chamberlain (Liberal), the task of the House was not to talk over and often talk out measures.
They argued that when a party had won an election on a given programme, it showed that the public wanted these measures to be passed.
Thus the doctrine of the mandate began to emerge.
The voters had pronounced and the newer, more radical leaders considered that the House should then give up its extensive powers; the measures endorsed by a majority at the polls should be passed with reasonable rapidity.
This view led to the first restrictions on private members' capacity to interrupt or hold up business whenever they liked — or whenever they could get the House to listen to them, for there was always considerable self-discipline.
The new Standing Orders adopted in 1882, after Speaker Brand had intervened in 1881 to stop a forty-one hours sitting, allowed the closure of debate by a simple majority.
In 1902 Balfour brought in his ‘reforms’, called ‘Balfour's railway timetable’, because under them, the government took control of virtually all the time of the House.
It decided what was to be debated, for how long and when the final vote was to be taken, so that the government could plan its legislative programme and could forecast accurately when each legislative train would reach the various stages on the journey to enactment.
These parliamentary procedures rest upon the government's command of a majority.
If this does not exist then both the government and its control of the timetable collapse but while the one lasts, the other is intact.
The government now announces each  Thursday the next week's business.
Private MPs rise and ask for time for this or that motion or debate which they particularly want, but normally the only concessions the Leader of the House will make is through ‘the usual channels’, that is in private discussions with the opposition Chief Whip.
This is because both frontbenches accept that it is the function of the House to permit the two sides to state their cases, and each party in power has respected the right of the Opposition to determine the subjects of debate for about one-third of the total time of the House.
The methods used for controlling debate are the power to apply the closure by a simple majority, though normally the majority must consist of a hundred members; the power to send bills upstairs for their committee stage to a standing committee and the power, when bills are taken on the floor of the House or in committee, to impose a guillotine.
This is a preliminary timetable resolution which requires the vote to be put on certain clauses at a certain time, irrespective of whether all the amendments to the clause or to previous clauses have been discussed.
Whether a guillotine has been imposed or not, the Speaker has the power to select and group amendments in order to cut down the number and to confine debate to the salient points, but even with this power of Speaker's selection, a guillotine may mean that blocks of amendments are never reached.
This control by the government of the life and work of the House is pervasive and for most purposes has ended any corporate sense of ‘the House’ as a body which could oppose the government of the day.
It is safely assumed that a government can obtain the passage of virtually all the bills it introduces.
This is true also of amendments.
Professor Griffiths, in a study of the committee stages of bills covering the period 1967–71 found that 907 amendments were moved by ministers, of which 906 were carried.
Backbenchers moved 3510 amendments, only 171 being carried and most of these were not opposed by the government.
Besides this control of measures, the government also controls the processes and personnel of the House.
Acting through the Leader of the House and the Chief Whip (aided by the Opposition Chief Whip), the government appoints the members of select committees, nominates the chairmen, and can guide the committees by suggesting suitable subjects.
The whips agree to give a certain amount of time for private members' bills and private members' motions, but they then encourage all their own  backbenchers to ballot for these opportunities.
They also circulate among their backbenchers suitable motions and advise about appropriate and acceptable bills for those who come out high up on the list of names which emerge from the ballot.
Of course, members can disregard this advice.
Once on a committee, a backbencher is relatively safe and select committees have been known to reject government suggestions as to suitable subjects and go their own way.
Indeed, there is now a tendency for select committees to show some greater independence of spirit, particularly since 1979 when they were first appointed on a systematic rather than an ad hoc basis.
Nevertheless, their recommendations can still be ignored.
The way this government control has come to be accepted as normal and proper can be seen by the irritated reactions of ministers and whips on the odd occasions when something goes wrong.
For instance, after the day's business is over, which is normally at 10 p.m., the government can put through unopposed items (such as the nomination of committees) but if an MP shouts ‘object’ the matter is postponed.
If this is repeated on several occasions, the government can either give up the proposal or take government time, have a short debate and then push the matter through.
But though the only effect of this kind of obstruction is a minor rearrangement of government business and a slight delay, the reaction of the whips and the Leader of the House can be intense.
The culprit is sent for and denounced, for this is regarded as a very serious crime.
The most spectacular case where the government lost control of the timetable was in the spring of 1969 over the Parliament (No. 2)— House of Lords Reform — Bill.
The situation was abnormal in that the substance of the bill had been agreed between the two frontbenches, but when the inter-party talks broke down (over a Rhodesian order), the Shadow Cabinet gave their members a free vote and a group of them resisted the measure.
The normal forces of party loyalty did not help the government precisely because there was no official opposition.
So the ministers in charge of the measure felt they could not bring in a guillotine or send the bill to a committee upstairs because most of the Conservatives would have voted against and, not being an issue of confidence between the parties, sufficient Labour dissidents might also have voted against the government to leave it in a minority.
So the bill had to be taken on the floor of the House and all selected amendments had to be debated and voted on.
As a result, though the government won every division, after nine days  only five out of twenty clauses had been passed.
This would have been counted as a great success and a reasonable rate of progress in the 1850s or 1860s but was so unprecedented and so humiliating, given the contemporary assumptions about government control, that the bill was dropped.
The effects of the timetable and work of the House passing under the control of the government have been widespread.
One sign of the degree of power and independence of a legislature is its capacity to extract information from the government.
In the nineteenth century, the House of Commons forced successive ministries to publish collections of dispatches dealing with Britain's relations with foreign powers shortly after the events had taken place, simply so that the House could judge whether the policies had been appropriate.
As party discipline tightened and governments could rely on regular majorities, motions ‘that papers be laid’ on given subjects were increasingly resisted.
Thus the flow of this information began to decline in the 1890s reaching a trickle, mainly on peripheral issues, by 1914 and ceasing totally after 1918.
The contrast can be seen by comparing the information available when the Commons in 1856 forced the publication of all dispatches dealing with the origins of the Crimean War before hostilities were over, and the capacity of successive governments to keep the House and the public in total and persistent ignorance of what led up to the invasion of Suez in 1956.
In the latter case, no information, other than private memoirs, has been published and though Labour leaders talked about revealing all the secrets when they won power, once in office in 1964, they also refused publication.
The other great method of investigation and discovery of information was by the appointment of select committees, governments often feeling that they could not oppose motions seeking to elicit the facts on any situation.
Again, party loyalty stopped this process.
All major inquiries are now initiated by ministers who prefer to rely on royal commissions or departmental committees, which may sometimes contain a couple of MPs.
Of course, one of the new breed of select committees can review any matter that falls within its ambit, but their reports tend to lack the prestige of inquiries set up by ministers.
The legislative process
The most important effect of this degree of government control has been to render the House of Commons incapable of adapting its procedure to keep pace with altered administrative practices.
It is generally accepted that control systems have to be organized in parallel to the activities that they are intended to monitor.
The procedures for legislation, for the scrutiny of expenditure and fur raising taxation have been described to show how this worked in the Victorian period.
By the 1970s, the legislative process had altered enormously, but the only changes in House of Commons procedure have been to make it less capable of controlling even the old pattern of legislation.
Now legislation arises either from major political commitments made by the Cabinet (or earlier by the Shadow Cabinet while the party was in opposition), or it is of a more routine nature and comes from within the departments when they find their existing powers insufficient or inappropriate for the conduct of administration along accepted lines.
Once it is agreed that legislation should be prepared, the civil servants consult with the outside pressure groups, they clear their ideas with other interested departments and negotiate any financial aspects with the Treasury.
Sometimes, if a matter is difficult, a committee may be set up to gather facts and produce a report.
The whole process will take months or even years if special problems are encountered.
When a bill has been negotiated in this way and drafted, it is then presented to the House for the first time.
The old stage of asking the House for ‘leave to introduce’ a bill when the possibilities can be debated before any negotiations or drafting have been started has been abandoned.
Occasionally governments have opened up a discussion by publishing a ‘Green Paper’ which set out alternative possibilities.
Thus the House receives what is, to all intents and purposes, a finished product.
The Opposition state their view of the bill during the second reading debate.
Then it is usually sent to a committee.
During this stage, the government may accept amendments or amend its own bill if deficiencies in drafting come to light.
Pressure groups that have narrowly lost points or who feel strongly opposed may brief members in the hope that with extra publicity and a show of support from friendly MPs, the government may relent during the passage of the bill.
But on controversial bills, many of the amendments at the committee stage and the debates at the end of each clause on the  motion ‘that clause X stand part of the bill’ merely give the Opposition a chance to reiterate its objections.
This ground can be traversed again three times, on report, third reading and Lords' amendments, all on the floor of the House.
So the procedure is admirably adapted to permit the Opposition to make its case several times over, and for the government to explain the virtues of the measure an equal number of times.
What the procedure does not permit is an exploration of alternative approaches, an understanding of the views of outside groups (unless they think it worth briefing MPs) and there is no scope for public opinion to form and react before the government has committed itself to a definite approach to the problem.
With this process of legislation, any changes the ministers may want to make look like concessions to the Opposition.
Government backbenchers are expected to be present at all stages and though they are entitled to speak for half the time available on the floor of the House, in committee they are expected neither to speak nor to move amendments but simply to keep voting for the government's proposals.
During the 1979 Parliament a very limited attempt was made to add to the flexibility of the committee stage.
For a small number of less contentious bills, the normal proceedings of the standing committee were preceded by three sessions conducted on the lines of a select committee.
Thus evidence was taken on the need for the bill and why it was proposed to deal with problems in a particular way.
Members of the committee became much better informed.
The quality of debate was improved.
Time was saved in that it became less necessary to put down formal amendments designed to probe government intentions.
This procedure is most suitable for bills that do not raise issues on which parties automatically disagree; to use select committee-type sittings on such a bill would be to provide further time for repetition of standard partisan arguments.
The limited experiment was widely thought to have been successful.
Yet the government is not keen to extend select committee-style examination of legislation, and it is not clear how far this process will be used in the future.
The procedure for dealing with delegated legislation is even more unsatisfactory.
Delegated legislation consists of orders — now known as statutory instruments — issued by ministers and based on powers given to them by Acts of Parliament.
These statutory instruments tend to deal with limited and technical matters: they fill in details and offer opportunities for second thoughts.
They  enable the text of bills to be much shorter than would otherwise be possible and so much time is saved on the discussions of new legislation.
The trouble is that little time is available to examine the statutory instruments.
Before 1953 the Commons was permitted unlimited opportunity to discuss these orders but since then severe restrictions have been imposed.
Now discussion is limited normally to one and a half hours and even that possibility disappears if the Commons has other urgent business that requires a sitting to be extended beyond the normal closure at 10 p.m.
Instruments are subject to either affirmative or negative procedure.
In the former case the Commons must pass a resolution for the order to have effect; this arrangement applies to the most important instruments, for example to authorize the annual payment of money to local authorities to subsidize local rates.
Most instruments are subject to negative procedure which means that they will be operative unless within forty days a ‘prayer’ is passed which requests the Crown that a particular instrument be dropped.
Because of the realities of party discipline a ‘prayer’ is rarely passed, but if no time is available a ‘prayer’is not even discussed.
Backbench dissatisfaction with this situation promoted the establishment in 1973 of a group of standing committees to which instruments could be referred for debate.
Yet the work of these committees is unpublicized and unheeded.
They are powerless.
Debate is limited to one and a half hours.
They cannot propose amendments (nor can amendments be moved when orders are discussed by the whole House in the Chamber).
The motion before such a committee is that it has considered an instrument, so that the only means of protest is to vote against the motion — in effect, deny doing what has been done!
Even then, the chairman is still required to report that the ‘prayer’ has been discussed.
It is true that this procedure can force a minister to answer for what his department intends to do but the Commons are denied any real measure of control.
Authorizing public expenditure and taxation
In financial matters.
much the same reduction in the capacity to scrutinize has taken place.
As early as the 1880s, it was found that the Commons could not adequately examine and comment on the estimates.
They were too complex for treatment on the floor of the House.
Also the Opposition did not want to waste time on such  minutiae, preferring to tackle the government on wider issues arising from the conduct of foreign or domestic policy.
As a result, the scrutiny of the estimates in the Committee of Supply became a formal vote to reduce the money for this or that department by a nominal figure so as to permit a general attack on the government's policy in that field.
Instead of these days being taken together in the spring when the estimates were published, ‘supply days’ were scattered throughout the session so that the Opposition, which is allowed to choose the subjects, could always have some time available should it wish to raise some immediate aspect of government policy.
To meet this gap in the old ‘circle of control’, an Estimates Committee was appointed in 1912 and reappointed in every session, except during the two world wars, until 1960 when Standing Order No. 80 made the sessional appointment of the committee mandatory.
At first, the committee was not -very successful as it had no staff, and a body of twenty-four to twenty-eight members is not very effective for cross-examining witnesses.
After 1945, the committee was allowed to divide itself into subcommittees, it gave up scrutinizing the estimates in detail and began to look at the way money was being spent in selected fields and how far government policy was being achieved.
While this was useful and did hold the attention of members interested in the specific subjects being examined, the subcommittees moved from one area of expenditure to another each session so that they developed no expertise and could not follow up previous work.
Thus House of Commons scrutiny of the estimates virtually ceased.
Meanwhile, within the executive, the Treasury in 1961 accepted the Plowden Committee's proposals and began to plan public expenditure on the framework of a five-year rolling programme.
Under this procedure, each summer a committee of officials called the Public Expenditure Scrutiny Committee (PESC) prepares a report forecasting public expenditure over the following five years.
The figures for the first two years are easy as these decisions have already been taken, years four and five are merely projections on current assumptions while the hard decisions have at this stage to be taken for year three.
At the same time a Medium Term Economic Assessment is prepared by the Treasury to show the anticipated resources available in the five years ahead.
With the PESC Report and the Economic Assessment before them, a Cabinet committee of ministers with the same name (PESC) then decides the levels and share out of expenditure for year three.
Only the conclusions or any outstanding disputes go to the full Cabinet.
But while Whitehall changed from organizing public expenditure on an annual basis to a five-year rolling programme, the House of Commons was still authorizing expenditure on the old twelve-month pattern.
To complicate matters even further, the House only authorized annual ‘supply services’.
Charges on the Consolidated Fund (such as interest on the National Debt, the Civil List and certain salaries) do not require annual authorization and were not included.
Expenditure by the nationalized industries and that of local authorities was not included.
The PESC Report, on the other hand, covered the whole of public expenditure.
Thus there was no House of Commons scrutiny of public expenditure and virtually no understanding of how the decisions had been reached.
All that happened was a series of complaints when the results of the overall programme began to affect spending in a particular field.
Occasionally, when there had to be a drastic reassessment of public expenditure, it became evident from the leaks and rumours of resignations that something important was going on in Whitehall during the summer months, but neither backbenchers nor the House in general were able to find out what was happening or to discuss the changes being made in expenditure plans.
Labour members of the Select Committee on Procedure obtained permission from the Chancellor of the Exchequer and the Chief Labour Whip to look at this omission in the 1968–9 session.
In July 1969, the select committee reported in favour of the publication both of the five-year rolling programme in the form of an annual White Paper with a full explanation of what changes had been made that year, and of the Medium Term Economic Assessment.
The report called for a major debate each year on this White Paper and recommended the creation of a new public Expenditure Select Committee to take the place of the former Estimates Committee.
This was to be a body of seventy-two members divided into eight subcommittees each specializing in a particular field of expenditure and backed by adequate staff.
The previous November, the government had assented to the idea of an annual White Paper on expenditure and a debate, the paper being published and the debate being held for the first time in the winter of 1969–70.
It is interesting that the Treasury was only willing to publish the White Paper in the autumn of each year after rather than before the hard decisions fur the third year had been taken, and made no commitment to publish the Medium Term Economic Assessment, actually refusing to do so in 1971.
The new Conservative Government after 1970 decided to accept  the Select Committee on Procedure's recommendations and a Select Committee on Expenditure of forty-nine members (six subcommittees) was created in 1971.
It had the right to examine policy and to question ministers and was organized into a general subcommittee which examined the whole PESC system and a series of specific subcommittees, each specializing in an area of expenditure.
Once the general subcommittee had done its survey of the system, it turned to inform Parliament of the issues embodied (or concealed) in the annual expenditure White Paper, the first of these reports being the Fifth Report of the 1972–3 session.
Meanwhile thy various subcommittees reported on public expenditure in their fields.
The result has appeared unimpressive to some in that the issues embedded in the Public Expenditure White Paper remained obscure to most MPs and the annual debate did not become a major parliamentary occasion.
On the other hand, more information did become available and there was more scrutiny of executive action.
In 1979 the Expenditure Committee was replaced by a team of a dozen select committees.
To each of these was allocated a major sector of government activity for inquiry and comment.
Viewed in the long term, the importance of the Expenditure Committee was that it helped to persuade the Commons as a whole of the need for a more comprehensive effort to review the processes of public administration.
The functional select committees vary in the extent to which they pay attention to the expenditure proposals in departmental estimates.
Some committees prefer to concentrate on broader issues of policy and administration.
However, there is a strong feeling among many backbenchers that the select committee system should be used to enhance parliamentary supervision of public expenditure.
In 1981 the Procedure Committee asked that eight days should be allocated in the chamber for the discussion of particular estimates; the estimates would be chosen by the liaison committee of chairmen of select committees, so this arrangement would provide a further opportunity of examining matters raised in committee inquiries.
The government accepted the idea in principle but allowed three days for such debates — not eight.
So since 1983 there has been a possibility that any estimate may be subjected to critical review by the House of Commons.
Estimates refer to proposals to spend money.
The public accounts refer to money that has been spent.
It was noted above  that these accounts are audited by the Comptroller and Auditor General who reports to the Public Accounts Committee.
In 1983 moves were made both to strengthen the powers of the Comptroller and to strengthen the links between him and the Commons.
The National Audit Act, a private member's bill sponsored by Mr St John Stevas, provided that the Public Accounts Committee should have a decisive voice in the choice of the Comptroller — previously it had been a government nomination.
This act also authorized the creation of a Public Accounts Commission composed of MPs to supervise the Comptroller's department, now known as the National Audit Office.
The commission, subject to parliamentary ratification, approves staffing levels in the National Audit Office; as only one member of this commission is a minister, the Commons has made the National Audit Office remarkably independent of ministers.
The Office examines the accounts of civil service departments for economy, efficiency and effectiveness.
Its remit extends to the National Health Service and to many other public bodies more than half of whose income comes from public funds.
Its scope does not include nationalized industries.
On the other side of financial procedure, that of authorizing taxation, the House is bound by a standing order of 1713 which prevents anyone, other than a minister, proposing a new or increased or varied form of taxation.
Since 1966, debate has been founded on resolutions moved immediately after the Chancellor of the Exchequer's Budget speech.
These are far-ranging debates on the state of the economy, though for some third of the time members have actually talked about taxation.
The second reading of the Finance Bill follows and from 1969 the bill has then been divided, clauses and schedules which involve issues of principle being taken on the floor of the House while the more detailed clauses are sent upstairs to a standing committee.
Here again the standing orders, which prohibit proposals to raise taxation or to provide relief if this would mean that other taxes would have to be raised, limit debate to general proposals about overall rates of VAT, supertax and corporation tax.
The Speaker has to use his power of selection drastically, choosing about a quarter of the amendments put down but the discussions are extensive, the committee stage usually allowing some twenty hours of debate followed by a report stage and third reading.
It is probably in this area that the House of Commons has had most effect in persuading governments to modify their original  proposals.
Traditionally the Chancellor of the Exchequer relents in relation to some minor aspects of the tax proposals in the Budget.
The reasons for this flexibility are that little party capital is made out of these alterations and since the Treasury fears forestalling, it is held that there c; in be no prior negotiations about tax changes with outside interests.
Therefore these negotiations take place during the committee stage of the Finance Bill, so that besides their direct representations to the government, the various pressure groups often brief MPs individually and the Opposition as a whole.
The issues are extremely complex and little understood by the public, so no great attention is fastened on these debates and concessions can be made without apparent loss of face.
The ministers involved recognize that MPs are being well briefed and though they will not necessarily concede directly they encounter a good case, they will usually move the amendment themselves at a later stage.
The chief weakness of the House of Commons is in matters of taxation; the way in which it has not been able to keep pace with administrative developments is that it has no method of collecting information (other than the briefing from outside pressure groups already mentioned) on the social and other side-effects of a tax or of examining possible future departures in taxation policy.
If this work is bring done by the government or by outside agencies, it is arguable that the Commons should know what information has been collected and, if no work is being done, members should be in a position to insist that this be remedied.
The Heath Government appointed a Select Committee on the Corporation Tax and the subsequent Labour Government appointed one on a wealth tax, but both refused a permanent subcommittee on taxation so that there is still no mechanism by which the House of Commons can know about or participate in investigations of taxation problems or possible developments in policy.
In 1983 the Procedure Committee recommended drastic revision of parliamentary procedure on taxation.
The annual Budget or Finance Bill now contains a wide mixture of items.
Some adjust levels of existing taxes; some involve technical or administrative questions; a few may suggest wholly new forms of taxation.
The Procedure Committee wanted these three categories to be kept apart.
A new type of tax should have a separate bill.
There should be an annual Taxes Management Bill to deal with technical alterations to tax law.
The annual Finance Bill could then be greatly simplified and concentrate on changes to the rates of the main tax levies.
Such reforms would greatly improve  the quality of parliamentary supervision, but there is little sign that the government will accept these ideas.
As it is, Commons' scrutiny of public finance is defective.
It is never possible to consider taxation and expenditure together: the rules of procedure insist that they be treated separately.
A local authority can discuss whether particular items of expenditure be cut so that the local rate may be reduced.
No such debate is possible in the House of Commons.
Taxation and estimates are discussed on different days.
Then the Commons have no powers in relation to borrowing.
No parliamentary sanction is needed for the Treasury to borrow.
Again, the Commons do not authorize public expenditure that is not included in the annual estimates, so the nationalized industries, the water authorities, the new towns and many other public bodies escape parliamentary review.
Finally, MPs lack information about future economic prospects.
The Procedure Committee has urged ministers to issue a ‘Green Budget’ in the autumn which would review the probable state of national revenue and expenditure in the coming financial year.
The aim was to assist the work of the Select Committee on the Treasury and also to promote public discussion of economic affairs.
Starting in 1982, an Autumn Statement has been made, but it is less detailed than the Procedure Committee had intended.
Pressing the government from the floor of the House
Turning from the functions of legislating and authorizing both expenditure and taxation to the other traditional function of pressing the government, the procedures involved have also undergone change but there has been a greater effort made to keep this weapon sharpened and up to the armour it has to pierce.
This is because, without some capacity to criticize, Parliament would be quite meaningless and because this capacity is of use to the Opposition, a point appreciated by ministers who may one day return to opposition.
Formerly, the methods of control or influence were all concentrated on the floor of the House.
Measures could be defeated or amended.
Powerful speeches which had an almost visible effect on the House could lead to concessions without any vote being taken.
So the great methods of exercising pressure were votes, speeches, the use of procedure to delay a measure and the demand for the relevant documents to be published or for the appointment of a select committee.
With the growth of party voting and the government's virtual monopoly of the timetable, the floor of the House has become much less important.
However, attempts have been made to make up for this by the development of other devices such as question time, ten-minute rule bills and the practice of asking wide-ranging questions each Thursday when the business for the following week is announced.
Supply Days, when at least in theory the Commons discussed ministerial proposals to spend money, have been replaced with Opposition Days which allow the government's opponents to decide the subject for debate.
There are twenty such days each session divided between the Opposition parties very roughly in accordance with their strength in the House.
In addition, there have been attempts to increase the influence of the House in a manner which escapes party divisions, particularly by the creation of more select or ‘specialist’ committees.
The methods by which MPs attempt to influence ministers from the floor of the House are by their speeches in major debates on government business, by calling for emergency debates under Standing Order No. 20, by the use of ten-minute rule bills, private members' bills and motions, adjournment debates, question time and abstention or cross-voting in divisions.
It is hard to say whether speeches have any effect nowadays.
A brilliant attack or defence (such as lain Macleod's assault in 1950 on the then invincible Aneurin Bevan) can affect the career of an MP.
A persistent and well-argued case has to be answered and this may eventually have some influence on a minister.
But, on the whole, members either support their leaders, make constituency points or obtain some publicity for their rebellious views.
But as the vote is a foregone conclusion (in outcome, if not in numbers), debates tend to be formalized occasions and, apart from the opening and the winding-up speeches, are attended only by the handful of MPs who wish to speak.
Members who are invited to appear on television or who write newspaper columns can have a far wider public audience and a far greater impact, even on ministers who are fellow members, than those MPs who merely speak in debates.
With the tight government control of the timetable, it may be difficult for the House to switch its programme to debate some urgent topic that occupies the attention of the public.
Ministers must always find time for an Opposition motion of censure but such a motion is inappropriate for some matters.
The Speaker can be asked to agree to an emergency debate on a definite matter of  urgent public importance.
Opposition parties choose subjects for discussion on Supply Days but supply time may not be included in the business of any particular week.
There is constant negotiation between the whips of the main parties over the use of parliamentary time.
In general, ministers are willing to be flexible to ensure that they can counter criticism arising from immediate public anxieties.
Private members' bills offer a major opportunity for backbench initiative.
Members ballot for the right to introduce bills on Fridays allocated to this purpose.
In the normal session, twenty members win a place in the ballot, but since only six Fridays are devoted to second readings of the balloted bills, only six members can be sure of a hearing.
A controversial bill normally uses up all the available time on a Friday and other bills due to be considered on that day fail for lack of time.
Since the great majority of members, other than ministers.
enter the ballot, it follows that the chances of an individual member being successful are very low.
Nevertheless, some private members' bills have been important and become a focus for public attention.
In particular, some bills have dealt with moral questions which as ‘issues of conscience’ fall outside the normal boundaries of party political argument.
On such issues each member uses his judgement.
There is no official party whipping.
The outcome is thus less predictable.
Major examples of such legislation are the acts on the abolition of capital punishment (1965), homosexuality (1967), abortion (1967), and divorce (1969) and the subsequent unsuccessful attempts to change the law on abortion and capital punishment.
Private members' motions and adjournment debates have very little effect.
Many are simply propagandist and are the result of prompting by the whips, while half-hour adjournment debates, divided equally between the backbencher who raised the issue and the minister, are normally used to press constituency points.
In the past, question time has been regarded as an effective method of pressing ministers.
It developed simply because the old freedom to raise any issue in a short debate at virtually any time had disappeared.
A fixed part of the Order Paper and a fixed time was first set aside for questions in 1869.
As the numbers of questions asked grew.
the procedures had to be tightened up, the number of oral questions rationed and members were in practice allowed only one supplementary question.
In the 1930s and 1940s, question time was largely dominated by backbenchers, and those concerned with  the point at issue were left to press their interrogation or were supported by others with a similar grievance.
However, at all times questions have been asked for all sorts of reasons, ranging from the sheer desire for information to an attempt to trip up the Prime Minister on a major policy issue.
By the late 1960s, members were putting down up to 300 questions a day and the Speaker attempted to reach more oral questions by speeding up the exchanges so as to cover forty to fifty questions in fifty or fifty-five minutes.
As a result, it became very much easier for a minister to brush aside any interrogation, since not only was the original purpose of the question soon left behind, but also the frontbenches have tended to intervene to try and score broader party points to which the minister in turn makes the usual party retort.
The other and most publicized method of registering opinion is by abstention or cross-voting.
As Philip Norton has shown, party discipline weakened steadily in the years before 1979.
A defeat on a specific issue does not lead to the resignation of a government; it is no more than an expression of dissatisfaction designed to force the Cabinet to change its policy.
When a government has a clear Commons majority such defeats are unusual.
The Thatcher Government has lost a vote only on rare occasions.
The major upset came in April 1986 when the second reading of the Shops Bill, designed to liberalize the law on Sunday trading, was lost by 296 to 284.
At that time the Conservative majority over all other parties exceeded 130 so the result demonstrated a major back-bench rebellion.
Such an event can take place only if ministers allow themselves to become seriously out of touch with the opinions of their supporters.
MPs critical of their leaders are less unwilling to vote against them when the government'; majority is assured, e.g. because the Opposition intend to abstain.
Thus when Labour is in office, Left-wing Labour MPs can vote for cuts in defence expenditure in the certain knowledge that the Conservatives will not join them.
It is also easier to defeat procedural motions rather than substantive ones, the Scotland and Wales (Devolution) Bill being effectively halted when the timetable motion (guillotine) was defeated by twenty-nine in February 1977.
The object of these exercises was sometimes to try and get a change of policy, sometimes to indicate alarm should certain lines of policy be carried further and sometimes so that the critics can signal their feelings to sections of the party outside Parliament (Left-wing MPs, for instance, use this  method to get support in the annual elections to the National Executive Committee of the party from activists in the constituencies).
The ultimate control over the government is the prospect that the Commons will refuse to pass a vote of confidence.
Such an event must force either the resignation of the government or an immediate general election.
It can only happen after a disastrous split in the majority party or when no party has a majority.
In Britain, with its strong two-party system, a government defeat on a vote of confidence has long been regarded as a theoretical possibility rather than practical politics.
However, in March 1979, the Callaghan Labour Government lost a vote of confidence by a majority of one and a general election followed.
Previously this had not happened since 1924.
The conditions in 1979 were exceptional.
The government was elected in October 1974 with an overall majority of three.
This majority disappeared by 1977 due to adverse by-election results.
The government had been sustained in office from March 1977 to the autumn of 1978 by an agreement with the Liberals.
Thereafter it lingered on with uneasy support from the Nationalist members who needed a Cabinet sympathetic to Scottish and Welsh devolution.
When the referenda failed to produce the necessary 40 per cent vote in favour of devolution the Nationalists lost hope and saw no point in keeping the government.
The vote of no confidence was a final humiliation for a government that had been clinging to office.
Had the Prime Minister called a general election in October 1978, as was expected, the Commons would not have had the opportunity to inflict a spectacular dismissal.
Indeed, the lesson of 1979 may be that a government which cannot be certain of winning a vote of confidence in the Commons would be well advised to call an election.
From the point of view of a Cabinet, if an election is inevitable, it is far better to hold it without a preliminary defeat in the Commons which gravely damages the prestige of the government and raises the morale of its opponents.
Pressing the government: upstairs and informal methods
Some writers have argued that since the parties became so strong, it was inevitable that the influence formerly exercised on the floor of the House should decline but that much the same influence is still exercised by the meetings of the parliamentary parties.
On the  Labour side, there is the Parliamentary Labour Party (PLP) which includes all ministers and Labour peers.
It elects a chairman and a Liaison Committee.
When the party is in opposition it also elects the Parliamentary Committee or Shadow Cabinet.
The PLP normally has a meeting every Wednesday morning to discuss general issues and a meeting at 6 p.m. every Thursday to consider the next week's business.
In addition it is divided into regional and subject groups which organize meetings on a wide variety of topics.
Among the Conservatives, the equivalent is the 1922 Committee (since it was founded in that year) but it has its weekly meetings without ministers or shadow ministers present, dealing with the party leaders through an elected chairman.
The Conservatives also have area and subject committees.
After the Labour victory in 1966 there was an attempt by Labour Left-wing MPs to push the government into certain policy changes, notably the abandonment of defence commitments east of Suez, by debates and votes at PLP meetings.
The Prime Minister, Mr Wilson, reacted by saying that such votes were not customary; however, his presence and that of his senior colleagues on important occasions showed that importance was attached to these gatherings.
The Labour Government also took the precaution of sending a special, private ‘whip’ or request to attend to all the 111 Labour ministers in both Houses.
If most of what was sometimes called ‘the payroll vote’ attended, the critics would have to carry seven-tenths of the backbenchers and if this had ever happened, the press would have treated it as a total collapse of confidence in the government.
In the early 1970s it became the practice to tell the press what had happened and whether any votes were taken.
With this publicity, the prestige of the leadership was clearly at stake.
If this occurs in government, the Prime Minister can evoke the sentiment of party loyalty with much the same effect as when he faces opposition on the floor of the House.
In the 1922 Committee, there are no votes and less divisiveness but the opinions, as conveyed by the chairman to the party leader, may have more influence than the votes and debates in the Parliamentary Labour Party.
This is certainly true of the subject groups.
When the Conservatives are in opposition, the frontbench spokesman on each subject area is also chairman of the parallel party group, thus providing a direct channel of communication between backbench opinion and the Shadow Cabinet.
Naturally, when Conservatives are in office, the opportunities for meetings  between backbenchers and party leaders are more restricted.
They also vary greatly depending upon the attitudes adopted by individual ministers.
Mr Whitelaw when Home Secretary had weekly meetings with the officers of the Conservative Home Affairs group: Mr Pym, when Defence Secretary, had no meetings at all with the officers of the defence committee.
Mrs Thatcher as Prime Minister has occasional meetings with committee officers, taking committees one at a time.
Vigorous lobbying through the Conservative backbench education committee in December 1984 secured a rapid retreat from a government proposal that parents of students should make a contribution towards their university fees.
Conservative party groups are better organized, better supported and are rather more effective than their Labour counterparts.
Indeed, in 1976 the PLP set up a committee of eight backbenchers to study how consultation with the Labour Government could be improved.
The report was highly critical of the backbench committees and noted that meetings frequently overlap or are cancelled and rearranged and that attendance was low.
Although attempts were made to streamline the structure and to have fewer and better organized meetings, the position has scarcely improved.
When Labour is in opposition the chairman of a subject committee is not the relevant shadow minister; instead the chairman is elected and the election is often another chance for conflict between opposing opinions among Labour MPs.
Besides these formal structures, each party has extensive methods of contacting its own leaders including deputations to the Prime Minister, casual conversation, the impression conveyed by the ‘sense of the House’ and messages relayed by Parliamentary Private Secretaries and by the whips.
There is no doubt that the reactions of the parties do have some effect on the leaders, though probably this is a little more true in the case of the Conservative Party.
One reason for the difference is that the Conservatives are less committed to predetermined lines of action and are therefore more open to any positive case put by their backbenchers.
Also Labour members have established positions on a Left-to-Right spectrum of opinion and more often put their own view than transmit the reactions of voters.
As has been said above, the Prime Minister seldom worries if the Opposition is opposing — his fear is of losing those voters who usually support his party.
If Labour MPs are known to have views which are not necessarily a reflection of the opinions of Labour voters, less attention can be paid to them.
But  Conservative MPs are much less easy to classify, they have fewer dogmatic positions to maintain and their criticisms of their own party's policies are therefore much less easy to dismiss in this way.
If a Conservative MP X or Y, who has not been known to take ideological stands, approaches a minister or a whip and expresses grave doubts, this is viewed with considerable worry and it is assumed that these objections have been put forward by the MP only after the points have been put to him with equal or greater force in his constituency.
For these reasons, the Conservatives are a little more responsive to widespread expressions of serious doubt on their own backbenches.
Standing and select committees
In addition to the activities of members on the floor of the House or in the parties, there has been an attempt to restore or increase the influence of the Commons by adopting new procedures, most of which involve the development of a new committee system.
The reformers, until 1964 mainly outside the House, argued that since the public wished to vote governments in or out of power and since every serious vote had become an issue of confidence, it was no longer possible to restore freer voting in order to improve the independence and power of the House.
But this did not mean that it was impossible for the House of Commons to exercise some influence.
Here the problem was not so much party loyalty as the fact that parliamentary procedures no longer fitted into the timescale or permitted an understanding of current administration.
The reformers argued that since departments built up their philosophies over a period of time and since new measures took a considerable period to negotiate, these processes should be opened up so that the informed public could make its reactions clear while principles were still being settled.
For this purpose, they advised the creation of permanent or standing select (specialist) committees with powers of interrogation and investigation to watch over each area of government action.
These select committees were not intended to be tied to producing particular reports, but were to collect information and let the House and the public know what disputes were going on and what agreements were being reached within ministries, between them and between civil servants and outside pressure groups.
If this was done, the reformers argued, it would give the sections of the public concerned with these areas of  policy a chance to react, and it would once again be worth the pressure groups' while to explain their points to the Commons before the precise details of forthcoming legislation were settled.
It is important to be clear about the distinction between these committees and the standing committees of the House.
(which include the Scottish and Welsh grand committees).
The latter are legislative committees set up to take the committee stage of a bill and they have to reflect the division of party strength that exists on the floor of the House.
With a chairman, two frontbenches and whips, these committees are microcosms of the Commons with no special facilities for fact-finding or for doing anything other than what would normally be done if the bill had been kept on the floor of the House.
As far as government backbenchers are concerned, their instructions are to be present at these committees but it is hoped that they will be silent as each speech only adds that much longer to the proceedings.
Opposition backbenchers, as in the House, make their general case against the bill.
The select committees, in contrast, were to be investigating bodies where policy issues were not of first importance, the principal task being to find out what was happening inside the various government departments, to inform the House and the public, thus bringing public opinion to bear at an earlier stage while policy was still relatively fluid.
This type of committee was modelled on the Select Committee on Nationalized Industries which had been set up in 1955 because it was felt that Parliament could not adequately control the range of corporations it had created.
The experiment, which had caused some worry, particularly on the Labour benches, was entirely successful.
All shades of political opinion on the committee worked well together elucidating the policies of the industries.
In 1966 the Labour Government agreed to establish two similar committees to examine specific areas of policy-making and administration — science and technology and agriculture.
Later, further select committees were established on education, Scottish affairs, overseas aid and race relations; the Agriculture Committee was closed down.
Towards the end of the Labour Government the entire experiment was being reviewed; some ministers and civil servants had found the experience troublesome.
The 1970 Conservative Government replaced the Estimates Committee by an Expenditure Committee with broader terms of reference; it had forty-five  members and worked through subcommittees specializing in different areas of government activity.
The Conservatives seemed rather more favourable to the prospect of scrutiny by backbench committees, perhaps because they felt that such a challenge would help to restrain public expenditure.
The 1974 Labour Government created a further select committee to review European legislation with the task of recommending which EEC measures should be debated on the floor of the House.
In 1978 the Select Committee on Procedure urged the creation of a series of select committees specialized by function as a permanent feature of parliamentary life.
A year later the essence of this proposal was accepted by the new Conservative Government.
Twelve committees were established for agriculture, defence, education, employment, energy, environment, foreign affairs, home affairs, industry and trade, social services, transport, and the Treasury and the civil service.
Two further regional committees were continued for Scotland and Wales but the committees for Europe, science and technology, race relations and the nationalized industries were discontinued as they would duplicate aspects of the work of the new committees.
Those who have urged wider activity by select committees were faced with some uncertainty about how MPs would react to this development.
For the system to succeed, two conditions had to be satisfied.
First, MPs had to be willing to devote considerable time and energy to the new committees.
Second, it was vital that the proceedings should be conducted largely on non-party lines; if the committees merely offered another forum for party battle, then the government side would always win, the committees would have no effect whatever and no good purpose would be served.
The slow evolution of select committee work has helped to ensure that both these obstacles have been surmounted.
The non-party tradition of the Public Accounts Committee extended to the Nationalized Industries Committee, the committees established in the 1960s and the Expenditure Committee.
With occasional exceptions the new departmental committees have worked in a parliamentary spirit as opposed to a party spirit.
The non-party element is emphasized by the fact that not all the chairmen are government supporters.
The committees do not go about their work in a uniform way.
There is no reason why they should.
They appoint advisers to assist them to help with the choice of witnesses, the preparation of questions to put to witnesses and perhaps to help the clerk of the  committee to frame the draft of a report.
Some committees make more extensive use of advisers than others.
Some committee clerks come to have an important role, especially when they work with the same committee and the same chairman for some time.
Some of the inquiries amass substantial memoranda and take oral evidence from a wide range of witnesses, ministers, civil servants and other people thought to be able to make useful contributions.
Such endeavour can last several months.
Other inquiries deal with matters of immediate concern and will be completed in a couple of weeks.
It is not possible to say whether a substantial report is more likely to make an impact than a slim report.
It follows that the subject matter of these inquiries varies considerably.
A committee may look at the rationale underlying a major aspect of policy, e.g. the investigation of the Treasury Committee into Monetary Policy.
Alternatively, the subject may be much more limited.
It may be a topic that has already aroused great controversy, e.g. the Defence Committee inquiry into Westland helicopters.
Without question, these select committees constitute a major development of the work of the Commons.
Three questions arise.
How do they affect relations with the executive?
What is the extent of their influence?
And what is their effect, if any, on the atmosphere of the House?
The first of these issues is considered on pp. 188–92 as part of the discussion of the relations between the civil service and Parliament.
Of course, it is impossible to measure influence in a precise manner.
Government departments always respond to committee reports, but the form of the response varies.
Major inquiries elicit a formal reply issued as a parliamentary paper available to all MPs and the mass media.
On lesser occasions the reply will appear as an answer to a ‘planted’ parliamentary question or be simply a letter to the chairman of a committee.
Often the contents of a reply are non-committal; it is said that points made by a committee are noted or that certain matters will be kept under review.
Possibly a subsequent review stimulates action that would not have taken place but for the committee's initial probing.
Even if the committees do not persuade ministers and civil servants to change what they do, their very existence makes Whitehall aware that any aspect of policy or administration may become the subject of more searching scrutiny than would be possible in the Commons' chamber.
Another important element is the chairman: successive chairmen of the Treasury Committee have been Sir Ernest du Cann and Mr  Terence Higgins and their stature, experience and ability added greatly to the weight of this committee.
Perhaps the clearest example of success has been that the Home Office was persuaded to repeal the ‘sus’ law by a critical report from the Home Affairs Committee.
On other occasions committees have been generally in support of government action but have urged that it be undertaken more vigorously: the Defence Committee has been critical of the Ministry of Defence when it has spent less than the sums provided in the annual estimates.
To be effective, a committee must be unanimous or virtually so; on the fairly rare occasions a committee divides on party lines, it is certain that its work will be ignored.
How far do select committees influence the general atmosphere in the House of Commons?
Again, no exact answer can be given.
But the non-party style of select committees involves more MPs than ever before.
The number is now in excess of 300.
Besides the fourteen committees discussed above that are concerned with the policy and administration of particular departments, there are further select committees on public accounts, privilege, statutory instruments, the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration and others besides.
Over half the backbenchers are regularly involved with select committee activity.
They thus become used to working together with political opponents and often find common ground.
It is not uncommon for a government backbencher to support his select committee as opposed to a ministerial view.
So it is arguable that the select committees promote independence of mind among MPs and make them less willing to vote automatically as the whips would like.
Certainly, as Philip Norton has shown, since 1970 MPs have been increasingly ready to go against the party line.
Some party leaders and whips dislike the new select committees because they encourage an independent approach, but the system is now quite strongly established and is likely to continue.
Yet it does not follow that there will be a constant growth of non-partisan tendencies among MPs, for much depends on the type of new MPs that will arrive at Westminster.
If the newcomers have fairly extreme opinions, some towards the Right and some towards the Left, it will be more difficult for the select committee atmosphere to mould them into a team upholding the legislature as opposed to the government of the day.
Television in Parliament
On several occasions since 1966 the Commons have discussed whether television cameras should be admitted to their Chamber.
Both Conservative and Labour MPs are divided on the issue, which is always allowed a free vote.
Until 1980 the vote always went against television, although the margin was narrow.
Then in 1980 and again in 1983 ten-minute rule bills on this subject obtained second readings which approved the principle; as is normally the case with such bills they made no further progress due to lack of parliamentary time.
Arguments for and against television can be summarized briefly.
Those in favour assert that democratic government should be conducted as openly as possible and argue that the more electors are made aware of the actions of their elected representatives the better.
Since television is now admitted to all other public aspects of our national life it is absurd for the Commons to conceal themselves.
The contrary view is that television would damage the intimate character of debates and would encourage exhibitionism amongst those MPs seeking publicity.
There are also worries about the impartiality of the editorial control over what is actually transmitted and whether it would elevate the stature of frontbench performers and depress that of backbenchers even further.
Pictures showing unruly behaviour or empty benches might not enhance the reputation of the House.
Since 1978 sound recordings of Commons debates have been made so extracts can be broadcast on radio and television.
A few very important occasions, such as the Chancellor's Budget speech, have recently been broadcast live.
Initially questions to the Prime Minister were also broadcast live.
Yet this caused adverse comment.
Parliamentary question time is frequently noisy; the interchanges are more concerned to make debating points than to add to public enlightenment.
Listeners were not pleased to learn that the Commons sometimes sounded like an undergraduate debating society and so these broadcasts of question time ceased.
It was widely thought that the acceptance of sound broadcasting would soon weaken opposition to television.
But to show pictures of major scenes in the chamber could well revive criticism of parliamentary manners.
Further, now the debates are recorded, it cannot be said that the Commons attempt to remain aloof.
Whether the tapes are used depends upon the broadcasting and  television producers.
Television could add to the drama but need not, in essence, increase public information.
However, in 1985 the House of Lords entered the scene by admitting cameras to its debates.
Their Lordships certainly gained added public recognition from television.
At the time it was widely forecast that if the Lords' experiment was a success the Commons would be forced to follow suit.
Cameras in the Lords seemed to cause no great problems: perhaps some of their major debates were better attended and persistent viewers became aware of the varied quality of the contributions to debates.
Spurred on by their Lordships' initiative the Commons spent a whole day discussing television in November 1985.
The Leader of the House, Mr Biffen, urged the acceptance of the cameras as a necessary leap in the dark, but his advice was rejected by 275 votes to 263.
Cabinet ministers were fairly evenly divided on the issue but the Prime Minister and the Conservative whips voted against any change.
Both the main parties were split with Labour more favourable to television than the Conservatives.
The Alliance wanted television yet feared that it would be damaging to them, as Alliance MPs are allowed such a small share of parliamentary time.
The bleak fact is that what should be a matter of political principle is being determined by calculations of party advantage.
Labour ministers in 1966 and Conservative tacticians in 1985 both feared that television would give valuable publicity to the arguments of their opponents.
While television may not do much to add to the information available to voters, it could increase its impact.
The House of Lords
Almost all democratic states have a legislature composed of two Houses.
The British second chamber is unique in that the majority of its members belong to it through hereditary right or accident of birth.
Since the Life Peerages Act 1958 the hereditary nobility have been reinforced by a trickle of people, usually fairly elderly, whose titles do not pass on to their heirs.
These life peers now play a major role in the day-to-day work of the Lords; indeed, their presence is essential for the great majority of hereditary peers rarely, if ever, attend.
In practice, then, the Lords is tending to become a nominated chamber.
The patronage is in the hands of the Prime  Minister who may from time to time invite leaders of opposition parties to propose names.
Thus many life peers are former members of the Commons.
The formal powers of the Lords are slight.
They can delay a bill for a year by forcing the Commons to pass the rejected bill a second time in the following session.
A ‘money bill’, one dealing essentially with financial matters, can be delayed only for a month.
However, the Lords still have a complete veto over legislation designed to extend the life of Parliament beyond five years and over statutory instruments, an apparently minor point which was brought sharply to public attention when the Lords rejected the Southern Rhodesia (Sanctions) Order in 1968.
It is impossible to deny that the Lords do useful work by clearing up minor points on government legislation and often having the major discussions on non-controversial measures and private bills.
The Lords are also active in their scrutiny of EEC business.
They hold debates on a wide variety of topics, some of which are squeezed out of the Commons programme through lack of time.
The objection to the House of Lords is that it is not a democratic institution.
It imparts a bias into the constitution as there is a permanent Conservative sympathy.
Admittedly the Lords have been cautious and, apart from Rhodesian sanctions, have avoided a head-on clash with Labour when a Labour Government had a clear majority in the Commons.
Their Lordships accept the ‘Salisbury doctrine’, produced by Lord Salisbury during the era of the post-war Attlee administration, which asserts that the Upper House should not stop the second reading of a bill that embodies proposals which appeared in the election manifesto of the governing party.
Amendments on points of detail can be made to force reconsideration by the Commons.
Especially since 1983 a significant number of amendments have been made to Conservative legislation.
In particular, the Lords feel that they have a duty to defend the constitution; indeed, that that is their ultimate raison d'être .
There is much sensitivity over the rights of electors.
Thus in 1969 the Lords rejected a bill that sought to free the Home Secretary from a legal obligation to present to Parliament the report of a commission that had reviewed parliamentary constituencies: the more equitable redistribution of seats it proposed was likely to cost the Labour Government up to twenty seats at the forthcoming general election.
In 1984 the Lords objected to Conservative  proposals to abandon elections for the GLC and the metropolitan counties the Government intended to abolish.
However, the abolition legislation had not at that stage been passed or even presented to Parliament.
Even worse, the Conservative plan was for the elected councillors for these authorities to be replaced by nominees from the second-tier borough councils, which in London involved the replacement of an elected Labour majority by an indirectly elected Conservative majority.
Such was the strength of feeling in the Lords that the Conservative Government was forced to accept that the existing councillors should remain in office until these authorities came to an end.
The Lords avoid controversy on financial questions, which are accepted as being the responsibility of the Commons, but otherwise they see little harm in asking the Commons to think again on points of detail.
Conservatives have traditionally urged the value of the Lords as a revising Chamber: what good is a revising body if it never revises?
However, in recent years Conservative ministers have been irritated by a steady trickle of government defeats in the Upper House.
Hostile amendments are particularly awkward if they occur in the autumn, near the end of the parliamentary session, when the time available for further reconsideration is short.
In 1986 the following causes were pressed successfully by the Lords: wider consultation rights for workers in relation to reorganization of the naval dockyards; local authorities to decide whether tenants should have the right to buy old people's properties; abolition of caning in schools; application of health and safety laws to all buildings used by the national health service.
In 1967 there was an all-party conference on the future of the Lords, the objectives being to retain these useful minor functions while ending the hereditary basis of membership, the built-in Conservative majority and the delaying powers of the Lords.
The solution proposed was a two-tier system by which government appointed peers would have the right to vote, hereditary peers being allowed to speak but not vote while the delaying powers on legislation would be cut to six months.
Though agreed between the parties, these proposals were bitterly attacked by some Conservatives as destroying the traditional upper House and by a few Labour members as creating a large new area of patronage for the Prime Minister.
As a result, the measure was abandoned.
Labour's 1983 election manifesto pledged the party to ‘take action to abolish the undemocratic House of Lords as quickly as  possible and, as an interim measure, introduce a bill in the first session of Parliament to remove its legislative powers — with the exception of those that relate to the life of a parliament’.
The final phrase seems to recognize that the Lords have some merit as a residual guardian of the constitution.
If there were no House of Lords, there would be nothing to prevent a majority in the Commons from postponing an election by extending Parliament beyond the limit of five years.
The Lords serve to protect the electorate against the possibility that the Commons might prevent the electorate from using their present rights.
The Labour Party has not yet decided how it can stop a single-chamber Parliament from abusing its position.
Indeed, the 1987 manifesto ignored the Lords altogether.
There is another problem about getting rid of the Lords.
They perform minor but useful functions: how far can these be absorbed into an already overcrowded schedule in the Commons?
One way out of the dilemma would be to change the composition of the second chamber by having it elected in some form.
But the Labour Party dislikes this prospect, and avoided it in 1967 because of the fear that an elected House might feel entitled to challenge the supremacy of the Commons.
Thus an elected second chamber could be a much stronger barrier to the achievement of socialist ideals than the present House of Lords.
The influence of Parliament
It is hard to estimate the effect of Parliament on the other sectors of British government, though its role is best understood by regarding it not primarily as a check on the executive but as one of the institutions through which the government operates.
Broadly speaking, the support of Parliament for any government with more than a nominal majority can be taken for granted and ministers come to the House to explain their policies, put through their bills, counter opposition propaganda and keep their supporters happy.
For most members, supporting their frontbench is normal and the occasions when they rebel are rare and cause them some heart-searching.
It is impossible to be precise over how much influence Parliament exercises over government policy.
There may be cases where there is parliamentary disquiet over a ministerial proposal and then the minister has a change of mind.
Whether pressure from MPs was crucial can be a matter of doubt.
Ministers may claim that the final  decision was influenced by some other considerations than the objections of MPs.
Yet there are some cases where it is clear that the views in the Commons were decisive.
In 1969 the Labour Government was forced to abandon both the bill to reform the House of Lords and its projected Industrial Relations Bill, while in 1980 the Thatcher Government limited economic sanctions against Iran as a result of dissatisfaction in the Commons.
Of course, a Cabinet that does not have an effective majority in the Commons is in a quite different position.
The situation which existed between March 1977 and March 1979 was unique in modern British politics.
During this period it was impossible for the government to introduce legislation that was unacceptable to both Liberals and the Nationalists.
Government backbenchers effectively destroyed the Devolution Bill by insisting on the 40 per cent rule in the devolution referendum.
The 1978 Budget proposals were amended.
Government defeats ceased to be unusual.
Yet the government survived until March 1979 because it always managed to win any vote of confidence.
Party discipline in the Commons is less severe than it was.
The party ‘whip-has not been formally withdrawn from an MP for over twenty years.
In the 1960s and 1970s abstention and cross voting became less unusual.
But the truly independently-minded MPs are the sort of Conservatives who turned out Neville Chamberlain in 1940 and whose mutterings in the Smoking Room could affect Conservative premiers. and the kind of Labour members with the outside income or the zeal who saw through the European Communities Bill.
But this kind of MP is becoming relatively rare.
The Conservative local associations are turning increasingly to young men of professional or business backgrounds for whom Parliament is a career.
while Labour Party ranks are being filled by further education lecturers, men and women with professional training with much the same outlook on politics as a profession as the younger Conservatives.
For these MPs there is both more restiveness over the aimlessness of life on the backbenches and a stronger motive for not annoying the leader on whose patronage a ministerial career depends.
In addition to these changes within the Commons.
the public are now beginning to appreciate the small extent of Parliament's influence and its prestige is falling.
The alienation of groups among the younger voters has perhaps received too much publicity but it is an attitude which is shared to some degree by other sections of the community.
This attitude.
together with the  frustrations experienced by the abler and younger people coming into politics, may in time lead to a decline in the quality of political leadership available, at least in comparison with the capacity of those setting the pace in other sectors of British life.
When it is argued that because the British Parliament is now under the control of the executive, nothing should or can be done to alter the situation, this denies the capacity of politicians and the public to remedy defects in their own institutions.
In fact, the chief restriction on British politicians is imposed by their own and the community's view of what is proper and desirable and if the former, supported by some public opinion, are convinced that changes are needed, there is every reason to think that effective reforms can be carried through.
Nothing stops a British government removing or reducing the Opposition's freedom to attack the government for roughly a third of the parliamentary session except the belief that this would be undesirable and would hamper both parties in the long run.
Similarly no party today would, without some adequate and agreed substitute, abolish the Public Accounts Committee and the right of the Opposition to nominate its chairman.
If there was a widespread desire to alter the degree of influence exercised by Parliament and to make the life of a backbench MP an attractive prospect in its own right for public-spirited men and if this could only be done by the acceptance of some new countervailing powers, this would be no harder for successive governments than, for example, accepting the limitations involved in joining the Common Market.
But it could only be done if there was this general agreement about the direction in which democracy in Britain should develop and about the role which Parliament should play.
GOVERNING THROUGH THE WHITEHALL DEPARTMENTS
A highly centralized country
In addition to Parliament, the other principal agency or institution through which the political leadership operates is the administrative machine.
Though local government is important in Britain and there is some decentralized administration, the chief impetus and the major decisions all come from the central departments of state based in Whitehall.
Britain has always been a highly centralized country.
Wales was conquered and subjected in the middle ages, Scotland's parliament and administration were absorbed in 1707, Ireland lost all but local administration in 1801 and the British upper classes reacted in horror at the prospect not of Irish independence but of an element of internal self-government when it was proposed by Gladstone in 1886.
The intensity of their feeling was due not just to fear that the landed interest might suffer but to the affront caused to a governing class centred on London and the Home Counties by the notion that those living in the provinces might prefer a degree of local autonomy.
It has remained the accepted practice that all important governmental decisions emanate from the central departments in Whitehall, a practice which is of great help to the political leadership as it collects all the levers of policy-making and administrative control into one, compact, signal box.
The convention of ministerial responsibility
The structure and methods of the Whitehall departments, the system of organization and the practices and outlook of the civil servants are determined by A number of historic decisions and constitutional conventions governing the relations between the administration and the other institutions.
Of these, by far the most important is the convention of ministerial responsibility.
Whitehall departments are pyramids whose apex is the minister and the whole  governmental machine is a larger, all-inclusive pyramid with the Prime Minister at the top.
Everything focuses on this control from above.
An instruction from the minister is the final word within a department, an excerpt from the Cabinet minutes conveying the decision of a committee of the Cabinet or of the full Cabinet outranks all other orders and is the source of direction for all the policy decisions taken lower down in the government.
The various departments’ relations with Parliament, with outside bodies and professions are all governed by the same consideration that the minister is in charge and that he can be attacked (in or out of Parliament) for anything that happens or fails to happen in his department.
So civil servants have to establish that negotiations with outside bodies will be in secret, or else they will not be able to explain and consider alternatives in case the arguments they deploy in favour of an option, not eventually chosen, may later be quoted against their minister.
For the same reason, civil servants above a certain level cannot take an overt or active part in politics in case it could be said that their opinions influenced the minister.
This convention of ministerial responsibility also enforces a vertical organization on the departments.
Everything that is done must be subordinate to some official who reports up to a member of the administrative class, who is under an assistant secretary who then puts the matter to the permanent secretary, he being the adviser to the minister.
It is not possible to take separate sectors of administration, appoint an official to be in charge, give him a budget and let him get on with it, because if anything is raised in the press or in the House about this sector, there must be an immediate channel of communications to and instructions from the top.
For these reasons also, it is hard to fit in any check points at intermediate levels in the hierarchy.
Somewhat the same difficulty arises when outside bodies wish to deal with the civil service as such.
When select committees of the House of Commons call civil servants as witnesses, problems occasionally arise.
A government Memorandum of Guidance for officials in this situation was revised in 1980.
It urged civil servants to be as helpful as possible and to withhold information only in the interests of national security and ‘good government’.
How, one wonders, is the concept of good government to be defined or applied to a particular issue?
The memorandum does not say.
Civil servants are instructed to safeguard the collective responsibility of ministers.
The work of Cabinet committees should not be  disclosed, nor official advice given to ministers, nor material about inter-departmental exchanges of matters of policy, nor information about the level at which decisions were made.
Officials are told to confine themselves to facts and to avoid being drawn into discussion of alternative policies.
If pressed to go beyond these limits they should suggest that the questioning be addressed to ministers.
Civil servants are also instructed not to answer questions about their own part in the conduct of business.
None of these restrictions inhibit the ability of Commons' committees to question ministers but they do maintain the curtain surrounding the influence of civil servants.
In a milder way, the doctrine of ministerial responsibility also inhibits the mass of able and highly trained and experienced civil servants from contributing fully in their own professional associations and academic conferences, in case their opinions or comments on their own work or methods might catch a headline or embarrass a minister.
The doctrine of ministerial responsibility is thus a major explanation for the isolation of Whitehall departments, for their inward-looking nature and for their constant emphasis on keeping within the policy bounds set from above.
It may be wondered why this doctrine is retained, but it has great advantages for both the major groups involved — the ministers and the civil servants.
The original point of the doctrine has disappeared.
It was devised in the mid nineteenth century, at a time when the Commons had considerable direct power over the government, the purpose being to ensure that the Commons could exercise control over officials by pressing the appropriate minister.
Then, this method was effective, forcing ministers to watch over everything that might cause trouble and forcing officials to be punctilious about every major step they took.
Since the decline of the Commons' direct powers to censure ministers, they have not felt obliged to resign if faults are revealed in their departments.
It is true that Sir Thomas Dugdale insisted on resigning over the Crichel Down case in 1954 but he was not pressed to go.
Certainly, it is ridiculous to expect a minister to resign because a civil servant makes a mistake, even if the error be very serious.
Government departments are now so vast that it is unrealistic to expect a minister to know all about matters of administration.
If a minister is in trouble over policy the tendency is for the Cabinet to rally round in support, at least in the short term.
Ministerial resignations were out of fashion until 1982 when there was a sudden change.
Mr Nicholas  Fairbairn, the Solicitor-General for Scotland, left office in a hurry after widespread criticism of his comments about a rape case.
The Falklands crisis led to the resignation of three Foreign Office ministers, Lord Carrington, Mr Humphrey Atkins and Mr Richard Luce.
In the Scottish rape case it was the personal action of the minister that caused indignation.
In the Foreign Office case it was felt that the responsible ministers should have been more alert to the possibility of aggression by Argentina.
In 1986 Mr Leon Brittan, the Home Secretary, resigned because he was held to be responsible for the leak of a letter containing the opinions of a law officer about the actions of the Secretary for Defence, Mr Michael Heseltine.
So while the practice of resignation has been re-established, it is still true that ministers are not expected to suffer for the shortcomings of their staff.
Thus ministers no longer feel that the doctrine exposes them to special risks in the House but, by confining all the advice of the departments to ministers, it does ensure that they are so much better informed and briefed than their critics.
As a result, the public, the press and MPs are often starved of the material with which to make up a counter-argument.
The ministries are staffed by very able men who have spent years on these particular issues.
They can put the case for the minister's decision, copy his style, anticipate hostile points and leave him feeling at a great advantage in any conflict.
If the doctrine was broken and officials could explain their views freely in public, then ministers would have the much more formidable task of making their case against men who were seized of the key counterpoints and who knew that their arguments were accepted by many in the ministry.
It is clear why ministers, who lose only a little and gain a great deal from the doctrine, should want to keep it going.
For civil servants, the advantage is that the doctrine leaves them utterly free of any repercussions arising from their advice and thus greatly adds to their freedom and power.
Thus ministerial responsibility is the main principle moulding the structure and outlook of the senior civil service and it is retained because it does much to reinforce the special position and powers both of ministers and of civil servants.
The Northcote-Trevelyan principles
The second main body of principles governing the civil service derives from the Northcote-Trevelyan Report of 1853 which was  put into full operation in 1870.
The first idea on which the report was based was that the home civil service (the foreign and colonial services were not included) should be organized as a single body of men with a common system of recruitment based on academic ability.
This latter task was allotted to a semi-independent.
Civil Service Commission which would conduct examinations for men in two age groups, 19 to 25 and 17 to 21, the one on the level of final examinations at a university, the other at approximately school-leaving standards.
Once recruited on this basis, the candidates would be allocated to departments.
Though promotion from one class to another was possible, it was across a wide gulf as the distinction between classes was held to be the distinction between mechanical and intellectual activity.
It was accepted that some specialists and a class of supplementary clerks would be needed, but they did not fit into the overall scheme.
This system has remained in broad outline.
The administrative grade, recruited from top-quality university graduates, prepares policy advice for ministers.
The executive grade undertakes a wide range of management tasks and is drawn from both graduates and the more able school-leavers.
The clerical grade undertakes routine duties.
The unity of the service has been encouraged by movement from one department to another.
Training has been ‘in-service’ rather than before entry, and the highest posts have not gone to specialists but to broadly educated men and women who have specialized only in administration.
Thus administrators have tended to live a relatively insulated life of their own, lacking close connections with those doing similar work for private organizations or in professional life.
As a result the service has produced administrators with a distinctive approach and outlook.
Accustomed to the doctrine of ministerial responsibility, used to the idea that they are the repository of the collective wisdom and experience of their departments, accepting that they must handle outside agencies and pressure groups as well as the vagaries of the politicians and the press, they operate with caution but also with great confidence knowing that they alone are in possession of all the facts and that without their activity the whole machine would come to a halt.
Departmental organizations and the Treasury
Besides ministerial responsibility and the Northcote-Trevelyan principles, a third determining feature has been the organization of  the service on a departmental basis.
Being highly centralized, the British system has not been to have powerful centres outside London from which groups of services can be conducted for that area, but to administer each of the important functions of government from Whitehall for the whole of the country.
The exceptions are Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales, experiments with regional offices and controllers in England having done nothing to alter the fact that both policy and much of the details of administration are still controlled from Whitehall.
The first of the special cases mentioned is Northern Ireland which (until the imposition of direct rule in 1972) had a devolved system based on the 1920 Government of Ireland Act.
This act allocated agriculture, health, home affairs, education, housing, roads and indeed all internal administration to a local executive and civil service responsible to the Stormont parliament.
In Scotland and Wales, there are regional ministries under a secretary of state, the Scottish Office having five departments (education, development, home and health, agriculture and fisheries.
and economic planning) while the Welsh Office has housing, roads, local government and certain aspects of development.
England is administered by centrally-based functional departments, while such functions as the supervision of employment and productivity, the work of the Departments of the Environment and of Health and Social Security also extend over Scotland and Wales.
Given this pattern, the task of controlling and co-ordinating these departments at the centre is of major importance.
This is undertaken by the Cabinet, the Cabinet Secretariat and then by the Treasury.
The central role of the Treasury dates from a minute of 1860. when it was decided that all funds for the government should be released by the Treasury to the various ministries.
These ministries had to ask permission for all major items of expenditure within the total sum voted and had, at the end of the year, to account to the Treasury for the detailed expenditure of their allocation of funds.
The permanent secretary in each ministry became the accounting officer responsible to the Treasury for the expenditure of the money allocated to his ministry.
Besides this control through the finances of a department, new activity usually means more staff and this requires the sanction of the Treasury.
The constant oversight of the Treasury is now maintained not only by its control of the normal disbursement of money, but by the fact that each year forward  estimates of public expenditure have to be put by the departments before the Treasury and Public Expenditure Scrutiny Committee and agreed upon there.
The Treasury employs sections which monitor the expenditure of the various departments and go over their estimates, the role of the Treasury being to insist on certain overall policies and ceilings on expenditure while the spending departments tend to argue in favour of certain policy objectives or programmes, hoping that if these are accepted, the necessary funds will be forthcoming.
The Treasury never likes to get involved in considerations of which aspects of departmental policy are more or less desirable, as the only result would be to commit the Treasury to the financial consequences.
Yet in fixing the allocations between departments, they have to take into consideration the policy of the government and what each department proposes to do with the money.
Criticisms of the civil service: its relations with ministers
Given this framework and governing principles, the civil service has operated without many upheavals over the last century.
Recently, however, there has been some criticism and some arguments about its structure, in addition to the more long-standing discussion of how far ministers can dominate their departments and how far civil service practices and attitudes have proved too much for the politicians.
The criticisms have fallen into certain categories, one general line being that the service has failed to adopt modern methods of management, that it has been slow in understanding the use of statistical information and of specialized knowledge of the social services, and that it does not think ahead enough or organize its planning on a sufficiently systematic basis, in part because officials spend too much time on routine departmental work.
A second theme has been a particular criticism of the Treasury and of its economic policies; in particular that too much emphasis has been placed on the balance of payments or prevention of inflation, while the need for economic growth was neglected.
There have also been attacks on the ‘generalist’ or ‘all-rounder’in administration, combined with the argument that the civil service is too isolated, complacent and insulated from outside pressures.
The post-war governments, both Labour and Conservative, have shown that a minister with coherent, workable policies and reasonable energy and capacity can get loyal co-operation from his  or her civil servants.
Moreover, for such a minister, the ideal is not a department without a policy or officials without positive ideas as to what needs to be done.
If there is a vacuum of this kind, far from the field being clear for political decision-taking (as Ramsay Muir suggests), the minister is lost because there are no properly prepared and documented alternatives from which he can choose.
On the other hand, from the civil servant's angle what is wanted as a minister is not a malleable man who can be moulded or pushed into particular views.
The officials want and respect a minister who can pick up a problem quickly, select from among the alternatives the line most in accord with the outlook of his Cabinet colleagues and his party, who is courageous and can win any necessary battles with other departments outside or inside the Cabinet, and who can explain the policy well in public.
Above all, they want a minister who, having taken a decision, does not constantly alter it every time some pressure is brought to bear.
But though the relationship, when satisfactory, is relatively straightforward and works as would be expected when any large organization is taken over by a new and competent managing director, there are other cases where problems can arise.
For instance, Cabinets are not chosen on grounds of administrative competence.
This is a factor in selection, and all Cabinets have some first-class administrators, but there are other, political reasons for appointments and it is possible that in any Cabinet of twenty, a half would not have been chosen if the only grounds had been the capacity to run a large department.
Further, the longer a party has been in opposition, the fewer of its leaders will have had ministerial office.
The Labour frontbench is almost devoid of people with Cabinet experience.
Finally, the reasons for moving ministers frequently have little to do with ability and the time spent in any particular office is often too short to allow the minister to master the subject and the department.
Senior civil servants can scarcely be blamed for thinking of their political masters as relatively temporary and likely to move on before fully understanding departmental problems and the merit of traditional policies.
It is notorious that ministers are overworked.
They cannot concentrate wholly on matters put before them by civil servants because they have to deal with parliamentary duties, party business and constituency cases.
An exhausting schedule of appointments means that ministers have too little time to think.
What happens is that having to serve on many Cabinet and other  committees, anyone other than a top-grade and experienced minister tends to use the brief he has been given.
And before most ministerial committees an equivalent official committee meets and goes over the points, so that the meeting can proceed without a hitch to an agreed conclusion, provided none of the ministers wishes to interject a personal note.
The author recalls an able Treasury minister who, after resignation, became a convinced and cogent parliamentary reformer, explaining that as a minister he had had no time to work out this aspect of policy and therefore, since the Treasury was opposed to more specialist committees of the House of Commons, he used the brief they provided and he had been a formidable opponent of these reforms at the Cabinet Committee level.
One source of official strength is to take time.
Civil servants are in the same department for many years, if not for life, while the minister lasts only two to three years.
It is understandable that a civil servant takes longer to negotiate or work out a solution over which he is unenthusiastic, the result being that by the time the work is complete, there is a new minister who is more ready to see the weaknesses of this line of action.
In addition, to argue with able, patriotic, experienced men is tiring and some ministers have found that it is best to conserve their energies for major issues.
finally, a strong departmental philosophy is hard to resist.
In the 1950s the Home Office persuaded successive Home Secretaries to support the death penalty.
In the 1960s the Foreign Office successfully urged the case for joining the EEC.
Overall, civil servants are loath to disturb good relations with well-established bodies that can
There is no doubt that senior civil servants exercise great influence.
If a minister lacks ability, experience, knowledge or, perhaps, the time to become confident of his own judgement, then the departmental view tends to prevail, and this may be desirable, for a country cannot be policyless on major issues.
But when a government sets its mind to a change of policy within the limits of feasibility, this can be achieved.
Exactly how far civil servants are prepared to go in order to thwart ministers is a matter of some controversy.
Left-wing critics allege that civil servants restrict or delay the availability of information to ministers if it does not fit easily with departmental views.
Briefs can be presented in a way which suggests a particular conclusion.
Ministerial instructions may be modified or evaded by clever drafting of documents.
In an extreme form this analysis would suggest that the senior civil  servants constitute an effective and permanent ruling class forced to make adjustments to their policies from time to time because of the intervention of ministers.
This picture has been powerfully reinforced in the public mind by the BBC series Yes, Minister and Yes, Prime Minister .
Some would argue that these programmes did not reflect contemporary reality because ministers in the Thatcher administration were generally more assertive than their predecessors.
Whether that is so is a matter for judgement.
It is also a matter of degree; the difference is perhaps fairly slight and will vary between individuals.
And while it may be admirable that ministers take initiatives to disturb the bland continuity of civil service administration, there is a further, separate question of whether the policies injected by ministers are desirable.
Criticisms of the civil service: its administrative methods
Turning to the criticisms of the administrative machine through which the political leadership operates, the pattern was set in the early 1960s by Professor Brian Chapman's British Government Observed .
He argued that Britain had failed to make ‘a reasonable proportion of right and wise decisions in matters of major policy’, and that other nations had done better.
The specific weaknesses of British government which Chapman alleged were first that the ministries, though expected to take all key decisions, were not expected to act — to build roads, run hospitals, train teachers and so on.
This always had to be done by another agency so that British government became ‘a rich Byzantine structure’ of boards, local authorities, commissions and joint committees.
As a result, he argued, responsibility is hard to pin down, action becomes desperately slow, planning is inadequate and too many wrong decisions are made.
In part, this is because the civil service is a closed corporation, over-specialized in ‘general administration’ and London-based to the point of becoming parochial.
In part it is because training is in-service and little emphasized and also because so much of government is secret, information being deliberately kept from Parliament and the public.
Further evidence of these weaknesses is the way governments, faced with difficult problems, do not turn to the departments (or to the Commons) but set up commissions and inquiries manned by distinguished outsiders to investigate and pronounce.
This was a formidable catalogue of sins, but many of the ideas became generally accepted and to some extent underlay Mr Wilson's thinking in 1963 when he talked of the Conservatives' period in power since 1951 as ‘thirteen wasted years’ and promised that in the first hundred days of dynamic government after a Labour victory at the polls a new atmosphere would pervade Whitehall.
However, it was not until 1966 that a committee under Lord Fulton was appointed to ‘examine the structure, recruitment and management, including training, of the Home Civil Service’.
The report appeared in 1968.
It asserted that ‘the structure and practices of the Service have not kept up with the changing tasks’ and found six major faults.
The first was the ‘cult of the generalist’ or ‘all-rounder’which the Fulton Committee said was ‘obsolete at all levels and in all parts of the Service’.
Then the division into classes was held to be an impediment and a cause of frustration.
The report alleged that many scientists, engineers and other specialists were not given the opportunities they should have and too few civil servants were skilled in the techniques of modern management.
There was not enough contact between the service and the world outside Whitehall while, in general, promotion depended too much on seniority and too little on merit.
Before considering the Fulton Committee's proposals to remedy the situation, these assorted criticisms of the public service have to be examined.
In general, the Fulton Committee's critique was overdone in that it was attacking a caricature of the service which was never wholly true, and certainly underestimated the changes that had taken place since the late 1950s.
The two further major reservations that must be made are first that the service is moulded chiefly by the doctrine of ministerial responsibility with all that flows from it — anonymity, one collective viewpoint, secrecy and a degree of isolation from the rest of the community.
The Fulton Committee was not, by its terms of reference, allowed to look at the relationship with Parliament but, as a result, it blamed the service itself for many characteristics imposed on it by virtue of this relationship.
The second was that this was the very difficult period when, as Dean Acheson said, Britain ‘had lost an Empire and failed to find a role’.
Inevitably, policy failures were attributed to the government and its officials, when the blame lay more widely with the whole of the community and in particular with the strong British dislike both for rethinking an entire situation and for the radical changes that might have to follow from such a reconsideration.
Given these two reservations, some of the detailed criticisms contain an element of truth but others are superficial.
For instance, the attack on the ‘generalist’ is overdone and for most specialists, the training that counts is what they learn after they start work.
After ten years in a department working, for example, on housing, the fact that one man's undergraduate degree was in philosophy and another's in sociology will make little or no difference; what will matter is the capacity and experience they have developed at the task.
It is true that over a decade when the senior civil service was moving from being primarily regulatory in outlook to being primarily managerial, there was a lack of research, of assessment of situations before action could be properly planned.
It is also true that the service is still obsessed with the idea that it should, if possible, not act itself but should operate through some external agency.
Thus when the officials think they must do something to stimulate tourism, plant trees or preserve the countryside, instead of acting themselves, they float a tourist board, a forestry commission or a countryside commission.
This has its merits and has been the practice in Sweden, but it is of value only if the central government departments then restrict themselves purely to planning, thinking and regulating.
In Britain, however, because of ministerial responsibility and because of the suspicion that the appropriate ministry could do the job much better than a new, inexperienced board (which usually has a lower calibre of staff), the ministries concerned have their own sections on tourism, forestry and the countryside which go over everything the board in question proposes, giving authorizations, suggestions or exercising a veto.
The result is delay, duplication and frustration.
The ministries become bogged down in detail when their energies and resources should be concentrated more on overall policy, and the ad hoc commissions grow disillusioned and frustrated because they are not allowed to get on with the job.
To solve the problems it diagnosed, the Fulton Committee recommended a number of changes which amounted to an attempt to introduce the modern (largely American) techniques of business management into the civil service.
The main principle involved is the delegation of responsibility for budgets and for staff to accountable units each with defined objectives and one person responsible for the performance of the unit.
Control is exercised by financial techniques and revision of the objectives set for each unit.
This permits both an effective method of assessing ability and  achievement with the minimum of day-to-day interference.
The weakness of this approach in terms of the British civil service is that it ignores the force of ministerial responsibility.
At present, no minister could answer a parliamentary question by saying that whatever his views on the matter, responsibility had been allocated for this function to Assistant Secretary Brown and it was up to that official to take whatever course of action he thought best to achieve the set objectives.
Thus the aspects of the Fulton recommendations that could be put into practice were those compatible with ministerial responsibility.
They included the abolition of separate classes in favour of a unified grading structure, the foundation of a civil service college, the establishment of planning units and the devotion of more resources to career management.
The independent Civil Service Department suggested by Fulton was also created but was brought to an end in 1981.
All the changes that were made underlined trends already evident before Fulton reported and none made any basic difference to the civil service.
Since 1979, the civil service has been under renewed pressure to reduce administrative cost.
Mr Heseltine, Secretary of State for the Environment 1979–83, made great efforts trying to streamline the operations of his department by insisting on a continuous review of its objectives and priorities.
More generally, efforts were made to reduce staff by limiting state functions or by privatization, i.e. by passing over some tasks to private contractors.
Other more drastic proposals were ventilated but never put into practice.
They included the abolition of one of the senior grades, that of under secretary, to reduce the steps in the administrative hierarchy, and also to remove the inflation-proofing of civil service pensions.
In 1981 conflict over pay settlements led to an unprecedented civil service strike.
The demise of the Civil Service Department may have been due to a feeling by ministers that it was too conscious of the interests of staff.
The position of public servants must be uneasy when the Cabinet is zealous to prune expenditure.
The civil service and Parliament
The traditional arrangement is that there are no direct links between the civil service and MPs.
They live in separate worlds, Whitehall and Westminster.
Civil servants are employed to assist ministers to carry on the business of government.
They work  in accordance with the instructions of ministers and they are responsible to ministers.
For their part, ministers are accountable to Parliament, so ministers are the vital link in the chain between the civil service and Parliament and, indeed, they have been in the past not merely a link but a barrier.
Senior civil servants and MPs have contrasting lifestyles.
Civil servants are non-political, anonymous, discreet and specialize in a particular sphere of public business.
MPs are partisan public figures who court publicity and get involved in a wide range of issues.
The divide between the two groups is considerable yet, increasingly, they do come into contact with each other.
The basic reason for this change is that the scale of government activity is so vast that, more and more, ministers have to delegate to their civil servants.
So civil servants tend to come out rather more into the open, to meet people on behalf of their ministers, receive deputations and so forth.
In particular, the extension of the select committee system has meant that more civil servants have attended Parliament to provide information about the work for which they are responsible.
Essentially they come to Westminster to explain rather than defend.
If a committee wishes to go beyond the scrutiny of administration and to challenge the basis of policy, then it is time for a minister to come and argue in favour of the policy under review.
In this way the concept of ministerial responsibility is maintained.
However, the boundary between policy and administration is often blurred and civil servants may be led dangerously close to the discussion of policy.
In 1986, as part of the aftermath of the Westland controversy, the Select Committee on Defence sought to question particular civil servants about their role in leaking to the press a letter from the Solicitor-General to the Secretary for Defence.
There is a strong probability, had such evidence been given, that the government would have been gravely embarrassed.
But the individuals concerned were instructed not to appear.
The government argued that select committees could examine the actions of civil servants but not their conduct.
Questions about actions are defined as those which seek to establish facts; questions which explicitly or implicitly seek to criticize individual officials are said to be directed at their conduct.
In practice, this distinction could be very fine.
Certainly, it is not the function of select committees to discipline civil servants.
And a civil servant giving evidence about ‘conduct’ could be placed in an unfair position.
He/she might be constrained  by loyalty to ministers; as a result, reputation and career might be at risk.
Further, such proceedings would clash with the orthodox line of responsibility from civil servants to ministers and from ministers to Parliament.
However, a select committee can ask that ministers review the conduct of a particular official.
Also if a civil servant fails to answer to a committee's satisfaction, the government accept that the appropriate minister should be prepared to come before the committee.
These rules of procedure help to reinforce the cordon sanitaire around Whitehall.
When a government department is preparing fresh legislation it will frequently consult with outside agencies with a particular interest in and/or specialized knowledge of the subject.
Such discussions, often conducted by civil servants, can be very influential in deciding the details of a bill.
In some cases unofficial ‘bargains’ may be made so that an outside body will agree not to lobby MPs to oppose the legislation in return for government acceptance of certain proposals.
There is nothing improper in this process; it may be regarded as a natural part of political negotiation in a pluralist society.
Nevertheless, it does bring senior civil servants into the task of policy formation in a way that seeks to by-pass MPs.
It may be claimed that open debate in Parliament is being replaced by confidential discussions at which the public is represented by anonymous officials.
If the objective of a democratic legislature is to inform the public about issues, to let them know what pressure groups are saying and to allow the civil service to assess public reaction before rather than after the government is committed to a line of action, then pressure groups should address Parliament.
In practice, this would mean coming before committees of the House of Commons.
The difficulty here is the shortage of MPs' time and perhaps energy.
So the role of the civil service expands not merely because ministers are overwhelmed with work but because Parliament is also.
Communication between civil servants and Parliament is hindered both by the convention of ministerial responsibility and by the Official Secrets Act, 1911.
Section 1 of this Act deals with spying and is not relevant in this context.
Section 2 is the famous, or infamous, ‘catch all’ provision which prohibits unauthorized disclosure of official information by any servant of the Crown.
Some disclosure is formally permitted.
Public relations staff regularly brief journalists.
Civil servants give evidence to parliamentary committees and other official inquiries.
But the prohibition  in the Act is so complete that it is commonly ignored.
Any civil servant who talks to his or her spouse about work would be committing an offence.
And how many times a day is the Act broken in and around Whitehall?
The unsatisfactory nature of the legislation has long been recognized.
In 1972 a committee under the chairmanship of Lord Franks was appointed to review the position.
It recommended that Section 2 be replaced by a new Act that would define more narrowly the information that was to be protected; restricted categories would cover confidential material about defence, foreign affairs and currency reserves, information concerning law enforcement and information provided for the government by an individual or private concern.
Bills promoted both by backbenchers and ministers to reform the law have been unsuccessful.
The 1911 Act remains in force.
The position is tolerable only because the Act is regularly ignored.
The Attorney-General has to consent to any prosecution under the Act and such cases have been fairly infrequent.
However, in recent years there has been a mounting tendency for civil servants to ‘leak’ information to the press.
Such information had no relation to national security.
Often the material was about plans for future changes in some aspect of domestic policy.
The premature release of these plans was a source of embarrassment and irritation to ministers as it might stir up greater opposition to what they wanted to do.
Attempts to track down the culprits who leaked information were commonly unsuccessful; the photo-copier is a great help to those who wish to be disloyal.
Meanwhile, ministers were known to favour strong action against anyone who was caught passing on information, to act as a general deterrent to other officials.
In August 1984, Mr Clive Ponting, a senior official at the Ministry of Defence, was charged with sending two documents to a Labour MP, Mr Tam Dalyell, without authority and thus contrary to Section 2 of the Official Secrets Act.
At his trial six months later Mr Ponting was acquitted by the unanimous verdict of a jury.
This case raised a number of important issues including the nature of the duty of a civil servant in relation to Parliament.
The documents sent to Mr Dalyell concerned the sinking of the Argentine warship General Belgrano during the Falklands conflict.
They had no security classification and related, not to naval operations, but to how the Ministry of Defence were dealing with  parliamentary questions about the incident.
They were of special interest to Mr Dalyell as he had been attempting to get more information from ministers about the sinking of the General Belgrano .
Mr Ponting's case for sending the documents was that he felt that they showed that Parliament was being misled and misinformed about the Belgrano affair.
Thus the Ponting case raises questions of law and morality.
The legal defence was that a civil servant can pass on information if it is in the interests of the state so to do.
The judge explained to the jury that the interests of the state were those of the government of the day and it was for ministers to decide the policies of the government.
Thus the judge, Mr Justice McCowan, seemed to equate the government with the state — a somewhat totalitarian view that was rejected by the jury.
Yet even with this verdict, moral problems still remain.
Is a civil servant entitled to act on a personal view of the nature of the best interests of the state?
Again, what is a civil servant to do if he is satisfied that ministers are misleading Parliament, not because of national security, but in order to evade political embarrassment?
The democratic process demands that ministers shall be accountable to Parliament: how can ministers be accountable if they avoid telling what they have done?
If ministers behave improperly in failing to inform Parliament, should a civil servant take the initiative and attempt to repair the omission?
There are no easy answers to these problems.
Of course, the situation would be greatly eased if our political leaders were less addicted to secrecy.
A fuller acceptance of the concept of open government would stimulate discussion of public policy inside and outside Parliament.
It could well make life more awkward for ministers.
But the principles of democratic government are not framed to make life easy for political leaders; they are concerned with ‘government of the people, for the people and by the people’.
The acceptance of the proposals of the Franks Committee to reform the Official Secrets Act would not necessarily prevent civil servants in the future being faced with a clash of loyalties but it should make the problem less acute.
The case for political advice
Any basic change in the executive branch of British government will need something more than the type of structural reform of the civil  service proposed by the Fulton Committee.
It would require an injection of supporters of the ministerial party, divorced from the tradition of the non-political career public servant.
There are two ways in which such an adjustment might be achieved.
A group of people politically sympathetic to the government of the day could be appointed to each department to assist ministers with advice that would have a political content.
Thus ministers would have alternative briefing to that provided by civil servants.
The alternative would be to ensure that top civil service posts were held by political supporters of the government: such people would have to lose their jobs if ministers lost office.
The idea that a minister should have a political associate to assist him is not new.
Each senior minister appoints a Parliamentary Private Secretary (PPS) who is a backbench MP.
There is no payment; the arrangement is purely personal.
The functions of a PPS vary.
Some ministers use them largely to keep in touch with parliamentary opinion on matters affecting their own departments.
Other ministers find it useful to consult with them more broadly on political questions.
Since 1964 some ministers have appointed political advisers to make policy suggestions that reflect their party's viewpoint.
This support need not be related to departmental business: in her diary entry for 4 March 1976 Barbara Castle, then Secretary of State for Health and Social Security, bewails the fact that she had no briefing for the Cabinet discussion of the defence review because her political adviser, Jack Straw, was out of action because of a family bereavement.
Lord Crowther-Hunt, who has had experience both as a policy adviser and a minister, records in his book,The Civil Servants , that the permanent staff tended to isolate advisers by excluding them from official committees and by reducing the information available to them.
Clearly, if the party input into the development of policy is to be significant then something more than an isolated individual is needed to make the system effective.
Mr Brian Sedgemore, formerly PPS to Mr Benn, has suggested in The Secret Constitution that these political offices should be staffed ‘by whoever the Minister wanted — industrialists, academics, journalists, trade unionists, shop stewards, may be MPs’.
However, there is a serious difficulty about adding to the number of MPs linked to the government.
Ministers cannot vote against the government in the House of Commons; nor can a PPS.
Were more MPs to a drawn  into the Whitehall web, then all independence on the government backbenches would be eliminated.
Ministers could expect to have a parliamentary majority whatever they did.
But the crux of the issue is whether it would be good for ministers to receive more partisan advice.
Pressure for this development comes from both Left- and Right-wing sources.
Sir John Hoskyns, head of Mrs Thatcher's Policy Unit 1979–82, and thus a temporary and political civil servant, favours drastic change as much as Mr Brian Sedgemore.
On leaving office he argued that the top level of the civil service needed an injection of fresh blood.
It was too much of a closed circle.
It lacked the confidence and energy that came from success.
Indeed, the concept of success could scarcely apply since it worked to no clear objectives.
Ministers are too overburdened with engagements to think out effectively what they want to do.
The tradition of the non-political civil service demands that ministers should be helped to put their ideas into practice, while being made aware of the pitfalls; but impartial civil servants should not put political ideas into ministers' heads.
This analysis led Sir John Hoskyns to support both the concept of political ‘think tanks’ to assist ministers and the nomination of some senior civil servants on a party political basis.
The contrary view is that such outsiders, fired with enthusiasm but lacking in experience of the realities of administration, would tend to produce ideas possibly admirable in theory but which would not work in practice.
Indeed, the permanent staff can argue that a cautious approach is in the best interests of the minister and his party for, if an unorthodox scheme is tried and fails, the result is politically damaging.
On this basis it is arguable, perhaps with some truth, that ministers need protection from their friends.
The weakness of a political office must be that it would lack the knowledge and experience of traditional civil servants.
A way to avoid this difficulty might be to put the political team on top of the bureaucratic hierarchy instead of in a separate box at the side of it.
This suggestion is truly drastic.
It means that, as in the USA, a change of the party in power would mean a complete change of those holding the most senior posts in government departments.
Continuity would be lost.
The permanent staff would lose the prospect of promotion to the highest rungs of their career ladder.
Damage to their morale would be severe.
The civil service would have great difficulty in recruiting and retaining those with the highest abilities.
Even if its policy advice role were reduced, the  nation still needs managers of the best quality to run the public services.
And the idea of placing party enthusiasts in command of policy advice is likely to appeal only to those who are keen or extreme supporters of the party in power.
Temporary advisers, especially those with a secure job to which they can return, need not feel a great sense of responsibility.
They may be too keen to indulge in social experiments.
If things go well, it is fine; if things go ill, it is goodbye, but at little personal cost.
The arguments against temporary appointments at the top of the civil service pyramid are overwhelming.
It is highly unlikely that any formal moves will be made to politicize senior civil service appointments.
When a vacancy occurs for the top post in a department, the tradition is for the vacancy to be discussed by the head of the civil service with the secretary of state.
The Prime Minister is also consulted.
As can be seen from the Crossman Diaries, the personality and ability of possible candidates are reviewed, but not political opinions.
The assumption is that senior civil servants are non-partisan and serve ministers loyally irrespective of politics.
It is reported that Mrs Thatcher has been keen to ensure that those promoted are sympathetic to her scale of values or are not unwilling to break away from the style of middle-of-the-road consensus policies that have predominated in recent years.
Such a development could have most serious consequences.
If there is a change in the party in power and the new Cabinet feels that their senior civil servants are personally attached to the policies of the previous Cabinet, then there would be a serious breakdown in confidence.
To resolve the matter smoothly might well be impossible.
If the new ministers took no action they would feel, perhaps with justice, that they did not get the quality of co-operation they were entitled to enjoy from their most senior staff.
But if permanent secretaries were dismissed or persuaded to retire en masse , then the cry would go up that the new ministers were engaging in a new and improper extension of patronage.
The new Cabinet could claim that they were faced with a dilemma not of their own making.
Whatever the outcome the long-standing, unwritten code of behaviour that governs relations between ministers and civil servants would be gravely battered.
GOVERNMENT OUTSIDE WHITEHALL
The purpose of this chapter is to describe the rest of the machinery through which the political leadership operates outside Whitehall and this includes more than just the system of local government.
In the late nineteenth century, all administration was grouped at two levels — central and local — so that at each level, decisions could be subjected to the scrutiny of an elected body.
Since then, central government departments have established regional offices.
Many essential services are now operated by public bodies organized on a regional basis; leading examples are gas, electricity, water and the hospitals.
Numerous ad hoc bodies have been created to run specific functions such as broadcasting and television, the ports, industrial training schemes and the administration of government property.
Such a proliferation of bureaucracy is an inevitable consequence of the expansion of the activities of the state.
These organizations are sometimes described as fringe bodies but more often the acronym ‘quango’ is used.
The word is a shorthand form for ‘quasi autonomous non-government organizations’.
Exactly how many quangos exist is not known.
Different studies produce different figures depending upon the categories included.
Certainly the total runs to hundreds.
They have been a very popular means of dealing with a wide variety of functions which ministers want to encourage, to finance and to guide, but which would not fit easily into the structure of a government department.
To create a separate agency for a particular task helps to remove it from the political arena.
Ministers do not have detailed responsibility for the decisions made.
An increase in the number of civil servants is avoided — and that is politically popular.
The growth of quangos fits in with the idea that the burden on ministers could be eased if government departments concentrated on the development of policy and ‘hived off’ large blocs of routine administration.
Nevertheless, quangos are financed from public funds, so there is a problem of public accountability.
The boards and commissions that  run these organizations are commonly appointed by ministers and so provide an increase in ministerial patronage.
It can be argued that they also produce an increase in civil service patronage in that senior civil servants generally advise ministers about the appointments, and quite often important chairmanships are awarded to recently retired civil servants.
So there has been criticism of the growth of patronage and of the extent to which bodies which are paid for by the taxpayer are not fully accountable to Parliament for their actions.
Public trading organizations, the nationalized industries, should, in theory, cover their own costs, but do not always do so.
The Thatcher Government has been critical of the growth of quangos.
They represent a growth of public expenditure and activity which Conservatives wish to curtail.
So some quangos and advisory committees have been eliminated.
Yet they still operate a substantial if ill-defined fringe of functions provided by the state.
The nationalized industries
When these various bodies were created, the question of control did arise, most acutely in the case of the nationalized industries.
These were created or taken over by the state at various times since the first examples under the 1906–14 Liberal Government, but the largest group of Nationalization Acts covering coal, road and rail services, gas, electricity and iron and steel came under the 1945 — 51 Labour Government.
At that time the old doctrines of the need for democratic control were still strong and an argument arose between those, such as Mr Aneurin Bevan, who favoured total subordination to Parliament (with a minister for each industry on the lines of the Post Office), and those led by Mr Herbert Morrison, who wanted to leave the industries a measure of independence to operate as fully commercial undertakings.
The latter approach prevailed and though the various Nationalization Acts differ in detail, the main points were the same.
A board was nominated to run each industry as a viable commercial enterprise.
The minister can change the board and give the board directions of a general character which have to be observed.
He has to be consulted on any substantial capital outlays and be provided with a full report of the board's activities.
In practice, the minister has only once had to issue such a directive (when the Conservatives after 1951 stopped any further action by the Iron and Steel Board) as these reserve  powers are quite sufficient to make the boards listen carefully to any suggestions made in a less formal manner by the minister.
Parliament, however, has a far weaker position.
It is entitled to see (and debate, if necessary) the annual accounts and report of each industry but it can only question the minister on those aspects of the industry's activities for which the minister is responsible.
In practice, this means that censure motions are possible and questions can be tabled on the general issues where it could be held that the minister ought to have issued a directive.
But on day-to-day issues or on detailed matters where the minister would not be authorized to intervene by the relevant act, however much he might discuss these points on an informal basis and influence the actions of the board, Parliament can do nothing.
In practice, the nationalized industries are subject to Whitehall and civil servants often re-examine the major management decisions (and some minor ones) in case points of principle arise, in particular considering whether investment and pricing policies are satisfactory from the ministry's point of view.
Also, ministers are often prepared to get answers on detailed questions for MPs, though the Commons decided that such letters were not ‘proceedings in Parliament’ and were therefore not protected from actions alleging libel.
It is scarcely surprising that when the Select Committee on Nationalized Industries examined this problem it found a ‘lack of clarity and certainty and purpose’ among what it called the sponsoring government departments.
The result was a ‘lack of understanding and in some cases, a breakdown of mutual confidence between boards and ministries’.
The select committee then went on to recommend very much the same principles as the Fulton Committee wanted to see adopted widely in the civil service.
It argued that government control should be ‘strategic guidance’ and should be exercised as far as possible in the same way for all the industries by the use of economic and financial criteria, and that this should be done by one minister and one department.
Other aspects which concerned the public such as the need to retain certain uneconomic railway lines, the use of coal to prevent too fast a rise in unemployment in areas dependent on mining or the case for airports on remote islands in Scotland, could then all be urged from outside on the individual industries and on the Ministry for Nationalized Industries without confusing these social objectives with the normal criteria of operation.
These recommendations (made in 1968) have not been adopted.
The major method of ensuring public accountability is through select committees of the House of Commons.
Originally, in 1955, a select committee was appointed to give specialized attention to the nationalized industries: when a full range of select committees were established in 1979, the Committee on Nationalized Industries was discontinued and its responsibilities transferred to the appropriate functional committees, e.g. energy and transport.
There has been a continuous tendency for governments, both Conservative and Labour, to intervene in the affairs of the nationalized industries in order to promote immediate political objectives.
Often the purpose has been to encourage wage restraint; the size and shape of investment programmes have been the subject of ministerial concern; in the past the National Coal Board has been dissuaded from closing uneconomic pits.
The scale and importance of the nationalized concerns are so great that ministers are not prepared to give their managers a free hand.
At the same time there has been strong pressure from MPs to allow the House of Commons to play a more effective role in these matters.
The new select committee system has strengthened parliamentary scrutiny over government departments: why should there not be a similar advance in relation to nationalized industries?
In 1983 Mr St John Stevas promoted a private member's bill, The National Audit Bill, which sought to give the Comptroller and Auditor General access to the accounts of nationalized industries so that his staff could investigate them as they do the accounts of government departments.
The chairmen of the nationalized industries were greatly alarmed by this proposal.
The government also objected and, ultimately, these provisions were dropped from the bill.
The controversy was quite fierce and embarrassing for Conservative ministers.
They were as keen as their backbenchers for the nationalized industries to be efficient and cost effective.
But such was the resistance from management, it was feared that it would become impossible to recruit top-quality personnel from the private sector if they were going to be subject to oversight from the Comptroller.
Further, the original theory of nationalization put forward by the Attlee Government after 1945 stressed that corporations should be free to take commercial risks in a way that would be inappropriate for government departments.
Thus it is arguable that the traditions of the Comptroller's Department do not fit the task of examining commercial accounts.
Scrutiny by the Comptroller could also reveal more fully the extent of ministerial  influence over nationalized industries and could provide fuel for parliamentary criticism of ministers.
Since 1979 there has been some contraction of nationalized industries.
Conservative policy is to ‘privatize’.
Public concerns that are profitable are being sold.
Local government: its structure and weaknesses
Local government was reformed in england and Wales in 1972 and in Scotland in 1973.
A system with historic origins which had been made democratic in the nineteenth century was reorganized on a two-tier basis after a series of reports.
In order to appreciate some of the present problems and the need for a reform, it is necessary to examine the pattern of local government as it stood before the 1972 act.
This pattern dated originally from the Middle Ages when the towns were able to purchase their right to self-government by paying an impecunious Crown for a charter.
The latter gave the right to self-government and self-taxation to all living within the town walls or boundary, leaving the surrounding rural area under the control of the aristocracy.
This division between town and country became hardened by the end of the nineteenth century into fifty-eight county councils and eighty-two county boroughs in England and Wales.
While these county boroughs looked after all their own local government, in the counties there were subordinate, partially self-governing bodies; namely 270 non-county boroughs, 535 urban district councils and 473 rural district councils, these last being further subdivided into some 7500 parish councils.
Thus the administrative map of England and Wales looked like a cloth with patches on it, the patches being towns governed by borough or urban district councils with the entire surrounding area administered by a county council.
County boroughs totally opted out of the surrounding county council's affairs, but for the other types of subordinate authorities the situation was complicated because they performed some functions for themselves while other functions in their areas, such as education, were run by the county council.
Thus the councillors for non-county boroughs, urban districts and rural districts had a limited range of responsibilities; separate elections were held to choose county councillors.
Similarly, the rates paid by the citizens in these areas had to be shared between the two levels of local authority.
In Scotland, the structure was very much the same except that the  number of people resident in the various categories of local authorities tended, on average, to be smaller and there was no third tier equivalent to the parish council.
The actual structure consisted of thirty-one counties and four cities, with the counties divided into twenty-one large burghs, 176 small burghs and 198 district councils.
This system of local government had much fine work to its credit but it was generally accepted that its structure had not changed enough to keep pace with the changing social pattern of travel to work, shopping and holiday areas.
Nor were the levels of resources available enough to pay for the increased skills needed for the more complex requirements of local administration.
These weaknesses appeared in many forms.
Perhaps the most fundamental was the great variation in the size and resources of units all supposed to perform the same tasks at roughly the same standards.
Thus Rutland with a population of 28,000 was supposed to provide a full range of county services of the same standard as Lancashire with a population of 2.3 million.
Among county boroughs the range was also extreme: Canterbury had only 33,000 souls while Birmingham had 1.
1 million citizens.
These variations had arisen from political unwillingness to change boundaries in the period between 1888 and 1972.
The consequence was that many authorities were too small and too poor financially to provide a good standard of service, to employ the requisite staff and provide the necessary specialized units.
Besides these limitations of area and size, finance added another dimension.
Traditionally, local government provided services for property owners — paved streets, lighting, water, sewerage and police — and so the main local government tax has always been a rate levied on property values.
But this meant that the areas with most problems are usually those where property values are low and where there are therefore fewest resources available to pay for remedial services.
Second, while many other tax sources are buoyant, property assessments only rise slowly and so more revenue means raising the tax rate and this always causes trouble as the tax is regressive, weighing more heavily as a percentage of total income on those in the lower income ranges.
These weaknesses as administrative agencies partly explain the suspicion of local government in the central departments and among many politicians and others in all walks of life.
In part, these feelings sprang from the tremendously centralized tradition of British society and administration.
It was felt by many politicians  and officials that local government, in its recent form, was slow and inept so that the departments dealing with local authorities either developed a mass of controls to enable them to watch over local authorities or actually withdrew services from the local authorities.
They also developed a series of financial controls through the grants made to local government.
All was underpinned by the widespread belief that local councillors were not likely to take a progressive view on educational policy, such matters as the arts or the preservation of historic buildings, and that local authority officials were less competent than their counterparts in Whitehall.
The results were evident at many levels.
One was the withdrawal of such functions as running hospitals, manufacturing gas and electricity and the distribution of national assistance (now known as supplementary benefits) from local government.
A second was the elaborate controls over local authority activities.
These developed from the legal concept of ultra vires (beyond the strength) which, since the mid nineteenth century, had prohibited local councils from doing anything for which they could not show precise legal authority.
As a result the law relating to local government had become very detailed.
Councillors have come to feel very dependent on legal advice and the top official of a local authority has normally been a lawyer.
Legal controls have been supplemented by financial controls, especially over capital expenditure.
In the nineteenth century limits were imposed on local borrowing to ensure that councils would not default over their debt liabilities, for any such default would have undermined financial confidence in public authorities and had a serious effect on rates of interest.
Today, the government wishes to control local borrowing as part of the attempt to limit the total of public spending.
Another powerful financial weapon is the annual decision made by the government on the amount of grant to be given to local authorities to aid current expenditure.
The accounts of local authorities are subject to scrutiny by auditors appointed by the Audit Commission.
The auditors check the accuracy of accounts and seek to recover money lost through fraud.
They can receive complaints from the public about local expenditure and apply to a court for a declaration that an item of expenditure is illegal or ultra vires .
If the court finds that councillors have acted illegally, then councillors can be surcharged and barred from holding public office for a period.
The arrangements for auditing were reorganized by the Local Government Finance Act 1982 and the Audit  Commission it established was given powers to undertake ‘value for money’ studies designed to help the efficiency of local authorities.
The auditors do try to avoid entanglement with arguments over local policy; nevertheless they are permanent watchdogs with powers of scrutiny and criticism.
Some local activities, notably education, police and the fire service, are subject to inspection by government-appointed inspectors.
In the case of some functions Whitehall has the power to take over the duties of a local authority if it fails to carry out its statutory obligations.
Examples of the use of this ultimate sanction are few.
The most recent case was in 1973 when the government appointed a commissioner to take over the housing responsibilities of the Clay Cross Urban District Council because the council refused to operate the provisions of the Housing Finance Act 1972 and charge higher rents to council tenants.
The wide array of central controls has necessarily created tension between central government and local councillors.
Ministers and perhaps civil servants may think of local authorities as useful agents for carrying out policies decided nationally in government departments and approved by Parliament.
Councillors feel that the fact that they have been elected gives them a right to some independence.
They can claim to represent local public opinion; such a claim cannot be made by those who serve on public bodies as a result of government nomination.
However, ministers are not impressed by the democratic mandate claimed by local councillors.
A national election victory gives a stronger moral claim to rule than a local election.
The turnout at a local election is also on average little more than half that at a general election.
Nevertheless, local elections are fought increasingly on national issues.
Often the local results reflect the unpopularity of the national government.
The longer a party has a majority in the Commons, the greater the number of local authorities likely to be captured by its opponents.
Thus the political message of local elections provides another motive for ministers to deny their importance.
Meanwhile the strong element of central intervention ensures that one local authority cannot be very different in its policies from all the others; citizens can travel round the country to places under different party control without detecting any very noticeable variations in the quality of local services.
The detailed character of financial, administrative and legal restraints imposed by Whitehall may change but the general effect remains the same — local  councillors are expected to fit in with the political priorities of the government of the day.
After 1979 the Conservatives forced local authorities to sell their houses and flats to sitting tenants.
Earlier, in 1976, the Labour Government took powers to require all local education authorities to organize secondary education on comprehensive principles.
The views of local authorities, and the results of local elections, were disregarded.
In turn the opposition parties denounced ministerial policy as monstrous interference with the democratic rights of local authorities.
This situation illustrates perfectly the old adage ‘where you stand depends on where you sit’.
In office each party wants to enforce its views irrespective of local opinion; in opposition, it is convenient to uphold the right of local councils to make their own decisions.
As noted above, the structure of local government is largely based on the reforms of 1972 and 1973.
Ever since 1945 it had been widely accepted that there was a need to reform local government to bring greater efficiency and more vigour into the system.
However, the lack of any popular interest in the subject, and the opposition of the local authority associations and of councillors who often hold posts in the constituency organizations of their parties, prevented any action.
Ultimately the pressure for reform came from the Whitehall ministries because they had to use local government to execute many of their plans, particularly for local economic development and urban renewal and they found that the machinery was simply ineffective.
The Royal Commission on Local Government, under the chairmanship of Lord Redcliffe-Maud, was appointed in 1967 and reported two years later.
With limited exceptions, it proposed that all functions of local government be undertaken by a single authority in each area.
This plan had the advantages of simplicity and ease of co-ordination of interlocking services, e.g. welfare and housing.
The contemporary Labour Government accepted the plan.
However, it aroused opposition.
Traditional boundaries between the counties were ignored so that all manner of sporting and social organizations were threatened with disturbance.
More seriously, the proposed authorities were criticized for being too large and too remote.
Objections were particularly strong from rural areas so it is not surprising that the Conservatives rejected the Redcliffe-Maud scheme.
After the 1970 election victory they introduced a reform of local government structure which retained a two-tier system throughout the country with duties divided  between county and district councils.
This arrangement was embodied in the Local Government Act 1972.
However, the distribution of duties was not uniform.
In the six largest industrial conurbations outside London, the metropolitan counties, education and social welfare were given to the second-tier authorities: elsewhere, in the more rural shire counties, the provision of education and welfare services was allocated to the counties.
As education is by far the most expensive local government service, this distinction was highly important.
In the large conurbations it was the boroughs that had the biggest impact on everyday life: outside these areas the counties mattered far more.
Thus was established an essentially two-tier system in England and Wales.
In England there were 6 metropolitan counties supported by 36 metropolitan boroughs and 39 shire counties with 296 boroughs or districts.
(It is open to a district to decide whether it wishes to be a borough and so enjoy the dignity of having a mayor.)
Wales has 8 counties and 37 boroughs or districts, A third-tier authority, a parish or a town, also exists outside urban areas; these bodies have limited powers but can act as a source of advice and focus for opinion.
In Wales the parishes are called communities.
Most counties have a population in excess of 400,000 but the Isle of Wight and Powys in mid-Wales are little more than 100,000.
The normal size for a second-tier shire district is around 75,000. -100,000 but this category also includes a dozen big towns and cities above 200,000.
The metropolitan boroughs also vary in size with a minimum near 200,000.
These figures are important because a central feature of the argument over local government reform was the size of authority required to carry out particular functions.
In 1972 there was a general agreement that major services, apart from housing, could not be provided economically and efficiently by units with less than 250,000 people.
Scottish local government was reformed by an Act in 1973 on a pattern not dissimilar to that of the English shires.
There are 8 regional authorities and 47 second-tier districts.
The uneven terrain and distribution of population means that the regions are unequal in size: the Strathclyde Region covers nearly half of the whole population of Scotland.
Separate arrangements of a single-tier nature are made for Orkney, Shetland and the Western isles.
The great shortcoming of the reform of local government in the 1970s is that the problem of finance was ignored.
Local authorities cannot be independent of central government unless they have an  adequate power to tax.
This issue was at the heart of the Report of the Layfield Committee on Local Government Finance (Cmnd 6453) published in 1976.
The committee had been established two years earlier by the Wilson Government in response to widespread indignation about rate increases imposed by the new councils in 1974.
Local rates are politically more delicate than other forms of taxation because they are the most visible.
Cash or a cheque has to be produced to pay a rate demand; in contrast, VAT is absorbed in the price of a commodity or service and most people pay income tax through a PAYE system which means that money is deducted before it is received.
But a rate increase cannot be concealed.
The distribution of the burden of rates is arguably less fair than that of income tax, so the Layfield Committee was expected to study the possibilities of reforming local taxation.
Indeed, in 1974 the Conservatives promised to abolish the rating of residential property, but never explained how the loss of rate revenue would be replaced.
After a full examination of the problem, the Layfield Committee recommended, not that the local rate should be abolished, but that rates should be supplemented by a local income tax.
It argued that some extra form of local taxation was needed if local government was to preserve its separate identity.
Without new taxing powers, local authorities would come to depend more and more on help from the National Exchequer and, since he who pays the piper calls the tune, the result must be even stronger central influence over local decisions.
If a local income tax were introduced, then the amount of national subsidy could be reduced and local councillors would be in fuller command of local affairs.
Greater local power would mean greater local responsibility and more public interest in local government.
The prescription was logical but totally unacceptable to the government, and there were two major objections to the Layfield proposals.
First, a local income tax would be complex and therefore expensive to administer.
Second, income tax has long been regarded as a tax of central importance in government management of the economy; it is a major financial and psychological weapon in securing the success of the Cabinet's economic strategy.
The introduction of local income tax would allow local authorities to undermine the budgetary plans of the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
So no action was taken on the ideas of the Layfield Committee.
On the contrary, the weight of central supervision over local  authorities becomes ever stronger because of the steady decline in our economic fortunes.
In 1976 the Labour Government was forced to impose curbs on public expenditure in order to obtain assistance from the International Monetary Fund.
Inevitably, local government could not escape from this policy and the rate support grant was trimmed back From 66 per cent of local authority expenditure to 61 per cent.
Thus local authorities, faced with this reduction in aid from the national taxpayer, had either to reduce their services or increase local rates.
At this time a new Central Council for Local Government Finance was established, composed of representatives of the government and of the local authorities.
Its formal purpose was to strengthen consultation between Whitehall and town and county halls.
To put the matter into more realistic fashion, the aim was to try and get local councils to understand and accept the implications of national economic policy for local government.
The Thatcher Government, inspired by monetary theories of economic management, was even more insistent on the need to cut back local expenditure.
This reaction was not simply another facet of their economic philosophy.
There had been deep disappointment in the Conservative Party with the results of their own reform of local government.
In 1972 it expected that the new system of fewer and larger local authorities would prove more efficient.
Economies of scale and the use of computers were expected to reduce administrative costs.
Big was beautiful.
There would be fewer committees, streamlined methods of decision-making, more delegation to officers and thus less delay.
Somehow this ideal was never achieved.
The larger size of authorities has produced complaints about remoteness from rural areas.
Further, larger authorities are felt to have increased the influence of officials and — very important from a Conservative viewpoint — this influence has not helped to reduce expenditure.
Indeed, the cost of local government has risen sharply since 1972; much of this increase is due to inflation, but the number of staff employed by local authorities has also risen.
The 1972 reform strengthened the local professional bureaucracy and a bureaucracy that is made stronger is unlikely to resist any opportunity to grow.
So since 1979 the Conservatives have made a determined effort to curtail local expenditure.
No major changes have been made in the responsibilities of local government.
Somehow local authorities are expected to perform the same range of duties more cheaply.
Targets for reductions are issued but each local council has to decide for itself how to meet the targets.
Some councils refuse to co-operate.
New legislation, the Local Government and Planning Act 1980, changed the basis of financial aid to local government.
Previously the rate support grant had been distributed to authorities on the basis of a complex formula which took account of a number of factors, including levels of local prosperity, which influence the need for local services.
The details of the formula were varied, sometimes year by year, but the formula was then automatic in its operation (it is true that the government had a reserve power to withhold grant from a particular authority, but this power was never used).
The 1980 Act changed these arrangements.
The rate support grant was replaced by a block grant to be calculated separately for each authority, so a council which displeases the government, by failing to keep local expenditure within a limit determined at the centre, can be penalized by a reduction in grant.
Faced with such a threat local councillors are forced to choose between cutting standards of service or imposing even higher rates on occupiers of property.
At the same time the level of grant was steadily reduced for all authorities until it was below 50 per cent of local costs.
These severe measures did not always produce the desired results.
Some councils controlled by the Labour Party defied the pressure from Whitehall, incurred penalties and put up the rates.
Conservatives in these areas, especially businessmen, complained bitterly.
In a few cases, notably that of the Greater London Council, the effect of the penalties was to eliminate central grant altogether.
Once the grant had gone, the disincentive effect of grant penalties ended: one cannot take away what is not being given.
At the 1983 election the Conservatives promised to take fresh powers to curb local recalcitrance.
The Rates Act 1984 introduced the concept of rate-capping.
This innovation allowed ministers to prescribe the maximum local rate that could be levied by particular local authorities.
Only a few authorities have been treated in this fashion and they are the councils which have substantially exceeded government targets for local expenditure.
Rate-capping is a fundamental challenge to the concept of independent local government.
It is wholly contrary to the philosophy of the Layfield Report published only eight years before rate-capping was enacted.
In 1976 the general tenor of the Report had gained a general welcome even if it secured no specific  action to strengthen local independence.
Since 1976 there has been great erosion of respect for local government.
In tune with this mood the Local Government Act 1985 proceeded to abolish the GLC and the six metropolitan county councils.
The Conservative Government claimed that these bodies were an unnecessary and highly expensive tier of administration.
Certainly these bodies were all Labour controlled.
Their expenditure had increased more sharply than that of other authorities but this was partly due to the government's own policy of spending more on law and order and accepting above-average increases in police pay.
No doubt Conservatives had other than financial motives for getting rid of these bodies.
County Hall, just across the Thames from Parliament itself, must have been an irritating sight, with its banner proclaiming the total of London's unemployed.
Indeed, it was far from clear how the abolition of these authorities would save money.
The greater part of their duties in terms of expenditure was not handed down to the boroughs but passed over to newly established joint boards for police, the fire brigade, passenger transport and the probation service because these functions require wider operational areas than the boroughs can provide.
So seven counties were replaced by nearly thirty joint boards.
Further joint consultation is also needed for other functions including planning and refuse disposal.
The government had to increase its grant to the Arts Council in order to replace at least part of the subsidies these county authorities had paid to support cultural activities.
The seven counties, especially the GLC, fought a vigorous campaign against their extinction — but to no avail.
All this activity did little or nothing to reduce the level of local taxation.
Conservative protests about the rates continued and were particularly strong in Scotland.
Mrs Thatcher was known to dislike the rating system but the rates continued to climb, largely because the Treasury steadily cut back on the grants paid to local authorities.
In 1985 Mr Baker, Secretary of State for the Environment, undertook a fresh review of the problems of local taxation which led to the publication in 1986 of a Green Paper,Paying for Local Government (Cmnd 9714).
Two main changes were proposed.
First, the level of the rate for non-domestic properties should be fixed by the government.
The level would be uniform for the whole country and the proceeds would be distributed to local authorities in proportion to the number of adults in  their area.
So business and commercial rates would cease to be imposed locally: they would be a national tax available for redistribution to local government.
To use a nineteenth-century phrase, they become an assigned revenue.
But the main idea in the Green Paper was to replace domestic rates over a period of years by a community charge.
Local authorities would decide the amount of this charge; the charge would be the same for everyone and all adults would pay it.
Legislation to impose such a community charge system in Scotland was passed in 1987.
Reaction to the Green Paper was hostile.
Labour and the Alliance both opposed it.
So did all the associations of local authorities.
The change in the non-domestic rate was seen as a further challenge to the financial independence of local government.
The redistribution of revenue involved would have varied and often unwelcome effects both on the revenue of some local authorities and on the tax burden of employers in some areas.
In particular, it seems likely that inner city areas, with high levels of social deprivation and physical disintegration, would lose money.
The community charge or poll tax is open to two major criticisms.
As everyone is to pay an equal amount, the burden of tax will fall far more heavily on the poor than the rich.
For the very rich, the tax will be so trivial as to be unnoticed.
The very poorest, who depend on state benefits, will be relieved of paying much of the charge, but those with just enough income to be denied this relief will suffer severely.
The second objection is that the community charge will be more expensive to collect than the present local rate.
It will be difficult if not impossible to secure payment from those who frequently move to another address.
Why did the Conservative Government propose such drastic change?
The basic reason given was that the traditional rating system failed to produce democratic accountability.
Non-domestic ratepayers pay more than domestic ratepayers but they have no vote.
Every adult has a vote but only half of them are ratepayers.
Further, a third of those liable for rates are excused the whole or a part of their liability under the rate rebate scheme to help those with low incomes.
So the link between voting and paying for local services has been broken.
The Conservatives want to see this link restored as they believe the present situation leads to extravagant and irresponsible local spending.
The poll tax was duly included in the 1987 Conservative election manifesto and after their election victory it became the dominant political issue.
One has a clear impression that the Conservative Government has become hostile to local government.
There is a concern not merely to restrict local spending but also to reduce, where possible, the functions of local authorities.
Education is the leading example.
The Education Bill of 1987 is the first ever piece of legislation to restrict the powers of local education authorities.
They are to lose control of polytechnics and institutes of higher education.
Teaching in schools must follow the lines of a national curriculum laid down by the Secretary of State which will dominate approximately 90 per cent of school timetables.
Head teachers are to have increased control over spending school budgets.
Head teachers and school governors are to have increased power over the choice of teaching staff.
Parents and governors may decide to remove a school from the local authority system, subject to the approval of the Secretary of State.
Even before the 1987 bill, local authorities had lost all influence over pay and conditions of teachers when the government took away the negotiating rights of the teachers' unions and imposed a pay settlement.
Thus the whole status of local education authorities is being eroded both by centralization — to the Secretary of State — and by decentralization to individual schools and colleges.
The local government legislation of the Thatcher administration represents a marked change in Conservative policy.
In 1972 the Heath Government promoted a major Local Government Act designed to strengthen local councils, partly by weeding out the smaller and weaker local units and partly by helping the whole system to become more efficient.
What has produced such a different approach?
One explanation is that the Conservatives have not fared well in local elections.
Many councils are controlled by their political opponents, even in areas where Conservatives hold parliamentary seats with quite large majorities.
It must be irritating for ministers, used to almost unbridled power at Westminster, to be faced by hostile local bodies who can also claim to have a democratic mandate.
Further, many Conservative councillors, who see great value in what they are doing, are unhappy about party policy towards local government.
The functions of local authorities, and indeed the legislation on which they are based, all imply support for the principles of the welfare state and the preservation of the environment.
Ministers who are keen advocates of a free market economy may be unsympathetic to such ideas.
Regionalism and devolution
The growing weakness of local government in terms of making decisions has been more than counterbalanced by the increasing weight of government departments and the influence of civil servants.
Yet this trend has also stimulated resistance.
There have been complaints that central departments are inefficient because they are overburdened; the Fulton Committee on the Civil Service urged the ‘hiving-off’ of units dealing with routine administration which were little concerned with major policy issues.
The development of semi-independent quangos was noted at the start of this chapter.
In the 1960s it was also argued that government departments dealing with domestic questions should be decentralized so that civil servants who had a powerful voice in matters of economic planning could be kept in touch with regional and local interests.
In 1966 regional planning was applied to the whole of England which was divided into eight regions for this purpose.
Each had a board of civil servants to bring together local representatives of central departments related to economic development.
Each region was also given a Planning Council nominated from prominent local figures.
The task of these boards and councils was to draw together the planning and administration of the area, to produce comprehensive studies setting out regional priorities and to link the efforts of central government and local authorities.
It cannot be claimed that this machinery was very successful and the Thatcher Government rapidly did away with it.
The Conservative view was that economic development should not be fashioned by the state but should rise from the natural operation of a free market economy.
Scotland and Wales enjoy separate administrative systems operated by their own government departments which are headed by ministers with seats in the Cabinet.
The Scottish arrangements were well established by the end of the nineteenth century; in Wales the pattern has evolved since the 1950s.
The Scottish Office, often known from the name of its Edinburgh offices as St Andrew's House, deals with local government services, including education, housing, social services and roads, economic development, agriculture and fisheries, health and Home Office functions including police and probation.
The Scottish Office does not cover functions which are felt to require uniform standards throughout the country, e.g. social security.
The Welsh Office is similar although it has fewer devolved powers.
These regional ministries operate as a normal part of the Whitehall machine except that they are located in Scotland and Wales, and they have the normal right to membership of any Cabinet committees dealing with matters for which they take responsibility in their areas.
Although one object of having such ministries is that they can deal with problems in a manner specially suited to conditions in Scotland and Wales, the fact that the ministers belong to the UK Cabinet and are responsible to the UK Parliament means that there is considerable pressure for uniformity.
In the case of Northern Ireland, the pressure for uniformity came from the majority of the electorate who want to be as well treated as British citizens are in England or Scotland.
In Scotland and Wales there is the same pressure for equal treatment but it comes in the first instance from MPs who will pounce on any discrepancies and ask why England (or Scotland and Wales) is receiving special treatment.
As a result, it is an established convention that the Scottish and Welsh Offices consult their Whitehall opposite numbers (and vice versa) before proposing any action which could be the thin end of an undesirable wedge for the other ministry.
In financial arrangements, neither of these offices approaches the Treasury with a request for a single budget for all their functions.
They allow the English ministries to make a case for an overall allocation for housing, health, roads and so on, the Scottish (and, where relevant, the Welsh) departments putting in a — bid for a share of these functional budgets based on the special needs of Scottish or Welsh housing, roads or water resources.
The reason for accepting this approach rather than asking for a ‘block allocation’ is simply the conviction that the summation of functional budgets produces a larger and more defensible total.
In England it has often been disputed whether there is any regional feeling and obviously there is nothing of the quasi-nationalism evident in Scotland and Wales.
There may be some sense of cohesion in the North-East, Yorkshire, Lancashire, or the South-West, but even if this sentiment is totally lacking in the rest of England, it can be argued that these areas would be better administered by a series of regional ministries.
However, most national politicians and local councillors share the civil service preference for the functional and centralized system based on Whitehall.
In Scotland and Wales public pressure developed for more independence than could be gained from decentralized administration.
The most extreme nationalists wanted complete  separation from England.
Before 1966 these claims were not widely supported and carried little political weight.
Then in July 1966 the Welsh Nationalists won a by-election at Carmarthen and in November 1967 the Scottish National Party overturned a 16,000 Labour majority to win a by-election at Hamilton.
These results were backed by solid gains at local elections and it became clear that the Nationalists had made substantial inroads into the Labour vote, at any rate between general elections.
Until this point, the structure of government outside Whitehall had been merely a matter which worried civil servants who wished to see their departmental policies executed more rapidly and efficiently, though some Liberals, some academics and sections of the ‘quality press’ had shown a passing interest in the subject.
For most of those in political life, the existing pattern of local government (through which numbers of politicians, particularly in the Labour Party, had graduated) was quite satisfactory and there seemed to be little point in tinkering with it.
Most politicians, in any case, are not interested in the machinery of government; their absorption is with the end product, the pensions, houses, levels of income and foreign policies that come out of the machine.
Added to this, MPs and ministers have in a special degree the conviction that central government knows best and that any devolution from London must mean giving powers to authorities that are poorer, weaker, slower, perhaps corrupt, perhaps more reactionary (for Labour members) or perhaps more reckless with public funds (for Conservative members).
But the advent of the Nationalists, though hard to analyse, did suggest that there were votes to be won or lost, at least in Scotland and Wales, on the public's sense of remoteness from decision-taking or its lack of knowledge of the existing degree of devolution to the Scottish and Welsh Offices and on the general confusion as to which body was responsible for what.
Both major parties were seriously worried by the situation.
The Labour Party saw its strongholds in Scotland and Wales endangered and some of the — younger members elected in 1964 and 1966, who had been interested in devolution and governmental reform long before the nationalist challenge arose, saw this as their chance to press for a degree of devolution to an elected all-Welsh or all-Scottish council.
But the older MPs from these areas saw these efforts as merely concessions to the Nationalists.
On the Labour side, these members were the products of the 1930s when the main issue in politics was insufficiency.
For them, the task was to win power at the centre and  then to distribute wealth more fairly.
Talk of regional governmental or elected assemblies seemed pointless eyewash, a sign of weakness in the face of the nationalist challenge; a policy designed to lead either to a call for total independence for Scotland and Wales or to a permanent loss of authority by Whitehall and therefore a diminution in the competence of Scottish and Welsh MPs.
The Conservatives likewise were aroused by the prospect of a weakening of Labour's hold on Scotland and Wales, as the Conservatives had had a constant majority at every post-1945 general election in England; it was the Celtic fringe that tilted the balance in favour of Labour.
Also some Conservatives were genuinely interested in decentralization.
In August 1968, the Conservatives established a Scottish Constitutional Committee, which behaved like a royal commission, under Sir Alec Douglas-Home.
It reported in early 1970 recommending a Scottish elected Assembly of some 125 members which would take all but the last or Third Reading stage of Scottish bills and would debate the Scottish estimates and general topics.
The flaw in this idea was that the Assembly was to have no executive powers and no powers to make or unmake ministers.
It would be expected to advise the Secretary of State for Scotland who would still be in the UK Cabinet and responsible to the UK House of Commons, a situation which would be intolerable to its members, resented by Scots MPs and bound to lead to conflict.
Inside the Labour Party, the conflict as to how to react was acute, those opposed to any concessions finally triumphing with the well-known formula of putting the matter to a royal commission which could not report till after the forthcoming general election.
This was the Commission on the Constitution asked to look at ‘the present functions of the central legislature and government in relation to the several countries, nations and regions of the United kingdom’.
When the Nationalists won only one seat at the general election of 1970, the tension went out of the argument.
But the Kilbrandon Commission reported in 1973, a majority of its members recommending legislative devolution for Scotland and Wales.
The issue suddenly came alive again with the Scottish National Party (SNP) winning seven seats and the Welsh Nationalists three in February 1974.
The Labour Party promptly changed its position and in October 1974 (when the SNP won eleven seats with 30 per cent of the Scottish vote) promised to bring in legislative devolution setting up a Scottish Assembly with most of the functions of the  secretary of state in the hands of a separate Scottish executive responsible to that Assembly.
The Welsh were offered a scheme of executive devolution only.
The 1974 Labour Government produced a White Paper in late 1975 entitled Our Changing Democracy outlining its proposals for devolution.
A devolution bill in the parliamentary session 1976–7 failed because of backbench Labour objections: the government was unable to carry the guillotine motion to curb debate which was essential if the bill was to reach the Statute Book.
In the following session separate bills for Scotland and Wales were issued.
A guillotine motion was carried and, after amendment, the bills were accepted.
Labour objectors did not change their minds but they feared that the loss of the bills could undermine the future existence of the Government which was depending on Liberals and Welsh and Scottish Nationalists for its survival.
Further, some opponents hoped that, even if the bills passed through Parliament, they would still be lost at the subsequent referenda.
This wish was ultimately fulfilled.
In other parts of the world there have been cases where it was desired to combine a system of local independent governments with a unifying central administration which would provide strength especially for foreign affairs and defence.
The solution has been a federal system.
Leading examples of this form of government can be seen in the United States, Canada, Australia and West Germany.
Why not adopt this arrangement for the United kingdom to meet the claims of Scottish and Welsh Nationalists?
The simple answer is that there is no evidence that the inhabitants of the United kingdom want a federal system.
Only in Scotland is there significant support for federalism and even there it is far from the majority view.
So the Devolution Bills proposed something less than federalism.
In Scotland the Assembly would have had limited powers to pass legislation on domestic affairs while in Wales the Assembly would have been restricted to the approval of Statutory Instruments.
The Assemblies had no taxing powers or independent source of revenue.
Their funds would come from a grant by the National Exchequer — an obvious source for constant friction.
The bills contained complex provisions to control the extent of the devolved powers.
The remainder of this paragraph relates to Scotland where devolution was to be greater.
Local government was devolved, but not the police.
Transport was to be devolved, but not the railways; how could an overall plan for transport be administered?
Education was included, but not universities.
Nor was agriculture, so what would happen to agricultural education?
Functions of the Scottish Development Agency were to be split; those relating to the environment were devolved, but not those relating to industrial investment because Whitehall was determined to keep command over questions of economic management.
Clearly, there would have been conflict and confusion over what had and had not been devolved.
If the Secretary of State for Scotland felt that the Scottish Assembly had exceeded its powers, he could refer any Scottish act or order to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council for a ruling on its legality.
In addition, the Secretary of State could override or veto any decision of the Scottish Assembly if it affected a matter reserved to the Westminster Parliament in a way which the Secretary of State felt was contrary to the public interest.
A veto or this kind would, of course, be subject to challenge and approval at Westminster.
It is also likely that a veto would produce severe strains in the relationship between Edinburgh and London.
Devolution would also create serious problems within the Westminster Parliament.
Under the terms of the Scotland Bill, MPs representing England, Wales and Ulster would have no rights over matters devolved to Scotland.
Yet MPs representing Scottish constituencies would be entitled to vote on all matters affecting other parts of the United kingdom.
This anomaly became known as the West Lothian question as it was continuously raised by Tam Dalyell, the Labour Member for West Lothian and a firm opponent of devolution.
To attempt to meet this situation the Commons passed an amendment by a majority of one and against the wish of the Labour Government.
The amendment, originally moved by Lord Ferrers in the House of Lords, required that if any Commons vote on a matter devolved to Scotland was passed by the votes of Scottish MPs, then a second vote on the matter would have to be taken two weeks after the first.
In the interval there would be pressure on Scottish MPs to abstain at the second vote on the ground that their constituents were not affected.
Of course, the wider implication is that a Cabinet might lose its majority if Scottish MPs do not vote.
Since Labour normally holds a large number of Scottish seats, a Labour Government with a small majority could find its authority undermined in moral terms if not in actual fact.
The anomaly highlighted by the West Lothian question is further aggravated by the existing distribution of seats in the House of  Commons.
On the basis of size of population, both Scotland and Wales were already overrepresented at Westminster.
Scotland has seventy-two MPs;pro rata with England it should have but fifty-eight.
The parallel figures for Wales are thirty-eight and thirty-two.
Of course, this problem could be eased by reducing the number of constituencies in Scotland and Wales, but since Labour has overwhelming strength in Wales and majority support in Scotland, the idea of cutting down their representatives in the Commons did not appeal to a Labour Government.
The plain fact is that any move to split up the political system of the United kingdom would increase the chance of having Conservative Government in England.
No doubt that was one reason for the deep-rooted Labour hostility to devolution, and there were other reasons.
It was feared that devolution would produce economic advantages for Scotland.
The North of England thinks it is in competition with Scotland for industrial investment.
If Scotland gains favours from the government, then the North fears the loss of opportunity and so Labour MPs from Northern constituencies were uneasy.
A further cause of tension is that devolution does not fit the concept of democratic centralism favoured by many Left-wing MPs.
This theory is that socialists should seek to capture power by winning control of a central legislature and use this position to impose their plans and policy on the whole community.
Any divisions in a political system, in the form of federalism, devolution or strong, independent local authorities, make it more difficult, perhaps impossible, for the central legislature to impose a socialist programme.
So Left-wing Labour MPs were aware that devolution could make yet more obstacles to the achievement of their long-term aims.
A quite contrary type of criticism of the Devolution Bill came from those who felt it did not go far enough: the existing degree of administrative devolution in Scotland required a genuine, federal assembly even with taxing powers.
Others claimed that the constitutional complexities of the bill could make it unworkable.
The original author of this book commented in the House of Commons, ‘Seldom have I seen the House or the Government in quite such a mess…as we are in over this Bill…this House does not contain a majority for this Bill.
As a person who has supported devolution for 20 years, I would rather see the House have the courage of its convictions and reject the Bill.
It should be  thrown out and the electorate should make their views known at a general election so that the Government can come back with a better Bill at a later stage.’
But the bill was passed.
John Mackintosh then argued strongly, right up to his death, for a ‘Yes’ vote in the referendum on the grounds that only a Scottish Assembly, however imperfect, could sort out the anomalies with Westminster.
The resistance to devolution was so strong that the government was forced to accept that the bills should be ratified by referenda.
Later the government agreed that orders should be brought before Parliament to annul the legislation if less than 40 per cent of the electorate in Scotland and Wales supported the proposals for their respective countries.
In Scotland 32.5 per cent voted ‘Yes’ while 30.4 per cent voted ‘No’.
Thus the vote, while in favour, was far short of the 40 per cent target required by Parliament.
In Wales the support for devolution amounted to a derisory 11.8 per cent.
So the legislation died.
At the 1979 election the Scottish Nationalists lost all but two of their seats in the Commons.
For a short while the devolution issue seemed to be dead.
Then in 1987 the Labour manifesto pledged that a Labour Government would ‘establish a democratically-elected Scottish Assembly in Edinburgh.
This will have a wide range of powers over health, education and housing and over significant aspects of industrial and economic policy’.
The 1987 election saw a considerable advance in Labour popularity in Scotland; its share of the 72 parliamentary seats rose from 41 to 50.
As the Alliance and the Scottish Nationalist Party both support devolution, it follows that over three-quarters of Scottish voters supported candidates who advocated a Scottish Assembly.
But, for Labour, the awkward fact remains that should devolution re-appear on the political agenda, then the ‘West Lothian’ question must re-emerge.
If MPs from south of the Border are to have no influence over certain matters in Scotland, why should Scottish MPs vote on parallel issues affecting England and Wales?
Yet Labour cannot hope to control any debate at Westminster from which Scottish MPs are excluded, even if it should win a majority at a future election.
To return to England, the proposals for devolution to Scotland and Wales inevitably raised the question — why should England be left out?
If decentralization produced benefits, why deny them to the majority of the population of Britain?
Faced with this challenge, the Labour Government issued a consultative document in 1976,Devolution: the English Dimension , which outlined arguments for and against the establishment of elected regional authorities in England.
Such bodies could ease the burden on central government and so help it to concentrate on matters of national importance.
They could take over the duties of nominated bodies, for example those for hospitals and water, and so make these services subject to democratic accountability and, in general, it is argued that they would strengthen popular interest and involvement in public affairs.
On the other hand, elected regional bodies should not be able to damage the power of ministers to sustain their policies.
There would be problems about fixing the boundaries of regional authorities and providing them with finance — a regional rate would scarcely be popular.
Finally, there is no enthusiasm at all in local government circles for elected regional assemblies because it is feared that the regions would ultimately take over existing local government functions.
The Consultation Paper failed to provoke any public excitement for the idea of regional government beyond the Liberal Party and a few academic writers.
Local government reform had raised expectations followed quickly by disillusion.
The public mood seemed to be that more organizations mean more bureaucracy, complexity and expense.
So with neither national nor local government in favour, the prospect for elected regional councils in England is bleak.
Northern Ireland
Northern Ireland poses quite unique problems.
There is general agreement about the principle of allowing some measure of independence to the province.
The problem is the enmity between Protestants and Catholics and the prospect for the Catholic minority of permanent subordination to the Protestant majority since the political parties are almost entirely based on religious affiliation.
Thus most Ulster Catholics want Ulster to be merged with Eire in a united Ireland; Ulster Protestants vigorously oppose such a policy and stress their loyalty to the British Crown.
Extremists on both sides resort to violence.
The consequence is an apparently endless flow of death, injury and destruction of property.
The original devolution arrangements for Ulster were set out in  the Government of Ireland Act 1920, supported by several conventional arrangements.
A bicameral parliament at Stormont near Belfast was given control of domestic policy on matters that did not affect other parts of the United kingdom.
The financial arrangements were that the Northern Ireland government received 2.5 per cent of whatever was raised by UK taxation and could raise a very limited amount in taxation on its own account.
Out of this it was agreed that services (unemployment relief, pensions, education, etc.) were provided at a similar level to those in Britain and if there was any money left, an ‘imperial contribution’ was paid towards the cost of common services such as the armed forces and the cost of conducting foreign policy.
In return for the element of subsidy in this system, the Treasury was consulted about any expenditure which was abnormal by British standards.
Thus Northern Ireland enjoyed the same standard of services and endured no greater taxation than the rest of the UK.
In most fields, the Stormont government aimed to follow British practice in so far as this benefited its citizens but to act separately when special local conditions required separate treatment.
Normally London left Stormont to get on with these policies, only intervening in 1969 at the time of the civil rights movement when there was a clear danger of a collapse of law and order due to disputes between Catholics and Protestants over local government, over the allocation of houses and of jobs and over the conduct of the Royal Ulster Constabulary and of the armed ‘B’ special reserves.
From 1969, the British government pressed certain reforms on the Stormont government, while the British army was deployed in Northern Ireland to try to separate inflamed areas and to preserve law and order.
As the situation deteriorated, it was felt that some further evidence of the British government's determination not to allow the majority to lean on the minority was needed.
In March 1972, the Stormont parliament and executive were abolished and direct rule was applied.
After much discussion but no evident diminution in the communal struggle, the British government brought out a White Paper in March 1973 proposing a return to a modified Stormont system.
The modifications were statutory proportional representation with ‘power sharing’ in the Cabinet and in the committees of the assembly, similar to those of Stormont except that control of security and law and order remained with the UK government.
Elections were held in June 1973 but the assembly was first paralysed by the Protestant-led ‘workers’ strike' and then  prorogued by Parliament.
A constitutional convention was elected in May 1975 to try to agree on a new form of government but it too ended in failure, leaving the province under direct rule from Whitehall, through the Northern Ireland Office and the continued presence of the army.
Later attempts to solve the political deadlock have failed.
The British government, whether Conservative or Labour, wants a solution that provides some safeguard for the Roman Catholic minority.
Protestant politicians resist such restraints as impediments to democracy, defined as the will of the majority.
The path least likely to cause trouble appears to be the continuation of direct rule from Westminster.
However, this policy is unpopular with British ministers and civil servants, with Ulster Catholics and many Ulster Protestants.
Reasons for this dislike are varied.
Official circles in London would dearly like to be rid of Irish problems.
The Catholic community objects to any part of Ireland being ruled from London.
Most Protestants want to return to the days of Stormont when they could control the internal policies in Northern Ireland.
In 1982 a fresh attempt was made to find a political solution by the establishment of a new assembly for the province.
At first its role was to be consultative.
The hope was that the assembly would come to be accepted by both religious groups; unanimity was not possible but the objective was to achieve a fairly broad consensus.
The assembly could ask the Westminster Parliament for powers to be transferred to it provided that such requests were supported by 70 per cent of the assembly.
However, the Catholic parties refused to take the seats they won in the assembly elections.
Sinn Fein, the political wing of the IRA, did not co-operate because to do so would be to recognize the partition of Ireland.
The Catholic Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP) did not co-operate because the assembly failed to offer them the opportunity of power-sharing which they gained in 1973.
The assembly was dissolved in 1986 because the remaining Protestant members had turned it into a forum for opposing the Anglo-Irish Agreement signed in November 1985.
This agreement between the governments in London and Dublin was an attempt to promote co-operation between them and to try to find a joint approach to at least some of the problems of Northern Ireland.
The agreement was carefully worded to give some satisfaction to both parties.
It recognized that any change in the status of the area would require the consent of a majority  of the population.
Acceptance by Dublin of this principle was pleasing to London.
But the agreement also established an inter-governmental conference to discuss on a regular basis political, security and legal matters and also cross-border security.
So Dublin was given a voice, but no responsibility, in the affairs of Northern Ireland, an arrangement that was expected to be well received by the Catholic community.
However, there was less to satisfy the Protestants.
Their leaders immediately launched a campaign against the agreement which they felt gave the adherents of the Pope a foothold in the government of their territory.
Early in 1986 all the Protestant MPs at Westminster resigned en masse to force a mini general election which demonstrated the strength of Unionist opinion.
Then, as noted above, the assembly was used to protest against the agreement.
In February 1987 a mass petition was presented to the Queen asking that a referendum be held in Northern Ireland to determine whether the agreement should continue.
Not surprisingly, the petition had no effect.
Thus the position remains unsatisfactory with occasional violence and the continuation of government from London.
Northern Ireland's representation in the Commons has been increased from twelve to seventeen, so it is now represented pro rata with the rest of the United kingdom.
This move weakens the case for a separate legislature at Stormont.
Democratic processes are difficult to operate in Northern Ireland for two basic yet related reasons.
Political consent cannot be obtained in a community where a large minority deny the legitimacy of the state.
Nor can democracy be expected to work smoothly in a society with rigid divisions, producing a permanent majority and a permanent minority.
In a democratic system political parties expect to alternate in office.
The minorities of today are kept happy by the prospect of a brighter tomorrow: the present majority is restrained from abusing power by the thought that it will be defeated at some subsequent election.
These restraints do not apply in Northern Ireland.
At present, it is hard to see a way forward.
THE DIRECTION OF CHANGE: THE ATTITUDES OF THE PARTIES
Away from the Westminster model towards what?
At the end of Chapter 3 it was pointed out that the 1960s had seen a series of reform proposals in British government and that by 1980 most of these had been carried out in some form though the question of devolution had still to be settled.
But these reforms failed to coalesce into a coherent system because there was no prevailing political doctrine which could provide answers to such questions as, how much power or influence should the House of Commons exercise or how far is it — desirable to have some democratic control over local and regional administration?
The doctrine that is usually referred to in the opening pages of these royal commission or ministerial committee reports is a watered-down version of the late nineteenth-century belief in democracy which inspired the system described as the Westminster model.
Genuflections are still made towards these old gods.
Thus every time a nominated board is established to perform some administrative function, it is felt that some sort of democratic check is necessary and as elections cannot be run for each ad hoc board, another nominated body is created called an ‘advisory council’, the idea being that this acts in lieu of democratic control.
In fact, these advisory councils neither have the strength conferred by expert knowledge, nor the experience of full-time work in the field, nor the responsibility conferred by direct election, but they cover up for the assumed need for some outside, popular supervision of these administrative agencies.
At the same time, this adherence to the remnants of old political beliefs can add to the complication of government.
For example, in the interests of efficiency, there should be amalgamations of the many regional and local authorities responsible for planning, development and the major environmental services.
One solution, to do all this from Whitehall, which is allegedly under the scrutiny of the House of Commons, is impossible because of the extent and variety of the work.
To hand  the work over to elected local authorities covering an extensive area would be to set up bodies with a genuine degree of independence and power, and this is suspect.
The result is the present multiplicity of bodies producing confusion both at the administrative level and on the part of the electorate, who are left wondering where and by whom decisions are actually taken.
The same problems inhibit reform of the Commons.
If it were possible to be clear about what power or general role the House should have, the relations between MPs and the executive could be adjusted accordingly.
At present the fiction that each MP acts on his own judgement and takes a discriminating part in legislation is preserved by insisting that members must be present and pass through the lobbies night after night, though in fact such activity makes no material difference, but seriously impedes MPs in their task of keeping up to date with their special interests and with their constituency work.
It would be perfectly possible to recast the system of democratic supervision so as to restore a considerable part of the power of the Commons and to provide a devolved system of regional and local elected councils, which would mean that every important administrative body was subject to checks and examination at one or other of the three levels — national, regional or local.
At the same time, the doctrine of ministerial responsibility could be limited, the degree of independent influence already existing in the civil service openly recognized, the Fulton reforms on management implemented and the Commons given powers of direct scrutiny of these subsections of the public service.
The reason all this has not happened has not been because of technical problems but because there is no clear view of how government should a organized or controlled.
The public are not very interested in such issues.
They are used to politicians listening with some care to their demands, and the evidence of this attention and the obvious impact of general elections is usually sufficient to make them feel that the old maxims of the Westminster model still have some meaning.
If the present drift in ideas and in practice was recognized and accepted, the British political system could openly be established on a popular plebiscitary basis, with a quinquennial election to put one party or the other in power checked only by ‘advisory committees’ at certain levels — the Commons in the centre and similar nominated or elected bodies at suitable subordinate points in the administration.
But though the machinery of government is developing in this direction, there is insufficient willingness to face  the facts, to give up some of the pretences left over from the old period of vigorous, participatory democracy in order to remove the anomalies and rationalize the system.
The political parties and the community
If some clarity of purpose and coherence of action is to take the place of this drift, the ideas and energy ought to come from the political parties because, in theory, they are supposed to provide the driving force in political development.
Yet the parties are rooted in the community.
The old view of the party organizations dating from Ostrogorski's great work,Democracy and the Organisation of Political Parties (translated by F. Clarke in 1902), was that these bodies had a life of their own.
They were organizations which could operate on the one hand on the electorate and on the other on the MPs, thus directly influencing policy.
In fact, this is to elevate a small group of officials or ‘caucus’, as Ostrogorski called them, into a prominence they do not deserve.
In Britain, the party machines are relatively weak and only hold meetings, choose candidates, run election campaigns and hold conferences.
But the parties are also deeply influenced by the two ends of their operations, the one end being in the constituencies and the other in the Cabinet or Shadow Cabinet.
The greatest opportunity for the local party organization to exercise freedom is in the choice of a parliamentary candidate.
For Conservatives this is normally a once-and-for-all choice as it is unusual for a sitting MP to be denied renomination: Labour MPs are now subject to re-selection.
In making the choice, the selection conference in the case of the Labour Party, and the constituency executive in the case of the Conservative Party, are not easily moved by pressure from outside and even the leaders of the parties have found it hard to get close friends and political associates nominated.
Senior party figures (such as Creech Jones on the Labour side after 1951 or Christopher Soames on the Conservative side after 1966) have found it almost impossible to be selected.
Thus this is one important way in which the parties must reflect the opinion of the more active local members, a necessity which keeps the parties tied fairly closely to their local connections.
At the other end, the parties are tied to promulgating the views of the parliamentary leadership.
In the Conservative Party, the organization is directly under the control of the leader while in the Labour Party, the organization serves the National Executive  which is elected by the annual conference.
In practice, being elected to the National Executive does give its members a degree of power and position.
Some are elected because of their independent standing in the party and because of specific positions they have adopted on certain issues.
A combination of the loyalty of trade union members, of the distribution of ministerial posts among MPs on the executive and of personal persuasion by the Prime Minister and senior colleagues helps to keep the Executive and the party leadership together, though there can be tension and even open conflict as occurred in 1976 — 82.
These two ends of the parties, in the constituencies and in the Cabinet, are brought together at regional and national conferences where the activists meet and exchange views with their leaders in the company of their MPs.
On such occasions, there is a process of mutual education and stimulation which can at times descend to mere manipulation of the delegates by the leadership and can also rise to a high level of discourse about the basic problems confronting the nation.
The activists are usually to the Left, in the case of the Labour Party, and to the Right, in the case of the Conservatives, of their parliamentary leaders.
But there is a recognition by both activists and leaders that the party's task is to win an election and this means carrying the less opinionated sectors of the electorate with them.
On the other hand, the leadership appreciates that it cannot indefinitely trample upon the deeper convictions of the solid party supporters.
Rooted in this way in the community, the parties are not organizations apart from British society which can, as it were, operate on society from outside.
The parties are collections of those most actively concerned with the political aspects of government and, by long association, these groups of activists develop their own slogans, atmosphere.
myths and methods.
While Professor R. T. McKenzie was right to argue that the common purpose of winning elections and of maintaining a government in power imposes or produces an almost identical power structure in the parties, it is wrong to infer from this that the atmosphere within the parties is the same.
A visit to the annual conferences of the two major parties should convince any observer of the deep contrasts, and this is as evident in the case of the minority parties such as the Liberals and Social Democrats, and the Scottish and Welsh Nationalists.
In the past it has been common wisdom that a major party will not suggest extreme policies, for to do so is to invite electoral defeat.
The winning side is that which holds the centre ground of politics.
Often it has seemed that there was not too much difference between the major parties.
Today the situation may be changing.
After the 1979 Conservative victory, it is less clear that a party will suffer if it advocates policies which are a clear break with the past.
Many people may not vote on the basis of a judgement of the party manifestos.
They may not know what is in these documents; even those who do may not understand the implications of the proposals.
Instead, it seems likely that voters choose on the basis of their experience, particularly of recent events.
So the crucial question is not whether party programme A is preferred to party programme B; the issue is whether we want to keep the same government for the next five years or whether we want a different one.
Is the devil we know better than the devil we don't know?
If the government's record has been unsatisfactory, then some voters may not examine too closely the nature of the alternative devil.
Should voters behave in this fashion, the contents of the Opposition's election manifesto become less significant in deciding the result.
Occupation of the centre ground may not be essential for success.
The major political parties may move further apart.
In the following sections it is shown how the parties have developed their ideas and attitudes.
The Labour Party
Looking first at the Labour Party, its doctrine or beliefs are now by no means as clear cut as when the party constitution was adopted in 1918.
Clause four declared that the objective of the party was ‘to secure for the producers by hand or by brain the full fruits of their industry, and the most equitable distribution thereof that may be possible, upon the basis of the common ownership of the means of production and the best obtainable system of popular administration and control of each industry and service’.
Underlying this was a mixture of beliefs and of desires to remedy particular situations.
British society was condemned by the early Labour leaders as being selfish and cruel.
There was too much poverty, and hardship fell on those with the fewest reserves and resources.
The accepted explanation was that the capitalist system of production was based on selfishness since only some in the community could prosper, as their prosperity had to be at the expense of others.
This was because these capitalists lived in part or in whole out of the profits which should have been shared with all  those who had helped in the process of production.
The solution was to end the capitalist system by turning to public ownership, where community interests could be considered first, where profit would be eliminated and where work and reasonable prosperity could be guaranteed to all.
But there was also a strong democratic element in the doctrine.
The early Labour leaders supported votes for women, home rule not merely for Ireland but for Scotland and Wales, and were deeply concerned about the respect that should be paid to individuals, about the sense of freedom that was lacking in the nineteenth-century employer-employee relationship.
In the 1930s, the emphasis changed.
The misery of the inter-war years in the areas of declining heavy industry left their mark, while the intractable nature of the problem was revealed by the failure of the first two Labour Governments.
As a result, Labour thinking began to lay more stress on state control, on the need to take over at the centre and then to redistribute wealth and plan for the whole country.
This drift of thought was emphasized in the 1940s by the Beveridge Report recommending a comprehensive pattern of welfare organized on a national basis, by the new emphasis on Keynesian planning and by Herbert Morrison's concept of the large national corporation as the best method of organizing nationalized industries.
The populist element in the party's thinking remained, but focused more on the party conference than on the degree of scope to be given to the House of Commons or to local government.
On the whole, the Labour Party took the old radical view that the task of Parliament was to enact the legislation foreshadowed or promised in the party's election manifesto.
A Labour majority in the House of Commons should rally round the executive and protect it against the array of hostile capitalist forces, the Conservative Opposition being merely the front-line troops for the captains of industry, the financiers and the press barons.
These ideas came together and were put into operation by the 1945 — 51 Labour Government.
Some of its politicians were backward-looking in that their major objectives were to remedy inter-war problems.
The older, declining industries were nationalized, the Beveridge plans enacted, a National Health Service started and full employment maintained, the emphasis all being on the results of these policies, on their effects on people's lives.
When Labour returned to opposition after 1951, there was a flare-up inside the party.
The dispute was over a mixture of issues, the Left or Bevanites being somewhat anti-American, opposed to rearmament, opposed to charges being introduced into the health service and, it was assumed, in favour of the traditional public ownership approach of the party.
Later some of the Bevanites, though not Mr Bevan himself, added opposition to nuclear weapons to their list of policies.
When Mr Wilson was elected to the leadership in 1963, these doctrinal disputes were smoothed over and the Labour Party entered office in 1964 committed to a more rapid rate of growth, improved welfare benefits, more expenditure on schools, houses, roads and health and one major measure of public ownership — the renationalization of the steel industry.
Mr Wilson had also said a good deal about modernizing the machinery of government.
He had proposed a more extensive No. 10 staff, a smaller Cabinet and many of the modern techniques of business management in the civil service which were later elaborated in the Fulton Report.
In practice, fine words seemed to produce few practical benefits.
The Labour Government was haunted constantly by economic difficulties, largely caused by an adverse balance of payments.
At the same time, welfare benefits were increased but this did produce complaints about ‘idlers’ and ‘scroungers’, across-the-board welfare payments were becoming increasingly expensive and some Labour Party members began to press for more selective methods of eliminating poverty.
By the early 1970s, it remained true that the Labour Party was identified with the interests of the working classes, with the need for a reduction in class barriers and for the maintenance of the welfare system.
But there was less confidence that rapid growth could be ensured and less assurance that the gaps between the really poor and the better-off workers could be narrowed by the traditional remedies.
There was some evidence that Labour's emphasis on regional development had reduced the contrast between the prosperous Midlands and South-East and the older industrial areas.
But it would be hard to identify a coherent or clear-cut Labour or socialist philosophy in the sense in which such philosophies had existed before 1914.
The democratic element in the party's thinking was mainly a conviction that ‘the people must be right’, but popular views were indicated by the act of choosing every four or five years between the two major parties.
But the party fell into the hands of those who saw it as the spokesman of the organized workers in politics, a view which  combined the Left and Centre.
This was embodied in what was called ‘the social contract’ with the unions.
When Harold Wilson retired in March 1976, the candidate of the radical Right, Mr Roy Jenkins, got only fifty-six votes and soon left British politics for the chairmanship of the European Commission.
The Left-wing of the party continued to fight for the adoption of socialist policies.
Meanwhile the actual direction of the party under Mr Callaghan, aided by Mr Foot, was in the hands of those who believed that its main task was to represent the interests of trade unions.
Even this concept was strained as the wish of the Labour Government to restrain inflation clashed with the unions' desire to return to free collective bargaining.
This conflict led to industrial unrest in the winter of 1978 — 9, the breakdown of the Government's pay policy and the Conservative election victory in 1979.
In opposition, the fratricidal strife within the Labour Party became stronger.
This tendency was predictable.
Whenever Labour has lost office there has always been strong pressure within the party to press for more extreme policies.
The years 1931, 1951 and 1970 each provide evidence of such a movement; notably in the early fifties the Bevanites provided a challenge to the Labour leadership.
But after defeat at the 1979 election, the feuding within the Labour Party was more severe because it was more highly organized.
Various groups within the party were formed to try and achieve particular objectives.
The most important were the Campaign for Labour Party Democracy (CLPD), the Labour Co-ordinating Committee (LCC), Militant and the Rank and File Mobilizing Committee (RFMC), which was an attempt to get the other Left-wing groups to work together.
To try and counteract the influence of the extremists, the moderate wing of the party launched a Labour Solidarity Campaign in 1981.
Thus the Labour Party became a battleground for its own warring factions.
The conflict was regularly reported in the mass media and had a serious effect on public confidence in the party.
The LCC was first established in 1978 to campaign on policy issues, especially withdrawal from the EBC, more nationalization and stronger efforts to reduce unemployment, a package often known as the alternative economic strategy.
The CLPD was founded in 1973 and became influential during the period of the Callaghan Government, urging constitutional changes in the Labour Party in order to make party leaders and MPs more responsive and responsible to opinion within the party.
Support for  these changes grew as many active members became more and more dissatisfied with the performance of the Labour Government between 1974 and 1979.
In their defence the party leadership could argue that they had been hampered by the lack of a parliamentary majority; the choice had been hanging on by the skin of one's teeth or of giving up and holding an election in the face of adverse opinion polls.
But the Left-wing were not satisfied and sought to ensure that the next Labour Government would do what the party wanted.
So the CLPD pressed for three major reforms.
The party leader should not be chosen by MPs alone.
MPs should be subject to a process of re-selection between general elections.
The party policy at an election, the manifesto, should be decided by the National Executive Committee on the basis of resolutions passed at the annual conferences.
On the first two issues the CLPD was successful.
Only the preparation of the manifesto stays unchanged and is a joint responsibility of the National Executive Committee and the Parliamentary Labour Party.
Even here the practice altered, for there was much fuller consultation about the preparation of the 1983 manifesto than had previously been the case.
The process of re-selection of MPs has forced fewer changes than might have been expected: only six were rejected prior to the 1987 election.
However, the tally of six underestimates the total effect because some MPs unsympathetic to Left-wing ideas may have decided to retire a little early rather than face a battle for re-adoption.
Argument over the method of selection of candidates continued.
The 1984 Labour Conference rejected a plan for the choice to be made by individual members of the party in each constituency instead of the decision being made by a meeting of representatives of wards and affiliated organizations.
To adopt ‘one person, one vote’ would be a democratic move but it offends trade unions by weakening their local influence and it undermines the position of Left-wing activists who tend to dominate many local parties.
The idea was subsequently revived by Neil Kinnock after the 1987 election in modified form which allowed local union branches to retain a voice in the selection process.
However, it proved difficult to embody this compromise in a satisfactory constitutional formula.
At the 1987 Labour Conference the issue of candidate selection proved to be a major source of controversy.
The CLPD secured remarkable success by the tactics of lobbying influential trade unionists and local party members and also by  drafting model resolutions carefully designed to promote its aims, which could then be proposed by supporters at a wide variety of meetings.
The Labour Solidarity Campaign also achieved success by discreet lobbying among leading trade unionists; among constituency parties there was little to show for its efforts.
As a result of trade union voting power, the Left-wing lost control of the National Executive Committee and this paved the way for a fresh conflict between the NEC and Militant.
The Militant Tendency is an organization of Labour Party members whose views are far to the Left of traditional Labour doctrines.
Militant believes that basic reforms in society cannot be achieved without victory in the class struggle.
Workers must defeat employers and take over power.
Class consciousness must be encouraged through industrial strife.
Parliament is an inadequate means to secure change; there must be mass protest on the streets.
Violence is not ruled out as a political weapon.
Clearly, these views are incompatible with the Labour Party's acceptance of the parliamentary system.
However, the conflict between the NEC and Militant has not been conducted in terms of an argument over policy but has developed as another constitutional wrangle.
The NEC decided that Militant did not satisfy the criterion that any group within the Labour Party must be open and free to any members.
Militant runs its own newspaper, has a substantial number of full-time employees and its financial basis is mysterious.
Liverpool has been its stronghold.
In 1986 some leading Militant supporters from Liverpool were expelled from the Labour Party after bitter arguments on the NEC.
The other focus of Left-wing activity has been the London area.
Here the problem for the Labour leadership is even more difficult for there is no constitutional issue about building up a separate organization within the party.
The trouble has arisen from the policies of Labour councillors who control some London boroughs.
Their aim is to give aid to groups of people who are held to be disadvantaged for any reason — because of ethnic origin, sex, sexual preference, age, unemployment or any kind of disability.
Some measures taken in this context have been controversial and offered an easy target for criticism in the press.
Unusual expenditure can readily appear extravagant.
The consequent adverse publicity was widely held to be damaging to the Labour cause.
It used to be said that the Labour Party was a ‘broad church’, as  it managed to contain such a wide range of opinion.
Today that is less true, as many of the middle-class, Fabian-style intellectuals have departed.
The Labour Party is largely a trade union party in which unions from the public sector play an increasing role.
There are also many active individual members, deeply dissatisfied with the record of recent Labour Cabinets, who are determined to ensure that any future Labour Government shall carry out socialist policies and be responsive to the views of active party members.
Whether this kind of Labour Party is capable of winning a general election is open to doubt.
Trade union membership has fallen partly due to higher unemployment and partly through changes in economic structure with more self-employed and more small employers.
Further, not all trade unionists support the Labour Party.
The central issue facing the Labour Party is how to regain power.
Apart from defence, its policies are not dissimilar to those of the 1960s when it last had an effective Commons majority.
Yet the pattern of British society in the 1990s will be very different to that of the sixties.
Is Labour still reflecting the ideals of the past rather than organizing a response to the problems of the future?
However, if policies are changed, party stalwarts will complain that traditional principles are being forgotten.
It will be argued that a party should stand by its beliefs: it should not bend with the wind and adopt views that happen to be popular.
Such opinions have commendable moral tone but they are perhaps not a recipe for electoral success.
As a contrast to their own dismal fortunes, Labour supporters may note the remarkable record of the Labour Party in Australia.
No doubt, repeated election victories under the leadership of Mr Hawke owe something to the disunity of Right-wing forces in Australia, but the fresh emphases in Labour thinking are also very significant.
Priorities in economic policy have changed; growth becomes more important than redistribution of wealth, and growth is encouraged by deregulation of the economy rather than by state intervention.
Mr Hawke moved his party from the Left to the Centre.
Will Mr Kinnock and the British Labour Party follow this path?
The Conservative Party
The Conservatives, in contrast, have always been a party more accustomed to government and less interested in theories, but they  have been equally class identified.
Although the party had a strong aristocratic and agricultural interest, by the 1930s it was becoming closely connected with industry.
Conservatives strongly held the Victorian belief that there were large areas of social organization in which it was simply improper for government to meddle.
The government did not have to concern itself with the balance of payments (which was always expected to be favourable or self-adjusting), free trade meant that there was no need for elaborate connections with industry, the level of employment had to be left to the supply and demand for labour, and all that the government should do was elementary regulation in the interests of those sections of the community unable to defend themselves.
With this view, the Conservatives in the inter-war period were for small-scale government and low taxes — the less done by government, the better and cheaper.
At the same time, those public health, welfare and property protection services, which the central or local government did provide, should be efficiently administered.
In the 1930s, this Conservative outlook (rather than philosophy) did not face any very serious challenge from the Labour Party's ideas but events did inflict certain serious blows.
The first was the pressure for independence or at least for a measure of internal self-government in India.
But more serious was the alarm and despondency caused by the 1929–33 slump in which the confidence of British industrialists, already sapped by the doldrums of the 1920s, was seriously shaken.
Some of the beliefs in the limited nature of government activity were abandoned.
The Conservatives turned to protection disguised as imperial preference in 1933, and adopted a series of state measures to aid the reduction and consolidation of the declining heavy industries.
This sense of self-doubt also had some part in convincing Conservative leaders that neither Britain nor western society could survive another trauma of the seriousness of the First World War and thus, for the only time in history, the party abandoned its usual reliance on strong defences and the balance of power in Europe, adopting a policy towards Nazi Germany known as appeasement.
Although Conservative morale rallied under the pressures of the Second World War and first accepted and later was thrilled by the leadership of Winston Churchill, some of the other aspects of the war constituted a serious challenge to Conservative ideas.
Wartime experience seemed to show that the government could control industry, produce full employment and higher output and  then share the available produce more fairly.
Also the movement of people involved in wartime adjustments, the identification of the Conservatives with appeasement and the ‘fair shares’ aspect of rationing all helped to undermine laissez-faire doctrines.
As a result, the Conservatives found themselves badly defeated in 1945.
In response to the early activities and enthusiasm of the Attlee Government, the Conservatives mounted little challenge.
Their older emotional attachments suffered with the decision to grant independence to India, Burma and Ceylon, but the new post-war MPs who came into the party (particularly at the 1950 election) were more exclusively concerned with domestic policy.
In part, they developed the traditional Conservative view that government was inherently inefficient and undesirable, particularly fastening on the record of the nationalized industries.
They were also protagonists of greater parliamentary supervision of the nationalized industries and supported the creation of the select committee on these industries against Labour resistance in the mid 1950s.
But the Conservatives are also by tradition believers in a strong executive.
They have felt this was necessary to conduct proper policy and, while in power, they trusted their own leaders.
For most Conservatives, there was no need for elaborate control systems built into Parliament.
Normally, having chosen a leader, they were prepared to leave everything to him.
If there was trouble and they became unhappy, a direct visit to the leader or the chief whip would usually suffice.
As for the civil service, it had to be cut down to the lowest level necessary.
Thus the Conservatives wanted a smaller, efficient and cheap executive but were then ready for a strong executive.
And each time there was a surge forward in governmental activity, for instance during the war or under the post-war Labour Government, they were prepared to extend their view of what was necessary to cover some if not all the machinery which had been established.
But new problems appeared which required a more positive approach on the part of the government, and this threw the the problem of regional discrepancies in the different levels of wages, unemployment and emigration north and south of a line drawn across England at about York.
Gradually this forced the Conservatives into ideas of planning and influencing the location of industry, special plans being brought out for Scotland and for the North-East of England.
Then the effort to locate industry in new  areas and to build new towns showed up the weakness of local government as an executive agency and the first talk of reform began in Whitehall.
In the early 1960s, it became fashionable to criticize British institutions and to say that this country was lagging behind its European competitors in many aspects of modern life from trade union structure to central heating, from the capacity to sell and provide after-sales service abroad to playing football.
Devising and enacting appropriate remedies fitted more easily into the Labour Party's outlook than into that of the Conservatives and they produced few very positive ideas for reform or change.
After Labour won the general election of 1964 and 1966, the Conservatives were on the defensive, until the consequences following on the deflation of July 1966 began to make the Labour Government unpopular.
But, unlike the last years of the Attlee Government, the Conservatives developed no critique of the form or extent of government.
Rather, they called for tax reductions, firmer enforcement of law and order and legislation to reduce the number of unofficial strikes.
Thus, Conservative views had changed very little since the 1950s.
There was a willingness to accept most of the new social and economic measures but to administer them as tightly as possible and to cut the cost of government.
Within this framework, the Conservatives wanted to retain a strong executive and to strengthen similarly the hands of private authorities, particularly the employer in dealing with the unions.
Mr Heath's Government was chiefly preoccupied with his attempt to restore the economy after Labour mismanagement.
Time was spent undoing Labour measures on price and income controls but the main effort was put into a new Industrial Relations Act, a new Housing Finance Act, into tax cutting and the reduction of public expenditure on industry and alleged welfare extravagances.
Unfortunately, the hoped-for investment boom did not materialize.
Unemployment rose to a million and inflation got worse, so the government had to reverse many of its policies.
It came to the rescue of Rolls-Royce and of Upper Clyde Shipbuilders and negotiated an incomes policy with the unions.
It enlarged the money supply in order to reduce unemployment.
The latter part of the Heath Government was taken up with the enforcement of its incomes policies and when the miners, having defeated the government in 1972, challenged again in late 1973, the government resisted while trying to find a formula for concession.
In the end the miners called a strike and the government called an election.
Unfortunately again for the Conservatives, the stern measures taken by the government added to its unpopularity, not to that of the miners and, after a series of mistakes or misfortunes in the campaign, the Conservatives just lost.
Many Conservatives were dismayed by the ‘U-turn’ in the policies of the Heath Government and this feeling led to the election of Mrs Thatcher as party leader in 1975.
But in taking measures to try to limit unemployment Mr Heath and his colleagues were following a well-established stream in Conservative thought that government should aim to promote the well-being of those in need and also try and heal differences between sections of society.
This approach is sometimes known as the ‘One Nation’ philosophy, supported by Disraeli, Butler and Macmillan.
Mrs Thatcher represents a different school of thought.
She stresses the importance of individual responsibility, freedom and choice.
The role of the state must be limited.
It must be strong enough to provide those services needed for the security of society; powerful and efficient armed forces and police are essential.
But in economic affairs state intervention can easily do more harm than good.
Where the state does take initiatives, it should do so by involving private enterprise, e.g. with the inner cities or the Channel tunnel.
There is also a belief that as far as possible people should be made to pay for services provided by the state, partly to reduce public expenditure and taxation, and partly because it is believed that charges will increase public pressure for services to be provided efficiently.
Since 1979 there has been fresh emphasis on the need to roll back the frontiers of the state.
The government view has been that the way towards prosperity is for the state to do less and so leave room for the private sector to expand.
Privatization of public corporations has become a major feature of Conservative policy.
There is certainly a sharp break in style between Mrs Thatcher and her Conservative predecessors.
She has little interest in achieving consensus.
Problems and opponents must be confronted.
There is little point in consulting people because they may not agree with you.
At the 1987 election Mrs Thatcher stressed that she favoured radical policies: a Conservative leader proclaiming the case for radical solutions is somewhat unusual.
Not all influential Conservatives, including some of Mrs Thatcher's former ministers, are happy about these attitudes.
They would like their party to do more to command the centre ground  of political opinion, do more to reduce unemployment and, in general, to cultivate a stronger caring image.
A further cause for unease is that adherence to a free market philosophy combined with reduced taxation has increased economic inequality.
The rich have become richer while, at the other end of the social scale, a growing number of people depend upon state benefits.
Sometimes this divide is expressed in geographical terms by reference to the widening gap between North and South.
Northern areas are depressed by the decline of old-style manufacturing industry while the South prospers by providing commercial and financial services as well as being the base for new ‘high tech’ industry.
More thoughtful Conservatives are aware that a movement towards greater inequality cannot continue indefinitely in a democratic society.
No doubt conditions today are far more egalitarian than they were in the nineteenth century, but then only a privileged few had the vote.
So long as everyone has an equal right to vote there must be a limit to the variations in prosperity in the community that are politically acceptable.
The politics of the centre
The Liberal Party was replaced after 1918 as a major political force by the Labour Party.
In the period after 1945 the Liberals were at a very low ebb and had significant support only in rural areas of Scotland, Wales and South-West England where industrial development was largely absent and so there was little trade union activity.
Religious nonconformity remained strong in these areas and combined with the anti-landlord, anti-aristocratic feeling which was the basis of historic liberalism.
Party policy is based on the idea that the state should promote the well-being of the individual; emphasis is placed on the development of education, health and welfare services.
Equally, there is an insistence on the need to protect people from the arbitrary power of the state.
Liberals favour the protection of human rights together with more participation and decentralization in government.
Thus, during the Liberal-Labour pact with the Callaghan Government the Liberals urged on the cause of devolution for Scotland and Wales.
The most active Liberal associations are keen on stirring up interest in purely local issues — a process known as community politics.
The Liberals are free of links with class interests.
Essentially they are the party of the centre ground, the middle way.
Their weakness is explained by two major factors.
Unlike the Conservative and Labour Parties there are no powerful economic forces to subsidize and support them.
And they are treated harshly by the form of the electoral system.
Between 1945 and the 1983 election Liberal strength in the Commons fluctuated between six and fourteen.
Of course, this was grossly disproportionate to their strength in terms of votes.
Then in 1983 the Liberals formed an alliance with the new Social Democratic Party (SDP) and withdrew Liberal candidates from half the parliamentary constituencies to give the SDP a clear run.
This arrangement proved fairly successful in terms of gaining popular support.
The Liberal SDP Alliance secured 26 per cent of votes cast but won only 23 seats or 3.5 per cent of the 650 constituencies.
Since then the Alliance has made steady progress at local elections.
Many councils are now ‘hung’ with no party holding a majority of seats.
Even some county councils in southern England, strongholds of conservatism since they were formed in 1888, have slipped into the ‘hung’ category.
At the 1987 general election the Alliance secured 23 per cent of the vote and 22 seats (17 Liberal, 5 SDP) in the Commons.
The 1987 result was a severe disappointment to the Alliance.
At previous elections the Liberals had tended to gain support during the campaign: in 1987 this did not happen.
Clearly, the presentation of the Alliance cause to the electors had been a failure.
The campaign was unusual in that the Alliance had presented two leaders, the two Davids, Steel and Owen, to the electors.
This arrangement was necessary because the Alliance was not a party but a political group.
Such an organization was abnormal to British political experience.
It invited fundamental questions.
If the partners to the Alliance disagreed on matters of policy how was it possible to present a single manifesto?
If the partners were united on policy, why have two parties, two organizations and two leaders?
The weakness caused by the bifurcated character of the Alliance was demonstrated in the autumn of 1986 when the separate Liberal and SDP Conferences passed incompatible resolutions on defence policy: the split damaged the Alliance rating in the opinion polls.
‘United we stand, divided we fall’ is among the oldest of political maxims.
The Alliance is seriously handicapped by the electoral system and it cannot afford any further drain of support caused by separate policies: it is imperative that policy  shall be decided at a single gathering.
That surely must imply a single organization, a single leader and just one party.
Many Liberals had favoured this approach long before the 1987 election.
The 1987 results produced immediate pressure for fusion with the Social Democrats.
The SDP was launched on 26 March 1981, by the ‘Gang of Four’: Mr Jenkins, Mrs Williams, Dr Owen and Mr Rodgers.
All of them had held office in Labour Cabinets.
It marked the most dramatic rift in a British political party since Ramsay MacDonald and his associates left the Labour Party fifty years earlier.
The immediate cause of the split was the constitutional changes taking place in the Labour Party; it was not that the Gang of Four and their sympathizers objected to reforms which improved internal party democracy, but they opposed the particular type of reform which was designed to strengthen the position of Left-wing elements in the Labour movement.
But behind these technical issues there were profound policy differences which became steadily greater as Left-wing influence increased in the Labour Party.
The  Gang of Four were all keenly pro-Europe: Labour policy was to leave the EEC.
Their new Social Democratic Party favoured multilateral disarmament as opposed to unilateral nuclear disarmament.
The SDP also favoured the welfare state and state action to reduce unemployment but argued that government control of the economy must include an effective incomes policy if ruinous inflation is to be avoided.
The SDP opposes further nationalization, believing it to be inefficient.
It favours social equality but accepts that economic equality is an unrealistic objective.
It strongly favours reform of the electoral system.
Thus there are major differences between the SDP and both the two major parties.
Yet the degree of difference with the Liberals is not large.
Without too much difficulty the SDP formed an Alliance with the Liberals to fight national and local elections.
One may well ask why the Gang of Four chose to start a new party instead of joining the Liberals.
To have separate parties urging effectively identical policies seems absurd and is quite contrary to British political traditions.
However, there were psychological and tactical advantages in forming a new organization.
It was easier for Labour MPs and other party members to move to a new organization than to transfer to another party; the SDP could stand for the memory of Attlee, Morrison and Gaitskell, and argue that the present-day Labour Party had moved away towards  more extreme policies.
It was also true that the Gang of Four would obviously lead a new party whereas their position within the Liberal organization would have been uneasy and uncertain.
The creation of a new party was also a more exciting enterprise which was expected to have a greater effect on public opinion: for the first twelve months — until the Falklands crisis arrived — the SDP gained much favourable publicity and appeared to be potentially successful.
Twenty-eight Labour MPs joined the new party and two gains were recorded at by-elections.
The 1983 election proved to be a near disaster for the SDP.
The party won only six seats in the Commons and all but five of their former thirty MPs were defeated.
During the 1983 — 7 Parliament two seats were won at by-elections but three were lost in the 1987 general election.
Of the original ‘Gang of Four’ only Dr Owen, the party leader, kept his place in the Commons.
The existence of the SDP has depended on the co-operation of the Liberals and there has always been a large question-mark over its ability to survive as a separate entity.
The failure of the Alliance election campaign produced an immediate argument within the SDP on the question of a full merger with the Liberals.
The party was deeply split.
David Owen opposed merger while the other members of the original ‘Gang of Four’ supported it.
In August 1987 a ballot of SDP members produced a 57 — 43 per cent vote in favour of merger.
David Owen resigned as leader amid strong suggestions that he would form another new party if the ‘marriage’ went through.
Subsequently Robert Maclennan became SDP leader and negotiations with the Liberals commenced.
In January 1988 the party conference voted for merger with the Liberals.