

PART 3 — SPRING 2201:
THE DOMAIN
‘With all its eyes the creature-world beholds
the open.
But our eyes, as though reversed,
encircle it on every side, like traps
set round its unobstructed path to freedom.
What is outside, we know from the brute's face
alone; for while a child's quite small we take it
and turn it round and force it to look backwards
at conformation, not that openness
so deep within the brute's face.
Free from death.
We alone see that ; the free animal
has its decease perpetually behind it
and God in front, and when it moves, it moves
within eternity, like running springs.
We've never, no, not for a single day,
pure space before us, such as that which flowers
endlessly open into: always world,
and never nowhere without no: that pure,
unsuperintended element one breathes,
endlessly knows, and never craves.
A child
sometimes gets quietly lost there, to be always
jogged back again.
Or someone dies and is it.’
Rainer Maria Rilke,Duino Elegies : ‘Eighth Elegy’.
THE DEAD RABBIT
Meg Shepherd, Hal Shepherd's daughter, was standing in the tall grass of the Domain, watching her brother.
It was early evening and on the far side of the water, dense shadow lay beneath the thick cluster of trees.
At this end the creek narrowed to a shallow, densely weeded spike of water.
To her left, in the triangle of wild, uncultivated land between the meadow and the vast, overtowering whiteness of the Wall, the ground grew soft and marshy, veined with streams and pocked with tiny pools.
Ben was crouched at the water's edge, intensely still, staring at something in the tall, thick rushes to his right.
For a moment there was only the stillness and the boy watching, the soft soughing of the wind in the trees across the water and the faint, lulling call of pigeons in the wood.
Then, with an abrupt crash and spray and a strong beating of wings, the bird broke from cover.
Ben's head went up, following the bird's steep ascent, his twelve-year-old eyes wide with watching.
‘Look at it, Meg!
Isn't it a beauty?’
‘Yes,’ she answered softly, but all the while she was watching him, seeing how his eyes cast a line to the climbing bird.
Saw how he grasped every last detail of it and held that knowledge tight in his memory.
His body was tensed, following the bird's flight, and his eyes burned.
She shivered.
It was astonishing to watch, that intensity of his.
The world seemed to take form in his eyes: to grow bright and rich and real.
as if , before he saw it, it was but a pale shadow of itself; a mere blueprint, uncreated until he saw and re-imagined it.
So it was for her.
She could see nothing unless he had seen it first.
The bird was gone.
He turned and looked at her.
‘Did you see it?’
‘Yes,’ she said, meaning something else.
‘It was beautiful.’
He turned his head, looking away from her, towards the village.
When he looked back his green eyes were dark, thoughtful.
‘Things are different this year, Meg.
Don't you feel it?
Small things.
Like the bird.’
She shrugged then pushed her way through the grass, out into the open.
Standing there beside him at the water's edge, she looked down at his reflection, next to her own in the still, clear water.
‘Why do you think that is?
Why should it change?’
He looked around him, his brow furrowing.
‘I mean, this place has always been the same.
Always.
Unchanged.
Unchanging but for the seasons.
But now…’
He looked at her.
‘What is it, Meg?
What's happening?’
She looked up from his reflection and met his eyes.
‘Does it worry you?’
He thought for a moment.
‘Yes,’ he said finally.
‘And I don't know why.
And I want to know why.’
She smiled at him and reached out to touch his arm.
It was so typical of him, wanting to understand what he thought and why he thought it.
Never happy unless he was worrying at the problem of himself.
‘It's nothing,’ she said reassuringly.
‘They're only small things, Ben.
They don't mean anything.
Really they don't.’
But she saw he wasn't convinced.
‘No,’ he said.
‘Everything has meaning.
It's all signs, don't you see?
It all signifies .
And the small things…that's where it's to be seen first.
Like the bird.
It was beautiful, yes, but it was also…’
He looked away and she said the word for him, anticipating him without quite knowing how, as she so often did.
‘Frightening.‘
‘Yes.’
She followed his gaze a moment, seeing how his eyes climbed the Wall to its summit far overhead, then looked back at him again.
He was more than a head taller than her, dark-haired and straight-boned.
She felt a small warmth of pride kindle in her.
So elegant he was.
So handsome.
Did he know how much she loved him?
He knew so much, but did he know that?
Maybe.
But if he did he gave no sign.
‘It was only a bird, Ben.
Why should it frighten you?’
He almost smiled.
‘It wasn't the bird, Meg.
At least, not the outer thing, the cage of bone and flesh, sinew and feather.
It was what was within the bird the force that gave it such power, such vitality.’
He looked down at his left hand, then turned it over, studying its back.
‘That's where its beauty lies.
Not in the outward show but in the shaping force.
That…’
He seemed to shiver.
‘Well, it's mystery.
Pure mystery.
And that frightens me, Meg.
The thought of all that dark, unharnessed power simply existing in the world.
I look at it and I want to know where it comes from.
I want to know why it's there at all.
Why it isn't mere mechanics and complexity of detail.
Why all that fiery excess?’
‘The force that through the green fuse drives the flower.’
And now he did smile, pleased by her recognition; by her quoting back at him the poem he had read to her only two days past.
How rare that was, him smiling.
And only for her.
Never for mother or father.
Nor for those others that came so rarely to this place.
‘I guess there's that too,’ he said.
‘That same force brings us on, from bud to flower to…well, to something browned and withered.
And thus to clay.’
He shrugged.
‘It's all connected, isn't it?
It uses us and then discards us.
as if we're here only to flesh out its game — to give it form.
Doesn't that frighten you, Meg?’
She shook her head.
‘Why should it?
There's plenty of time, Ben.
A whole world of time before we have to think of that.’
He studied her intently for a moment, then bowed his head slightly.
‘Perhaps.’
He began to walk, treading a careful path through the marshy ground, following a rising vein of rock that jutted from the sodden turf, until he came beneath the shadow of the Wall.
There, facing them not thirty paces away, was the Seal.
Part of the Wall, it was the same dull pearl in colour, a great circle five times Ben's height, its base less than an arm's length above the surface of the ground, its outer edge a thick ridge of steel-tough plastic.
For a moment he stood there, staring at it, oblivious of all else.
Meg, watching him, understood.
It was a gateway.
A closed door.
And beyond it was the darkness of the Clay.
Primal, unadulterated Clay.
Beyond it the contiguous earth was sun-deprived and barren.
Here Heaven, there Hell.
And only a Wall, a Seal, between the two.
She climbed up beside him on the ridge of rock.
‘What's that?’
She pointed outward to their left.
There was something there.
Something small and pale and grey against the green.
Something that hadn't been there before.
He looked, then shrugged.
‘I don't know.
Let's see, eh?’
At once he scrambled down.
Meg hesitated, then followed.
The ground was soft and spongy and in only a few paces her canvas shoes were soaked.
Ben had gone ahead of her, his feet sinking, squelching as he ran.
Then she saw him crouch down and examine something.
She came up behind him and looked over his shoulder.
It was a rabbit.
A dead rabbit.
‘What killed it?’ she asked.
He prised the carcass up from out of the wet, clinging turf and turned it over, examining it.
‘I don't know.
There's no sign of external injury.
But it's not been here long.’
He looked up at her.
‘Here, Meg, give me your jumper.’
She pulled her jumper off and handed it to him, then watched as he spread it out and laid the dead animal on it.
‘What are you doing?’
Ben drew his hunting knife from its sheath, then cut the rabbit from chin to rump.
For a moment he watched the blood well from the cut, staining the mottled grey fur, then laid the knife down and eased the flesh apart.
Meg watched, fascinated and horrified, as he probed inside the animal, the  blood dark on his fingers.
Then he lifted something small and wet; a pale, tiny sac attached by tubes and tendons to the rest.
It glistened in his fingers as he bent to study it.
Then he looked up at her.
‘It's as I thought.
Look.
The liver's covered in dark blotches.’
She shook her head, not understanding, watching him bundle the rabbit in her jumper, then lift it and sling it over his shoulder.
‘It was diseased,’ he said, staring across at the Seal.
Then he turned to look at her again.
‘It's part of the change in things, Meg.
Don't you see that now?
There's a sickness here in the Domain.
A killing thing.’
Hal Shepherd stood at the turn of the road, his hands resting lightly on the low stone wall, looking down at the row of cottages and the bay beyond.
To his right the hill rose up above where he stood, then fell again to meet the next turn of the river.
It was dotted with old stone-built houses and cottages.
At its summit was a small church.
It was almost three months since he had been home, but now, standing there, it seemed that he had never been away.
This much at least remains unchanged, he thought; each hill, each tree, each house familiar to him from youth.
I see it as my grandfather saw it, and his grandfather before him.
In three hundred years only the trees had changed, growing older, dying, replaced by others of their own ancient seed.
Like us, he thought.
We too are trees.
He walked on.
The road dipped steeply here then curved back wickedly upon itself.
Where he had been standing had been a turning point for cars once upon a time — when there were still cars in the world — but this had never been a place for modern things.
Even back then, when the world was connected differently, it had been seven miles by road to the nearest town of any size, and that easier to get to by the river.
Time had stood still here even then.
During the Madness, when the old world had heaved itself apart, this place had been a point of stillness at the centre of things.
Now it was timeless.
There were walls, no more than a pace or two either side of him.
Whitewashed walls, in heavy shadow now, their low-silled windows dark; only one cottage in the row lit up.
He smiled, seeing it ahead of him; imagining Beth there in the low-beamed living room, the fire lit and the curtains drawn; seeing her, as he had so often seen her, go to the back door and call the children in from the meadow.
Home.
It meant so many things, but only one to him.
He would have withered inside long ago had there not been this to return to.
He stood outside the low, broad door, listening, then put his hand out flat against the wood and gently pushed.
There was no need for locks here.
No need for fear.
The door swung back slowly, silently, and he went in.
Beth stood there in the doorway, framed by the soft light of the living room  behind her and to her left.
She smiled.
‘I knew you were coming.
I dreamed of you last night.’
He laughed and went to her, then held her tightly against him, kissing her tenderly.
‘Your dreams…’
He gazed into her eyes, loving the beauty, the measureless depth of them.
‘They never fail you, do they?’
She smiled and kissed his nose.
‘No.
Never.’
He shivered and reached up to stroke her cheek then trace the contours of her lips with a fingertip.
His whole body was alive with desire for her.
‘Where's Ben?
And Meg?’
Her body was pressed hard against his own, her hands at his neck.
Her eyes now were dark with longing, her voice softer, more alluring.
‘They're outside.
Down by the creek.
But they'll not be back.
Not just yet.’
She kissed him again, a harder, longer kiss this time.
‘Yes…’
He let his left hand rest gently on her waist a moment, then rucked up her skirt.
Beneath it she wore nothing.
He shuddered and sought her mouth again, the kiss more urgent now.
His fingers traced the warm smoothness of her thighs and belly, then found the hot wetness at the core of her.
She moaned softly and closed her eyes, her whole body trembling at his touch, then she reached down and freed him, holding his swollen penis momentarily, her fingers softly tracing its length, once, then again, almost making him come, before drawing him up into her.
He groaned, then grasped her by the buttocks and lifted her, backing her against the wall, thrusting up into her once, twice, a third time before he came explosively, feeling her shudder violently against him.
For a while, then, they were silent, watching each other.
Then Beth smiled again.
‘Welcome home, my love.’
The pine surface of the kitchen table was freshly scrubbed, the knives newly sharpened.
Ben looked about him, then left the bundled rabbit on the wide stone step outside and busied himself.
He spread an oilcloth on the table then laid the big cutting board on top of it.
He laid the knives out beside the board and then, because it was growing dark, brought the lamp from beside the old ceramic butler sink, trimming the wick before he lit it.
Meg stood in the garden doorway, her small figure silhouetted against the twilight redness of the bay.
She watched him roll back his sleeves, then fill a bowl with water and set it beside the knives.
‘Why are you doing that?’ she asked.
‘You know it's diseased.
Why not burn it?
Surely that's best?’
‘No.’
Ben barely glanced at her.
He turned and went down the four steps that led into the long, dark, low-ceilinged dining room, returning a moment later with a book from the shelves.
An old thing, leather-bound and cumbersome.
‘I've a hunch,’ he said, putting the heavy volume down on the other side of the board to the knives and the water.
Meg went across and stood beside him.
It was a book of animal anatomy.
One of their great-great-great, grandfather Amos's books.
Ben flicked through the pages until he came to the diagram he was looking for.
‘There,’ he said, the heavy, glossy pages staying in place as he turned away to bring the rabbit.
She looked.
Saw at once how like a machine it was.
A thing of pumps and levers, valves and switches, controlled by chemicals and electric pulses.
It was all there on the page, dissected for her.
The whole of the mystery — there at a glance.
Ben came back.
He placed the dead rabbit carefully on the block then turned and looked at her.
‘You needn't stay, Meg.
Not if you don't want to.’
But she stayed, fascinated by what he was doing, knowing that this had meaning for him.
Something had caught his attention.
Something she had missed but he had seen.
Now she waited as he probed and cut and then compared what had been exposed against the diagram spread across the double page.
At last, satisfied, he went to the sink and washed his hands, then came back and threw a muslin cloth over the board and its bloodied contents.
‘Well?’
He was about to answer her when there was the sound of footsteps in the dining room.
Their mother's.
Then a second set.
Meg pushed past him and jumped down the four steps in her haste.
‘Daddy!‘
Hal Shepherd gathered his daughter up, hugging her tight and kissing her, delighted to see her.
Then he ducked under the lintel and climbed the steps up into the kitchen, Beth following.
‘Gods, Ben, what have you been up to?’
Ben turned to face the table.
‘It's a dead rabbit.
We found it down by the Seal.
It's diseased.
But that's not all.
It doesn't come from here.
It was brought in.’
Hal put Meg down and went across.
‘Are you sure, Ben?’
But he knew that Ben was rarely if ever wrong.
Ben pulled back the cloth.
‘Look.
I made certain of it against Amos's book.
This one isn't real.
It's a genetic re-design.
Probably GenSyn.
One of the guards must have made a substitution.’
Hal studied the carcass a while, then nodded.
‘You're right.
And it won't be the only one, I'm sure.
I wonder who brought it in?’
Ben saw the anger mixed with sadness on his father's face.
There were two gates to the Domain, each manned by an elite squad of a dozen men, hand-picked by the T'ang himself.
Over the years they had become friends of the family and had been granted privileges — one of which was limited entry to the Domain.
Now that would have to stop.
The culprit would have to be caught and made to pay.
Meg came up to him and tugged at his arm.
‘But why would they do it, daddy?
There's no great difference, is there?’
Hal smiled sadly.
‘It's a kind of foolishness, my love, that's all.
You see, there are people in the City who would pay a vast sum of money to be able to boast they had real rabbit at one of their dinners.’
Ben stared at the carcass fixedly.
‘How much is a vast sum?’
Hal looked down at his son.
‘Fifty, maybe a hundred thousand yuan for each live animal.
They would breed them, you see, then sell the doctored litters.‘
Ben considered.
Such a sum would be as nothing to his father, he knew, but to others it was a fortune.
He saw at once how such an opportunity might have tempted one of the guards.
‘I see,’ he said.
‘But there's another, more immediate worry.
If they're all like this they could infect everything in the Domain.
We'll need to sweep the whole area.
Catch everything and test it.
Quarantine whatever's sick.’
Hal nodded, realising his son was right.
‘Damn it!
Such stupidity!
I'll have the culprit's hide!’
He laid a hand on his son's shoulder.
‘But you're right, Ben, we'd best do something straight away.
This can't wait for morning.’
He turned to Beth, anger turning to apology in his face.
‘This complicates things, I'm afraid.
I meant to tell you earlier, my love.
We have a guest coming, tomorrow evening.
An important guest.
He'll be with us a few days.
I can't say any more than that.
I was hoping we could hunt, but this business buggers things.’
She frowned at him and made a silent gesture towards Meg.
Shepherd glanced at his daughter then looked back at his wife and gave a slight bow.
‘I'm sorry.
Yes…
My language.
I forget when I've been away.
But this…’
He huffed angrily, exasperated, then turned to his son again.
‘Come, Ben, there's much to be done.’
It was calm on the river.
Ben pulled easily at the oars, the boat moving swiftly through the water.
Meg sat facing him, looking across at the eastern shore.
Behind her, in the stern, sat Peng Yu-wei, tall, elderly and very upright, his staff held in front of him like an unflagged mast.
It was ebb tide and the current was in their favour.
Ben kept the boat mid-stream, enjoying the warmth of the mid-day sun on his bare shoulders, the feel of the mild sea breeze in his hair.
He felt drowsy, for one rare moment almost lapsed out of consciousness, then Meg's cry brought him back to himself.
‘Look, Ben!’
Meg was pointing out towards the far shore.
Ben shipped oars and turned to look.
There, stretching from the foreshore to the Wall, was a solid line of soldiers.
Slowly, methodically, they moved between the trees and over the rough-grassed, uneven ground, making sure nothing slipped between them.
It  was their third sweep of the Domain and their last.
What was not caught this time would be gassed.
Peng Yu-wei cleared his throat, his head held slightly forward in a gesture of respect to his two charges.
‘What is it, Teacher Peng?’
Ben asked coldly, turning to face him.
Lessons had ended an hour back.
This now was their time and Peng, though chaperone for this excursion, had no authority over the master and mistress outside his classroom.
‘Forgive me, young master, I wish only to make an observation.’
Meg turned, careful not to make the boat tilt and sway, and looked up at Peng Yu-wei, then back at Ben.
She knew how much Ben resented the imposition of a teacher.
He liked to make his own discoveries and follow his own direction, but their father had insisted upon a more rigorous approach.
What Ben did in his own time was up to him, but in the morning classes he was to do as Peng Yu-wei instructed; learn what Peng Yu-wei asked him to learn.
With some reluctance Ben had agreed, but only on the understanding that outside the classroom the teacher was not to speak without his express permission.
‘You understand what Teacher Peng really is?’ he had said to Meg when they were alone one time.
‘He is their means of keeping tabs on me.
Of controlling what I know and what I learn.
He's bit and bridle, ball and chain, a rope to tether me like any other animal.’
His bitterness had surprised her.
‘Surely not,’ she had answered.
‘Father wouldn't want that, would he?’
But he had not answered, only looked away, the bitterness in his face unchanged.
Now some of that bitterness was back as he looked at Teacher Peng.
‘Make your observation then.
But be brief.’
Peng Yu-wei bowed, then turned his head, looking across at the soldiers who were now level with them.
One frail, thin hand went up to pull at his wispy grey goatee, the other moved slightly on the staff, inclining it towards the distant line of men.
‘This whole business seems most cumbersome, would you not agree, Master Ben?’
Ben's eyes never left the teacher's face.
‘No.
Not cumbersome.
Inefficient's a better word.’
Teacher Peng looked back at him and bowed slightly, corrected.
‘Which is why I felt it could be made much easier.’
Meg saw the irritation and impatience on Ben's face and looked down.
She knew no good would come of this.
‘You had best tell me how, Teacher Peng.’
The note of sarcasm in Ben's voice was bordering on outright rudeness now.
Even so, Peng Yu-wei seemed not to notice.
He merely bowed and continued.
‘It occurs to me that, before returning the animals to the land again, a trace could be put inside each animal.
Then, if this happened again, it would be  a simple thing to account for each animal.
Theft and disease would both be far easier to control.’
Peng Yu-wei looked up at his twelve-year-old charge expectantly, but Ben was silent.
‘Well, master?’ he asked after a moment.
‘What do you think of my idea?’
Ben looked away.
He lifted the oars and began to pull at them again, digging heavily into the water to his right, bringing the boat back onto a straight course.
Then he looked back at the teacher.
‘It's a hideous idea, Peng Yu-wei.
An unimaginative, small-minded idea.
Just another way of keeping tabs on things.
I can see it now.
You would make a great electronic wall chart of the Domain, eh?
And have each animal as a blip on it.’
The stretched olive skin of Peng Yu-wei's face was relaxed, his dark eyes, with their marked epicanthic fold, impassive.
‘That would be a refinement, I agree, but…’
Ben let the oars fall and leaned forward in the boat.
Peng Yu-wei reflexively moved back.
Meg watched, horrified, as Ben scrabbled past her, the boat swaying violently, and tore at the teacher's pau , exposing his chest.
‘Please, young master.
You know that is not allowed.’
Peng Yu-wei still held his staff, but with his other hand he now sought to draw the two ends of the torn silk together.
For a moment, however, the white circle of the control panel set into his upper chest was clearly visible.
For a second or two Ben knelt there in front of him threateningly, his whole body tensed as if to act.
Then he moved back.
‘You'll be quiet, understand?
And you'll say nothing of this.
Nothing!
Or I'll switch you off and drop you over the side.
Understand me, Teacher Peng?’
For a moment the android was perfectly still, then it gave the slightest nod.
‘Good,’ said Ben, moving back and taking up the oars again.
‘Then we'll proceed.‘
As Ben turned the boat into the tiny, box-like harbour the two sailors looked up from where they sat on the steps mending their nets and smiled.
They were both old men, in their late sixties, with broad, healthy, salt-tanned faces.
Ben hailed them, then concentrated on manoeuvring between the moored fishing boats.
There was a strong breeze now from the mouth of the river and the metallic sound of the lines flapping against the masts filled the air, contesting with the cry of gulls overhead.
Ben turned the boat's prow with practised ease and let the craft glide between a big, high-sided fisherboat and the harbour wall, using one of the oars to push away, first one side, then the other.
Meg, at the stern, held the rope in her hand, ready to jump ashore and tie up.
Secured, Ben jumped ashore, then looked back into the boat.
Peng Yu-wei had stood up, ready to disembark.
‘You'll stay,’ Ben said commandingly.
For a moment Peng Yu-wei hesitated, his duty to chaperone the children conflicting with the explicit command of the young master.
Water slopped noisily between the side of the boat and the steps.
Only paces away the two old sailors had stopped their mending, watching.
Slowly, with great dignity, the teacher sat, planting his staff before him.
‘I'll do as you say, young master,’ he said, looking up at the young boy on the quayside, ‘But I must tell your father about this.’
Ben turned away, taking Meg's hand.
‘Do what you must, tin man,’ he muttered under his breath.
The quayside was cluttered with coils of rope, lobster pots, netting and piles of empty wooden crates — old, frail-looking things that awaited loads of fish that never came.
The harbour was filled with fishing boats, but no one ever fished.
The town beyond was full of busy-seeming people, but no one lived there.
It was all false: all part of the great illusion Ben's great-great-great-grandfather had created here.
Once this had been a thriving town, prospering on fishing and tourism and the naval college.
Now it was dead.
A shell of its former self, peopled by replicants.
Meg looked about her, delighted, as she always was by this.
Couples strolled in the afternoon sunshine, the ladies in crinolines, the men in stiff three-piece suits.
Pretty little girls with curled blonde hair tied with pink ribbons ran here and there, while boys in sailor suits crouched, playing fivestones.
‘It's so real here!’
Meg said enthusiastically.
‘So alive!’
Ben looked down at her and smiled.
‘Yes,’ he said.
‘It is, isn't it?’
He had seen pictures of the City.
It seemed such an ugly, hideous place by comparison.
A place of walls and cells and corridors-a vast, unending prison of a place.
He turned his face to the breeze and drew in great lungfuls of the fresh salt air, then looked back at Meg.
‘What shall we do?’
She looked past the strolling holidaymakers at the gaily-painted shops along the front, then looked up at the hillside and, beyond it, the Wall, towering over all.
‘I don't know…’
She squeezed his hand.
‘Let's just go where we want, Ben.
Look wherever we fancy looking, eh?’
‘Okay.
Then we'll start over there, at the Chandler's.’
For the next few hours they went among the high street shops, first searching through the shelves of Joseph Toms, Toys and Fancy Goods, for novelties, then looking among the tiny cupboards of Charles Weaver, Apothecary, sampling the sweet-tasting, harmless powders on their fingers and mixing the brightly-coloured liquids in beakers.
But Ben soon tired of such games and merely watched as  Meg went from shop to shop, unchallenged by the android shopkeepers.
In Nash's Coffee House they had their lunch, the food real but somehow unsatisfying, as if reconstituted.
‘There's a whole world here, Meg.
Preserved.
Frozen in time.
Sometimes I look at it and think it's such a waste.
It should be used somehow.’
Meg sipped at her iced drink then looked up at him.
‘You think we should let others come here into the Domain?’
He hesitated, then shook his head.
‘No.
Not that.
But…’
Meg watched him curiously.
It was unusual to see Ben so indecisive.
‘You've an idea,’ she said.
‘No.
Not an idea.
Not as such.’
Again that uncertainty, that same slight shrugging of his shoulders.
She watched him look away, his eyes tracing the row of signs above the shop fronts: David Wishart, Tobacconist; Arthur Redmayne, Couturier; Thomas Lipton, Vintner; Jack Delcroix, Dentist & Bleeder; Stagg & Mantle, Ironmongers; Verry's Restaurant; Jackson & Graham, Cabinet Makers; The Lambe Brothers, Linen-Drapers; and there, on the corner, facing Goode's Hostelry, Pugh's Mourning House.
Seeing Pugh's brought back a past visit.
It was months ago and Ben had insisted on going into Pugh's, though they had always avoided the shop before.
She had watched him go amongst the caskets, then lift one of the lids, peering inside.
The corpse looked realistic enough, but Ben had turned to her and laughed.
‘Dead long before it was dead.’
Somehow that had made him talk about things here.
Why they were as they were, and what kind of man her great-great-great-grandfather had been to create a place like this.
He had not skimped on anything.
One looked in drawers or behind doors and there, as in real life, one found small, inconsequential things.
Buttons and pins and photographs.
A hatstand with an old, well-worn top hat on one peg, a scarf on another, as if left there only an hour past.
Since then she had searched and searched, her curiosity unflagging, trying to catch him out — to find some small part of this world he had made that wasn't finished.
To find some blank, uncreated part behind the superficial details.
Would she have thought to do this without Ben?
Would she have searched so ardently to find that patch of dull revealing blankness?
No.
In truth she would never have known.
But he had shown her how this, the most real place she knew, was in other ways quite hollow.
Was all a marvellous sham.
A gaudy, imaginative fake.
‘If this is fake, why is it so marvellous, Ben?’ she had asked, and he had shaken his head in wonder at her question.
‘Why?
Because it's god-like!
Look at it, Meg!
It's so presumptuous!
Such consummate mimicry!
Such shameless artifice!’
Now, watching him, she knew he had a scheme.
Some way of using this.
‘Never mind,’ she said.
‘Let's move on.
I'd like to try on some of Lloyd's hats.’
Ben smiled at her.
‘Okay.
Then we'll start back.’
They were upstairs in Edgar Lloyd, Hatters, when Ben heard voices down below.
Meg was busy trying on hats at the far side of the room, the android assistant standing beside her at the mirror, a stack of round, candy-striped boxes in her arms.
Ben went to the window and looked down.
There were soldiers in the passageway below.
Real soldiers.
And not just any soldiers.
He knew the men at once.
Meg turned to him, a wide-brimmed creation of pale cream lace balanced precariously on top of her dark curls.
‘What do you think, Ben?
Do you…’
He hushed her urgently.
‘What is it?’ she mouthed.
‘Soldiers,’ he mouthed back.
She set the hat down and came across to him.
‘Keep down out of sight,’ he whispered.
‘They're our guards, and they shouldn't be here.
They're supposed to be confined to barracks.’
She looked up at him, wide-eyed, then knelt down, so that her head was below the sill.
‘Tell me what's happening,’ she said quietly.
He watched.
There were ten of them down there, their voices urgent, excited.
For a moment Ben couldn't understand what was going on, then one of them turned and he saw it was the captain, a man called Rosten.
Rosten pointed down the passageway towards the open ground in front of the old inn and muttered something Ben couldn't quite make out.
‘What are they doing?’
He looked down at Meg and saw the fear in her eyes.
‘Nothing.
Hush now, Megs.
It'll be all right.’
He put his hand on her shoulder and looked out again.
What he saw this time surprised him.
Two of the men were being held and bound; their wrists and ankles taped together.
One of the men started to struggle, then began to cry out.
Meg tried to get up to see, but with a gentle pressure he pushed her back down.
There was the sound of a slap, then silence from below.
A moment later Rosten's voice barked out.
‘Out there!
Quick now!’
Ben moved across to the other side s) f the window, trying to keep them in sight, but he lost them in a moment.
‘Stay here, Meg.
I'm going downstairs.’
‘But, Ben…’
He shook his head.
‘Do what I say.
I'll be all right.
I'll not let them see me.’
He had to move slowly, carefully on the stairs because, for a brief moment, he was in full sight of the soldiers through the big plate glass window that looked  out onto the narrow quay.
At the bottom he moved quickly between the racks and tables until he was crouched between two mannequins, looking out through their skirts at the scene in front of the inn.
Two men held each of the prisoners.
The other three stood to one side, in a line, at attention.
Rosten had his back to Ben and stood there between the window and the prisoners.
With an abrupt gesture that seemed to jerk his body forward violently, he gave an order.
At once both prisoners were made forcibly to kneel and lower their heads.
Only then, as Rosten turned slightly, did Ben see the long, thin blade he held.
For a moment the sight of the blade held him; the way the sunlight seemed to flow like a liquid along the gently curved length of it, flickering brilliantly on the razor-sharp edge and at the tip.
He had read how swords could seem alive could have a personality, even a name — but he had never thought to see it.
He looked past the blade.
Though their heads were held down forcibly, the two men looked up at Rosten, anxious to know what he intended for them.
Ben knew them well.
Gosse, to the left, was part Han, his broad, rough-hewn, Slavic features made almost Mongolian by his part-Han ancestry.
Wolfe, to the right, was a southerner, his dark, handsome features almost refined; almost, but not quite, classical.
Almost.
For when he smiled or laughed, his eyes and mouth were somehow ugly.
Somehow brutish and unhealthy.
Rosten now stood between the two, his feet spread, his right arm outstretched, the sword in his right hand, its tip almost touching the cobbled ground a body's length away.
‘You!
You understand why you're here?
You've heard the accusations?’
‘They're lies…’ began Wolfe, but he was cuffed into silence by the man behind him.
Rosten shook his head.
The long sword quivered in his hand.
‘Not lies, Wolfe.
You-have been tried by a panel of your fellow officers and found guilty.
You and Gosse here.
You stole and cheated.
You have betrayed our master's trust and dishonoured the Banner.’
Wolfe's eyes widened.
The blood drained from his face.
Beside him Gosse looked down, as if he had already seen where this led.
‘There is no excusing what you did.
And no solution but to excise the shame.’
Wolfe's head came up sharply and was pushed down brutally.
‘No!’ he shouted, beginning to struggle again.
‘You can't do this!
You…’
A blow from one of the men holding him knocked him down onto the cobbles.
‘Bring him here!’
The two guards grabbed Wolfe again and dragged him, on his knees, until he was at Rosten's feet.
Rosten's voice was almost hysterical now.
He half-shouted, half-screamed, his sword arm punctuating the words.
‘You are scum, Wolfe!
Faceless!
Because of you, your fellow officers have fallen under suspicion!
Because of you, all here have been dishonoured!’
Rosten shuddered violently and spat on the kneeling man's head.
‘You have shamed your Banner!
You have shamed your family name!
And you have disgraced your ancestors!’
Rosten stepped back and raised the sword.
‘Hold the prisoner down!’
Ben caught his breath.
He saw how Wolfe's leg muscles flexed impotently as he tried to scrabble to his feet; how he squirmed in the two men's grip, trying to get away.
A third soldier joined the other two, forcing Wolfe down with blows and curses.
Then one of them grabbed Wolfe's topknot and, with a savage yank that almost pulled the man up off his knees, stretched his neck out, ready for the sword.
Wolfe was screaming now, his voice hoarse, breathless.
‘No!
No!
Kuan Yin, Goddess of Mercy, help me!
I did nothing!
Nothing!’
His face was torn with terror, his mouth twisted, his eyes moving frantically in their sockets, pleading for mercy.
Ben saw Rosten's body tauten like a compressed coil.
Then, with a sharp hiss of breath, he brought the sword down sharply.
Wolfe's screams stopped instantly.
Ben saw the head drop and roll, the body tumble forward like a sack of grain, the arms fall limp.
Ben looked across at Gosse.
Gosse had been watching all in silence, his jaw clenched, his neck muscles taut.
Now, with a visible shudder, he looked down again, staring at the cobbles.
Rosten bent down and wiped the sword on the back of Wolfe's tunic, then straightened, facing Gosse.
‘You have something to say, Gosse?’
Gosse was silent a moment, then he looked up at Rosten.
His eyes, which, moments earlier, had been filled with fear and horror, were now clear, almost calm.
His hands shook, but he clenched them to control their trembling.
He took a deep breath, then another, like a diver about to plunge into the depths, and nodded.
‘Speak then.
You've little time.’
Gosse hunched his shoulders and lowered his head slightly, in deference to Rosten, but kept his eyes on him.
‘Only this.
It is true what you say.
I am guilty.
Wolfe planned it all, but I acted with him, and there is no excusing my actions.
I accept the judgement of my fellow officers and, before I die, beg their forgiveness for having shamed them before the T'ang.’
Rosten stood there, expecting more, but Gosse had lowered his head.
After a moment's reflection, Rosten gave a small nod, then spoke.
‘I cannot speak for all here, but for myself I say this.
You were a good soldier, Gosse.
And you face death bravely, honestly, as a soldier ought.
I cannot prevent your death now, you understand, but I can, at least, change the manner of it.’
There was a low gasp from the men on either side as Rosten took a pace forward and drew the short sword from his belt and handed it to Gosse.
Gosse understood at once.
His eyes met Rosten's, bright with gratitude, then looked down at the short sword.
With his left hand he tore open the tunic of his uniform and drew up the undershirt, baring the flesh.
Then he gripped the handle of the short sword with both hands and turned it, so that the tip was facing his stomach.
The two guards who had been holding him released him and stood back.
Rosten watched him a moment, then took up his place, just behind Gosse and to one side, the long sword half raised.
Ben eased forward until his face was pressed against the glass, watching Gosse slow his breathing and focus his whole being upon the blade resting only a hand's length from his stomach.
Gosse's hands were steady now, his eyes glazed.
Time slowed.
Then, quite abruptly, it changed.
There was a sudden, violent movement in Gosse's face — a movement somewhere between ecstasy and extreme agony — and then his hands were thrusting the blade deep into his belly.
With what seemed super-human strength and control he drew the short sword to the left, then back to the right, his intestines spilling out onto the cobbles.
For a moment his face held its expression of ecstatic agony, then it crumpled and his eyes looked down, widening, horrified by what he had done.
Rosten brought the sword down sharply.
Gosse knelt a moment longer.
Then his headless body fell and lay there, motionless, next to Wolfe's.
Ben heard a moan behind him and turned.
Meg was squatting at the top of the stairs, her hands clutching the third and fourth struts tightly, her eyes wide, filled with fright.
‘Go up!’ he hissed anxiously, hoping he'd not be heard; horrified that she had been witness to Gosse's death.
He saw her turn and look at him, for a moment barely recognising him or understanding what he had said to her.
Dear gods, he thought; how much did she see?
‘Go up!’ he hissed again.
‘For heaven's sake go up!’
It was dark on the river, the moon obscured behind the Wall's north-western edge.
Ben jumped ashore and tied the rowboat up to the small, wooden jetty, then turned to give a hand to Peng Yu-wei who stood there, cradling a sleeping Meg in one arm.
He let the teacher go ahead, reluctant to go in, wanting to keep the blanket of darkness and silence about him a moment longer.
There was a small rectangle of land beside the jetty, surrounded on three sides by steep clay walls.
A set of old, wooden steps had been cut into one side.
Ben climbed them slowly, tired from the long row back.
Then he was in the garden, the broad swathe of neat-trimmed grass climbing steadily to the thatched cottage a hundred yards distant.
‘Ben!’
His mother stood in the low back doorway, framed by the light, an apron over her long dress.
He waved, acknowledging her.
Ahead of him, Peng Yu-wei strode purposefully up the path, his long legs showing no sign of human frailty.
He felt strangely separate from things.
as if he had let go of oars and rudder and now drifted on the dark current of events.
On the long row back he had traced the logic of the thing time and again.
He knew he had caused their deaths.
From his discovery things had followed an inexorable path, like the water's tight spiral down into the whirlpool's mouth.
They had died because of him.
No.
Not because of him.
Because of his discovery.
He was not to blame for their deaths.
They had killed themselves.
Their greed had killed them.
That and their stupidity.
He was not to blame; yet he felt their deaths quite heavily.
If he had said nothing.
If he had simply burned the rabbit as Meg had suggested….
It would have solved nothing.
The sickness would have spread; the discovery would have been made.
Eventually.
And then the two soldiers would have died.
It was not his fault.
Not his fault.
His mother met him at the back door.
She knelt down and took his hands.
‘Are you okay, Ben?
You look troubled.
Has something happened?’
He shook his head.
‘No.
I…’
The door to the right of the broad, low-ceilinged passageway opened and his father came out, closing the door behind him.
He smiled at Ben, then came across.
‘Our guest is here, Ben.
He's been here all afternoon, in fact.
’ He hesitated and glanced at his wife.
‘I know I said earlier that you would be eating alone tonight, Ben, but…
Well, he says he would like to meet you.
So I thought that maybe you could eat with us after all.’
Ben was used to his father's guests and had never minded taking his evening meal in his room, but this was unusual.
He had never been asked to sit at table with a guest before.
‘Who is it?’ he asked.
His father smiled enigmatically.
‘Wash your hands, then come through.
I'll introduce you.
But Ben…be on your best behaviour, please.’
Ben gave a slight bow, then went straight to the small washroom.
He washed his face and hands, then scrubbed his nails and tidied his hair in the mirror.
When he came out his mother was waiting for him.
She took his hands, inspecting them, then straightened his tunic and bent to kiss his cheek.
‘You look fine, Ben.
Now go in.’
‘Who is it?’ he asked again.
‘Tell me who it is.’
But she only smiled and turned him towards the door.
‘Go on in.
I'll be there in a moment.’
A CONVERSATION IN THE FIRELIGHT
In the light from the open fire the T'ang's strong, oriental features seemed carved in ancient yellowed ivory.
He sat back in his chair, smiling, his eyes brightly dark.
‘And you think they'll be happy with that, Hal?’
Li Shai Tung's hands rested lightly on the table's edge, the now-empty bowl he had been eating from placed to one side, out of his way.
Ben, watching him, saw once again how the light seemed trapped by the matt black surface of the heavy iron ring he wore on the index finger of his right hand.
The Ywe Lung .
The seal of power.
Hal Shepherd laughed, then shook his head.
‘No.
Not for a moment.
They all think themselves emperors in that place.’
They were talking about the House of Representatives at Weimar —‘That troublesome place’, as the T'ang continually called it — and about ways of shoring up the tenuous peace that now existed between it and the Seven.
The T'ang and his father sat at one end of the long, darkwood table, facing each other, while Ben sat alone at the other end.
His mother had not joined them for the meal, bowing in this regard to the T'ang's wishes.
But in other respects she had had her own way.
The T'ang's own cooks sat idle in her kitchen, watching with suspicion and a degree of amazement as she single-handedly prepared and served the meal.
This departure from the T'ang's normal practices was remarkable enough in itself, but what had happened at the beginning of the meal had surprised even his father.
When the food taster had stepped up to the table to perform his normal duties, the T'ang had waved him away and, picking up his chopsticks, had taken the first mouthful himself.
Then, after chewing and swallowing the fragrant morsel, and after a sip of the strong green Longjing ch'a — itself ‘untasted’— he had looked up at Beth Shepherd and smiled broadly, complimenting her on the dish.
It was, as Ben understood at once, seeing the surprised delight on his father's face and the astonished horror on the face of the official taster, quite  unprecedented, and made him realise how circumscribed the T'ang's life had been.
Not free at all, as others may have thought, but difficult; a life lived in the shadow of death.
For Li Shai Tung, trust was the rarest and most precious thing he had to offer; for in trusting he placed his life — quite literally his life — in the hands of others.
In that small yet significant gesture, the T'ang had given his father and mother the ultimate in compliments.
Ben studied the man as he talked, aware of a strength in him that was somehow more than physical.
There was a certainty — a vitality — in his every movement, such that even the slightest hesitancy was telling.
His whole body spoke a subtle language of command; something that had developed quite naturally and unconsciously during the long years of his rule.
To watch him was to watch not a man but a directing force; was to witness the channelling of aggression and determination into its most elegant and expressive form.
In some respects Li Shai Tung was like an athlete, each nuance of voice or gesture the result of long and patient practice.
Practice that had made these things second nature to the T'ang.
Ben watched, fascinated, barely hearing their words, but aware of their significance, and of the significance of the fact that he was there to hear them.
Li Shai Tung leaned forward slightly, his chin, with its pure white, neatly braided beard, formulating a slight upward motion that signalled the offering of a confidence.
‘The House was never meant to be so powerful.
Our forefathers saw it only as a gesture.
To be candid, Hal, as a sop to their erstwhile allies and a mask to their true intentions.
But now, a hundred years on, certain factions persist in taking it at face value.
They maintain that the power of the House is sanctioned by ‘the People’.
And we know why, don't we?
Not for ‘the People’.
Such men don't spare a second's thought for ‘the People’.
No, they think only of themselves.
They seek to climb at our expense.
To raise themselves by pulling down the Seven.
They want control, Hal, and the House is the means through which they seek to get it.’
The T'ang leaned back again, his eyes half-lidded now.
He reached up with his right hand and grasped the tightly-furled queue at the back of his head, his fingers closing about the coil of fine white hair.
It was a curious, almost absent-minded gesture; yet it served to emphasise to Ben how at ease the T'ang was in his father's company.
He watched, aware of a whole vocabulary of gesture there in the dialogue between the two men: conscious not just of what they said but of how they said it; how their eyes met or did not meet; how a shared smile would suddenly reveal the depths of their mutual understanding.
All served to show him just how much the T'ang depended on his father to release these words, these thoughts, these feelings.
Perhaps because no other could be trusted with them.
‘I often ask myself, is there any way we might remove the House and  dismantle the huge bureaucratic structure that has grown about it?
But each time I ask myself I know beforehand what the answer is.
No.
At least, not now.
Fifteen, maybe twenty years ago it might have been possible.
But even then it might simply have pre-empted things.
Brought us quicker to this point.’
Hal Shepherd nodded.
‘I agree.
But perhaps we should have faced it back then.
We were stronger.
Our grip on things was firmer.
Now things have changed.
Each year's delay sees them grow at our expense.’
‘You'd counsel war, then, Hal?’
‘Of a kind.’
The T'ang smiled, and Ben, watching, found himself comparing the man to his tutor, Peng Yu-wei.
That epicanthic fold over the eye, which seemed so much a part of the android's ‘difference’— its machine-nature — was here, on the natural man, quite attractive.
‘And what kind is that?’
‘The kind we're best at.
A war of levels.
Of openness and deception.
The kind of war the Tyrant, Tsao Ch'un, taught us how to fight.’
The T'ang looked down at his hands, his smile fading.
‘I don't know.
I really don't, Hal.
Sometimes I question what we've done.’
‘As any man must surely do.’
Li Shai Tung looked up at him and shook his head.
‘No, Hal.
For once I think you're wrong.
Few men actually question their actions.
Most are blind to their faults.
Deaf to the criticisms of their fellow men.’
He laughed sourly.
‘You might say that Chung Kuo is filled with such men — blind, wicked, greedy creatures who see their blindness as strength, their wickedness as necessity, their greed as historical process.’
‘That's so…’
For a moment the two men fell silent, their faces solemn in the flickering light from the fire.
Before either could speak again, the door at the far end of the room opened and Ben's mother entered, carrying a tray.
She set it down on a footstool beside the open fire, then leaned across to take something from a bowl on the mantlepiece and sprinkle it on the burning logs.
At once the room was filled with the sweet, fresh smell of mint.
The T'ang gave a gentle laugh, delighted, and took a long, deep breath.
Ben watched his mother turn from the fire, drawing her long dark hair back from her face, smiling.
‘I've brought fresh ch'a ,’ she said simply, then lifted the tray and brought it across to them.
As she set it down the T'ang stood and, reaching across, put his hand over hers, preventing her from lifting the kettle.
‘Please.
I would be honoured if you sat a while with us and shared the ch ‘a .‘
She hesitated then, smiling, did as he bid her; watching the strange sight of a T'ang pouring ch'a for a commoner.
‘Here,’ he said, offering her the first bowl.
‘Ch'a from the dragon's well.’
The T'ang's words were a harmless play on the name of the Longjing ch'a , but for Ben they seemed to hold a special meaning.
He looked at his mother, seeing how she smiled self-consciously and lowered her head, for a moment the youthful look of her reminding him terribly of Meg — of how Meg would be a year or two from now.
Then he looked back at the T'ang, standing there, pouring a second bowl for his father.
Ben frowned.
The very presence of the T'ang in the room seemed suddenly quite strange.
His silks, his plaited hair, his very foreign-ness seemed out of place amongst the low oak beams and sturdy yeoman furniture.
That contrast, that curious juxtaposition of man and room, brought home to Ben how strange this world of theirs truly was.
A world tipped wildly from its natural balance.
The dragon's well.
It made him think of fire and darkness, of untapped potency.
Is that what's missing from our world? he asked himself.
Have we done with fire and darkness?
‘And you, Ben?
Will you drink of the dragon's well?’
Li Shai Tung looked across at him, smiling; but behind the smile — beyond it, in some darker, less accessible place — lay a deep disquiet.
Flames danced in the glass of each eye, flickered wet and evanescent on the dark surface of his vision.
But where was the fire on the far side of the glass?
Where the depths that made of Man a man ?
In word and gesture, the T'ang was a great and powerful man — a T'ang, unmistakably a king among men — but he had lost contact with the very thing that had made — had shaped — his outer form.
He had denied his inner self once too often and now the well was capped, the fire doused.
He stared at the T'ang, wondering if he knew what he had become; if the doubt that he professed was as thorough, as all-inclusive as it ought to be.
Whether, when he looked at his reflection in the mirror, he saw beyond the glass into that other place behind the eyes.
Ben shivered.
No.
It could not be so.
For if it were the man himself would crumble.
Words would fail, gestures grow hesitant.
No.
This T'ang might doubt what they had done, but not what he was.
That was innate — was bred into his bones.
He would die before he doubted himself.
The smile remained, unchallenged, genuine; the offered bowl awaited him.
‘Well, Ben?’ his father asked, turning to him.
‘Will you take a bowl with us?’
Li Shai Tung leaned forward, offering the boy the cup, conscious that he had become the focus of the child's strange intensity; of the intimidating ferocity of his stare.
Hal was right.
Ben was not like other children.
There was something wild in his nature; some part of him that remained untamed, unsocialised.
When he sat there at table it was as if he held himself in check.
There was such stillness  in him that when he moved it was like something dead had come alive again.
Yet he was more alive — more vividly alive — than anyone the T'ang had ever met.
As he handed Ben the bowl he almost expected to receive some kind of shock — a violent discharge of the child's unnatural energy — through the medium of the bowl.
But there was nothing.
Only his wild imagining.
The T'ang looked down, thoughtful.
Ben Shepherd was a breed of one.
He had none of those small refinements that fitted a man for the company of his fellows.
He had no sense of give and take; no idea of the concessions one made for the sake of social comfort.
His stare was uncompromising, almost proprietorial.
as if all he saw was his.
Yes, Li Shai Tung thought, smiling inwardly.
You should be a T'ang, Ben Shepherd, for you'll find it hard to pass muster as a simple man.
He lifted his bowl and sipped, thinking back to earlier that afternoon.
They had been out walking in the garden when Hal had suggested he go with him and see Ben's room.
He had stood in the centre of the tiny, cluttered upstairs room, looking at the paintings that covered the wall above the bed.
Some were lifelike studies of the Domain.
Lifelike, at least, but for the dark, unfocused figures who stood in the shadows beneath the trees on the far side of the water.
Others were more abstract, depicting strange distortions of the real.
Twins figured largely in these latter compositions; one twin quite normal — strong and healthy — the other twisted out of shape, the eyes white and blank, the mouth open as if in pain.
They were disturbing, unusually disturbing, yet their technical accomplishment could not be questioned.
‘These are good, Hal.
Very good indeed.
The boy has talent.’
Hal Shepherd gave a small smile, then came alongside him.
‘He'd be pleased to hear you say that.
But if you think those are good, look at this.’
The T'ang took the folder from him and opened it.
Inside was a single ultra-thin sheet of what seemed like pure black plastic.
He turned it in his hands and then laughed.
‘What is it?’
‘Here,’ Shepherd indicated a viewer on the table by the window, then drew the blind down.
‘Lay it in the tray there, then flick that switch.’
Li Shai Tung placed the sheet down in the viewer.
‘Does it matter which way up?’
‘Yes and no.
You'll see.’
The T'ang flicked the switch.
At once the tank-like cage of the viewer was filled with colour.
It was a hologram.
A portrait of Hal Shepherd's wife, Beth.
‘He did this?’
Shepherd nodded.
‘There are one hundred and eighty cross-sectional layers of information.
Ninety horizontal, ninety vertical.
He hand drew each sheet and then compressed them.
It's his own technique.
He invented it.’
‘Hand drew…?’
‘And from memory.
Beth wouldn't sit for him, you see.
She said she was too busy.
But he did it anyway.’
Li Shai Tung shook his head slowly.
‘It's astonishing, Hal.
It's like a camera image of her.’
‘You haven't seen the half of it.
Wait…’
Shepherd switched the hologram off, then reached in and lifted the flexible plate up.
He turned it and set it down again.
‘Please…’
The T'ang reached out and pressed the switch.
Again the viewing cage was filled with colour.
But this time the image was different.
The hologram of Hal Shepherd was far from flattering.
The flesh was far cruder, much rougher than the reality, the cheeks ruddier.
The hair was thicker, curlier, the eyebrows heavier and darker.
The nose was thick and fleshy, the ears pointed, the eyes larger, darker.
The lips were more sensuous than the original, almost licentious.
They seemed to sneer.
Shepherd moved closer and looked down into the viewer.
‘There's something of the satyr about it.
Something elemental.’
The T'ang turned his head and looked at him, not understanding the allusion.
Shepherd laughed.
‘It was a Greek thing, Shai Tung.
In their mythology satyrs were elementary spirits of the mountains and the forests.
Part-goat, part-man.
Cloven-hooved, thickly-haired, sensual and lascivious.’
Li Shai Tung stared at the urbane, highly-sophisticated man standing at his side and laughed briefly, bemused that Shepherd could see himself in that brutal portrait.
‘I can see a slight likeness.
Something in the eyes, the shape of the head, but…’
Shepherd shook his head slowly.
He was staring at the hologram intently.
‘No.
Look at it, Shai Tung.
Look hard at it.
He sees me clearly.
My inner self.’
Li Shai Tung shivered.
‘The gods help us that our sons should see us thus!‘
Shepherd turned and looked at him.
‘Why?
Why should we fear that, old friend?
We know what we are.
Men.
Part mind, part animal.
Why should we be afraid of that?’
The T'ang pointed to the image.
‘Men, yes.
But men like that?
You really see yourself in such an image, Hal?’
Shepherd smiled.
‘It's not the all of me, I know, but it's a part.
An important part.’
Li Shai Tung shrugged — the slightest movement of his shoulders — then looked back at the image.
‘But why is the other as it is?
Why aren't both alike?’
‘Ben has a wicked sense of humour.’
Again the T'ang did not understand, but this time Shepherd made no attempt to enlighten him.
Li Shai Tung studied the hologram a moment longer then turned from it, looking all about him.
‘He gets such talent from you, Hal.’
Shepherd shook his head.
‘I never had a tenth of his talent.
Anyway, even the word ‘talent’ is unsatisfactory.
What he has is genius.
In that he's like his great-grandfather.‘
The T'ang smiled at that, remembering his father's tales of Augustus Shepherd's eccentricity.
‘Perhaps.
But let us hope that that is all he has inherited.’
He knew at once that he had said the wrong thing.
Or, if not the wrong thing, then something which touched upon a sensitive area.
‘The resemblance is more than casual.’
The T'ang lowered his head slightly, willing to drop the matter at once, but Shepherd seemed anxious to explain.
‘Ben's schizophrenic too, you see.
Oh, nothing as bad as Augustus.
But it creates certain incongruities in his character.’
Li Shai Tung looked back at the pictures above the bed with new understanding.
‘But from what you've said the boy is healthy enough.’
‘Even happy, I'd say.
Most of the time.
He has bouts of it, you understand.
Then we either dose him up heavily or leave him alone.’
Shepherd leaned across and switched off the viewer, then lifted the thin black sheet and slipped it back into the folder.
‘They used to think schizophrenia was a simple malfunction of the brain; an imbalance in certain chemicals — dopamine, glutamic acid and gamma-amino-butyric acid.
Drugs like largactil, modecate, disipal, priadel and haloperidol were used, mainly as tranquillisers.
But they simply kept the thing in check and had the side-effect of enlarging the dopamine system.
Worst of all, at least as far as Ben is concerned, they damp down the creative faculty.’
The T'ang frowned.
Medicine, like all else, was based on traditional Han ways.
The development of Western drugs, like Western ideas of progress, had been abandoned when Tsao Ch'un had built his City.
Many such drugs were, in fact, illicit now.
One heard of them, normally, only in the context of addiction — something that was rife in the lowest levels of the City.
Nowadays all serious conditions were diagnosed before the child was born and steps taken either to correct them or to abort the foetus.
It thus surprised him, first to hear that Ben's illness had not been diagnosed beforehand, second that he had even considered taking drugs to keep the illness in check.
‘He has not taken these drugs, I hope.’
Shepherd met his eyes.
‘Not only has but still does.
Except when he's working.’
The T'ang sighed deeply.
‘You should have told me, Hal.
I shall arrange for my herbalist to call on Ben within the next few days.’
Shepherd shook his head.
‘I thank you, Shai Tung.
Your kindness touches me.
But it would do no good.’
‘No good?’
The T'ang frowned, puzzled.
‘But there are numerous sedatives — things to calm the spirit and restore the body's yin-yang balance.
Good, healthy remedies, not these…drugs!’
‘I know, Shai Tung, and again I thank you for your concern.
But Ben would have none of it.
Oh, I can see him now —‘Dragon bones and oyster shells!’ he'd say scornfully, ‘What good are they against this affliction!’
The T'ang looked down, disturbed.
In this matter he could not insist.
The birthright of the Shepherds made them immune from the laws that governed others.
If Ben took drugs to maintain his mental stability there was little he, Li Shai Tung, could do about it.
Even so, he could not stop himself from feeling it was wrong.
He changed the subject.
‘Is he a good son, Hal?’
Shepherd laughed.
‘He is the best of sons, Shai Tung.
Like Li Yuan, his respect is not a matter of rote, as it is with some of this new generation, but a deep-rooted thing.
And as you've seen, it stems from a thorough knowledge of his father.’
The T'ang nodded, leaving his doubts unexpressed.
‘Good.
But you are right, Hal.
These past few years have seen a sharp decline in morality.
The li — the rites — they mean little now.
The young mouth the old words but they mean nothing by them.
Their respect is an empty shell.
We are fortunate, you and I, that we have good sons.’
‘Indeed.
Though Ben can be a pompous, intolerant little sod at times.
He has no time for fools.
And little enough for cleverness, if you see what I mean.
He loathes his machine-tutor, for instance.’
Li Shai Tung raised his eyebrows.
‘That surprises me, Hal.
I would have thought he cherished knowledge.
All this,’ he looked about him at the books and paintings and machines, ‘it speaks of a love of knowledge.’
Shepherd smiled strangely.
‘Perhaps you should talk to him yourself, Shai Tung.‘
The T'ang smiled.
‘Perhaps I should.’
Now, watching the boy across the length of the dinner table, he understood.
‘What do you think, Ben?
Do you think the time has come to fight our enemies?’
Unexpectedly, the boy laughed.
‘That depends on whether you know who or what your enemies are, Li Shai Tung.’
The T'ang lifted his chin slightly.
‘I think I have a fair idea of that.’
Ben met his eyes again, fixing that same penetrating stare on him.
‘Maybe.
But you must first ask yourself what exactly you are fighting against.
When you think of your enemies your first thought is of certain identifiable men and groups of men, is that not so?’
The T'ang nodded.
‘That is so, Ben.
I know my enemies.
I can put names to them and faces.’
‘There, you see.
And you think that by waging war against them you will  resolve this present situation.’
Ben set his bowl down and sat back, his every gesture momentarily — though none but Ben himself realised it — the mirror image of the T'ang's.
‘With respect, Li Shai Tung, you are wrong.’
The T'ang laughed fiercely, enjoying the exchange.
‘You think their ideology will outlive them?
Is that it, Ben?
If it were not so false in the first place, I would agree with you.
But their sole motivation is greed.
They don't really want change.
They want power.’
Ben shook his head.
‘Ah, but you're still thinking of specific men.
Powerful men, admittedly, even men of influence, but only men.
Men won't bring Chung Kuo down, only what's inside Man.
You should free yourself from thinking of them.
To you they seem the greatest threat, but they're not.
They're the scum on the surface of the well.
And the well is deep.’
Li Shai Tung took a deep breath.
‘With respect, Ben, in this you are wrong.
Your argument presupposes that it does not matter who rules — that things will remain as they are whoever is in power.
But that's not so.
Their ideology is false, but, forgive me, they are Hung Mao .’
Across from him Hal Shepherd smiled, but he was clearly embarrassed.
It was more than two decades since he had taken offence at the term-a term used all the while in court, where the Han were predominant and the few Caucasians treated as honorary Han — yet here, in the Domain, he felt the words incongruous, almost — surprisingly — insulting.
‘They have no sense of harmony,’ continued the T'ang, unaware.
‘No sense of li .
Any change they brought would not be for the good.
They are men of few principles.
They would carve the world up into principalities and then there would be war again.
Endless war.
As it was before.’
There was the faintest of smiles on Ben's lips.
‘You forget your own history, Li Shai Tung.
No dynasty can last forever.
The wheel turns.
Change comes, whether you will it or no.
It is the way of Mankind.
All of Mankind, even the Han.’
‘So it may have been, but things are different now.
The wheel no longer turns.
We have done with history.’
Ben laughed.
‘But you cannot stop the world from turning!’
He was about to say more but his mother touched his arm.
She had sat there, perfectly still and silent, watching the fire while they talked, her dark hair hiding her face.
Now she smiled and got up, excusing herself.
‘Perhaps you men would like to go through into the study.
I've lit the fire there.‘
Shepherd looked to the T'ang, who gave the slightest nod of agreement before standing and bowing to his hostess.
Again he thanked her warmly for the meal and her hospitality, then, when she had gone, went before Shepherd and his son into the other room.
‘Brandy?’
Shepherd turned from the wall cabinet, holding the decanter up.
The T'ang was usually abstemious, but tonight his mood seemed different.
He seemed to want to talk — to encourage talk.
as if there were some real end to all this talking: some problem which, though he hadn't come to it, he wished to address.
Something he found difficult; that worried him profoundly.
The T'ang hesitated, then smiled.
‘Why not?
After all, a man should indulge himself now and then.’
Shepherd poured the T'ang a fingernail's measure of the dark liquid and handed him the ancient bowled glass.
Then he turned to his son.
‘Ben?’
Ben smiled almost boyishly.
‘Are you sure mother won't mind?’
Shepherd winked at him.
‘Mother won't know.’
He handed the boy a glass, then poured one for himself and sat, facing the T'ang across the fire.
Maybe it was time to force the pace; time to draw the T'ang out of himself.
‘Something's troubling you, Shai Tung.’
The T'ang looked up from his glass almost distractedly and gave a soft laugh.
‘Everything troubles me, Hal.
But that's not what you mean, is it?’
‘No.
No visit of yours is casual, Shai Tung.
You had a specific reason for coming to see me, didn't you?’
The T'ang's smile was filled with gratitude.
‘As ever, Hal, you're right.
But I'll need no excuse to come next time.
I've found this very pleasant.’
‘Well?‘
The T'ang took a long inward breath, steeling himself, then spoke Tolonen.’
For some time now the T'ang had been under intense pressure from the House to bring the General to trial for the murder of Under Secretary Lehmann.
They wanted Tolonen's head for what he'd done.
But the T'ang had kept his thoughts to himself about the killing.
No one— not the Seven nor Hal Shepherd — knew how he really felt about the matter, only that he had refused to see Tolonen since that day; that he had exiled him immediately and appointed a new General, Vittorio Nocenzi, in his place.
Shepherd waited, conscious of how tense Li Shai Tung had suddenly become.
Tolonen had been of the same generation as the T'ang and they shared the same unspoken values.
In their personal lives there had been parallels that had drawn them close and formed a bond between them; not least the loss of both their wives some ten years back.
In temperament, however, they were ice and fire.
‘I miss him.
Do you understand that, Hal?
I really miss the old devil.
First and foremost for himself.
For all that he was.
Loyal.
Honest.
Brave.’
He looked up briefly, then looked down again, his eyes misting.
‘I felt he was my champion, Hal.
Always there at my side.
From my eighteenth year.
My General.
My most trusted man.’
He shuddered and was silent for a while.
Then he began again, his voice softer, yet somehow stronger, more definite than before.
‘Strangely I miss his rashness most of all.
He was like Han Ch'in in that.
What he said was always what part of me felt.
Now I feel almost that that part of me is missing — is unexpressed, festering in the darkness.’
‘You want him back?’
Li Shai Tung laughed bitterly.
‘as if I could.
No, Hal, but I want to see, him.
I need to speak to him.’
Shepherd was silent for a time, considering, then he leaned forward and set his glass down on the table at his side.
‘You should call him back, Shai Tung.
For once damn the House and its demands.
Defy them.
You are T'ang, and thus above their laws.’
Li Shai Tung looked up and met Shepherd's eyes.
‘I am T'ang, yes, but I am also Seven.
I could not act so selfishly.’
‘Why not?’
The T'ang laughed, surprised.
‘This is unlike you, Hal.
For more than twenty years you have advised me to be cautious, to consider the full implications of my actions, but now, suddenly, you counsel me to rashness.’
Shepherd smiled.
‘Not rashness, Shai Tung.
Far from it.
In fact, I've thought of little else this past year.’
He got up and went across to a bureau in the corner furthest from the fire, returning a moment later with a folder which he handed to the T'ang.
‘What is this, Hal?’
Shepherd smiled, then sat again.
‘My thoughts on things.’
Li Shai Tung stared thoughtfully at Shepherd a moment, then set his glass down and opened the folder.
‘But this is handwritten.’
Shepherd nodded.
‘It's the only copy.
I've said things in there that I'd rather not have fall into the hands of our enemies.’
He looked briefly at his son as he said the last few words, conscious that the boy was watching everything.
Li Shai Tung looked up at him, his face suddenly hawk-like, his eyes fiercer than before.
‘Why did you not mention this before?’
‘It was not my place.
In any case, it was not ready before now.’
The T'ang looked back down at the folder and at the summary Shepherd had appended to the front of his report.
This was more than a simple distillation of the man's thoughts on the current political situation.
Here, in its every detail, was the plan for that ‘War of Levels’ Shepherd had mentioned earlier.
A scheme which would, if implemented, bring the Seven into direct confrontation with the House.
Li Shai Tung flicked through the pages of the report quickly, skimming, picking out phrases which Shepherd had highlighted or underlined, his pulse quickening as he read.
Shepherd's tiny, neat handwriting filled almost forty pages, but the meat of it was there, in that opening summary.
He read once more what Shepherd had written.
Power is defined only through the exercise of power.
For too long now we  have refrained from openly exercising our power and that restraint has been taken for weakness by our enemies.
In view of developments it might be argued that they have been justified in this view.
However, our real weakness is not that we lack the potential, but that we lack the will to act.
We have lost the initiative and allowed our opponents to dictate the subject — even the rules — of the debate.
This has resulted in the perpetuation of the belief that change is not merely desirable but inevitable.
Moreover, they believe that the natural instrument of that change is the House, therefore they seek to increase the power of the House.
The logic of this process is inexorable.
There is nothing but House and Seven, hence the House can grow only at the expense of the Seven.
War is inevitable.
It can be delayed but not avoided.
And every delay is henceforth to our opponents' advantage.
They grow while we diminish.
It follows that we must pre-empt their play for power.
We must destroy them now, while we yet have the upper hand.
Li Shai Tung closed the file with a sigh.
Shepherd was right.
He knew, with a gut certainty, that this was what they should do.
But he had said it already.
He was not simply T'ang, he was Seven, and the Seven would never act on this.
They saw it differently.
‘Well?’
‘I can keep this?’
‘Of course.
It was meant for you.’
The T'ang smiled sadly, then looked across at the boy.
He spoke to him as he would to his own son, undeferentially, as one adult to another.
‘Have you seen this, Ben?’
Shepherd answered for his son.
‘You've heard him already.
He thinks it nonsense.’
Ben corrected his father.
‘Not nonsense.
I never said that.
I merely said it avoided the real issue.’
‘Which is?’
Li Shai Tung asked, reaching for his glass.
‘Why men are never satisfied.’
The T'ang considered a moment, then laughed softly.
‘That has always been so, Ben.
How can I change what men are?’
‘You could make it better for them.
They feel boxed-in.
Not just physically, but mentally, too.
They've no dreams.
Not one of them feels real any more.’
There was a moment's silence, then Hal Shepherd spoke again.
‘You know this, Ben?
You've talked to people?’
Ben stared at his father momentarily, then turned his attention back to the T'ang.
‘You can't miss it.
It's there in all their eyes.
There's an emptiness there.
An unfilled, unfulfilled space deep inside them.
I don't have to talk to them to see that.
I have only to watch the media.
It's like they're all dead but they can't see it.
They're looking for some purpose for it all and they can't find it.’
Li Shai Tung stared back at the boy for a moment, then looked down, chilled by what Ben had said.
Was it so?
Was it really so?
He looked about the room, conscious suddenly of the lowness of the ceiling, of the dark oak beams that divided up the whitewashed walls, the fresh cut roses in a silver bowl on the table in the corner.
He could feel the old wood beneath his fingers, smell the strong pine scent of the fire.
All this was real.
And he, he too was real, surely?
But sometimes, just sometimes…
‘And you think we could give them a purpose?’
Strangely, Ben smiled.
‘No.
But you might give them the space to find one for themselves.’
The T'ang nodded.
‘Ah.
Space.
Well, Ben, there are more than thirty-nine billion people in Chung Kuo.
What practical measures could we possibly take to give space to so many?’
But Ben was shaking his head.
‘You mistake me, Li Shai Tung.
You take my image too literally.’
He put a finger to his brow.
‘I meant space up here.
That's where they're trapped.
The City's only the outward, concrete form of it.
But the blueprint — the paradigm — is inside their heads.
That's where you've got to give them room.
And you can only do that by giving them a sense of direction.’
‘Change.
That's what you mean, isn't it?’
‘No.
You need change nothing.’
Li Shai Tung laughed.
‘Then I don't understand you, Ben.
Have you some magic trick in mind?’
‘Not at all.
I mean only that if the problem is in their heads then the solution can be found in the same place.
They want outwardness.
They want space, excitement, novelty.
Well, why not give it to them?
But not out there, in the real world.
Give it to them up here, in their heads.’
The T'ang was frowning.
‘But don't they get that, Ben?
Doesn't the media give them that now?’
Ben shook his head.
‘No.
I'm talking of something entirely different.
Something that will make the walls dissolve.
That will make it real to them.’
Again he tapped his brow.
‘Up here, where it counts.’
The T'ang was about to answer him when there was a knock on the door.
‘Come in!’ said Shepherd, half turning in his seat.
It was the T'ang's steward.
He bowed low to Shepherd and his son, then turned, his head still lowered, to his master.
‘Forgive me,Chieh Hsia , but you asked me to remind you of your audience with Minister Chao.’
Then, with a bow, the steward backed away, closing the door behind him.
Li Shai Tung looked back at Shepherd.
‘I'm sorry, Hal, but I must leave soon.’
‘Of course…’
Shepherd began, but his son interrupted him.
‘One last thing, Li Shai Tung.’
The T'ang turned, patient, smiling.
‘What is it, Ben?’
‘I saw something.
This afternoon, in the town.’
Li Shai Tung frowned.
‘You saw something?’
‘An execution.
And a suicide.
Two of the elite guards.’
‘Gods!’
The T'ang sat forward.
‘You saw that?’
‘We were upstairs in one of the shops.’
Shepherd broke in.
‘We.
You mean Meg was with you?’
Ben nodded, then told what he had seen.
At the end Li Shai Tung, his face stricken, turned to Shepherd.
‘Forgive me, Hal.
This is all my fault.
Captain Rosten was acting on my direct orders.
However, had I known Ben and Meg would be there…’
He shuddered, then turned back to the boy.
‘Ben, please forgive me.
And ask Meg to forgive me, too.
Would that I could undo what has been done.’
For a moment Ben seemed about to say something, then he dropped his eyes and made a small movement of his head.
A negation.
But what it signified neither man knew.
There was another knock on the door; a signal that the T'ang acknowledged with a few words of Mandarin.
Then the two men stood, facing each other, smiling, for a brief moment in perfect accord.
‘It has been an honour to have you here, Li Shai Tung.
An honour and a pleasure.’
The T'ang's smile broadened.
‘The pleasure has been mine, Hal.
It is not often I can be myself.’
‘Then come again.
Whenever you need to be yourself.’
Li Shai Tung let his left hand rest on Shepherd's upper arm a moment, then nodded.
‘I shall.
I promise you.
But come, Hal, I've a gift for you.’
The door opened and two of the T'ang's personal servants came in, carrying the gift.
They set it down on the floor in the middle of the room, as the T'ang had instructed them earlier, then backed away, heads lowered.
It was a tree.
A tiny, miniature apple tree.
Shepherd went across and knelt beside it, then turned and looked back at Li Shai Tung, clearly moved by the T'ang's gesture.
‘It's beautiful.
It really is, Shai Tung.
How did you know I wanted one?’
The T'ang laughed softly.
‘I cheated, Hal.
I asked Beth.
But the gift is for you both.
Look carefully.
The tree is a twin.
It has two intertwined trunks.’
Shepherd looked.
‘Ah yes.’
He laughed, aware of the significance.
Joined trees were objects of good omen; symbols of conjugal happiness and marital fidelity.
More than that, an apple —p'ing , in Mandarin — was a symbol of peace.
‘It's perfect, Li Shai Tung.
It really is.’
He shook his head, overwhelmed, tears forming in his eyes.
‘We shall treasure it.’
‘And I this.’
Li Shai Tung held up Shepherd's file.
He smiled, then turned to the boy.
‘It was good to talk with you, Ben.
I hope we might talk again some time.‘
Ben stood and, unexpectedly, gave a small bow to the T'ang.
‘My father's right, of course.
You should destroy them.
Now, while you still can.
‘Ah…’
Li Shai Tung hesitated, then nodded.
Maybe so, he thought, surprised yet again by the child's unpredictability.
But he said nothing.
Time alone would prove them right or wrong on that.
He looked back at Shepherd who was standing now.
‘I must go, Hal.
It would not do to keep Minister Chao waiting.’
He laughed.
‘You know, Chao has been in my service longer than anyone but Tolonen.’
It was said before he realised it.
‘I forget…’ he said, with a small, sad laugh.
Shepherd, watching him, shook his head.
‘Bring him back, Shai Tung,’ he said softly.
‘This once, do as your heart bids you.’
The T'ang smiled tightly and held the file more firmly.
‘Maybe,’ he said.
But he knew he would not.
It was as he had said.
He was T'ang, yes, but he was also Seven.
When the T'ang had gone they stood at the river's edge.
The moon was high overhead — a bright, full moon that seemed to float in the dark mirror of the water.
The night was warm and still, its silence broken only by the sound — a distant, almost disembodied sound — of the soldiers working on the cottage.
Shepherd squatted down, looking out across the water into the darkness on the other side.
‘What did you mean, Ben, earlier?
All that business about dissolving walls and making it real.
Was that just talk or did you have something real in mind?’
Ben was standing several paces from his father, looking back up the grassy slope to where they had set up arc lamps all around the cottage.
The dark figures of the suited men seemed to flit through the glare like objects seen peripherally, in a dream.
‘It's an idea I have.
Something I've been working on.’
Shepherd turned his head slightly and studied his son a moment.
‘You seemed quite confident.
Almost as if the thing existed.’
Ben smiled and met his father's eyes briefly.
‘It does.
Up here.’
Shepherd laughed and looked down, tugging at the long grass.
‘So what is it?
I'm interested.
And I think the T'ang was interested, too.’
‘What did he want?’
A faint breeze ruffled the water, making the moon dance exaggeratedly on the darkness.
‘What do you mean?’
‘Why was I there?’
Shepherd smiled to himself.
He should have known better than to think Ben would not ask that question.
‘Because he wanted to see you, Ben.
Because he thinks that one day you might help his son.’
‘I see.
And he was assessing me?’
‘You might put it that way.’
Ben laughed.
‘I thought as much.
Do you think he found me strange?‘
‘Why should you think that?’
Ben looked directly at his father.
‘I know what I am.
I've seen enough of the world to know how different I am.’
‘On a screen, yes.
But not everything's up there on the screen, Ben.’
‘No?’
Ben looked back up the slope towards the cottage.
They were hauling the first of the thin, encasing layers over the top of the frame, the heavily-suited men pulling on the guide ropes.
‘What don't they show?’
Shepherd laughed, but let the query pass.
Ben was right.
He did know what he was, and he was different.
There was no point in denying that.
‘You've no need to follow in my footsteps, Ben.’
Ben smiled but didn't look at him.
‘You think I'd want that?’
Shepherd felt a twinge of bitterness, then shook his head.
‘No.
No, I guess not.
In any case, I'd never force that on you.
You know that, don't you?’
Ben turned and stared out across the water fixedly.
‘Those things don't interest me.
The political specifics.
The who-runs-what and who-did-what.
I would be bored by it all.
And what good is a bored advisor?
I'd need to care about those things, and I don't.’
‘You seemed to care.
Earlier, when we were talking about them.’
‘No.
That was something different.
That was the deeper thing.’
Shepherd laughed.
‘Of course.
The deeper thing.’
Ben looked back at him.
‘You deal in surfaces, father, both of you.
But the problem's deeper than that.
It's inside.
Beneath the surface of the skin.
It's bred in the blood and bone of men, in the complex web of nerve and muscle and organic tissue.
But you…
Well, you persist in dealing with only what you see.
You treat the blemished skin and let the inner man corrupt.’
Shepherd was watching his son thoughtfully, aware of the gulf that had grown between them these last few years.
It was as if Ben had outgrown them all.
Had done with childish things.
He shrugged.
‘Maybe.
But that doesn't solve the immediate problem.
Those surfaces you dismiss so readily have hard edges.
Collide with them and you'll realise that at once.
People get hurt, lives get blighted, and those aren't superficial things.’
‘It wasn't what I meant.’
Shepherd laughed.
‘No.
Maybe not.
And maybe you're right.
You'd make a lousy advisor, Ben.
You've been made for other things than politics and intrigue.’
He stood up, wiping his hands against his trousers.
‘You know, there were many things I wanted to do, but I never had the time for them.
Pictures I wanted to paint, books I wanted to write, music I wanted to compose.
But in serving the T'ang I've had to sacrifice all those and much else besides.
I've seen much less of you and Meg than I ought — and far, far too little of your mother.
So…’
He shrugged.
‘Well, if you don't want that kind of life, I understand.
I understand only too well.
More than that, Ben, I think the world would lose something were you to neglect the gifts you have.’
Ben smiled.
‘We'll see.’
Then he pointed up the slope.
‘I think they've almost finished.
That's the third of the isolation skins.’
Shepherd turned and looked back up the slope.
The cottage was fully encased now, its cosy shape disguised by the huge, white insulating layers.
Only at the front, where the door to the garden was, was its smooth, perfectly geometric shape broken.
There they had put the seal-unit; a big cylinder containing the air-pump and the emergency generator.
A dozen suited men were fastening the edges of the insulator to the brace of the frame.
The brace was permanently embedded in the earth surrounding the cottage; a crude, heavy piece of metal a foot wide and three inches thick with a second, smaller ‘collar’ fixed by old-fashioned wing-screws to the base.
The whole strange apparatus had been devised by Ben's great-great-great-grandfather, Amos — the first of the Shepherds to live here — as a precaution against nuclear fallout.
But when the Great Third War—’ The War To End It All’as the old man had written in his journal — had failed to materialise, the whole cumbersome isolation-unit had been folded up and stored away, only the metal brace remaining, for the amusement of each new generation of Shepherd children.
‘Gift-wrapped!’
Shepherd joked, beginning to climb the slope.
Ben, following a few paces behind, gave a small laugh, but it was unrelated to his father's comment.
He had had an insight.
It had been Amos' son, Robert, who had designed City Earth.
His preliminary architectural sketches hung in a long glass frame on the passage wall inside the cottage.
But the idea had not originated with him.
The seed of City Earth lay here, now, before them physically before them — as they climbed the grassy slope.
Here, in this outward symbol of his great-great-great-grandfather'sdf paranoia was the genesis of all that had followed.
Robert had merely enlarged and refined his father's scheme until it embraced a world.
He laughed softly to himself, then looked across at his father, wondering if he saw it too, or whether the connection existed in his mind alone.
Nearer the cottage the soldiers had set up an infestation grid, the dull mauve light attracting anything small and winged from the surrounding meadows.
Ben stood and watched as a moth, its wings like the dull gauze of an old and faded dress, its body thick and stubby like a miniature cigar, fluttered towards the grid.
For a moment it danced in the blue-pink light, mesmerised by the brightness, its translucent wings suffused with purple.
Then its wing-tip brushed against the tilted surface.
With a spark and a hiss the moth fell, senseless, into the grid, where it flamed momentarily, its wings curling, vanishing in an instant, its body cooking to a dark cinder.
Ben watched a moment longer, conscious of his own fascination; his ears filled with the brutal music of the grid — the crack and pop and sizzle of the dying creatures, his eyes drawn to each brief, sudden incandescence.
And in his mind he formed a pattern of their vivid after-images against the dull mauve light.
‘Come, Ben.
Come on in.’
He turned.
His mother was standing in the doorway, beckoning to him.
He smiled then sniffed the air.
It was filled with the tart, sweet scent of ozone and burnt insects.
‘I was watching,’ he said, as if it explained everything.
‘I know.’
She came across to him and put her hand on his shoulder.
‘It's horrible, isn't it?
But necessary, I suppose.’
‘Yes.‘
But he meant something other by the word: something more than simple agreement.
It was both horrible and necessary, if only to prevent the spread of the disease throughout the Domain; but it was just that — the horrible necessity of death — that gave it its fascination.
Is all of life just that? he asked himself, looking away from the grid, out across the dark, moonlit water of the bay.
Is it all merely one brief, erratic flight into the burning light?
And then nothing?
Ben shivered, not from fear or cold, but from some deeper, more complex response, then turned and looked up at his mother, smiling.
‘Okay.
Let's go inside.‘
The captain of the work party watched the woman and her son go in, then signalled to his men to complete the sealing-off of the cottage.
It was nothing to him, of course— orders were orders — yet it had occurred to him several times that it would have been far simpler to evacuate the Shepherds than go through with all this nonsense.
He could not for the life of him understand why they should wish to remain inside the cottage while the Domain was dusted with poisons.
Still, he had to admit.
it was a neat job.
Old man Amos had known what he was up to.
He walked across and inspected the work thoroughly.
Then, satisfied that the seal was air-tight, he pulled the lip mike up from under his chin.
‘Okay.
We're finished here.
You can start the sweep.’
Six miles away, at the mouth of the estuary, the four big transporters, converted specially for the task, lifted one by one from the pad and began to form up in a line across the river.
Then, at a signal, they began, moving slowly down the estuary, a thin cloud — colourless, like fine powdered snow — drifting down behind them.
AUGUSTUS
It was just after ten in the morning, yet the sun already blazed down from a vast, deep blue sky that seemed washed clean of all impurities.
Sunlight burnished the surface of the grey-green water, making it seem dense and yet clear, like melted glass.
The tide was high but on the turn, lapping sluggishly against the rocks at the river's edge.
In mid-stream Meg let Ben take the oars from her, changing seats with him nimbly as the boat drifted slowly about.
Then she sat back, watching him as he strove to right their course, his face a mask of patient determination, the muscles of his bare, tanned arms tensing and untensing.
Ben clenched his teeth then pulled hard on the right-hand oar, turning the prow slowly towards the distant house, the dark, slick-edged blade biting deep into the glaucous, muscular flow as he hauled the boat about in a tight arc.
‘Are you sure it's all right?’
Ben grimaced, concentrating, inwardly weighing the feel of the boat against the strong pull of the current.
‘She'll never know,’ he answered.
‘Who'll tell her?’
It wasn't a threat.
He knew he could trust her to say nothing to their mother.
Meg looked down briefly, smiling, pleased that he trusted her.
Then she sat there, quiet, content to watch him, to see the broad river stretching away beyond him, the white-painted cottages of the village dotted against the broad green flank of the hill, while at her back the house grew slowly nearer.
Solitary, long-abandoned, it awaited them.
The foreshore was overgrown.
Weeds grew waist-high in the spaces between the rocks.
Beyond, the land was level for thirty yards or so then climbed, slowly at first, then steeply.
The house wasn't visible from where they stood, in the cool beneath the branches, and even further along, where the path turned, following the contours of the shoreline, they could see only a small part of it, jutting up, white between the intense green of the surrounding trees.
The land was strangely, unnaturally silent.
Meg looked down through the trees.
Below them, to their right, was the cove, the dark mouth of the cave  almost totally submerged, the branches of the overhanging trees only inches above the surface of the water.
It made her feel odd.
Not quite herself.
‘Come on,’ said Ben, looking back at her.
‘We've not long.
Mother will be back by two.’
They went up.
A path had been cut from the rock.
Rough hewn steps led up steeply, hugging an almost sheer cliff face.
They had to force their way through a tangle of bushes and branches.
At the top they came out into a kind of clearing.
There was concrete underfoot, cracked but reasonably clear of vegetation.
It was a road.
To their left it led up into the trees.
To their right it ended abruptly, only yards from where they stood, at an ornate cast-iron gate set into a wall.
They went across and stood there, before the gate, looking in.
The house lay beyond the gate; a big, square, three-storey building of white stone, with a steeply-pitched roof of grey slate.
They could see patches of it through the over-run front garden.
Here, more noticeably than elsewhere, nature had run amok.
A stone fountain lay in two huge grey pieces, split asunder by an ash that had taken seed long ago in the disused fissure at its centre.
Elsewhere the regular pattern of a once elaborate garden could be vaguely sensed, underlying the chaotic sprawl of new growth.
‘Well?’ she said, looking up at him.
‘What now?’
The wall was too high to climb.
The gate seemed strong and solid, with four big hinges set into the stone.
A big, thick-linked steel chain was wrapped tightly about the lock, secured by a fist-sized padlock.
Ben smiled.
‘Watch.’
Taking a firm hold of two of the upright bars, he shook the gate vigorously, then gave it one last sharp forward thrust.
With a crash it fell inward, then swung sideways, twisting against the restraining chain.
Ben stepped over it, then reached back for her.
‘The iron was rotten,’ he said, pointing to the four places in the stone where the hinges had snapped sheer off.
She nodded, understanding at once what he was really saying to her.
Be careful here.
Judge nothing by its appearance .
He turned from her.
She followed, more cautious now, making her way through the thick sprawl of greenery towards the house.
A verandah ran the length of the front of the house.
At one end it had collapsed.
One of the four mock-doric pillars had fallen and now lay, like the broken leg of a stone giant, half-buried in the window frame behind where it had previously stood.
The glass-framed roof of the verandah was broken in several places where branches of nearby trees had pushed against it, and the whole of the wooden frame — the elaborately-carved side pieces, the stanchions, rails and planking — was visibly rotten.
Ben stood before the shallow flight of steps that led up to the main entrance, his head tilted back as he studied the frontage.
‘It's not what I expected,’ he said as she came alongside him.
‘It seems a lot grander from the river.
And bigger.
A real fortress of a place.’
She took his arm.
‘I don't know, Ben.
I think it is rather grand.
Or was, anyway.’
He turned his head and looked at her.
‘Did you bring the lamp?’
She nodded and patted her pocket.
‘Good.
Though I doubt there'll be much to see.
The house has been boarded up more than eighty years now.’
She was silent a moment, thoughtful, and knew he was thinking the same thing.
Augustus.
The mystery of this house had something to do with their great-grandfather, Augustus.
‘Well?’ she prompted after a moment.
‘Shall we go inside?’
‘Yes.
But not this way.
There's another door round the side.
We'll get in there, through the kitchens.’
She stared at him a moment, then understood.
He had already studied plans of the old house.
Which meant he had planned this visit for some while.
But why this morning?
Was it something to do with the soldiers' deaths?
Or was it something else?
She knew they had had a visitor last night, but no one had told her who it was or why they'd come.
Whatever, Ben had seemed disturbed first thing when she had gone to wake him.
He had been up already.
She had found him sitting there, hunched up on his bed, his arms wrapped about his knees, staring out through the open window at the bay.
That same mood was on him even now as he stood there looking up at the house.
‘What exactly are we looking for?’
‘Clues…’
She studied his face a moment longer but it gave nothing away.
His answer was unlike him.
He was always so specific, so certain.
But today he was different.
It was as if he was looking for something so ill-defined, so vaguely comprehended that even he could not say what it was.
‘Come on then,’ he said suddenly.
‘Let's see what ghosts we'll find.’
She laughed quietly, that same feeling she had had staring down at the cove through the trees — that sense of being not quite herself — returning to her.
It was not fear, for she was never afraid when she was with Ben, but something else.
Something to do with this side of the water.
With the wildness here.
as if it reflected something in herself.
Some deeper, hidden thing.
‘What do you think we'll find?’ she called out to him as she followed him, pushing through the dense tangle of bushes and branches.
‘Have you any idea at all?’
‘None,’ he yelled back.
‘Maybe there's nothing at all.
Maybe it's an empty shell.
But then why would they board it up?
Why bother if it's empty?
Why not just leave it to rot?’
She caught up with him.
‘From the look of it it's rotted anyway.’
Ben glanced at her.
‘It'll be different inside.’
A broad shaft of daylight breached the darkness.
She watched Ben fold the shutter into its recess, then move along to release and fold back another, then another, until all four were open.
Now the room was filled with light.
A big room.
Much bigger than she'd imagined it in the dark.
A long wooden worksurface filled most of the left-hand wall, its broad top cleared.
Above it, on the wall itself, were great tea-chest-sized oak cupboards.
At the far end four big ovens occupied the space, huge pipes leading up from them into the ceiling overhead.
Against the right-hand wall, beneath the windows, was a row of old machines and, beside the door, a big enamel sink.
She watched Ben bend down and examine the pipes beneath the sink.
They were green with moss, red with rust.
He rubbed his finger against the surface of one of them, then put the finger gingerly to his lips.
She saw him frown then sniff the finger, his eyes intense, taking it all in.
He turned, then, surprisingly, he laughed.
‘Look.’
There, in the middle of the white-tiled floor, was a beetle.
A rounded, black-shelled thing the size of a brooch.
‘Is it alive?’ she asked, expecting it to move at any moment.
He shrugged, then went across and picked it up.
But it was only a husk, the shell of a beetle.
‘It's been dead years,’ he said.
Yes, she thought; maybe since the house was sealed.
There was another door behind them, next to an old, faded print that was rotten with damp beneath its mould-spattered glass.
Beyond the door was a narrow corridor that led off to the right.
They went through, moving slowly, cautiously, side by side, using their lamps to light the way ahead of them.
They explored, throwing open the shutters in each of the big rooms, but there was nothing.
The rooms were empty, their dusty floorboards bare, only the dark outlines of long-absent pictures interrupting the blankness of the walls.
No sign of life.
Only the husk, the empty shell of what they'd come for.
Augustus.
No one talked of Augustus.
Yet it was that very absence which made him so large in their imaginations.
Ever since Ben had first found that single mention of him in the journals.
But what had he been?
What had he done that he could not be talked of?
She shivered and looked at Ben.
He was watching her, as if he knew what she was thinking.
‘Shall we go up?’
She nodded.
Upstairs it was different.
There the rooms were filled with ancient furniture, preserved under white sheets, as if the house had been closed up for the summer only, while its occupant was absent.
In one of the big rooms at the front of the house, Meg stood beside one of the huge, open shutters, staring out through the trees at the river.
Light glimmered on the water through gaps in the heavy foliage.
Behind her she could hear Ben, pulling covers off chairs and tables, searching, restlessly searching for something.
‘What happened here?’
Ben stopped and looked up from what he was doing.
‘I'm not sure.
But it's the key to things.
I know it is.’
She turned and met his eyes.
‘How?
How do you know?’
He smiled.
‘Because it's the one thing they won't talk about.
Gaps.
Look for the gaps, Meg.
That's where the truth is.
That's where they hide all the important stuff.’
‘Like what?’
His face hardened momentarily, then he looked away.
She looked down, realising just how keyed up he was; how close he had come to snapping at her.
‘There's nothing here,’ he said, after a moment.
‘Let's go up again.’
She nodded, then followed him up, knowing there would be nothing.
The house was empty.
Or as good as.
But she was wrong.
Ben laughed, delighted, then stepped inside the room, shining his lamp about the walls.
It was a library.
Or a study maybe.
Whichever, the walls were filled with shelves, and the shelves with books.
Old books, of paper and card and leather.
Ben hurried to the shutters and threw them open, then turned and stared back into the room.
There was a door, two windows and a full length mirror on the wall to his left.
Apart from that there were only shelves.
Books and more books, filling every inch of the wall-space.
‘Whose were they?’ she asked, coming alongside him; sharing his delight at their find.
He pulled a book down at random, then another and another.
The bookplates were all the same.
He showed her one.
She read the words aloud.
‘This book is the property of Amos William Shepherd.’
She laughed, then looked up into Ben's face.
‘Then he lived here.
But I thought…’
Ben shrugged.
‘I don't know.
Maybe he used this house to work in.’
She turned, looking about her.
There were books scattered all about their cottage, but not a tenth as many as were here.
There must have been five, maybe ten thousand of them here.
She laughed, astonished by their find.
There were probably more books here —real books — than there were in the rest of Chung Kuo.
Ben was walking slowly up and down the room, looking about him curiously.
‘It's close,’ he said softly.
‘It's very close now.
I know it is.’
‘What's close?’ she wanted to ask him.
What?
What?
What?
But the question would only anger him.
He knew no better than she.
He only sensed there was something.
Then, suddenly, he stopped and turned and almost ran outside into the corridor again.
‘There!’ he said, exultant, and she watched him pace out the  distance from the end of the corridor to the doorway.
Fifteen paces.
He went inside and did the same.
Twelve.
Only twelve!
She saw at once.
The mirror.
The mirror was a door.
A way through.
He went to it at once, looking for a catch, a way of releasing it, but there was nothing.
Frustrated, he pulled books down from the shelf and knocked at the wall behind them.
It was brick, solid brick.
For a moment he stood before the mirror, staring into it.
Then he laughed.
‘Of course!’
He turned and pointed it out to her.
‘Level with the top of the mirror.
That row of books opposite.
Look, Meg.
Tell me what you see.’
She went across and looked.
They were novels.
Famous novels.
ULYSSES, NOSTROMO, TESS OF THE  D'URBERVILLES , VANITY FAIR, HOWARD'S END, BLEAK HOUSE, DANIEL MARTIN, ORLANDO and several others.
She turned back to him and frowned.
‘I don't understand, Ben.
What am I looking for?’
‘It's a cryptogram.
Look at the order.
The first letter of the titles.’
She looked, doing as he said.
D.A.E.H.R.E.V.O.N.O.T.T.U.B. Then she understood.
It was mirrored.
You had to reverse the letters.
He laughed, ahead of her, and reached up to find the button.
With a faint hiss of escaping air the mirror sprang free.
Beyond it was a room.
Ben shone his lamp inside.
It seemed like a smaller version of the library, the walls covered with books.
But in its centre, taking up most of the floor space, was a desk.
He shone his lamp over the desk's surface, picking out four objects.
A letter knife, an ink-block, a framed photograph and a large, folio-sized journal.
The light rested on the last of these for some while, then moved upward, searching the end wall.
Meg came alongside him.
‘What are you looking for?’
‘A window.
There must have been a window.’
‘Why?
If he really wanted to keep this room a secret, having no window onto the outside would be the best way, surely?’
He looked at her, then nodded.
But she, watching him, was surprised that he hadn't seen it for himself.
It was as if , now that he'd found it, he was transfixed by his discovery.
She shone her lamp into his face.
‘Meg…’
He pushed her hand away.
She moved past him, into the room, then turned back, facing him.
‘Here.’
She handed him the journal, knowing, even before he confirmed it, whose it was.
Augustus.
There was a space for it on the shelf on her father's study amongst the others there.
She recognised the tooled black leather of its
Ben opened it.
He turned a page, then smiled and looked up at her.
‘Am I right?’ she asked.
In answer he turned the book and showed her the page.
She laughed  uneasily, shocked, then looked back up at him.
It was a picture of Ben.
An almost perfect portrait of him.
And underneath, in Ben's own handwriting, was a name and a date.
‘Augustus Shepherd.
Anno Domini 2120.’
‘But that's you.
Your handwriting.’
He shook his head.
‘No.
But it's a clue.
We're getting close, Meg.
Very close now.’
Beth Shepherd set the two bags down on the kitchen table then went to the garden door and undid the top catch.
Pushing the top half back, she leaned out and called to the children.
‘Ben!
Meg!
I'm back!’
She went inside again and busied herself, filling the cupboards from the bags.
Only when she had finished did she go to the door again and, releasing the bottom catch, go out into the rose garden.
There was no sign of them.
Perhaps they're indoors, she thought.
But then they would have heard her, surely?
She called again, moving out through the gate until she stood at the top of the lower garden that sloped down to the bay.
She put her hand up to her eyes, searching the sun-lit meadows for a sign of them.
‘Strange…’ she muttered, then turned and went back inside.
She knew she was back quite early, but they usually came when she called, knowing she would have brought something special for each of them.
She took the two gifts from her handbag and set them on the table.
An old-fashioned paper book for Ben — one he had specifically asked for — on sensory deprivation.
And for Meg a tiny Han ivory.
A delicately carved globe.
Beth smiled to herself, then went down the steps and into the relative darkness of the dining room.
‘Ben?
Meg?
Are you there?’
She stopped at the bottom of the steps and listened.
Strange.
Very strange.
Where could they be?
Ben had said nothing about going into town.
In any case, it was only a little after twelve.
They weren't due to finish their lessons for another twenty minutes.
Curious, she went upstairs and searched the rooms.
Nothing.
Not even a note on Ben's computer.
She went out and put her hand up to her brow a second time, searching the meadows more thoroughly this time.
Then she remembered Peng Yu-wei.
The android tutor had a special location unit.
She could trace where they were by pinpointing him on Hal's map.
Relieved, she went back upstairs, into Hal's study, and called the map up onto the screen.
She waited a moment for the signal to appear somewhere on  the grid, then leaned forward to key the search sequence again, thinking she must have made a mistake.
But no.
There was no trace.
Beth felt her stomach flip over.
‘Gods…’
She ran down the stairs and out again.
‘Ben!
Meg!
Where are you?’
The meadows were silent, empty.
A light breeze stirred the waters of the bay.
She looked.
Of course, the bay.
She set off down the slope, forcing herself not to run, telling herself again and again that it was all right; that her fears were unfounded.
They were sensible children.
And anyway, Peng Yu-wei was with them.
Where the lawn ended she stopped and looked out across the bay, scanning the water for any sign of life.
Then she turned and eased herself over the lip, clambered down the old wooden steps set into the clay wall, and ran across towards the jetty.
It was gone.
The rowboat was gone.
Where?
She couldn't understand it.
Where?
Then, almost peripherally, she noticed something.
Off to the far left of her, jutting from the water, revealed by the ebb of the tide.
She climbed up again, then ran along the shoreline until she was standing at the nearest point to it.
It lay there, fifteen, maybe twenty ch'i from the shore, part-embedded in the mud-bank, part-covered by the receding water.
She knew what it was at once.
And knew, for a certainty, that Ben had done this to it.
The android lay unnaturally in the water, almost sitting up, one shoulder, part of its upper arm and the side of its head projecting above the surface.
It did not float, like a corpse would float, but rested there, solid and heavy, its torn clothing flapping about it like weeds.
‘Poor thing,’ she might have said another time, but now any sympathy she had for the machine was swamped by her fears for her children.
She looked up sharply, her eyes going immediately to the far shore and to the house on the crest above the cove.
They had been forbidden.
But that would not stop Ben.
No.
The sight of Peng Yu-wei in the water told her that.
She turned, her throat constricted now, her heart pounding in her breast, and began to run back up the slope towards the cottage.
And as she ran her voice hissed from her, heavy with anxiety and pain.
‘Gods, let them be safe!
Please gods let them be safe!’
Ben sat at the desk, reading from the journal.
Meg stood behind him, at his shoulder, holding the two lamps steady above the page, following Ben's finger as it moved from right to left, up and down the columns of cyphers.
Ben had explained it to her.
He had shown her how the frontispiece illustration was the key to it.
In the illustration a man sat by a fireplace, reading a newspaper, his face obscured, the scene reflected at an angle in the mirror  over the  mantelpiece .
Using the magnifying glass he had found in the left-hand drawer, Ben had shown her how the print of the reflected newspaper was subtly different from the one the man held.
Those differences formed the basis of the cypher.
She understood that — even the parts about the governing rules that made the cypher change — but her mind was too slow, too inflexible to hold and use what she had been shown.
It was as if all this was a special key — a coded lexicon — designed for one mind only.
Ben's.
It was as if Augustus knew that Ben would come.
as if he had seen it clearly, as in a glass.
It reminded her of the feeling she had had in the room below this one, stood there amongst the shrouded furniture; that the house was not abandoned, merely boarded up temporarily, awaiting its occupant's return.
And now he was back.
She shuddered, and the light danced momentarily across the page, making Ben look up.
He smiled and closed the journal, then stood and moved past her, leaving the big, leather-bound book on the desk.
Meg stood there a moment, staring at the journal, wondering what it said, knowing Ben would tell her when he wanted to.
Then she picked it up and turned, following Ben out.
Always following, she realised.
But the thought pleased her.
She knew he needed her to be there — a mirror for his words, his thoughts, his dark, unworded ambitions.
She, with her mere nine years of experience, knew him better than anyone.
Understood him as no one else could understand him.
No one living, anyway.
He was standing there, at the window, looking down thoughtfully through the broad crowns of the trees.
‘What is it?’ she asked.
‘I'm trying to work out where the garden is.’
She understood at once.
There had been a picture towards the back of the journal-a portrait of a walled garden.
She had thought it fanciful, maybe allegorical, but Ben seemed to think it was an actuality — somewhere here, near the house.
She stared at the book-filled wall above the desk, then turned back, seeing how he was looking past her at the same spot.
He smiled and moved his eyes to her face.
‘Of course.
There was a door at the end of the bottom corridor.’
She nodded.
‘Let's go down.’
The door was unlocked.
Beyond it lay the tiny garden, the lawn neatly trimmed, delphinia and gladioli, irises and hemerocallis in bloom in the dark earth borders.
And there, beneath the back wall, the headstone, the white marble carved into the shape of an oak, its trunk exaggeratedly thick, its crown a great cumulus.
‘Yes,’ Ben said softly.
‘I knew he would be here.’
He bent down beside the stone and reached out to touch and trace the indented lettering.
AUGUSTUS RAEDWALD SHEPHERD Born December 7 2106 Deceased August 15 2122 
Meg frowned.
‘That date is wrong, surely, Ben?’
‘No.’
He shook his head, not looking at her.
‘He was fifteen when he killed himself.’
‘Then…
’ But she still didn't understand.
He was their great-grandfather, wasn't he?
Only fifteen?
Then, belatedly, she realised what he had said: the whole of what he had said.
‘Killed himself?’
There was a door set into the wall behind the stone.
A simple wooden door, painted red, with a latch high up.
Ben had stood up, facing it, and was staring at it in his usual intent manner.
Doors, she thought; always another door.
And behind each door something new and unexpected.
Augustus, for instance.
She had never dreamed he would be so much like Ben.
Like a twin.
‘Shall we?’
Ben asked, looking at her.
‘Before we set off back?
There's time.’
She looked down at the headstone, a strange feeling of unease nagging at her.
She was tempted to say no, to tell him to leave it, but why not?
Ben was right.
There was time.
Plenty of time before they'd be missed.
‘Okay,’ she said quietly.
‘But then we go straight back.
All right?’
He smiled at her and nodded, then went to the door, stretching to reach the latch.
It was a workroom.
There were shelves along one wall on which were a number of things: old-fashioned screwdrivers and hammers, saws and pliers; a box of nails and an assortment of glues; locks and handles, brackets and a tray of different keys.
A spade and a pitchfork stood against the wall beneath, beside a pair of boots, the mud on them dried, flaky to the touch.
Meg looked around her.
At the far end, against the wall, was a strange upright shape, covered by an old bedspread.
Above it, hanging from an old iron chain, hung a bevelled mirror.
As she watched, Ben went across and threw the cloth back.
It was a piano.
An old upright piano.
He lifted the lid and stared at the keys a while.
‘I wonder if it's…’
Some sense — not precognition, nor even the feeling of danger-made her speak out.
‘No, Ben.
Please.
Don't touch it.’
He played a note.
A chord.
Or what should have been a chord.
Each note  was flat, a harsh, cacophonic noise.
The music of the house.
Discordant.
She heard the chain break with a purer note than any sounded by her brother; heard the mirror slither then crash against the top of the piano; then stepped forward, her hand raised to her mouth in horror, as the glass shattered all about him.
‘Ben!!!’
Her scream echoed out onto the water beyond the house.
Inside the room there was a moment of utter stillness.
Then she was at his side, sobbing breathlessly, muttering to him again and again.
‘What have you done, Ben?
What have you done?’
Shards of glass littered his hair and shoulders.
His cheek was cut and a faint dribble of blood ran towards the corner of his mouth.
But Ben was staring down at where his left hand had been only a moment before, sounding the chord.
It still lay there on the keys, the fingers extended to form the shape.
But the arm now ended in a bloodied stump.
Cut clean, the blood still pumping.
For a moment she did nothing, horrified, her lips drawn back from her teeth, watching how he turned the stump, observing it, his eyes filled with wonder at the thing he had accidentally done.
He was gritting his teeth against the pain, keeping it at bay while he studied the stump, the severed hand.
Then, coming to herself again, she pressed the stud at her neck and sounded the alarm.
Much later Meg stood at the bottom of the slope, looking out across the water.
Night had already fallen, but in one place its darkness was breached.
Across the bay flames leapt high from the burning house and she could hear the crackling of burning vegetation, the sudden sharp retorts as wood popped and split.
Smoke lay heavy on the far side of the water, laced eerily with threads of light from the blaze.
She could see dark shapes moving against the brilliance; saw one of the security craft rise up sharply, its twin beams cutting the air in front of it.
‘Meg?
Meg!
Come inside!’
She turned and looked back up the slope towards the cottage.
Lights burned at several of the windows, throwing faint spills of light across the white-painted stonework.
Her father stood there, a dark, familiar figure, framed in the light of the doorway.
‘I'm coming, daddy.
Just a moment longer.
Please .’
He nodded, somewhat reluctantly, then turned away.
The door closed behind him.
Meg faced the blaze again, looking out across the dark glass of the bay.
She thought she could see small shapes in the uprush of flame, like insects burning, crackling furiously as their shells ignited in a sudden flare of brilliance.
Books, she thought; all those books…
Ben was upstairs, in his bed.
They had frozen the stump but they had not saved the hand.
He would need a new one now.
She could still hear the chord he had sounded; still see his fingers spreading to form the shape.
She looked away from the blaze.
After-images flickered in the darkness.
The eye moved on, but the image remained.
For a time.
She went indoors.
Went up and saw him where he lay, propped up with a mound of pillows behind his back.
He was awake, fully conscious.
She sat at his bedside and was silent for a time, letting him watch her.
‘What's it like?’ he asked after a moment.
‘Beautiful.’
she said.
‘The way the light's reflected in the dark water.
It's…’
‘I know,’ he said, as if he had seen it too.
‘I can imagine it.’
She looked away a moment, noticing how the fire's light flickered in the window pane; how it cast a mottled, ever-changing pattern against the narrow opening.
‘I'm glad you did what you did,’ he said, more softly than before.
‘I would have stood there and watched myself bleed to death.
I owe you my life.’
It was not entirely true.
He owed his life to their mother.
If Beth had not come back early then what she had done would not have mattered.
‘I only wrapped it with the sheet,’ she said.
But she saw how he was looking at her, his eyes piercing her.
She could see he was embarrassed.
Yet there was something else there, too — something that she had never seen in him before — and it touched her deeply.
She felt her lips pucker and her eyes grow moist.
‘Hey, little sis, don't cry.’
He had never called her that before; nor had he ever touched her as he touched her now, his good right hand caressing both of hers where they lay atop the bedclothes.
She shuddered and looked down.
‘I'm fine,’ he said, as if in answer to something she had said, his hand squeezing both of hers.
‘Father says they can graft a new hand onto the nerve ends.
It'll work as good as new.
Maybe better.’
She found she could not look up at him.
If she did she would burst into tears, and she didn't want him to see her weakness.
He had been so strong, so brave.
The pain — it must have been awful.
‘You know, the worst thing was that I missed it.’
‘Missed what?’ she said, staring at his hand.
‘I didn't see it,’ he said, and there was genuine surprise in his voice.
‘I wasn't quick enough.
I heard the chain break and I looked up, but I missed the accident.
It was done before I looked down again.
My hand was no longer part of me.
When I looked it was already separate, there on the keyboard.’
He laughed.
A queer little sound.
Meg looked at him.
He was staring at the stub of his left arm.
It was neatly capped, like the end of an old cane.
Silvered and neutral.
Reduced to a thing.
‘I didn't see it,’ he insisted.
‘The glass.
The cut.
And I felt…only a sudden absence.
Not pain, but…’
She could see that he was searching for the right words, the very thing that would describe what he had felt, what he had experienced at that moment.
But it evaded him.
He shrugged and gave up.
‘I love you, Ben.’
‘I know,’ he said, and seemed to look at her as if to gauge how love looked in a person's eyes.
as if to place it in his memory.
After Meg had gone he lay there, thinking things through.
He had said nothing to her of what was in the journal.
For once he felt no urge to share his knowledge with her.
It would harm her, he knew, as it had harmed him: not on the surface, as the mirror had, but deeper, where his true self lived.
In the darkness inside himself.
He felt angered that he had not been told; that Hal had not trusted him enough to tell him.
More than that, he felt insulted that they had hidden it from him.
Oh, he could see why it was important for Meg not to know; she responded to things in a different way from him.
But to hide it from him?
He clenched his fists, feeling the ghostly movement in the hand he had lost.
Didn't they know?
Didn't they understand him, even now?
How could he make sense of it all unless he could first solve the riddle of himself?
It was all there, in the journal.
Some of it explicit, the rest hidden teasingly away — cyphers within cyphers — as if for his eyes alone.
He had heard Augustus's voice, speaking clearly in his head, as if direct across the years.
‘I am a failed experiment,’ he had said.
‘Old Amos botched me when he made me from his seed.
He got more than he bargained for.’
It was true.
They were all an experiment.
All the Shepherd males.
Not sons and fathers and grandfathers, but brothers every one — all the fruit of old Amos's seed.
Ben laughed bitterly.
It explained so much.
For Augustus was his twin.
Ben knew it for a certainty.
He had proof.
There, in the back of the journal, were the breeding charts-a dozen complex genetic patterns, each drawn in the tiniest of hands, one to a double page; each named and dated, Ben's own amongst them.
A whole line of Shepherds, each one the perfect advisor for his T'ang.
Augustus had known somehow.
Had worked it out.
He had realised what he was meant for.
What task he had been bred for.
But Augustus had been a rebel.
He had defied his father; refusing to be trained as the servant of a T'ang.
Worse, he had sired a child by his own sister, in breach of the careful plans Amos had laid.
His mirror had become his mate.
Furious, his ‘father’, Robert, had made him a prisoner in the house, forbidding  him the run of the Domain until he changed his ways, but Augustus had remained defiant.
He had preferred death to compromise.
Or so it seemed.
There was no entry for that day.
No explanation for his death.
Ben heard footsteps on the stairs.
He tensed, then made himself relax.
He had been expecting this visit; had been rehearsing what he would say.
Hal Shepherd stood in the doorway, looking in.
‘Ben?
Can I come in?’
Ben stared back at him, unable to keep the anger from his face.
‘Hello, elder brother.’
Hal seemed surprised.
Then he understood.
He had confiscated the journal, but he could not confiscate what was in Ben's head.
It did not matter that Ben could not physically see the pages of the journal: in his mind he could turn them anyway and read the tall columns of cyphers.
‘It isn't like that,’ he began, but Ben interrupted him, a sharp edge to his voice.
‘Don't lie to me.
I've had enough of lies.
Tell me who I am.’
‘You're my son.’
Ben sat forward, but this time Hal got in first.
‘No, Ben.
You're wrong.
It ended with Augustus.
He was the last.
You're my son, Ben.
Mine and your mother's.‘
Ben made to speak, then fell silent, watching the man.
Then he looked down.
Hal was not Lying.
Not intentionally.
He spoke as he believed.
But he was wrong.
Ben had seen the charts, the names, the dates of birth.
Amos's great experiment was still going on.
He let out a long, shuddering breath.
‘Okay…
But tell me.
How did Augustus die?
Why did he kill himself?’
‘He didn't.’
‘Then how did he die?’
‘He had leukaemia.’
That too was a lie, for there was no mention of ill health in the journal.
But again Hal believed it for the truth.
His eyes held nothing back from Ben.
‘And the child?
What happened to the child?’
Hal laughed.
‘What child?
What are you talking about, Ben?’
Ben looked down.
Then it was all a lie.
Hal knew nothing.
Nor would he learn anything from the journal unless Meg gave him the key to it; for the cypher was a special one, transforming itself constantly page by page as the journal progressed.
‘Nothing,’ he said finally, in answer to the query.
‘I was mistaken.’
He lifted his eyes and saw how concerned Hal was.
‘I'm sorry,’ he said.
‘I didn't mean to trouble anyone.’
‘No…‘
Then, strangely, Hal looked down and laughed.
‘You know, Ben, when I saw Peng Yu-wei stuck there in the mud, all my anger drained from me.’
He  looked up and met Ben's eyes, his voice changing, becoming more serious.
‘I understand why you did it, Ben.
Believe me.
And I meant what I said the other night.
You can be your own man.
Live your own life.
It's up to you whether you serve or not.
Neither I nor the great T'ang himself will force you to be other than yourself.’
Ben studied his brother — the man he had always thought of as his father and saw suddenly that it did not matter what he was in reality, for Hal Shepherd had become what he believed he was.
Ben's father.
A free man, acting freely, choosing freely.
For him the illusion was complete.
It had become the truth.
It was a powerful lesson.
One Ben could use.
He nodded.
‘Then I choose to be your son, if that's all right?’
Hal smiled and reached out to take his hand.
‘That's fine.
That's all I ever wanted.’
PART 4 — SUMMER 2201:
ICE AND FIRE
‘War is the highest form of struggle for resolving contradictions, when they have developed to a certain stage, between classes, nations, states, or political groups, and it has existed ever since the emergence of private property and of classes.’
— Mao Tse Tung, Problems Of Strategy in China's Revolutionary War (December 1936)
‘It is our historical duty to eradicate all opposition to change.
To cauterise the cancers that create division.
The future cannot come into being until the past is dead.
Chung Kuo cannot live until the world of petty nation states, of factions and religions, is dead and buried beneath the ice.
Let us have no pity then.
Our choice is made.
Ice and fire.
The fire to cauterise, the ice to cover over.
Only by such means will the world be freed from enmity.’
— Tsao Ch'un, Address to his Ministers,(May 2068)
THE SADDLE
The old T'ang backed away, his hands raised before him, his face rigid with fear.
‘Put down the knife,erh tzu !
For pity's sake!’
A mount before there had been laughter; now the tension in the room seemed unendurable.
Only the hiss and wheeze of Tsu Tiao's laboured breathing broke the awful silence.
In the narrow space between the pillars, Tsu Ma circled his father slowly, knife in hand, his face set, determined.
On all sides T'ang and courtier alike all Han, all Family — were crowded close, looking on, their faces tense, unreadable.
Only one, a boy of eight, false whiskered and rouged up, his clothes identical to those of the old T'ang, showed any fear.
He stood there, wide-eyed, one hand gripping the arm of the taller boy beside him.
‘Erh Tzu !’ the old man pleaded, falling to his knees.
My son !
He bowed his head, humbling himself.
‘I beg you, Tsu Ma!
Have mercy on an old man!’
All eyes were on Tsu Ma now.
All saw the shudder that rippled through the big man like a wave; the way his chin jutted forward and his face contorted in agony as he steeled himself to strike.
Then it was done and the old man slumped forward, the knife buried deep in his chest.
There was a sigh like the soughing of the wind, then Tsu Ma was surrounded.
Hands clapped his back or held his hand or touched his shoulder briefly.
‘Well done, Tsu Ma?’ each said before moving on, expecting no answer; seeing how he stood there, his arms limp at his sides, his broad chest heaving, his eyes locked on the fallen figure on the floor beneath him.
Slowly the great room emptied until only the six T'ang and the two young boys remained.
Li Shai Tung stood before him, staring into his face, a faint smile of sadness mixed with satisfaction on his lips.
He spoke softly, ‘Well done, Tsu Ma.
It's hard, I know.
The hardest thing a man can do…’
Slowly Tsu Ma's eyes focused on him.
He swallowed deeply and another great shudder racked his body.
Pain flickered like lightning across the broad, strong features of his face, and then he spoke, his voice curiously small, like a child's.
‘Yes…but it was so hard to do, Shai Tung.
It…it was just like him.’
Li Shai Tung shivered but kept himself perfectly still, his face empty of what he was feeling.
He ached to reach out and hold Tsu Ma close, to comfort him, but knew it would be wrong.
It was hard, as Tsu Ma now realised, but it was also necessary.
Since the time of Tsao Ch'un it had been so.
To become T'ang the son must kill the father.
Must become his own man.
Only then would he be free to offer his father the respect he owed him.
‘Will you come through, Tsu Ma?’
Tsu Ma's eyes had never left Li Shai Tung's face, yet they had not been seeing him.
Now they focused again.
He gave the barest nod, then, with one last, appalled look at the body on the floor, moved towards the dragon doorway.
In the room beyond, the real Tsu Tiao was laid out atop a great, tiered pedestal on a huge bed spread with silken sheets of gold.
Slowly and with great dignity, Tsu Ma climbed the steps until he stood there at his dead father's side.
The old man's fine grey hair had been brushed and plaited, his cheeks delicately rouged, his beard brushed out straight, his nails painted a brilliant pearl.
He was dressed from head to foot in white.
A soft white muslin that, when Tsu Ma knelt and gently brushed it with his fingertips, reminded him strangely of springtime and the smell of young girls.
You're dead , Tsu Ma thought, gazing tenderly into his father's face.
You're really dead, aren't you ?
He bent forward and gently brushed the cold lips with his own, then sat back on his heels, shivering, toying with the ring that rested, heavy and unfamiliar, like a saddle on the first finger of his right hand.
And now it's me .
He turned his head, looking back at the six T'ang standing amongst the pillars, watching him.
You know how I feel , he thought, looking from face to face.
Each one of you.
You've been here before me, haven't you ?
For the first time he understood why the Seven were so strong.
They had this in common: each knew what it was to kill their father: knew the reality of it in their bones.
Tsu Ma looked back at the body — the real body, not the lifelike GenSyn copy he had ‘killed’— and understood.
He had been blind to it before, but now he saw it clearly.
It was not life that connected them so firmly, but death.
Death that gave them such a profound and lasting understanding of each other.
He stood again and turned, facing them, then went down amongst them.
At the foot of the steps they greeted him; each in his turn bowing before Tsu Ma; each bending to kiss the ring of power he now wore; each embracing him warmly before repeating the same eight words.
‘Welcome, Tsu Ma.
Welcome, T'ang of West Asia.’
When the brief ceremony was over, Tsu Ma turned and went across to the two boys.
Li Yuan was much taller than when he had last seen him.
He was  entering that awkward stage of early adolescence and had become a somewhat ungainly-looking boy.
Even so, it was hard to believe that his birthday in two days' time would be only his twelfth.
There was something almost unnatural in his manner that made Tsu Ma think of childhood tales of changelings and magic spells and other such nonsense.
He seemed so old, so knowing.
So unlike the child whose body he wore.
Tao Chu, in contrast, seemed younger than his eight years and wore his heart embroidered like a peacock on his sleeve.
He stood there in his actor's costume, bearded, his brow heavily-lined with black make-up pencil, yet still his youth shone through, in his eyes and in the quickness of his movements.
Tsu Ma reached out and ruffled his hair, smiling for the first time since the killing.
‘Did it frighten you, Tao Chu?’
The boy looked down, abashed.
‘I thought…’
Tsu Ma knelt down and held his shoulders, nodding, remembering how he had felt the first time he had seen the ritual, not then knowing what was happening, nor why.
Tao Chu looked up and met his eyes.
‘It seemed so real, Uncle Ma.
For a moment I thought it was Grandpa Tiao.’
Tsu Ma smiled.
‘You were not alone in that, Nephew Chu.’
Tao Chu was his dead brother's third and youngest son and Tsu Ma's favourite; a lively, ever-smiling boy with the sweetest, most joyful laugh.
At the ritual earlier Tao Chu had impersonated Tsu Tiao, playing out scenes from the old T'ang's life before the watching Court.
The practice was as old as the Middle Kingdom itself and formed one link in the great chain of tradition, but it was more than mere ritual, it was a living ceremony, an act of deep respect and celebration, almost a poem to the honoured dead.
For the young actor, however, it was a confusing, not to say unnerving experience, to find the dead man unexpectedly there, in the seat of honour, watching the performance.
‘Do you understand why I had to kill the copy, Tao Chu?’
Tao Chu glanced quickly at Li Yuan, then looked back steadily at his uncle.
‘Not at first, Uncle Ma, but Li Yuan explained it to me.
He said you had to kill the guilt you felt at Grandpa Tiao's death.
That you could not be your own man until you had.’
‘Then you understand how deeply I revere my father?
How hard it was to harm even a copy of him?’
Tao Chu nodded, his eyes bright with understanding.
‘Good.’
He squeezed the boy's shoulders briefly, then stood.
‘But I must thank you, Tao Chu.
You did well today.
You gave me back my father.’
Tao Chu smiled, greatly pleased by his uncle's praise, then, at a touch from Li Yuan, he joined the older boy in a deep bow and backed away, leaving the T'ang to their Council.
From the camera's vantage point, twenty li out from the spaceship, it was hard to tell its scale.
The huge sphere of its forward compartments was visible only as a nothingness in the star-filled field of space — a circle of darkness more intense than that which surrounded it.
Its tail, so fine and thin that it was like a thread of silver, stretched out for ten times its circumference, terminating in a smaller, silvered sphere little thicker than the thread.
It was beautiful.
Li Shai Tung drew closer, operating the remote from a distance of almost three hundred thousand li , adjusting the camera image with the most delicate of touches, the slight delay in response making him cautious.
Five li out he slowed the remote and increased the definition.
The darkness took on form.
The sphere was finely stippled, pocked here and there with hatches or spiked with communication towers.
Fine, almost invisible lines covered the whole surface, as if the sphere were netted by the frailest of spiders' webs.
Li Shai Tung let the remote drift slowly towards the starship and sat back, one hand smoothing through his long beard while he looked about him at the faces of his fellow T'ang.
‘Well?’
He glanced across at the waiting technicians and dismissed them with a gesture.
They had done their work well in getting an undetected remote so close to The New Hope .
Too well, perhaps.
He had not expected it to be so beautiful.
‘How big is it?’ asked Wu Shih, turning to him.
‘I can't help thinking it must be huge to punch so big a hole in the star field.’
Li Shai Tung looked back at him, the understanding of thirty years passing between them.
‘It's huge.
Approximately two li in diameter.’
‘Approximately?’
It was Wei Feng, T'ang of East Asia, who picked up on the word.
‘Yes.
The actual measurement is one kilometre.
I understand that they have used the old Hung Mao measurements throughout the craft.’
Wei Feng grunted his dissatisfaction, but Wang Hsien, T'ang of Africa, was not so restrained.
‘But that's an outrage!’ he roared.
‘An insult!
How dare they flout the Edict so openly?’
‘I would remind you, Wang Hsien,’ Li Shai Tung answered quietly, seeing the unease on every face.
‘We agreed that the terms of the Edict would not apply to the starship.’
He looked back at the ship.
The fine web of lines was now distinct.
In its centre, etched finer than the lines surrounding it, were two lines of bead-like figures spiralling about each other, forming the double-helix of heredity, symbol of the Dispersionists.
Three years ago — the day after Under Secretary Lehmann had been killed in the House by Tolonen — he had summoned the leaders of the House before him, and there, in the Purple Forbidden City where they had murdered his son, had granted them concessions, amongst them permission to build a generation  starship.
It had prevented war.
But now the ship was almost ready and though the uneasy peace remained intact, soon it would be broken.
The cusp lay just ahead.
Thus far on the road of concession he had carried the Seven.
Thus far but no further.
He stared at the starship a moment longer.
It was beautiful, but both House and Seven knew what The New Hope really was.
No one was fooled by the mask of rhetoric.
The Dispersionists talked of it being an answer —‘the only guarantee of a future for our children’— but in practical terms it did nothing to solve the problem of over-population that was supposedly its raison d'etre .
Fully-laden, it could carry no more than five thousand settlers.
In any case, the ship, fast as it was, would take a thousand years to reach the nearest star.
No,The New Hope was not an answer, it was a symbol, a political counter — the thin end of the great wedge of Change.
It heralded not a new age of dispersal, but a return to the bad old days of technological free-for-all-a return to that madness that had once before almost destroyed Chung Kuo.
He cleared the image and, for a while sat there, conscious that they were waiting for him to say what was on his mind.
He looked from face to face, aware that the past three years had brought great changes in his thinking.
What had once seemed certain was no longer so for him.
His belief in peace at all costs in a policy of concession and containment — had eroded in the years since Han Ch'in's death.
He had aged, and not only in his face.
Some days there was an air of lethargy about him, of having done with things.
Yes, he thought, looking down at his own long hands; the tiger's teeth are soft now, his eyes grown dull.
And they know this.
Our enemies know it and seek advantage from it.
But what might we do that we have not already done?
How can we stem the tidal flow of change?
Tsu Ma broke into his thoughts.
‘Forgive me, Li Shai Tung.
But what of Tolonen?’
Li Shai Tung looked up, surprised, meeting the new T'ang's eyes.
‘Tolonen?
I don't understand you, Tsu Ma.
You think I should accede to the House's demands?
Is that what you're saying?’
He looked away, a bitter anger in his eyes.
‘You would have me give them that satisfaction too?’
Tsu Ma answered him softly, sympathetically.
‘No.
Not at all, Shai Tung.
You mistake my meaning.
Things have changed.
Many who were angry three years ago have cooled.
They see things differently now, even in the House.’
Li Shai Tung looked about him, expecting strong disagreement with Tsu Ma's remarks, but there was nothing.
They looked at him expectantly.
‘I still don't follow you.
You mean they'd have him back?
After what he did?’
Tsu Ma shook his head.
‘Not as General, no.
But in some other role.’
Li Shai Tung looked down sharply.
It was more than he could have hoped But dare he say yes?
Dare he call the old rogue back?
‘We are not alone in thinking things have gone too far,’ said Wu Shih, picking up on what Tsu Ma had said.
‘There are many at First Level — even among the Hung Mao — who feel we gave too much; were too timid in our dealings with the Dispersionists.
They would see the changes to the Edict reversed,The New Hope melted down.’
‘We daren't go so far.
There would be war, surely?’
Tsu Ma leaned forward.
‘Not if we challenge them in their own sphere.’
‘You mean the House?’
There were nods all around.
So, they had discussed this between them.
Why?
Had he been so preoccupied?
So unreachable?
Wei Feng now spoke for them all.
‘We know the last three years have been hard for you, Shai Tung.
You have tasted bitterness and we have had to watch in silence.
But we shall watch no longer, nor hold our tongues for fear of hurting you.
We have seen the plan your advisor, Shepherd, drew up and…’
Li Shai Tung sat forward jerkily.
‘Impossible!
No one has seen those papers!‘
Wei Feng waited a moment then continued.
‘Not impossible, old friend.
Not at all.
Shepherd merely took advantage of his right as equal to appeal to us.
He knew you would not act as your heart dictated, so he sent us copies.’
Li Shai Tung stared back at him, astonished.
Then they knew…
‘And we agree.’
Wei Feng was smiling now.
‘Don't you see, Li Shai Tung.
We agree with Shih Shepherd's proposals.
Our enemies have gone too far.
To kill your son and take advantage from it — it was too much for any man to bear.
And a T'ang is not just any man.
A T'ang is one of Seven.’
‘And the Seven?’
Wei Feng looked about him, then back at Li Shai Tung.
‘In this the Seven shall do as Li Shai Tung decides.’
As the door at the far end of the room hissed open, steam billowed out into the corridor beyond.
Berdichev shivered but stood straighter, his skin still tingling from the shower.
An armed guard stood there in the doorway, head bowed, a clean silk pau folded over one arm.
Behind him stood two Han servants who, after a moment's hesitation, entered the room and began to dry Berdichev with soft towels.
When they had done, he went over to the guard and took the full-length gown from him, pulling it on and tying it at the waist.
‘You have my charm?’
The guard's head moved fractionally, but remained bowed.
‘I'm sorry, excellency.
I was given only the pau .’
Berdichev huffed impatiently and looked up at the overhead camera.
Moments later an official appeared at the far end of the corridor and hurried to him.
The man bowed deeply, his face flushed with embarrassment, and held out one hand, offering the necklace.
‘My humble apologies, Excellency.
I did not understand.’
Berdichev took the silver chain and fastened it about his neck, closing his hand over the smooth surface of the charm a moment.
The impertinence of these little men, he thought, making a mental note of the official's number — so prominently displayed on his chest — before he waved him away.
Then he waited as one of the two Han brought him anti-static slippers while the other combed and plaited his hair.
Only then, when they were finished, did Director Clarac make his appearance.
Clarac embraced him lightly and then stepped back, smiling pleasantly, his appearance and manner the very model of elegance and charm.
Berdichev smiled tightly and gave the barest of nods in response to Clarac's respectful bow.
As ever, he was in two minds about Clarac's value to the project.
He was a good front man, but the real work was done by his team of four assistants.
Clarac had only to step out of line once and he would be out, family connections or no.
Clarac's voice oozed warmth and friendliness.
‘Soren!
It's a real delight to have you here as our guest.’
Yes, thought Berdichev; but I'm the last person you expected to see up here today.
I bet you were shitting your elegant white pants when you heard I was here.
Even so, Berdichev was impressed by what he had seen.
The defences about The New Hope left nothing to be desired.
Nor had he had any reason to complain about the security measures surrounding visitors to the base.
He had been forced to undergo the full body-search and decontamination procedure.
And when he had tried to bully the guards into making an exception in his case, their officer had politely but firmly stated that there could be no exceptions hadn't Shih Berdichev insisted as much?
‘Shih Clarac,’ he answered, distancing the man at once and subtly reminding him of their relative status.
‘I'm delighted to be here.
But tell me, what are you doing about the spy camera?’
Clarac's momentary hesitation was telling.
He was a man who prided himself on having everything at his fingertips, but he had not counted on Berdichev's directness.
Clarac was used to social nicety.
It was how he functioned.
He approached such matters slowly, obliquely, over wine and sweetmeats.
But Berdichev had no time for such ‘niceties’.
‘We know about the remote,’ Clarac answered, recovering quickly.
‘In fact, if you'll permit me,Shih Berdichev, I'll take you to our tracking room.’
Berdichev nodded tersely and walked on, not waiting for Clarac, who had to hurry to catch up with him.
‘And that gap in your defences — the blind spot on darkside — how do you account for that?’
Clarac did not hesitate this time.
‘Our defence experts have assured me that nothing of any real size could get through undetected.
The blind spot, as you call it, is a mere 30 degrees of arc.
Our central sensors would detect any ship coming in from five thousand li out.
In any case, no one would come from  that direction.
There's nothing out there.
You would have to orbit the moon in a one-man craft to get into position.
And who would do that?’
Berdichev stopped and stared at him a moment.
‘Even so…’
‘Besides which,’ Clarac added quickly, facing Berdichev, ‘there's the question of cost.
To extend our defence satellite system to cover the darkside channel would cost a further one hundred and twenty million.
The budget is already two hundred and eighty-five per cent over original costings.
Our investors are justifiably concerned…’
‘And if one man did just what you say is impossible and slipped in on the darkside?’
Clarac laughed.
‘If he did it would make no difference.
Every air-lock is linked to central security.
There are seals at every level.
And more than a thousand security men guarding the outer shell alone.
The inner shell is a self-sufficient unit which can be cut off at once from the outer shell.
As the engines and life-support systems are there, there's no possibility of them being under threat.
No, the only way the Seven could get at The New Hope would be to try to blow it out of the sky from below.
And we've designed our defence system to prevent just that possibility.’
Berdichev sniffed then, satisfied, nodded and began to walk on.
Beside him, Clarac began to talk about the progress they had made, the difficulties they had overcome, but Berdichev was hardly listening.
He had seen the reports already.
What he wanted were answers to some of the things they might not have thought of.
He wanted to make certain for himself that nothing had been overlooked.
In the tracking room he took a seat at the desk and listened while Clarac explained the system.
But all the time he was looking about him, noting things.
Interrupting Clarac he pointed to the screen which showed the remote spy camera.
‘You're certain it's not a weapon?’
Clarac laughed.
A laugh which, to Berdichev's ear, was just a touch too self-confident.
‘We've scanned it thoroughly, of course.
There's an engine unit at the back of it and a whole system of foils and anti-jamming devices, and though the central core of it is lead-screened, our experts have calculated that there's barely enough room for the camera unit, let alone any kind of weaponry.’
‘Unless they've developed something new, eh?’
Clarac looked at him and gave a slight bow, understanding that he would be allowed nothing today.
He would need answers for everything.
‘I've assumed that that might be the case.
Which is why I personally ordered that the thing should be tracked twenty-four hours a day.
I've two lasers trained on the aperture constantly.
At the smallest sign of unusual activity they'll blow the thing apart.’
‘Before it can damage The New Hope ?’
‘The lasers are set for automatic response.
The remote would be blasted out of the sky in less than a fiftieth of a second.’
Berdichev turned his head and looked at Clarac, for the first time letting a brief smile signal his satisfaction.
‘Good.
I want nothing to stop The New Hope from making its maiden flight three months from now.’
He saw the surprise on Clarac's face, followed an instant later by a broad smile of unfeigned delight.
‘But that's excellent,Shih Berdichev!
That's marvellous news!
When did the Seven agree to this?’
‘They haven't.
But they will.
Very soon now.
By the week's end there will be a proposal in the House.
We're going to push them on this one, Clarac.
We're going to make them fulfil the promises they made three years ago.
And then we'll push some more.
Until there's a whole fleet of these ships.
You understand me?
But this is the first, the most important of them.
The New Hope will break their stranglehold.
They know that and they'll try to prevent it — but we must pre-empt their every move.
That's why it's so important things are right up here.
That's why I came to see things for myself.’
Clarac bowed.
‘I understand,Shih Berdichev.
You think, then, that we should extend the satellite system?’
Berdichev shook his head.
‘No.
I'm satisfied with your reasoning.
As you say, it would be impossible for a single man to do any real damage to the craft.
Let us worry about more direct approaches, eh?
And for a start let's destroy that remote.
I'm sure one of our ferry craft could have a little accident, eh?
A technical malfunction, perhaps, that would place it on a collision course?’
Clarac smiled.
‘Of course,Shih Berdichev.
It shall be done at once.’
Fei Yen stood in the shade of the willow, waiting for the two princes to come along the path that led to the bridge.
She had seen their craft land only minutes earlier and had placed herself deliberately here where they would have to pass her.
Her maids stood off at a slight distance, amongst the trees, talking quietly amongst themselves and pretending not to watch her, but she knew they were as inquisitive as she.
For the past three years they had shared her tedious exile on her father's estate, where she had seen no one but her brothers and aunts.
Today, however, for the first time since the period of mourning had ended, she had been granted permission to call upon the young prince — to stay a week and celebrate his birthday.
Seeing movement among the trees at the far end of the stone-flagged path, she turned and signalled to the maids to be quiet.
‘Here they come!’ she mimed exaggeratedly.
The maids giggled then, obedient, fell silent.
Fei Yen turned back to watch the two young men approach.
But as they  came closer she drew her sandalwood fan and waved it impatiently, certain there must be a mistake.
Where was Tao Chu?
Where was Tsu Ma's strapping young nephew?
She saw the taller of the boys hesitate, then touch the arm of the other and lean close to whisper something.
The smaller of them seemed to stare at her a moment, then turn to the other and nod.
Only then did the older boy come on.
Three paces from her he stopped.
At first she didn't recognise him, he was so much taller, so much gawkier than when she had seen him last.
‘Li Yuan?’
Li Yuan swallowed and then bowed; an awkward, stilted movement that betrayed his unease.
When he straightened up and looked at her again she saw his face was scarlet with embarrassment.
His lips moved as if he was about to say something, but he had not formed the words when she interrupted him.
‘Where is Tao Chu?
I was told Tao Chu would be with you.’
There were giggles from the trees behind her, and she turned sharply, furious with her maids, then turned back in time to see Li Yuan summon the small boy forward.
‘Fei Yen?’ said the boy, bowing elegantly like a tiny courtier.
Then, in a lilting yet hesitant voice that betrayed his unfamiliarity with English, he added, ‘I am most honoured to meet you, Lady Fei.
My uncle told me you were beautiful, but he did not tell me how beautiful.’
She laughed, astonished.
‘And who have I the pleasure of addressing?’
The boy bowed again, enjoying her astonishment in the same way he had enjoyed the applause of the T'ang earlier that day when he had played Tsu Tiao.
‘I am Tsu Tao Chu, son of Tsu Wen, and third nephew of the T'ang, Tsu Ma.’
The fan that she had been waving stopped in mid motion and clicked shut.
‘Tao Chu?’
She laughed — a different, shorter laugh, expressing a very different kind of surprise — then shook her head.
‘Oh no.
I mean, you can't be.
I was told…’
Then she understood.
She heard the giggling from the trees topple over into laughter.
Flushing deeply, she lowered her head slightly.
‘Tsu Tao Chu.
I…
I'm delighted to meet you.
Forgive me if I seemed confused.
I…’
Then, forgetting her disappointment, she too burst into laughter.
‘What is it?’ asked the eight-year-old, delighted that he had somehow managed to amuse this mature woman of nineteen.
‘Nothing,’ she said quickly, fanning herself and turning slightly, so that the shadow of the willow hid her embarrassment.
‘Nothing at all.’
She turned quickly to Li Yuan, finding it easier, suddenly, to talk to him.
‘Li Yuan, forgive me.
My father, Yin Tsu, sends his deep regards and best wishes on your forthcoming birthday.
I have come on his behalf to celebrate the day.’
Li Yuan's smile was unexpectedly warm.
Again he bowed, once more colouring from neck to brow.
His awkwardness made her remember the last time they had met — that time he had come to her and cried upon her shoulder, four days after Han Ch'in's death.
Then, too, his reaction had been unexpected.
Then, too, he had seemed to shed a skin.
‘I…
I…’
He stuttered, then looked down, seeming almost to laugh at himself.
‘Forgive me, Fei Yen.
I was not told you were coming.’
She gave the slightest bow.
‘Nor I until this morning.’
He looked up at her, a strange expectation in his eyes.
‘Will you be staying long?’
‘A week.’
She turned and signalled to her maids who at once came out from beneath the trees and hurried along the path to her.
Then, turning back to the two boys, she added.
‘We had best be getting back, don't you think?
They'll be expecting us in the house.’
And then, before they could answer, she had turned away and was heading back towards the bridge.
Li Yuan stood there a while, watching her go.
Only when he turned to speak to Tao Chu did he realise how avidly the boy was studying him.
‘What are you staring at, Squib?’ he said, almost angrily, conscious that his cheeks were warm for the third time that afternoon.
‘At you, Great Yuan,’ answered Tao Chu with a mock earnestness that made Li Yuan relent.
Then, in a softer voice, the small boy added, ‘You love her, don't you?’
Li Yuan laughed awkwardly then turned and looked back up the path.
‘What does it matter?
She was my brother's wife.’
The Overseer's House dominated the vast plain of the East European plantation.
Three tiers high, its roof steeply pitched, it rested on stilts over the meeting point of the two broad irrigation canals that ran north-south and east-west, feeding the great latticework of smaller channels.
To the south lay the workers' quarters; long, low huts that seemed embedded in the earth.
To the north and east were storehouses; huge, covered reservoirs of grain and rice.
West, like a great wave frozen at its point of turning under, lay the City, its walls soaring two li into the heavens.
Now it was late afternoon and the shadow of the Overseer's House lay like a dark, serrated knife on the fields to the east.
There, in the shadow, on a bare earth pathway that followed the edge of one of the smaller north-south channels, walked three men.
One walked ahead, alone and silent, his head down, his drab brown clothes, with their wide, short trousers indicative of his status as field worker.
The two behind him joked and laughed as they went along.
Their weapons — lethal Deng rifles, ‘lantern guns’— slung casually over their shoulders.
They were more elegantly dressed, the kingfisher blue of their jackets matching the colour of the big sky overhead.
These were the Overseer's men, Chang Yan and Teng Fu; big, brutal men who were not slow to chastise their workers and beat them if they fell behind with quotas.
‘What does he want?’
Teng asked, lifting his chin slightly to indicate the  man plodding along in front of them, but meaning the Overseer when he said ‘he’.
No one requested to see the Overseer.
He alone chose who came to see him.
‘The man's a thief,’ said Chang.
He spat out into the channel, below and to his left, and watched the off-white round of spittle drift away slowly on the water.
Then he looked back at Teng.
‘One of the patrol cameras caught him in the Frames making harvest.’
The Frames were where they grew the special items; strawberries and lychees, pineapples and oranges, grapes and peaches, cherries and almonds, pears and melons.
‘Stupid,’ Teng said, looking down and laughing.
‘These peasant types — they're all stupid.’
Chang shrugged.
‘I don't know.
I thought this one was different.
He was supervisor.
A trusted man.
We'd had no trouble with him before.’
‘They're all trouble,’ said Teng, scratching his left buttock vigorously.
‘Stupid and trouble.
It's genetic.
That's what it is.’
Chang laughed.
‘Maybe so.’
They had come to a bridge.
The first man had stopped, his head still bowed, waiting for the others.
He was forbidden to cross the bridge without a permit.
‘Get on!’ said Teng, drawing the long club from his belt and jabbing the man viciously in the small of the back.
‘The Overseer wants to see you.
Don't keep him waiting, now!’
The man stumbled forward onto the bridge, then got up and trudged on again, wiping his dirtied hands against his thighs as he went and glancing up briefly, fearfully, as the big house loomed over him.
More guards lounged at the foot of the steps.
One of them, a tall Hung Mao sat apart from the rest, looked up as the three men approached, then, with the vaguest movement of his head to indicate that they should go on up, looked back down at the rifle in his lap, continuing his meticulous inspection of the weapon.
‘Good day,Shih Peskova,’ said Teng, acknowledging the Overseer's lieutenant with a bow.
But Peskova paid him no attention.
Teng was Han and Han were shit.
It didn't matter whether they were guard or peasant.
Either way they were shit.
Hadn't he heard as much from The Man himself often enough?
When they had gone, Peskova turned and looked up at the house again.
He would have to watch that Teng.
He was getting above himself.
Thinking himself better than the other men.
He would have to bring him down a level.
Teach him better manners.
With a smile he put the rifle down and reached for the next in the stack at his side.
Yes, it would be fun to see the big Han on his knees and begging.
A lot of fun.
Overseer Bergson looked across as the three men entered.
‘What is it, Teng Fu?’
The big Han knelt in the doorway and bowed his head.
‘We have brought the man you asked for, Overseer.’
Bergson turned from the bank of screens that took up one whole wall of the long room and got up from his chair.
‘You can go, Teng Fu.
You too, Chang Yan.
I'll see to him myself.’
When they were gone and he was alone with the field supervisor, Bergson came across and stood there, no more than an arm's length from the man.
‘Why did you do it, Field Supervisor Sung?’
The man swallowed, but did not lift his head.
‘Do what,Shih Bergson?’
Bergson reached out almost tenderly and took the man's cheek between the fingers of his left hand and twisted until Sung fell to his feet, whimpering in pain.
‘Why did you do it, Sung?
Or do you want me to beat the truth out of you?’
Sung prostrated himself, holding on to Bergson's feet.
‘I could not bear it any longer, Overseer.
There is barely enough to keep a child alive, let alone men and women who have to toil in the fields all day.
And when I heard the guards were going to cut our rations yet again…’
Bergson stepped back, shaking Sung's hands off.
‘Barely enough?
What nonsense is this, Sung?
Isn't it true that the men steal from the rice fields?
That they eat much of the crop they are supposed to be harvesting?’
Sung went to shake his head, but Bergson brought his foot down firmly on top of his left hand and began to press down.
‘Tell me the truth, Sung.
They steal, don't they?’
Sung cried out, then nodded his head vigorously.
‘It is so,Shih Bergson.
There are many who do as you say.’
Bergson slowly brought his foot up, then stepped away from Sung, turning his back momentarily, considering.
‘And you stole because you had too little to eat?’
Sung looked up, then quickly looked back down, keeping his forehead pressed to the floor.
‘No…
I…’
‘Tell me the truth, Sung!’
Bergson barked, turning sharply.
‘You stole because you were hungry, is that it?’
Sung miserably shook his head.
‘No,Shih Bergson.
I have enough.’
‘Then why?
Tell me why.’
Sung shuddered.
A sigh went through him like a wave.
Then, resigned to his fate, he began to explain.
‘It was my wife, Overseer.
She is a kindly woman, you understand.
A good woman.
It was her suggestion.
She saw how it was for the others: that they were suffering while we, fortunate as we were, had enough.
I told her we could share what we had, but she would not have it.
I pleaded with her not to make me do as she asked…’
‘Which was?’
‘I stole, Overseer.
I took fruit from the Frames and gave it to the others.’
Bergson laughed coldly.
‘Am I meant to believe this, Sung?
An honest thief?
A charitable thief?
A thief who sought no profit from his actions?’
Sung nodded his head once but said nothing.
Bergson moved closer.
‘I could have you flogged senseless for what you did, Sung.
Worse, I could have you thrown into the Clay.
How would you like that, Field Supervisor Sung?
To be sent into the Clay?’
Sung stared up at Bergson, his terror at the thought naked in his eyes.
‘You'd not do that,Shih Bergson.
Please.
I beg you.
Anything but that.’
Bergson was silent a moment.
He turned and went across to the desk.
When he returned he was holding a thin card in one hand.
He knelt down and held it in front of Sung's face a moment.
‘Do you know what this is, Sung?’
Sung shook his head.
He had never seen the like of it.
It looked like a piece of Above technology — something they never saw out in the fields — but he would not have liked to have guessed just what.
‘This here, Sung, is the evidence of your crime.
It's a record of the hour you spent harvesting in the Frames.
A hidden camera took a film of you.‘
Again Sung shuddered.
‘What do you want,Shih Bergson?’
Bergson smiled and slipped the thin sliver of ice into his jacket pocket, then stood up again.
‘First I want you to sit down over here and write down the names of all those who shared the stolen fruit with you.’
Sung hesitated, then nodded.
‘And then?’
‘Then you'll go back to your barracks and send your wife to me.’
Sung stiffened but did not look up.
‘My wife, Overseer?’
‘The good woman.
You know, the one who got you into all this trouble.’
Sung swallowed.
‘And what will happen to my wife,Shih Bergson?’
Bergson laughed.
‘If she's good — if she's very good to me — then nothing.
You understand?
In fact — and you can tell her this — if she's exceptionally good I might even give her the tape.
Who knows, eh, Sung?’
Sung looked up, meeting Bergson's cold grey eyes for the first time in their interview, then looked down again, understanding perfectly.
‘Good.
Then come.
There's paper here and ink.
You have a list of names to write.’
She came when it was dark.
Peskova took her up to the top room — the big room beneath the eaves- and locked her in as he had been told to.
Then he went, leaving the house empty but for the woman and the Overseer.
For a time DeVore simply watched her, following her every movement with the hidden cameras, switching from screen to screen, zooming in to focus  on her face or watching her from the far side of the room.
Then, when he was done with that, he nodded to himself and blanked the screens.
She was much better than he had expected.
Stronger, prettier, more attractive than he'd anticipated.
He had thought beforehand that he would have to send her back and deal with Sung some other way, but now he had seen her he felt the need in him, like a strong, dark tar in his blood, and knew he would have to purge himself of that.
He had not had a woman for weeks — not since that last trip to the Wilds — and that had been a sing-song girl, all artifice and expertise.
No, this would be different; something to savour.
Quickly he went to the wall safe at the far end of the room and touched the combination.
The door irised open and he reached inside, drawing out the tiny phial before the door closed up again.
He hesitated a moment then gulped the drug down, feeling its warmth sear his throat and descend quickly to his stomach.
It would be in his blood in minutes.
He climbed the stairs quickly, almost eagerly now, but near the top he slowed, calming himself, waiting until he had complete control.
Only then did he reach out and thumb the lock.
She turned, surprised.
A big woman, bigger than her husband, nothing cowed or mean about the way she stood.
You married below yourself, DeVore thought at once, knowing that Sung would never have made Field Supervisor without such a woman to push him from behind.
Her bow was hesitant.
‘Overseer?’
He closed the door behind him, then turned back to her, trying to gauge her response to him.
Would she do as he wanted?
Would she try to save her husband?
She was here.
That, at least, augured well.
But would she be compliant?
Would she be exceptionally good to him?
‘You know why you're here?’ he asked, taking a step closer to her.
Her eyes never left him.
‘I'm here because my husband told me to be here,Shih Bergson.’
DeVore laughed.
‘From what I'm told old Sung is a docile man.
He does what he's told.
Am I wrong in thinking that?
Does Sung roar like a lion within his own walls?’
She met his gaze fiercely, almost defiantly, making the blood run thicker, heavier in his veins.
‘He is my husband and I a dutiful wife.
He wished me here, so here I am.’
DeVore looked down, keeping the smile from his face.
He had not been wrong.
She had spirit.
He had seen that when he had been watching her; had seen how she looked at everything with that curious, almost arrogant stare of hers.
She had strength.
The strength of twenty Sungs.
He took another step then shook his head.
‘You're wrong, you know.
You're here because I said you should be here.’
She did not answer him this time, but stared back at him almost insolently, only a slight moistening of her lips betraying her nervousness.
‘What's your name, Sung's wife?’
She looked away, then looked back at him, as if to say Don't toy with me.
Do what you are going to do and let me be .’
Your name?’ he insisted, his voice harder now.
‘My name is Si Wu Ya,’ she answered proudly.
This time he smiled.
Si Wu Ya.
Silk Raven .
He looked at her and understood why her parents had given her the name.
Her hair was beautifully dark and lustrous.
‘Better an honest raven than a deceitful magpie, eh?’ he said, quoting the old Han adage.
‘What do you want me to do?’
He shook his head.
‘Don't be impatient, Si Wu Ya.
We'll come to that.
But tell me this — is Sung a good man?
Is he good in bed?
Does he make you sing out with pleasure?’
He saw how she bridled at the question, but saw also how the truth forbade her to say yes.
So, Sung was a disappointment.
Well, he, DeVore, would make her sing tonight.
Of that he had no doubt.
He took a step towards her, then another, until he stood before her, face to face.
‘Is he hard like bamboo, or soft like a rice frond?
Tell me, Si Wu Ya.
I'd like to know.’
For a moment her eyes flared with anger, but then she seemed to laugh deep inside herself and her eyes changed, their anger replaced by a hard amusement.
‘Don't mock me,Shih Bergson.
I'm here, aren't I?
Do what you want.
I'll be good to you.
I'll be very good.
But don't mock me.’
He looked back at her a moment, then reached down and took her left hand in his own, lifting it up to study it.
It was a big, strong hand, roughly calloused from fieldwork, but she had made an effort.
It was clean and the nails were polished a deep brown.
He met her eyes again.
‘My friends tell me you Han women wear no underclothes.
Is it true?’
In answer she took his hand and placed it between her legs.
His fingers met the soft, masking texture of cloth, but beneath them he could feel her warmth, the firm softness of her sex.
‘Well?’ she asked, almost smiling now, determined not to be cowed by him.
‘Strip off,’ he said, standing back a pace.
‘I want to see what you look like.‘
She shrugged, slipped the one-piece off and kicked off her briefs, then stood there, her hands at her sides, making no effort to cover her nakedness.
DeVore walked round her, studying her.
She was a fine woman, unspoilt by childbirth, her body hardened by fieldwork.
Her breasts were large and firm, her buttocks broad but not fat.
Her legs were strongly-muscled yet still quite shapely, her stomach flat, her shoulders smooth.
He nodded, satisfied.
She would have made a good wife for a T'ang, let alone a man like Sung.
‘Good.
Now over there.’
She hesitated, her eyes showing a momentary unease, then she did as she was told, walking over to the corner where he had indicated.
He saw how she looked about her; how her eyes kept going to the saddle.
as if she knew.
‘What do you want me to do?’
DeVore smiled coldly.
He had watched her earlier.
Had seen, through the camera's hidden eye, how fascinated she had been with the saddle.
Had witnessed her puzzlement and then her shocked surprise as she realised what it was.
It was a huge thing, almost half a man's height and the same in length.
At first glance it could be mistaken for an ornately carved stool, its black and white surfaces for a kind of sculpture.
And in a way it was.
Ming craftsmen had made the saddle more than seven hundred years before, shaping ivory and wood to satisfy the whim of a bored nobleman.
‘Have you seen my saddle?’ he asked her.
She watched him, eyes half-lidded now, and nodded.
‘It was a custom of your people, you know.
They would place a saddle in the gateway to the parental home before the bride and bridegroom entered it.’
She wet her lips.
‘What of it?’
He shrugged.
‘An , it was.
A saddle.
An .
Almost the same sound as for peace.’
He saw her shiver, yet the room was warm.
‘Have you studied my saddle?’
She nodded briefly.
‘And did it amuse you?’
‘You're mocking me again,Shih Bergson.
Is that what you want me to do?
To play that game with you?’
He smiled.
So she had worked it out.
He went across and stood there beside the saddle, smoothing his hand over its finely polished surfaces.
What at first seemed a mere tangle of black and white soon resolved itself.
Became a man and woman locked in an embrace that was, some said, unnatural; the man's head buried between the woman's legs, the woman's head between the man's
He looked across at her, amused.
‘Have you ever done that with Sung?’
She blinked.
Then, unexpectedly, she shook her head.
‘Would you like to do that, now, with me?’
He waited, watching her like a hawk watching its prey.
Again she hesitated, then she nodded.
‘You think you'd like it, don't you?’
This time she looked away, for the first time the faintest colour appearing at her neck.
Ah, he thought.
Now I have you.
Now I know your weakness.
You are dissatisfied with Sung.
Perhaps you're even thinking what this might lead to.
You've ambitions, Si Wu Ya.
For all your social conscience you're a realist.
And, worse for you, you enjoy sex.
You want to be made love to.
You want the excitement that I'm offering here.
‘Come here.’
He saw how her breathing changed.
Her nipples were stiff now and the colour had not left her neck.
Slowly, almost fearful now, she came to him.
He took her hand again, guiding it down within the folds of his pau , then heard her gasp as her hand closed on him; saw her eyes go down and look.
DeVore laughed, knowing the drug would last for hours yet — would keep him at this peak until he had done with her.
He leaned closer to her, drawing her nearer with one hand, his voice lowering to a whisper.
‘Was he ever this hard, Si Wu Ya?
Was he ever this hot?’
Her eyes went to his briefly, the pupils enlarged, then returned to the splendour she held.
Unbid, she knelt and began to stroke him and kiss him.
He put his hands on her shoulders now, forcing her to take him in her mouth, her whole body shuddering beneath his touch, a soft moaning in her throat.
Then he pushed her off, roughly, almost brutally and moved away from her.
She knelt there, her breasts rising and falling violently, her eyes wide, watching him.
Almost.
She was almost ready.
One more step.
One more step and she would be there.
He threw off the pau and stood there over her, naked, seeing how eagerly she watched him now.
How ready she was for him to fuck her.
With one foot he pushed her back, then knelt and spread her legs, watching her all the while, one hand moving between her legs, seeing how her eyes closed, how her breath caught with the pleasure of it.
‘Gods,’ she moaned, reaching up for him.
‘Goddess of mercy, put it there!
Please,Shih Bergson!
Please put it there!’
His fingers traced a line from her groin up to her chin, forcing her to look back at him.
‘Not like this,’ he said, putting her hands on him again.
‘I know a better way.
A much, much better way than this.’
Quickly he led her to the saddle, pushing her face down onto its hard smooth surface, his hands caressing her intimately all the while, keeping her mind dark, her senses inflamed.
Then, before she realised what was happening, he fastened her in the double stirrups, binding her hands and feet.
He stood back, looking at his handiwork, then crossed to the wall and switched off all the lights but one — the spot that picked out her naked rump.
She was shaking now.
He could see the small movement of the muscles at the top of her legs.
‘What's happening?’ she asked in a tiny, sobered voice.
‘What are you doing?’
He went over to her and placed his hand on the small of her back, running his fingers down the smooth channel that ended in the tight hole of her anus, feeling her shudder at his touch.
Pleasure or fear? he wondered.
Did she still believe it would all turn out all right?
The thought almost made him laugh.
She had mistaken him.
She had thought he wanted ordinary satisfactions.
He reached beneath the saddle and dipped his fingers in the shelf of scented unguents, then began to smear them delicately about the tiny hole, pushing inward, the unguents working their magic spell, making the muscles relax.
He felt her breathing change again, anticipating pleasure; knew, without looking, that she would have been newly aroused by his ministrations; that her nipples would be stiff, her eyes wide with expectation.
He reached under the saddle a second time and drew out the steel-tipped phallus that was attached by a chain to the pommel.
The chain was just long enough.
Longer and there would not be that invigorating downward pull — that feeling of restraint — shorter and penetration would not be deep enough to satisfy.
He smiled, holding the hollowed column lovingly between his hands and smoothing his fingers over the spiralling pattern of the wu-tu , the ‘five noxious creatures’— toad, scorpion, snake, centipede and gecko — then drew it on, easing himself into its oiled soft-leather innards and fastening its leather straps about his waist.
For a moment he hesitated, savouring the moment, then centred the metal spike and pushed.
His first thrust took her by surprise.
He felt her whole body stiffen in shock, but though she gasped, she did not cry out.
Brave girl, he thought, but that's not what you're here for.
You're not here to be brave.
You're here to sing for me.
The second thrust tore her.
He felt the skin between her anus and vagina give like tissue and heard her cry out in agony.
‘Good,’ he said, laughing brutally.
‘That's good.
Sing out, Si Wu Ya!
It's good to hear you sing out.’
He thrust again.
When he was done he unstrapped himself, then took one of the white sheets from the side and threw it over her, watching as the blood spread out from the centre of the white; a doubled circle of redness that slowly formed into an ellipse.
Hearing her moan, he went round and knelt beside her, lifting her face gently, almost tenderly, and kissing her brow, her nose, her lips.
‘Was that good, Si Wu Ya?
Was it hard enough for you?’
He laughed softly, almost lovingly.
‘Ah, but you were good, Si Wu Ya.
The best yet.
And for that you'll have your tape.
But later, eh?
In the morning.
We've a whole night ahead of us.
Plenty of time to play our game again.’
Sung was kneeling on the top of the dyke, staring across at the House as the dawn broke.
He was cold to the bone and his clothes were wet through, but still he knelt there, waiting.
He had heard her cries in the night.
Had heard and felt his heart break inside his chest.
Had dropped his head, knowing, at last, how small he was, how powerless.
Now, as the light leached back into the world, he saw the door open at the head of the steps and a figure appear.
‘Si Wu Ya…’ he mouthed, his lips dry, his heart, which had seemed dead in him, pounding in his chest.
He went to get up but his legs were numb from kneeling and he had to put his hand out to stop himself from tumbling into the water far below.
But his eyes never left her distant, shadowed figure, seeing at once how slowly she moved, how awkwardly, hobbling down the steps one by one, stopping time and again to rest, her whole body crooked, one hand clutching the side rail tightly, as if she'd fall without it.
He dragged himself back, anxious now, and began to pound the life back into his legs.
Once more he tried to stand and fell back, cursing, almost whimpering now in his fear for her.
‘Si Wu Ya,’ he moaned, ‘Si Wu Ya.’
Once more he tried to stand, gritting his teeth, willing his muscles to obey him.
For one moment he almost fell again, then he thrust one leg forward, finding his balance.
‘Si Wu Ya…’ he hissed.
‘Si Wu Ya…’
Forcing his useless legs to work he made his way to the bridge, awkwardly at first, hobbling, as if in some grotesque mimicry of his wife, then with more confidence as the blood began to flow, his muscles come alive again.
Then, suddenly, he was running, his arms flailing wildly, his bare feet thudding against the dark earth.
Until he was standing there, before her, great waves of pain and fear, hurt and anger washing through him like a huge black tide.
He moaned, his voice an animal cry of pain.
’ What did he do, Si Wu Ya?
Gods save us, what did he do?’
She stared back at him almost sightlessly.
‘Your face…’ he began, then realised that her face was unmarked.
The darkness was behind her eyes.
The sight of it made him whimper like a child and fall to his knees again.
Slowly, each movement a vast, unexplored continent of pain, she pushed out from the steps and hobbled past him.
He scrambled up and made to help her but she brushed him off, saying nothing, letting the cold emptiness of her face speak for her.
On the narrow bridge he stood in front of her again, blocking her way, looking back past her at the House.
‘I'll kill him.’
For the first time she seemed to look at him.
Then she laughed; her laughter  so cold, so unlike the laughter he had known from her, that it made his flesh tingle with fear.
‘He'd break you, little Sung.
He'd eat you up and spit you out.’
She leaned to one side and spat.
Blood.
He could see it, even in this half light.
She had spat blood.
He went to touch her, to put his hands on her shoulders, but the look in her eyes warned him off.
He let his arms fall uselessly.
‘What did he do, Si Wu Ya?
Tell me what he did.’
She looked down, then began to move on, forcing him to move aside and let her pass.
He had no will to stop her.
At the first of the smaller channels she turned and began to ease herself down the shallow bank, grunting, her face set against the pain she was causing herself.
Sung, following her, held out his hand and for the first time she let him help her, gripping his hand with a force that took his breath, her fingers tightening convulsively with every little jolt she received.
Then she let go and straightened up, standing there knee deep in the water at the bottom of the unlit channel, the first light lain like a white cloth over the latticework of the surrounding fields, picking out the channel's lips, the crouching shape of Sung.
The same clear light that rested in the woman's long dark hair like a faintly-jewelled mist.
She looked up at him.
‘Have you your torch, Sung?’
He nodded, not understanding why she should want it, but took it from his pocket and, edging down the bank, reached out and handed it to her, watching as she unscrewed the top, transforming it into a tiny cutting tool.
Then she took something from the pocket of her one-piece.
Something small enough to fold inside her palm.
The card.
The tape that had the record of his theft.
Sung swallowed and looked at her.
So she had done it.
Had saved them both.
He shivered, wanting to go down to her, to stroke her and hold her and thank her, but what he wanted wasn't somehow right.
He felt the coldness emanate from her, a sense of the vast distance she had travelled.
It was as if she had been beyond the sky.
Had been to the place where they said there was no air, only the frozen.
winking nothingness of space.
She had been there.
He knew it.
He had seen it in her eyes.
She put the card against the bank and played the cutting beam upon it.
Once, twice, three times she did it, each time picking up the card and examining it.
But each time it emerged unscathed, unmarked.
She looked up at him, that same cold distance in her eyes, then let the card fall from her fingers into the silt below the water.
Yes, he thought, they'll not find it there.
They could search a thousand years and they'd not find it.
But she had forgotten about the card already.
She was bent down now, unbuttoning the lower half of her one-piece, her fingers moving gingerly, as if what she touched were flesh not cloth.
‘Come down,’ she said coldly, not looking at him.
‘You want to know what he did, don't you?
Well, come and see.
I'll show you what he did.’
He went down and stood there, facing her, the water cold against his shins, the darkness all around them.
He could see that the flap of cloth gaped open, but in the dark could make out no more than the vague shape of her legs, her stomach.
‘Here.’
She handed him the two parts of the torch and waited for him to piece the thing together.
He made to shine the torch into her face, but she pushed his hand down.
‘No,’ she said.
‘Not there.
Down here, where the darkness is.’
He let her guide his hand, then tried to pull back as he saw what he had previously not noticed, but she held his hand there firmly, forcing him to look.
Blood.
The cloth was caked with her blood.
Was stained almost black with it.
‘Gods…’ he whispered, then caught his breath as the light moved across onto her flesh.
She had been torn open.
From her navel to the base of her spine she had been ripped apart.
And then sewn up.
Crudely, it seemed, for the stitches were uneven.
The black threads glistened in the torchlight, blood seeping from the wound where she had opened it again.
‘There,’ she said, pushing the torch away.
‘Now you've seen.’
He stood there blankly, not knowing what to say or do, remembering only the sound of her crying out in the darkness and how awful he had felt, alone, kneeling there on the dyke, impotent to act.
‘What now?’ he asked.
But she did not answer him, only bent and lowered herself into the water, hissing as the coldness burned into the wound, a faint moan escaping through her gritted teeth as she began to wash.
At dawn on the morning of his twelfth birthday — in the official court annals his thirteenth, for they accorded with ancient Han tradition in calling the day of the child's birth its first ‘birth day’— Li Yuan was woken by his father and, when he was dressed in the proper clothes, led down to the stables of the Tongjiang estate.
It was an informal ceremony.
Even so, there was not one of the six hundred and forty-eight servants — man, woman or girl — who was not present.
Nor had any of the guests — themselves numbering one hundred and eighty — absented themselves on this occasion.
The grounds surrounding the stable buildings had been meticulously swept and tidied.
the grooms lined up, heads bowed, before the great double doors.
And there, framed in the open left-hand doorway of the stalls, was the T'ang's birthday gift to his son.
It was an Andalusian; a beauty of a horse, sixteen hands high and a perfect  mulberry in colour.
It was a thick-necked, elegant beast, with the strong legs of a thoroughbred.
It had been saddled up ready for him and as Li Yuan stood there, it turned its head curiously, its large dark eyes meeting the prince's as if it knew its new owner.
‘You have ridden my horses for too long now,’ Li Shai Tung said to his son quietly.
‘I felt it was time you had your own.’
Li Yuan went across to it and reached up gently, stroking its neck, its dappled flank.
Then he turned and bowed to his father, a fleeting smile on his lips.
The chief groom stood close by, the halter in his hand, ready to offer it to the prince when he was ready.
But when Li Yuan finally turned to him it was not to take the halter from him.
‘Saddle up the Arab, Hung Feng-Chan.’
The chief groom stared back at him a moment, open-mouthed, then looked across at the T'ang as if to query the instruction.
But Li Shai Tung stood there motionless, his expression unchanged.
Seeing this, Hung Feng-Chan bowed deeply to his T'ang, then to the prince, and quickly handed the halter to one of the nearby grooms.
When he had gone, Li Yuan turned back to his father, smiling, one hand still resting on the Andalusian's smooth, strong neck.
‘He's beautiful, father, and I'm delighted with your gift.
But if I am to have a horse it must be Han Ch'in's.
I must become my brother.’
Throughout the watching crowd there was a low murmur of surprise, but from the T'ang himself there was no word, only the slightest narrowing of the eyes, a faint movement of the mouth.
Otherwise he was perfectly still, watching his son.
The chief groom returned a minute later, leading the Arab.
The black horse sniffed the air, and made a small bowing movement of its head, as if in greeting to the other horse.
Then, just when it seemed to have settled, it made a sharp sideways movement, tugging against the halter.
Hung Feng-Chan quieted the horse, patting its neck and whispering to it, then brought it across to where Li Yuan was standing.
This was the horse that General Tolonen had bought Han for his seventeenth birthday; the horse Han Ch'in had ridden daily until his death.
A dark, spirited beast; dark-skinned and dark-natured, her eyes full of fire.
She was smaller than the Andalusian by a hand, yet her grace, her power were undeniable.
‘Well, father?’
All eyes were on the T'ang.
Li Shai Tung stood there, bare-headed, a bright blue quilted jacket pulled loosely about his shoulders against the morning's freshness, one foot slightly before the other, his arms crossed across his chest, his hands holding his shoulders.
It was a familiar stance to those who knew him, as was the smile he now gave his son; a dark, ironic smile that seemed both amused and calculating.
‘You must ride her first, Li Yuan.’
Li Yuan held his father's eyes a moment, bowing, then he turned and, without further hesitation, swung up into the saddle.
So far so good.
The Arab barely had time to think before Li Yuan had leant forward and, looping the reins quickly over his hands, squeezed the Arab's chest gently with both feet.
Li Yuan's look of surprise as the Arab reared brought gasps as well as laughter from all round.
Only the T'ang remained still and silent.
Hung Feng-Chan danced round the front of the horse, trying to grab the halter, but Li Yuan shouted at him angrily and would have waved him away were he not clinging on dearly with both hands.
The Arab pulled and tugged and danced, moving this way and that, bucking, then skittering forward and ducking its head, trying to throw the rider from its back.
But Li Yuan held on, his teeth gritted, his face determined.
And slowly, very slowly, the Arab's movements calmed.
With difficulty Li Yuan brought the Arab's head round and moved the stubborn beast two paces closer to the watching T'ang.
‘Well, father, is she mine?’
The T'ang's left hand went from his shoulder to his beard.
Then he laughed; a warm, good-humoured laugh that found its echo all around.
‘Yes, Li Yuan.
In name, at least.
But watch her.
Even your brother found her difficult.’
They met by accident, several hours later, in one of the bright, high-ceilinged corridors leading to the gardens.
‘Li Yuan.’
Fei Yen bowed deeply, the two maids on either side of her copying her automatically.
The young prince had showered and changed since she had last seen him.
He wore red now, the colour of the summer, his ma kua , the waist-length ceremonial jacket, a brilliant carmine, his loose silk trousers poppy, his suede boots a delicate shade of rose.
About his waist he wore an elegant ta lien,or girdle pouch, the border a thick band of russet, the twin heart-shaped pockets made of a soft peach cloth, the details of trees, butterflies and flowers picked out in emerald green and blue and gold.
On his head he wore a Ming-style summer hat, its inverted bowl lined with red fur and capped with a single ruby.
Three long peacock feathers hung from its tip, reminder that Li Yuan was a royal prince.
‘Fei Yen…’
It might only have been the light reflected from his costume, yet once again he seemed embarrassed by her presence.
‘I…
I was coming to see you.
She stayed as she was, looking up at him from beneath her long black lashes, allowing herself the faintest smile of pleasure.
‘I am honoured, Li Yuan.’
Fei Yen had dressed quite simply, in a peach ch'i p'ao,over which she  wore a long embroidered cloak of white silk, decorated with stylised bamboo leaves of blue and green and edged in a soft pink brocade that matched the tiny pink ribbons in her hair and set the whole thing off quite perfectly.
She knew how beautiful she looked.
From childhood she had known her power over men.
But this was strange, disturbing.
It was almost as if this boy, this child…
Fei Yen rose slowly, meeting the prince's eyes for the first time and seeing how quickly he re-directed his gaze.
Perhaps it was just embarrassment — the memory of how he had shamed himself that time when she had comforted him.
Men were such strange, proud creatures.
It was odd what mattered to them.
Like Han Ch'in that time, when she had almost bettered him at archery…
Li Yuan found his tongue again.
But he could only glance at her briefly as he complimented her.
‘May her name be preserved on bamboo and silk.’
She laughed prettily at that, recognising the old saying and pleased by his allusion to her cloak.
‘Why, thank you, Li Yuan.
May the fifteen precious things be yours.’
It was said before she fully realised what she had wished for him.
She heard her maids giggle behind her and saw Li Yuan look down, the flush returning to his cheeks.
It was a traditional good-luck wish, for long life and prosperity.
But it was also a wish that the recipient have sons.
Her own laughter dispelled the awkwardness of the moment.
She saw Li Yuan look up at her, his dark eyes strangely bright, and was reminded momentarily of Han Ch'in.
As Han had been, so Li Yuan was now.
One day he would be Head of his family-a powerful man, almost a god.
She was conscious of that as he stood there, watching her.
Already, they said, he had the wisdom of an old man, a sage.
Yet that brief reminder of her murdered husband saddened her.
It brought back the long months of bitterness and loneliness she had suffered, shut away on her father's estate.
Li Yuan must have seen something of that in her face, for what he said next seemed to penetrate her mood, almost to read her thoughts.
‘You were alone too long, Fei Yen.’
It sounded so formal, so old-mannish, that she laughed.
He frowned at her, not understanding.
‘I mean it,’ he said, his face earnest.
‘It isn't healthy for a young woman to be locked away with old maids and virgins.’
His candidness, and the apparent maturity it revealed, surprised and amused her.
She had to remind herself again of his precocity.
He was only twelve.
Despite this she was tempted to flirt with him.
It was her natural inclination, long held in check, and, after a moment's hesitation, she indulged it.
‘I'm gratified to find you so concerned for my welfare, Li Yuan.
You think I should have been living life to the full, then, and not mourning your brother?’
She saw immediately that she had said the wrong thing.
She had misread his comment.
His face closed to her and he turned away, suddenly cold, distant.
It troubled her and she crossed the space between them, touching his shoulder.
‘I didn't mean…’
She stood there a moment, suddenly aware of how still he was.
Her hand lay gently on his shoulder, barely pressing against him, yet it seemed he was gathered there at the point of contact, his whole self focused in her touch.
It bemused her.
What was this?
She felt embarrassed, felt that she ought to remove her hand, but did not know how.
It seemed that any movement of hers would be a snub.
Then, unexpectedly, he reached up and covered her hand with his own, pressing it firmly to his shoulder.
‘We both miss him,’ he said.
‘But life goes on.
I too found the customs too…too strict.’
She was surprised to hear that.
It was more like something Han Ch'in might have said.
She had always thought Li Yuan was in his father's mould.
Traditional.
Bound fast by custom.
He released her and turned to face her.
Li Yuan was smiling now.
Once more she found herself wrong-footed.
What was happening?
Why had his mood changed so quickly?
She stared at him, finding the likeness to Han more prominent now that he was smiling.
But then, Han had always been smiling.
His eyes, his mouth, had been made for laughter.
She looked away, vaguely disturbed.
Li Yuan was too intense for her taste.
Like his father there was something daunting, almost terrible about him an austerity suggestive of ferocity.
Yet now, standing there, smiling at her, he seemed quite different — almost quite likeable.
‘It was hard, you know.
This morning…to mount Han's horse like that.’
Again the words were unexpected.
His smile faded, became a wistful, boyish expression of loss.
It touched her deeply.
For the first time she saw through his mask of precocious intelligence and saw how vulnerable he was, how frail in spite of all.
Not even that moment after Han's death had revealed that to her.
Then she had thought it grief, not vulnerability.
She was moved by her insight and, when he looked up at her again, saw how hurt he seemed, how full of pain his eyes were.
Beautiful eyes.
Dark, hazel eyes.
She had not noticed them before.
Han's death had touched him deeply, she could see.
He had lost far more than her.
She was silent, afraid she would say the wrong thing, watching him, this man-boy, her curiosity aroused, her sympathies awoken.
He frowned and looked away.
‘That's why I came to see you.
To give you a gift.’
‘A gift?’
‘Yes.
The Andalusian.’
She shook her head, confused.
‘But your father…’
He looked directly at her now.
‘I've spoken to my father already.
He said the horse is mine to do with as I wish.’
He bowed his head and swallowed.
‘So I'd like to give him to you.
In place of the Arab.’
She laughed shortly.
‘But the Arab was Han's, not mine.’
‘I know.
Even so, I'd like you to have him.
Han told me how much you enjoyed riding.’
This time her laughter was richer, deeper, and when Li Yuan looked up again he saw the delight in her face.
‘Why, Li Yuan, that's…’
She stopped and simply looked at him, smiling broadly.
Then, impulsively, she reached out and embraced him, kissing his cheek.
‘Then you'll take him?’ he whispered softly in her ear.
Her soft laughter rippled through him.
‘Of course, Li Yuan.
And I thank you.
From the bottom of my heart I thank you.’
When she was gone he turned and looked after her, feeling the touch of her still, the warmth on his cheek where she had kissed him.
He closed his eyes and caught the scent of her,mei hua — plum blossom — in the air and on his clothes where she had brushed against him.
He shivered, his thoughts in turmoil, his pulse racing.
The plum.
Ice-skinned and jade-boned, the plum.
It symbolised winter and virginity.
But its blossoming brought the spring.
‘Mei hua …’
He said the words softly, like a breath, letting them mingle with her scent, then turned away, reddening at the thought that had come to mind.
Mei hua.
It was a term for sexual pleasure, for on the bridal bed were spread plum blossom covers.
So innocent a scent, and yet…
Shivering, he took a long, slow breath of her.
Then he turned and hurried on, his fists clenched at his sides, his face the colour of summer.
‘There have been changes since you were last among us, Howard.’
‘So I see.’
DeVore turned briefly to smile at Berdichev before returning his attention to the scene on the other side of the one-way mirror that took up the whole of one wall of the study.
‘Who are they?’
Berdichev came up and stood beside him.
‘Sympathisers.
Money men, mainly.
Friends of our host, Douglas.’
The room the two men looked into was massive; was more garden than room.
It had been landscaped with low hills and narrow walks, with tiny underlit pools, small temples, carefully-placed banks of shrub and stone, shady willows, cinnamon trees and delicate wu-tong .
People milled about casually, talking amongst themselves, eating and drinking.
But there the similarities with past occasions ended.
The servants who went amongst them were no longer Han.
In fact, there was not a single Han in sight.
DeVore's eyes took it all in with great interest.
He saw how, though they still wore silks, the style had changed; had been simplified.
Their dress seemed more austere, both in its cut and in the absence of embellishment.
What had been so popular only three years ago was now conspicuous by its absence.
There were no birds or flowers, no dragonflies or clouds, no butterflies or pictograms.
Now only a single motif could be seen, worn openly on chest or collar, on hems or in the form of jewellery, on pendants about the neck or emblazoned on a ring or brooch: the double-helix of heredity.
Just as noticeable was the absence of the colour blue — the colour of imperial service.
DeVore smiled appreciatively; that last touch was the subtlest of insults.
‘The Seven have done our work for us, Soren.’
‘Not altogether.
We pride ourselves on having won the propaganda war.
There are men out there who, three years ago, would not have dreamed of coming to a gathering like this.
They would have been worried that word would get back — as, indeed, it does — and that the T'ang would act through his Ministers to make life awkward for them.
Now they have no such fears.
We have educated them to the fact of their own power.
They are many, the Seven few.
What if the Seven close one door to them?— here, at such gatherings, a thousand new doors open.‘
‘And The New Hope ?’
Berdichev's smile stretched his narrow face against its natural grain.
The New Hope was his brainchild.
‘In more than one sense it is our flagship.
You should see the pride in their faces when they talk of it.
We did this, they seem to be saying.
Not the Han, but us, the Hung Mao,as they call us.
The Europeans.’
DeVore glanced at Berdichev.
It was the second time he had heard the term.
Their host, Douglas, had used it when he had first arrived.
‘We Europeans must stick together,’ he had said.
And DeVore, hearing it, had felt he had used it like some secret password; some token of mutual understanding.
He looked about him at the decoration of the study.
Again there were signs of change — of that same revolution in style that was sweeping the Above.
The decor, like the dress of those outside, was simpler — the design of chairs and table less extravagant than it had been.
On the walls, now, hung simple rural landscapes.
Gone were the colourful historical scenes that had been so much in favour with the Hung Mao .
Gone were the lavish screens and bright floral displays of former days.
But all of this, ironically, brought them only further into line with the real Han — the Families — who had always preferred the simple to the lavish, the harmonious to the gaudy.
These tokens of change, superficial as they yet were, were encouraging, but they were also worrying.
These men — these Europeans -were not Han, nor had they ever been Han.
Yet the Han had destroyed all that they had once been — had severed them from their cultural roots as simply and as thoroughly as a gardener might snip the stem of a chrysanthemum.
The Seven had given them  no real choice: they could be Han or they could be nothing.
And to be nothing was intolerable.
Now, however, to be Han was equally untenable.
DeVore shivered.
At present their response was negative: a reaction against Han ways, Han dress, Han style.
But they could not live like this for long.
At length they would turn the mirror on themselves and find they had no real identity, no positive channel for their new-born sense of racial selfhood.
The New Hope was a move to fill that vacuum, as was this term, ‘European’; but neither was enough.
A culture was a vast and complex thing and, like the roots of a giant tree, went deep into the dark, rich earth of time.
It was more than a matter of dress and style.
It was a way of thinking and behaving.
A thing of blood and bone, not cloth and architecture.
Yes, they needed more than a word for themselves, more than a central symbol for their pride; they needed a focus — something to restore them to themselves.
But what?
What on earth could fill the vacuum they were facing?
It was a problem they would need to address in the coming days.
To ignore it would be fatal.
He went to the long table in the centre of the room and looked down at the detailed map spread out across its surface.
‘Has everyone been briefed?’
Berdichev came and stood beside him.
‘Not everyone.
I've kept the circle as small as possible.
Douglas knows, of course.
And Barrow.
I thought your man, Duchek, ought to know, too, considering how helpful he's been.
And then there's Moore and Weis.’
‘Anton Weis?
The banker?’
Berdichev nodded.
‘I know what you're thinking, but he's changed in the last year or so.
He fell out with old man Ebert.
Was stripped by him of a number of important contracts.
Now he hates the T'ang and his circle with an intensity that's hard to match.’
‘I understand.
Even so, I'd not have thought him important enough.’
‘It's not him so much as the people he represents.
He's our liaison with a number of interested parties.
People who can't declare themselves openly.
Important people.’
DeVore considered a moment, then smiled.
‘Okay.
So that makes seven of us who know.’
‘Eight, actually.’
DeVore raised his eyebrows in query, but Berdichev said simply, ‘I'll explain later.’
‘When will they be here?’
‘They're here now.
Outside.
They'll come in when you're ready for them.’
DeVore laughed.
‘I'm ready now.’
‘Then I'll tell Douglas.’
DeVore watched Berdichev move among the men gathered there in the garden room, more at ease now than he had ever been; saw too how they looked  to him now as a leader, a shaper of events, and noted with irony how different that was from how they had formerly behaved.
And what was different about the man?
Power.
It was power alone that made a man attractive.
Even the potentiality of power.
He stood back, away from the door, as they filed in.
Then, when the door was safely closed and locked, he came forward and exchanged bows with each of them.
Seeing how closely Weis was watching him, he made an effort to be more warm, more friendly in his greeting there, but all the while he was wondering just how far he could trust the man.
Then, without further ado, they went to the table.
The map was of the main landmass of City Europe, omitting Scandinavia, the Balkans, Southern Italy and the Iberian Peninsula.
Its predominant colour was white, though there was a faint, almost ivory tinge to it, caused by the fine yellow honeycombing that represented the City's regular shape — each tiny hexagon a hsien , an administrative district.
All Security garrisons were marked in a heavier shade of yellow, Bremen to the north-west, close to the coast, Kiev to the east, almost off the map, Bucharest far to the south; these three the most important of the twenty shown.
Weimar, to the south-east of Bremen, was marked with a golden circle, forming a triangle with the Berlin garrison to the north-east.
Two large areas were marked in red, both in the bottom half of the map.
One, to the left, straddled the old geographic areas of Switzerland and Austria; the other, smaller and to the right, traced the border of old Russia and cut down into Rumania.
In these ancient, mountainous regions — the Alps and the Carpathians — the City stopped abruptly, edging the wilderness.
They formed great, jagged holes in its perfect whiteness.
Again in the top right-hand section of the map the dominant whiteness ceased abruptly in a line extending down from Danzig hsien to Poznan, and thence to Krakow and across to Lvov, ending on the shores of the Black Sea, at Odessa.
This, shaded the soft green of springtime, was the great growing area, where the Hundred Plantations — in reality eighty-seven — were situated; an area which comprised some twenty-eight per cent of the total land mass of City Europe.
DeVore's own plantation was in the northwest of this area, adjoining the garrison at Lodz.
He let them study the map a while, accustoming themselves once again to its details, then drew their attention to the large red-shaded area to the bottom left of the map.
To him the outline of the Swiss Wilds always looked the same.
That dark red shape was a giant carp turning in the water, its head facing east, its tail flicking out towards Marseilles hsien , its cruel mouth open, poised to eat Lake Balaton which, like a tiny minnow, swam some three hundred li to the east.
Seven of the great Security garrisons ringed the Wilds-Geneva, Zurich, Munich and Vienna to the north, Marseilles, Milan and Zagreb to the south.
Strategically  that made little sense, for the Wilds were almost empty, yet it was as if the City's architect had known that this vast, jagged hole — this primitive wilderness at the heart of its hive-like orderliness — would one day prove its weakest point.
As, indeed, it would.
And all the preparedness of architects would not prevent the City's fall.
He leaned forward and jabbed his finger down into the red, at a point where the carp's backbone seemed to twist.
‘Here!’ he said, looking about him and seeing he had their attention.
‘This is where our base will be.’
He reached into the drawer beneath the table and drew out the transparent template, then laid it down over the shaded area.
At once that part of the map seemed to come alive; was overlaid with a fine web of brilliant gold, the nodes of which sparkled in the overhead light.
They leaned closer, attentive, as he outlined the details of his scheme.
Three nerve-centres, built deep into the mountainsides, joined to a total of eighteen other fortresses, each linked by discreet communication systems to at least two other bases, yet each capable of functioning independently.
The whole thing hidden beneath layers of ice and rock, untraceable from the air: a flexible and formidable system of defences from which they would launch their attack on the Seven.
And the cost?
The cost they knew already.
It was a staggering sum.
Far more than any one of them could contemplate.
But together…
DeVore looked from face to face, gauging their response, coming to Weis last of all.
‘Well,Shih Weis?
Do you think your backers would approve?’
He saw the flicker of uncertainty at the back of Weis's eyes, and smiled inwardly.
The man was still conditioned to think like a loyal subject of the T'ang.
Even so, if he could be pushed to persuade his backers…
DeVore smiled encouragingly.
‘You're happy with the way funds will be channelled through to the project, I assume?’
Weis nodded, then leaned forward, touching the template.
‘This is hand drawn.
Why's that?’
DeVore laughed.
‘Tell me,Shih Weis, do you trust all your dealings to the record?’
Weis smiled and others about the table laughed.
It was a common business procedure to keep a single written copy of a deal until it was considered safe for the venture to be announced publicly.
It was too easy to gain access to a Company's computer records when everyone used the same communications web.
‘You want the T'ang to know our scheme beforehand?’
Weis withdrew his hand, then looked at DeVore again and smiled.
‘I think my friends will be pleased enough, Major.’
DeVore's face did not change immediately, but inwardly he tensed.
It had  been agreed beforehand that they would refer to him as Shih Scott.
Weis, he was certain, had not forgotten that, nor had he mentioned his former Security rank without some underlying reason.
You're dead, thought DeVore, smiling pleasantly at the man as if amused by his remark.
As soon as you're expendable, you're dead.
‘I'm delighted,Shih Weis.
Like yourself, they will be welcome any time they wish to visit.
I would not ask them to fund anything they cannot see with their own eyes.’
He saw the calculation at the back of Weis's eyes that greeted his comment — saw how he looked for a trap in every word of his — and smiled inwardly.
At least the man was wise enough to know how dangerous he was.
But his wisdom would not help him in this instance.
DeVore turned to Barrow.
‘And you, Under Secretary?
Have you anything to add?’
Barrow had succeeded to Lehmann's old position, and whilst his contribution to this scheme was negligible, his role as leader of the Dispersionist faction in the House made his presence here essential.
If he approved then First Level would approve, for he was their mouthpiece, their conscience in these times of change.
Barrow smiled sadly, then looked down.
‘I wish there were some other way,Shih Scott.
I wish that pressure in the House would prove enough, but I am realist enough to know that change — real change — will only come now if we push from every side.’
He sighed.
‘Your scheme here has my sanction.
My only hope is that we shall never have to use it against the Seven.’
‘And mine, Barrow Chen,’ DeVore assured him, allowing no trace of cynicism to escape into his voice or face.
‘Yet as you say, we must be realists.
We must be prepared to use all means to further our cause.
We Europeans have been denied too long.’
Afterwards, alone with Berdichev and Douglas, he talked of minor things, concealing his pleasure that his scheme had their sanction and — more important — their financial backing.
Times have certainly changed, he thought, admiring a small rose quartz snuff bottle Douglas had handed him from a cabinet to one side of the study.
Three years ago they would have hesitated before speaking against the Seven; now — however covertly — they sanctioned armed rebellion.
‘It's beautiful,’ he said.
And indeed it was.
A crane, the emblem of long life, stood out from the surface of the quartz, flanked by magpies, signifying good luck; while encircling the top of the bottle was a spray of peonies, emblematic of spring and wealth.
The whole thing was delightful, almost a perfect work of art, yet small enough to enclose in the palm of his hand.
‘One last thing, Howard.’
DeVore raised his head, aware of the slight hesitation in Berdichev's voice.
‘What is it?
Is there a problem?’
‘Yes and no.
That is, there is only if you feel there's one.’
DeVore set the rose quartz bottle down and turned to face his friend.
‘You're being unusually cryptic, Soren.
Are we in danger?’
Berdichev gave a short laugh.
‘No.
It's nothing like that.
It's…
Well, it's Lehmann's son.’
DeVore was silent a moment.
He looked at Douglas, then back at Berdichev.
‘Lehmann's son?
I didn't know Pietr had a son.’
‘Few did.
It was one of his best kept secrets.’
Yes, thought DeVore, it certainly was.
I thought I knew everything about you all — every last tiny little, dirty little thing — but now you surprise me.
‘Illegitimate, I suppose?’
Berdichev shook his head.
‘Not at all.
The boy's his legal heir.
On Lehmann's death he inherited the whole estate.’
‘Really?’
That too was news to him.
He had thought Lehmann had died intestate that his vast fortune had gone back to the Seven.
It changed things dramatically.
Lehmann must have been worth at least two billion yuan.
‘It was all done quietly, of course, as Lehmann wished.’
DeVore nodded, masking his surprise.
There was a whole level of things here that he had been totally unaware of.
‘Explain.
Lehmann wasn't even married.
How could he have a son and heir?’
Berdichev came across and stood beside him.
‘It was a long time ago.
Back when we were at college.
Pietr met a girl there.
A bright young thing, but unconnected.
His father, who was still alive then, refused to even let Pietr see her.
He threatened to cut him off without a yuan if he did.’
‘And yet he did, secretly.
And married her.’
Berdichev nodded.
‘I was one of the witnesses at the ceremony.’
DeVore looked away thoughtfully; looked across at the window wall and at the gathering in the garden room beyond it.
‘What happened?’
For a moment Berdichev was quiet, looking back down the well of years to that earlier time.
Then, strangely, he laughed; a sad, almost weary laugh.
‘You know how it is.
We were young.
Far too young.
Pietr's father was right: the girl wasn't suitable.
She ran off with another man.
Pietr divorced her.’
‘And she took the child with her?’
The look of pain on Berdichev's face was unexpected.
‘No.
It wasn't like that.
You see, she was four months pregnant when they divorced.
Pietr only found out by accident, when she applied to have the child aborted.
Of course, the official asked for the father's details, saw there was a profit to be made from the information and went straight to Lehmann.’
DeVore smiled.
It was unethical, but then so was the world.
‘And Pietr made her have the child?’
Berdichev shook his head.
‘She refused.
Said she'd kill herself first.
But Pietr hired an advocate.
You see, by law the child was his.
It was conceived  within wedlock and while she was his wife any child of her body was legally his property.‘
‘I see.
But how did hiring an advocate help?’
‘He had a restraining order served on her.
Had her taken into hospital and the foetus removed and placed in a MedFac nurture unit.’
‘Ah.
Even so, I'm surprised.
Why did we never see the child?
Pietr's father died when he was twenty-three.
There was no reason after that to keep things secret.’
‘No.
I suppose not.
But Pietr was strange about it.
I tried to talk to him about it several times, but he would walk out on me.
As for the boy, well, he never lived with his father, never saw him, and Pietr refused ever to see the child.
He thought he would remind him too much of his mother.’
DeVore's mouth opened slightly.
‘He loved her, then?
Even after what she did?’
‘Adored her.
It's why he never married again, never courted female company.
I think her leaving killed something in him.’
‘How strange.
How very, very strange.’
DeVore looked down.
‘I would never have guessed.’
He shook his head.
‘And the son?
How does he feel about his father?’
‘I don't know.
He's said nothing, and I feel it impertinent to ask.’
DeVore turned and looked directly at Berdichev.
‘So what's the problem?’
‘For the last three years the boy has been my ward.
As Pietr's executor I've handled his affairs.
But now he's of age.’
‘So?’
‘So I'd like you to take charge of the boy for a while.’
DeVore laughed, genuinely surprised by Berdichev's request.
‘Why?
What are you up to, Soren?’
Berdichev shook his head.
‘I've nothing to do with this, Howard.
It's what the boy wants.’
‘The boy…’
DeVore felt uncomfortable.
He had been wrong-footed too many times already in this conversation.
He was used to being in control of events, not the victim of circumstance; even so, the situation intrigued him.
What could the boy want?
And, more to the point, how had he heard of him?
‘Perhaps you should meet him,’ Berdichev added hastily, glancing across at Douglas as if for confirmation.
‘Then you might understand.
He's not…
Well, he's not perhaps what you'd expect.’
‘Yes.
Of course.
When?’
‘Would now do?’
DeVore shrugged.
‘Why not?’
But his curiosity was intense now.
Why should the boy be not what he'd expect?
‘Is there something I should know beforehand, Soren?
Is there something strange about him?’
Berdichev gave a brief laugh.
‘You'll understand.
You more than anyone will understand.’
While Berdichev went to get the boy he waited, conscious of Douglas's unease.
It was clear he had met the boy already.
It was also clear that something about the young man made him intensely uncomfortable.
He glanced at DeVore, then, making up his mind, gave a brief bow and went across to the door.
‘I must be getting back, Howard.
You'll forgive me, but my guests…’
‘Of course.’
DeVore returned the bow, then turned, intrigued, wondering what it was about the boy that could so thoroughly spook the seemingly-imperturbable Douglas.
He did not have long to wait for his answer.
‘Howard, meet Stefan Lehmann.’
DeVore shivered.
Despite himself, he felt an overwhelming sense of aversion towards the young man who stood before him.
It wasn't just the shocking, skull-like pallor of his face and hair, nor the unhealthy pinkness of his eyes, both signs of albinism, but something to do with the unnatural coldness of the youth.
When he looked at you it was as if an icy wind blew from the far north.
DeVore met those eyes and saw through them to the emptiness beyond.
But he was thinking, Who are you?
Are you really Lehmann's son?
Were you really taken from your mother's womb and bred inside a nurture-unit until the world was ready for you?
Red in white, those eyes.
Each eye a wild, dark emptiness amidst the cold, clear whiteness of the flesh.
He stepped forward, offering his hand to the albino but looking at Berdichev as he did so.
‘Our eighth man, I presume.’
‘I'm sorry?’
Then Berdichev understood.
‘Ah, yes, I said I'd explain, didn't I?
But you're right, of course.
Stefan was the first to be briefed.
He insisted on it.
After all, he's responsible for sixty per cent of the funding.’
DeVore looked down at the hand that held his own.
The fingers were long, unnaturally thin, the skin on them so clear it seemed he could see right through them to the bone itself.
But the young man's grip was firm, his skin surprisingly warm.
He looked up, meeting those eyes again, suddenly curious; wanting to hear the boy speak.
‘So.
You want to stay with me a while?’
Stefan Lehmann looked at him — looked through him — then turned and looked across at Berdichev.
‘You were right, Uncle Soren.
He's like me, isn't he?’
DeVore laughed, uncomfortable, then let go the hand, certain now.
The boy's voice was familiar — unnaturally familiar.
It was Pietr Lehmann's voice.
The albino was standing behind where he was sitting, studying the bank of screens, when Peskova came into the room.
DeVore saw how his lieutenant  hesitated — saw the flicker of pure aversion, quickly masked, that crossed his face — before he came forward.
‘What is it, Peskova?’
DeVore sat back, his eyes narrowed.
Peskova bowed, then glanced again at the albino.
‘There's been unrest,Shih Bergson.
Some trouble down on Camp Two.’
DeVore looked down at the desk.
‘So?’
Peskova cleared his throat, self-conscious in the presence of the stranger.
‘It's the Han woman, overseer.
Sung's wife.
She's been talking.’
DeVore met his lieutenant's eyes, his expression totally unreadable.
‘Talking?’
Peskova swallowed.
‘I had to act,Shih Bergson.
I had to isolate her from the rest.’
DeVore smiled tightly.
‘That's fine.
But you'll let her go now, eh?
You'll explain that it was all a mistake.’
Peskova's mouth opened marginally then closed without a sound.
Bowing deeply, and with one last, brief look at the albino, he turned and left, to do at once what the Overseer had ordered.
‘Why did you tell him that?’
DeVore turned and looked at Lehmann's son.
He was eighteen, but he seemed ageless, timeless.
Like death itself.
‘To make him do as I say, not as he thinks he should do.’
‘And the woman?’
DeVore smiled into that empty, mask-like face.
He had no need to answer.
The boy knew already what would happen to the woman.
The moon was huge and monstrous in the darkness: a full, bright circle, like a blind eye staring down from nothingness.
Si Wu Ya looked up at it and shivered, anxious now.
Then, as the rope tightened again, tugging at her, she stumbled on, the tops of her arms chafing where the rope bit into them.
Ahead of her Sung was whimpering again.
‘Be quiet!’ she yelled, angry with him for his weakness, but was rewarded with the back of Teng's hand.
Then Teng was standing over her, his breathing heavy and irregular, a strange excitement in his face.
Groaning, the pain in her lower body almost more than she could bear, she got to her feet, then spat blood, unable to put her hand up to her mouth to feel the damage he had done to her.
Ahead lay the water-chestnut fields, glimmering in the reflected light from Chung Kuo's barren sister.
We are cursed, she thought, staggering on, each step sending a jolt of pain through her from arse to abdomen.
Even Teng and Chang.
Even Peskova and that bastard Bergson.
All cursed.
Every last one of us.
All of us fated to go this way; stumbling on in darkness, beneath the gaze of that cold, blind eye.
She tried to laugh but the sound died in her before it reached her lips.
Then, before she realised it, they had stopped and she was pushed down to the ground next to Sung, her back to him.
She lay there, looking about her, the hushed voices of the four men standing nearby washing over her like the senseless murmur of the sea.
Smiling, she whispered to her husband.
‘The sea, Sung.
I've never seen the sea.
Never really seen it.
Only on vidcasts…’
She rolled over and saw at once that he wasn't listening.
His eyes were dark with fear, his hands, bound at his sides like her own, twitched convulsively, the fingers shaking uncontrollably.
‘Sung…’ she said, moved by the sight of him.
‘My sweet little Sung…’
She wanted to reach out and hold him to her, to draw him close and comfort him, but it was too late now.
All her love for him, all her anguish welled up suddenly, overwhelming her.
‘Kuan yin!’ she said softly, tearfully.
‘Oh, my poor Sung.
I didn't mean to be angry with you.
Oh, my poor, poor darling.
I didn't mean…’
Teng kicked her hard in the ribs, silencing her.
‘Which one first?’
The voice was that of the simpleton, Seidemann.
Si Wu Ya breathed slowly, deeply, trying not to cry out again, letting the pain wash past her, over her; trying to keep her mind clear of it.
In case.
Just in case…
She almost shook her head; almost laughed.
In case of what?
It was done with now.
There was only pain ahead of them now.
Pain and the end of pain.
Peskova answered.
‘The woman.
We'll do the woman first.’
She felt them lift her and take her over to the low stone wall beside the glimmering field of water-chestnuts.
The woman, she thought, vaguely recognising herself in the words.
Not Si Wu Ya now, no longer Silk Raven, simply ‘the woman’.
She waited, the cold stone of the wall pushed up hard against her breasts, her knees pushing downward into the soft, moist loam, while they unfastened the rope about her arms.
There was a moment's relief, a second or two free of pain, even of thought, then it began again.
Teng took one arm, Chang the other, and pulled.
Her head went down sharply, cracking against the top of the wall, stunning her.
There was a cry followed by an awful groan, but it was not her voice.
Sung had struggled to his feet and now stood there, only paces from where the Overseer's man, Peskova was standing, a big rock balanced in both hands.
Sung made a futile struggle to free his arms, then desisted.
‘Not her,’ he pleaded.
‘Please gods, not her.
It's me you want.
I'm the thief, not her.
She's done nothing.
Nothing.
Kill me, Peskova.
Do what you want to me, but leave her be.
Please gods, leave her be…=’ His voice ran on a moment longer, then fell silent.
Teng began to laugh, but a look from Peskova silenced him.
Then, with a  final look at Sung, Peskova turned and brought the rock down on the woman's upper arm.
The cracking of the bone sounded clearly in the silence.
There was a moment's quiet afterwards, then Sung fell to his knees, vomiting.
Peskova stepped over the woman and brought the heavy stone down on the other arm.
She was unconscious now.
It was a pity, that; he would have liked to have heard her groan again, perhaps even to cry out as she had that night when The Man had played his games with her.
He smiled.
Oh yes, they'd all heard that.
Had heard and found the echo in themselves.
He looked across at Sung.
Poor little Sung.
Weak little Sung.
All his talk meant nothing now.
He was powerless to change things.
Powerless to save his wife.
Powerless even to save himself.
It would be no fun killing him.
No more fun than crushing a bug.
He brought the stone down once again; heard the brittle sound of bone as it snapped beneath the rock.
So easy it was.
So very, very easy.
Teng and Chang had stepped back now.
They were no longer necessary.
The woman would be going nowhere now.
They watched silently as he stepped over her body and brought the stone down once again, breaking her other leg.
‘That's her, then.’
Peskova turned and glanced at Sung, then looked past him at Seidemann.
‘Bring him here.
Let's get it over with.’
Afterwards he stood there beside the wall, staring at Sung's body where it lay, face down on the edge of the field of water-chestnuts.
Strange, he thought.
It was just like a machine.
Like switching off a machine.
For a moment he looked out across the water meadow, enjoying the night's stillness, the beauty of the full moon overhead.
Then he heaved the stone out into the water and turned away, hearing the dull splash sound behind him.