

Methodological Principles and Fieldwork Strategy: Two Case Studies
4.1 Introductory
Methodological principles need to be discussed at the rather abstract level at which they were presented in the preceding chapters; otherwise it is not always easy to assess the applicability of a set of methods to a new research context.
But it is also helpful to see how such principles have been put into operation, and for this reason we look now at a discussion of two large urban sociolinguistic research projects, in Philadelphia and Belfast, which have utilized a range of different methods to attain different types of goal.
The information on Philadelphia in the following sections is taken from Labov's own account of the field methods used in the Philadelphia project on Linguistic Change and Variation, where a detailed evaluation can also be found (Labov 1981).
4.2 The Project on Linguistic Change and Variation
Labov sees the methods of this research as deriving from two sources.
The first is the early dialectological methods from which the interviewing techniques used in New York City were developed; these in turn are refined yet further in the Philadelphia project.
The second source of influence, is the participant observation techniques developed by Blom and Gumperz and adapted by Labov and his colleagues in their study of black adolescents in Harlem.
Labov comments as follows on both of these traditions of sociolinguistic research:
The original sources for the two models for field methods…are both extreme in the ways that they fail as solutions to the observer's paradox.
Survey methodology is a highly developed technique for obtaining a representative sample of opinions and attitudes from an enumerated population, but the interactive technique used in such  surveys is designed to keep rapport at a moderate level and filter out all information that cannot be coded in the scheme developed.
Here the experimenter effect is maximal, and the correspondence of the attitudes expressed to those that operate in every-day life is not easily determined.
On the other hand, the opposing approach used by social anthropologists and  ethnographers fails as a solution in the opposite way.
The participant-observer may gather data on interactive behavior with a minimum of observer effect, but very little linguistic data can be recorded accurately in journals several hours after the event.
Many participant-observers feel quite limited in the extent that they can introduce recording apparatus; when they do record group interaction with a minimum of other observational effects, the data is limited in both quality and quantity.
Our basic goal is to modify both methods as far as we can to reduce these limitations, and then combine both approaches to converge on the linguistic system we hope to describe.
There will be sources of error in participant-observation and in face-to-face interviews, but they are complementary; by combining both methods, we can estimate the degree and direction of error in our final statement of the rules of the vernacular.
(Labov 1981: 4)
In pursuit of this ‘basic goal’, the Philadelphia project retained, in the form of a telephone survey , the advantages of the formal interview with its emphasis on collecting strictly schematized and comparable data from a systematically sampled population.
But a much looser style of interviewing was developed for use in a series of neighbourhood studies .
The intention here was to allow the interviewer to simulate a conversation and over a period move towards a more symmetrical interactive relationship so that this interviewing style came to resemble participant observation.
Overall, the two types of study each had its own areas of strength and compensated for the weaknesses of the other; the neighbourhood studies were intended to obtain depth of linguistic and social information, while the telephone survey provided breadth .
We shall look at them in turn.
4.2.1 The neighbourhood studies
Six major neighbourhood studies were carried out in Philadelphia between 1972 and 1976, utilizing a range of information-seeking techniques:
[The neighbourhood studies]are designed to obtain a large amount of linguistic and social data on the major social networks of the neighbourhoods.
They include long-range participant-observation which permits unlimited access to the linguistic competence of the central figures of those networks, along with recordings of group  interaction in which the vernacular is displayed with minimum interference from the effects of observation.
At the same time, the neighbourhood studies utilize systematic sociolinguistic interviews to obtain comparable data on all members of the social network.
(Labov 1981: 5) The six neighbourhoods were selected to give a broad coverage of the major class and ethnic groups in the city — working-class Italian, Irish and Puerto-Rican; middle-class Catholic; working- and middle-class black and white.
No attempt was made to claim even a weak kind of representativeness.
Two basic fieldwork strategies were used to obtain entry to the neighbourhoods.
The first was to approach groups of people gathered in public areas like parks or street corners; the second was through individuals such as priests, teachers or shopkeepers who, in the nature of their work, are ‘brokers’ and have contacts with large numbers of individuals.
Labov notes that the first type of approach appears to work best in working-class neighbourhoods while the second is more successful in middle-class neighbourhoods.
The fieldworker presented the research quite accurately as a study of the neighbourhood, including its language, without singling out language for particular comment.
The study of change in American life and cities was truthfully specified as an important goal for indeed socially sensitive sociolinguistic work always takes place within such a context.
Once the first contacts were made, the fieldworker attempted to fulfil certain goals which are outlined only briefly here (see Labov 1981: 8 for details).
Some are concerned with eliciting comparable and highly schematized data such as word-lists or responses to subjective reaction tests; for the moment, these will not be discussed (but see chapter 8).
The goals on which the comment in this section will concentrate are the major ones of (a) obtaining the range of social and demographic data which is needed to interpret the linguistic material and (b) stimulating large amounts of  conversation with as little interference as possible from the observer.
The fieldworker was not provided with a formal set of interview questions to work through systematically; a formal questionnaire is replaced with modules or sets of questions organized around specific topics.
These modules may then be organized into what Labov describes as conversational networks .
The topics of the modules are selected using two criteria.
First, previous experience had shown some topics to be successful in engaging speakers in interaction (the danger of death question discussed in 3.1 is of this type).
But also important is the information which a given topic can yield on neighbourhood norms and on general social and background information of value to the researchers.
The fieldworker on  any given occasion selects modules from a larger set in order to construct a conversational network appropriate to a given speaker; figure 4.1 shows a typical network selected for an adolescent or young adult in Philadelphia.
Figure 4.1 Characteristic network of modules for adolescent or young adult speaker (adapted from Labov 1981: Appendix)
Question design is always given very careful attention in terms both of phrasing and ordering within modules; the initial and final questions from each module are designed to facilitate topic shifts to other modules in  the system.
Module 3, ‘Fights’, ends with the questions:
Do girls fight around here?
Did you ever get into a fight with a girl?
This can lead, for example, directly into the module dealing with dating patterns:
What are girls really like around here?
All questions, as illustrated by the three quoted here, are designed to be brief; Labov notes that questions formulated without preparation can often be lengthy and unclear, containing spontaneous conversation phenomena such as hesitations and false starts.
Module questions are also formulated to be as colloquial as possible, avoiding any ‘bookishness’ in syntax and lexicon.
The general idea of this neighbourhood study interview schedule is to use interlocking modules to simulate the seamless topic-shift structure of normal conversation.
However, we have seen that this approach can be criticized on the grounds that the discourse structure of the interview is still present and that attempts to obscure the nature of the speech event are likely to lead in practice to confusion and difficulty.
Certainly there are several differences between the structure of these extended interviews and everyday conversation.
Most obviously, since the asymmetrical question/answer structure of the interview remains, it does not seem plausible to claim that the topic-shifting techniques described by Labov resemble at all closely those in normal conversation where speakers have equal rights of topic initiation.
Moreover, although there is no fixed order for working through the modules and the fieldworker is expected to allow the subject's interest in any particular set of topics to guide transition through the network from module to module, his or her role as topic-initiator is still very much in the forefront; it is the interviewer who makes decisions about how or when topics shall be shifted or closed down.
A further point which might be made is that the concise, fluent format of the interviewer's questions is very unlike the format of normal conversation, where false starts, hesitations and ambiguities are the norm (Schegloff 1979).
Perhaps more seriously, there is some evidence that in everyday interaction fluent, smooth speech by a conversational partner is viewed as a mark of social distance and of higher social status (Good 1979).
Labov apparently sees this interview format as extending over several sessions in meetings with individuals and pairs, the interview structure finally dissolving as greater familiarity with neighbourhood residents allows the fieldworker to conduct group sessions.
Also included in the design is what Labov describes as ‘continued interviews’.
This is a second series, using as a conversational resource a different set of modules; these modules are designed to obtain information which can be used to plot out speakers' interpersonal network relationships both within and outside the neighbourhood.
Again, the main technique is of modifying the structure of  the face-to-face interview so that it comes to resemble, in certain respects, a conversation.
4.2.2 The telephone survey
The aim of the neighbourhood studies was to obtain in-depth information, both linguistic and social, from a number of selected communities.
The telephone survey was designed to provide complementary information, on how the language of the community related to that of Philadelphia as a whole.
Informants were obtained by randomly selecting listed telephone numbers.
They were then telephoned and asked to participate in a short interview (15 minutes long) presented as dealing with communication in Philadelphia.
Permission to record the interview was sought after subjects had indicated willingness to participate.
Altogether, 109 persons were interviewed in this way — a relatively high number for an urban sociolinguistic survey.
The original selection of telephone numbers totalled 238, out of which 196 were successfully contacted; of these, there were 87 refusals.
These figures suggest that interviewing by telephone is not a particularly good way of cutting down the high refusal rate customary in sociolinguistic surveys; but interestingly, Nordberg (1980) reports a very much lower refusal rate in Sweden.
If claims of strict representativeness are made for a telephone survey such as Labov's in Philadelphia, the method is subject to exactly the same criticisms as those discussed in 2.2.
But since interviews can be carried out from a single base, it is a very economical and efficient way of contacting a large number of speakers from a wide geographical and social sample.
Since no particular attempt is being made to study spontaneous, informal conversation, the interview can be extremely short, focusing clearly on the linguistic features in which the investigator is interested.
Although telephone speech is acoustically limited — the frequency range is sharply reduced at both ends — both Labov and Nordberg report that it is sufficiently clear even for instrumental analysis.
One obvious disadvantage of a telephone survey is that it does not represent people who are too poor to afford telephones.
This would be a severe difficulty in the United Kingdom, where a larger proportion of the population would be excluded than in the United States; indeed the method is probably suitable only in countries where a very substantial number of people own telephones.
If we take the neighbourhood studies and the telephone survey together, we can see that two different sets of goals are pursued by means of two entirely different methods.
In contrast with the design of the New York City interviews, no attempt is made to attain breadth of coverage (by sampling) and depth of linguistic information (by eliciting both formal and  casual speech styles) in a single operation.
Hence the design of the Philadelphia research acknowledges the problem of reconciling within a unitary study the need for both depth and breadth.
4.2.3 Rapid and anonymous surveys
The prototype of the rapid and anonymous sociolinguistic survey is of course the famous ‘fourth floor’ study in three New York City department stores.
The basic idea is that in order to study a single linguistic feature, the investigator will elicit a set word or phrase in entirely naturalistic conditions from persons who happen to be in a given place at a given time.
In New York City the population studied was department store assistants, and the linguistic feature was /r/ in both pre-consonantal and word final  position (as in the phrase fourth floor ).
The procedure was for the investigator to ask for the location of any item already known in advance to be on the shop's fourth floor.
He then obtained a repetition by pretending to mishear the response, thus eliciting four instances of the target feature in two separate phonetic environments.
Pronunciations of the target feature were covertly marked down in a notebook on the spot, using a simple preset schema.
The same principle was used in Philadelphia to investigate the alternation between [str]and [? tr]in str- clusters.
This time, the data were obtained in the following way:
We obtained data on (str) in a wide variety of Philadelphia neighbourhoods by asking for directions in the neighbourhood of a given street which had a name of a form X Street .
However, we asked
‘Can you tell me how to get to X Avenue?’
In the great majority of cases, the informants would respond ‘X Street?’ with considerable emphasis on Street .
(Labov 1981: 30) Plainly, considerable ingenuity is needed to design rapid and anonymous survey questions which will reliably elicit the target feature, and the main advantages of the method are that a very clear view of the distribution of a single variant, geographically and sometimes socially, can be obtained extremely quickly.
In fact, the [? tr]variant appears to represent an innovation in Philadelphia, and Labov was able to track its distribution through various types of residential area in the city.
Nor is the observer's paradox an issue, since speakers are not tape-recorded and are not even aware that they are being observed.
The method is, however, applicable only if the investigator has extremely clear goals in mind, already well worked out in advance, and a major disadvantage is the very limited nature of the data which it is capable of yielding.
Not only is the investigator restricted to a single linguistic feature, but social information on the  speaker is likely to be only approximate.
A rapid and anonymous survey carried out in Birmingham, England, is described by Rimmer (1982).
4.3 The Belfast Projects
In the years 1975–81, two substantial sociolinguistic research projects were completed in Belfast, Northern Ireland, concerned with language variation and change in the city.
The methods and findings of the first project, which was restricted to a study of vernacular phonology in three inner-city  communities have been  discussed elsewhere (Milroy and Milroy 1978; L. Milroy 1980; J. Milroy 1981a).
However, we shall consider both projects together here, as they were designed as two phases of a single, integrated research programme.
As in Philadelphia, the Belfast study made use of two distinctly different methods to attain different goals.
These are respectively a series of five community studies and a doorstep survey .
In terms of what they seek to achieve, but not in details of their design, they are parallel to Labov's neighbourhood studies and telephone survey .
In addition, the Belfast project incorporated a rural hinterland study of Lurgan, a small country town in the Lagan Valley, seventeen miles south-west of Belfast.
4.3.1 The community studies
Five of these were carried out altogether.
Although Belfast has a much smaller and less socially and ethnically heterogeneous population than Philadelphia, the community studies resembled Labov's neighbourhood studies in that they were designed to give broad coverage of major geographical, status and ethnic divisions in the city.
The first three, Ballymacarrett, the Clonard and the Hammer, are very low-status inner-city areas.
Ballymacarrett is located east and the Clonard and the Hammer west of the River Lagan, which bisects Belfast and constitutes an important socio-geographical boundary.
The other two, Braniel and Andersonstown, are both located on the outer edges of the city and might be described approximately as upper-working to lower-middle class.
Braniel is east of the river and is exclusively Protestant, while Andersonstown is west of the river and is exclusively Catholic.
Ballymacarrett and the Clonard can be viewed as somewhat lower-status ‘feeder’ areas of Braniel and Andersonstown respectively.
Many Andersonstown people originated from or had family ties with the Falls Road, the area where the Clonard is located; the Braniel population on the other hand are East Belfast people, many of whom have ties with the Newtownards Road where Ballymacarrett is located (see map 4.1).
The identification of these interrelationships between the areas is well  motivated; for when Belfast people change their place of residence, for whatever reason, there is a strong likelihood that the new location will be selected in accordance with a highly predictable set of urban sectoral preferences.
To some extent, these sectoral preferences are related to ethno-religious lines of demarcation (Boal and Poole 1976); certainly it is reasonable to view inner-city communities east and west of the river as each having a higher-status ethnic counterpart.
Map 4.1 Location of five speech communities in Belfast
A comparison of the inner city and outer city informants' occupations gives a good idea of the relative status of the communities.
Ballymacarrett and Clonard people were at the time of the research overwhelmingly unemployed or in unskilled and low-status occupations.
Typical occupations were street sweepers, barrow boys, forklift-loader drivers, or labourers.
The women were usually office cleaners or domestic helps; sometimes they worked in rather poor neighbourhood shops for low wages, being unable to get work in the better city centre stores like Boots or the British Home Stores, where labour was unionized.
By way of contrast, we find in the outer areas skilled tradesmen (an electrician and a fitter), a school meals' supervisor, a bricklaying instructor at a government training centre, a shop assistant at Boots, a primary school teacher, students and unemployed ex-students and apprentices.
Even these unemployed young people contrast with their counterparts in the inner-city areas in having potentially marketable skills and qualifications.
The general idea of selecting communities which were interrelated in this way on the dimensions of status and ethnicity was to ‘match-up’ linguistic data from the four areas, so as to obtain some fairly detailed information on the linguistic strategies which Belfast people employed as they moved from urban vernacular to slightly higher-status speech patterns.
We were also curious as to whether east/west differences in the structure of the vernacular (see L. Milroy 1980) would be maintained by higher-status speakers.
Thus, the choice of communities was constrained quite sharply by the analytical goals of the research.
An outline of the way field-workers gained entry to the communities, with particular reference to the thinking behind the method, may be found in 3.6; I shall look at the procedures in a little more detail here.
Recall that the fieldworkers were anxious to reach central community networks in each area in order to gain access to vernacular speech.
Since contacts made through individuals with a clear institutional status — such as teachers, priests and community leaders — can often lead to rather standardized speakers, these contacts were avoided.
Instead, communities were always approached initially through persons encountered directly or indirectly in the course of everyday living who had no institutional status in the communities, but were members of them.
The Andersonstown fieldworker however, an anthropology graduate, was a local resident and was also one of the informants.
It was in this community that the closest approximation to a traditional participant observation study was achieved, since the observer had for her entire life been part of the social setting which she was observing.
This guiding principle of participant observation — that the observer should be part of the setting which he or she is studying — was followed as closely as possible in the other communities.
It was for this reason that the fieldworkers in the other areas, who were not local residents, adopted the role of ‘a friend of a friend’ which gave them a clear status of an informal kind.
In all communities, but most particularly in the poorer inner-city areas (largely as a consequence of the denser, more multiplex structure of local networks) they were passed from one family to another, being received with warmth, friendliness and trust.
The research was presented as an investigation of the way life and language in the community had changed, and general permission was sought to record interaction at which the fieldworker was present.
Once people had agreed to participate, this permission was never refused.
As a consequence of the local norm of  extended visiting (which was commonest in the low-status inner-city areas and least common in Braniel) many of the recordings were of two, three or four people talking amongst themselves, often with minimal fieldworker participation.
The general idea, using these methods, was to carry on recording until a quota sample of sixteen people in each area had been filled.
The target quota consisted of eight young adults (18–25 years) and eight middle-aged adults (40–55), equally divided between males and females.
In practice of course very many speakers fell outside the target quota.
The quality and quantity of data  collected during these community studies was excellent, including many group sessions with minimal (or even zero) linguistic participation by the fieldworker.
4.3.2 Participant observation methods: an evaluation
The very high quality of the data in terms of capacity to provide a good sample of everyday language is of course the major advantage of a participant observation method.
Another major advantage is the insight it is capable of yielding into the social and communicative norms of the community.
Under this head is included not only information on informal social ties and organization, but also the fields of study generally described as ‘the ethnography of speaking’(Saville-Troike 1982) and ‘interactional sociolinguistics’(Gumperz 1982; see further 8.4.1).
A third advantage, pointed out by Labov (1981: 25), is that ‘by emphasising deeper studies of groups and social networks, we gain in the possibility of explaining linguistic behaviour’, in other words, we might derive insights into why a speaker's language occupies a particular position in a wider social structure.
For example in Belfast, information collected during the community studies enabled us to attempt such an explanation in terms of group pressure to adopt vernacular norms exerted upon an individual whose interpersonal ties were largely local, dense and multiplex.
It was argued that the strength of these pressures was roughly in proportion to the centrality of the speaker's position in the closeknit group.
Conversely, persons occupying peripheral positions in such a group were more exposed to external standardizing pressures (L. Milroy 1980; Milroy and Milroy 1985b).
Although we may in this way gain in explanatory capacity, there are several important disadvantages associated with a participant observation study.
The first, noted by Labov with respect to the Philadelphia neighbourhood studies, is that however good the data there is no way in the absence of a supplementary broader study of locating it in a wider sociolinguistic context.
We simply do not know how it fits in to the system of sociolinguistic variation and stratification in the city as a whole.
This has implications, for example, for the study of linguistic change in progress.
Such a study requires information on the language of a range of social groups and generation cohorts.
Second, for the fieldworker such studies are extremely demanding in tact, energy, persistence, time and emotional involvement.
Strong and sometimes quite intense relationships with individuals are built up over a period of even a few weeks.
Largely because of this level of involvement, it is often quite difficult to persevere with tape-recording during the observation period.
It is perhaps worth commenting here that informants in this type of study are not usually unhappy about being tape-recorded; Peter Trudgill (1986b) has suggested that people are now generally familiar with recording equipment and relaxed about being recorded.
Third, the method is somewhat wasteful, being quite the converse of Labov's telephone survey in this respect.
Many more speakers and many more hours of speech are usually recorded than can ultimately be analysed; a useful rule of thumb is that about ten hours will be needed to analyse each hour of recorded data.
Another aspect of this extravagance is the large amount of unanalysable recorded data; this is presumably the point Labov is making when he remarks that the (technical) quality of participant-observation data is often poor (1981: 4).
We do, however, need to modify the force of this comment by noting that in Belfast no problem was experienced in obtaining plenty of recordings of sufficient technical quality to be analysable.
But wastage was also high because of interference from the normal background noise of day-to-day living; on one occasion, interference from electronic equipment in the room resulted in a whole blank tape.
In short, this kind of work cannot be approached by examining its cost-effectiveness in terms of man-hours spent in the community.
A further problem emerges if, as in Belfast, the fieldworker is attempting to fill a quota of individuals divided into specified categories; this can often be frustratingly difficult.
For example, in all the community studies the intention was to obtain recordings of eight males and eight females, divided into two age groups (1825; 40–55).
However, in the Braniel a young male fieldworker found (for rather obvious reasons) that he was not passed on to any young women of a similar age to himself.
A different gap emerged in the Andersonstown data, which probably reflected the structure of the participant-observer's own social network; only one male in the older age group was contacted.
It is clear that such gaps restrict methods of handling data (see chapters 5 and 6); for example data for age- and sex-groups could not easily be aggregated.
The problem of filling quotas to specification is probably the most severe disadvantage of a participant-observation study; since the groups studied are self-recruited, the fieldworker by definition relinquishes control over choice of subject.
The problem of social role One particular difficulty which is liable to beset participant observation studies was touched on in the previous  paragraph; it concerns the social role allocated to the fieldworker as a consequence of his or her age, sex, ethnicity or other socially significant attributes.
It was suggested in chapter 3 that social role can be varied to some extent by, for example, manipulating discourse patterns or by creating an acceptable category of identity such as that of ‘friend of a friend’.
However, attributes like those listed above clearly cannot easily be manipulated, a particular problem in Nordberg's view when an ‘insider’ is used as fieldworker:
It is important to bear in mind that he/she has a defined social position in the local community, which in turn gives rise to a varying social role in relation to the interviewees.
And I think this social position is more apparent to the informant and the variation in role relations more marked than if the interviewer is an outsider and not in a particular relation to the speakers from the outset.
The same thing probably applies to smaller communities compared with larger ones.
(Nordberg 1980: 5) Certainly it is true that such difficulties emerge particularly with small-scale community studies.
In Belfast, the first three of these (in the inner-city areas) were carried out by an outsider to Northern Ireland (myself) who as a consequence was not assigned a role in relation to local ethnic categories.
Since English people are also stereotyped in Ulster in various (usually unfavourable) ways, it was probably equally important that my mixed, but mainly Scottish, accent made it extremely difficult for subjects to fit me into any clear popular category.
However, the research assistant responsible for organizing fieldwork in the two outer-city community studies (John Harris) is an Ulsterman, and therefore, although in no sense associated with any of Ulster's political pressure groups, was very conscious that there were parts of the city which he could not visit freely and confidently.
It was initially for this reason that fieldwork in Andersonstown was delegated to one of the informants, while Harris himself carried out the Braniel study.
Pursuing the issue of the fieldworker's social role, it is worth commenting on a very general and apparently reasonable assumption that the closer the fieldworker is matched to subjects in terms of various social attributes, the more successful he or she is likely to be.
This is the position adopted, for example, by Nordberg (1980: 5), and is plainly correct up to a point.
For example a bilingual fieldworker acceptable to an Asian community in Britain would probably need to be selected carefully for a range of characteristics such as religion, geographical provenance, or political affiliation, all of which are associated with a distinctive ethnicity.
Similarly, Wolfson attributes her unsuccessful interview with the restaurant owner to a mismatch of age, sex and status  in addition perhaps to the particularly low social esteem accorded to a young woman.
A female fieldworker certainly will not have access to some of the characteristically male speech events recorded by Labov et al.in 1968; none of these were recorded in the Belfast inner-city communities.
By the same token a male fieldworker will not have easy access to conversations with adolescent girls, as John Harris found in Belfast.
But close matching in terms of age and sex and other attributes is not the only social factor which makes for choice of fieldworker; attitudes to males and females also need to be taken into account.
While, as Wolfson implies, the generally low esteem in which women are held may create problems for a young female fieldworker, we have to note correspondingly that many communities find males — particularly young males — very threatening.
For example, it is clear from work with an English- and Punjabi-speaking family in Newcastle upon Tyne, where a young white woman carried out modified participant observation sessions over a period of several months, that no male, regardless of age or ethnicity, would be allowed into the house (Scothern 1985).
It may be the case rather generally that male fieldworkers find it difficult to gain access to a domestic setting particularly if they are visiting women during the day when the man of the house is at work.
This was certainly the case in Belfast, and may be the underlying reason for Labov's apparent preference for recording in public, non-domestic settings.
A further, apparently reasonable, assumption is that a male subject will adopt the more formal styles in his repertoire when addressing a woman (cf.
Trudgill 1986a: 8).
But in Belfast, quite sharp style-shifting in a formal direction was noted on one occasion when a young man addressed an older male researcher, after speaking to a woman.
Age and perceived seniority were probably the  crucial variables here.
In summary, it is likely that the effect of the social role assigned to the fieldworker might be quite complex, with status, sex, age and ethnicity interacting in a manner which is not always initially obvious.
The best solution is not necessarily the one proposed by Nordberg of socially matching fieldworkers to subjects.
4.3.3 Small group studies in Philadelphia and Belfast: a comparison
On the basis of experience in the Belfast community studies, the advantages and disadvantages of participant observation have been assessed.
The main difference between the design of Labov's neighbourhood studies and the Belfast community studies is probably the extent to which they have endeavoured to adopt the major principle of this method — that the observer should be part of the setting being studied.
Taking that principle as a starting point, an attempt was made in Belfast to assign to the fieldworker a clear social identity which allowed him or her to claim a role in the community.
Consequently, no attempt was made to provide an  interview schedule such as that developed by Labov; fieldworkers were simply briefed on the kind of social information (such as occupation, educational background, family connections and previous residence of speaker) which they would need to have acquired by the end of the observation period.
The topics associated with this information — such as local attitudes and local networks of relationships — generally provided a more than adequate conversational resource.
Section 4.2.1 describes how, following quite a different method, Labov developed the traditional face-to-face interview into a series of interlocking modules with the intention of simulating the topic-shift patterns of conversation.
In view of the interviewer's role in the discourse, it is not clear how far or how reliably such an extended interview really does resemble spontaneous conversation; but Labov's schema is likely to be less demanding of the fieldworker, more economical of time and resources, and so not subject to the same range of disadvantages as the participant observation methods of the Belfast community studies.
In general, it is probably fair to say that the Philadelphia neighbourhood studies provide a better general model for the in-depth study of communities located at various points in the class continuum.
The Belfast methods, on the other hand, were developed primarily for the study of closeknit communities — and indeed it is likely that they are particularly and rather generally suitable for urban or rural communities of this type.
Bortoni-Ricardo's (1985) work in Brasilia provides an example of a sociolinguistic ‘network’ study of a closeknit migrant community from a very different kind of society, using methods very similar to those described here.
We look now at the method adopted in Belfast (parallel to Labov's telephone survey) of complementing, by means of a rather wider but shallower study, the detailed information collected in the five communities.
4.3.4 The Belfast doorstep survey
When the doorstep survey was designed, intensive work on the three inner-city areas had already been completed.
Consequently, it was in no sense intended to provide basic facts about sociolinguistic patterns in the city, but rather to obtain quite specific and limited linguistic information.
In this respect also, its general goals differ from those of the community studies.
Altogether, 60 speakers were recorded, taken from a random sample of 120 households.
This sample was provided for the project by the Northern Ireland Housing Executive and was in turn drawn from a larger sample of 500 households which the Executive had used for their own survey of housing patterns in the city (cf.
Labov's subsampling procedure in New York City).
The original intention was to record about 80 speakers, divided more or less equally between males and females.
The sample of 120 households was therefore divided into three matched lists of 40 addresses, A, B and C. Each provided a coverage of the major social and ethnic variations in residential pattern similar to that which could be found in the original list of 120.
Fieldworkers used list A as a basis and the other two as a back-up resource; B and C were ordered in such a way that if researchers failed to record an interview at, for example, household number 4 on list A, household number 4 of lists B and C would be of a similar type in the same locale.
This procedure was adopted in anticipation of difficulty in obtaining recordings from households on the basic list and was designed to ensure that for each household replacements with broadly similar social characteristics were available.
In the event, 73 speakers were interviewed at 38 addresses.
An analysis was made of data from 60 speakers, 32 males and 28 females.
In order to ensure comparability, the main effort in the interviews was focused on recording carefully designed word-lists, which sampled realizations of several phonological variables in a range of phonetic environments.
Some spontaneous speech was also recorded.
The interviews could be completed on the doorstep in as little as 10 minutes, but most lasted between 15 and 45 minutes and more often than not the fieldworker was invited into the house, offered tea and biscuits — and on one occasion two meat pies!
In view of the brevity of the basic interview, subjects were not contacted in advance; fieldworkers simply knocked on the door and requested interviews.
It was hoped in this way to reduce the high refusal rate which is a hazard in sociolinguistic surveys, and indeed the method seemed in general to be successful in this respect; altogether, out of 40 addresses visited, only 8 refusals were recorded.
These refusals were mainly from relatively high-status households, and where they were not categorical (for example, people sometimes excused themselves on the grounds that they were too busy to be interviewed), were dealt with initially by a follow-up visit.
Interestingly, these second visits were never successful, and interviewers then had recourse to the back-up lists.
There were two reasons for interview failure other than refusals; first, residents were sometimes too old or incapacitated to be interviewed, and second, many of the listed addresses in inner-city areas turned out to be demolished or boarded up.
For practical reasons, fieldworkers adopted a policy in these cases of knocking at the door of the nearest house of a similar type; since the survey was based on geographical area and housing type, this seemed a reasonable way of obtaining data from a range of addresses while conserving time and resources.
A formal letter of introduction from Queen's University, Belfast, was carried, to be produced on demand as accreditation; it proved however to be useful mainly for dealing  with the security forces, since unwilling interviewees were not impressed by it and willing ones did not request it.
The purpose of the research was presented as an investigation of change in Belfast life and language.
This rather vague account satisfied and stimulated the interest of most people; fieldworkers began asking interviewees how long they had lived in the area and moved on to discuss their general attitudes and background.
The minimum social information required for each speaker was (approximate) age, sex, housing type and (where possible) occupation.
Since the word-list (constructed to sample a range of linguistic environments) was considered particularly important, it was usually produced early in the proceedings.
Where possible, fieldworkers attempted to record a male and a female at each address, and since very often both were not at home at the time of the first visit, a second and even a third visit was arranged to most addresses.
The general principle of the Belfast doorstep survey is quite similar to that of Labov's telephone survey in that neither are designed to attain any depth of insight into, for example, stylistic variation, or the structure of a speaker's vernacular.
Rather, information is sought on broad patterns of variation across a wide social range in the urban community.
As in Philadelphia the major effort of the Belfast research was focused on the community studies; the main function of both the doorstep survey and the telephone survey was to provide a context within which to place the findings of those studies.
Although the data collected were quite adequate for this purpose, no attempt was made to claim representativeness for the doorstep survey.
This was considered generally impractical and in view of the particular difficulties of carrying out social research in Belfast, probably unattainable.
From the point of view of economy of effort and resources, a telephone survey is certainly preferable to a doorstep survey of the type described here.
However, since the proportion of households owning telephones is much lower in Britain and Ireland than in the United States, a telephone survey in those countries is probably not feasible.
The disadvantage of the method noted by Labov, viz., that households from the lower end of the social range are not represented, would be very much greater.
A point which needs to be emphasized about brief, shallow surveys of the types exemplified in the Philadelphia and Belfast research is that they are most rewarding when they are designed to solve quite specifiable and well-understood problems.
They are not suitable instruments for exploratory research, which is best carried out by in-depth investigation of a small number of speakers.
In Belfast, for example, a great deal of well-documented linguistic information was used in designing the word-list, in order to examine the effect of specific phonetic environments on a range of vowels.
4.3.5 Evaluation of the Belfast doorstep survey
A linguistic survey such as this carried out in 1980 was able to benefit from the experience of earlier sociolinguistic work; many problems had already been anticipated.
But it is worth drawing attention to two particular difficulties which stemmed from the disturbed condition of the city of Belfast, but are likely to occur rather generally in run-down industrial cities.
The civil disturbances had given rise to a number of population movements within the urban area, with the result that many randomly selected households were burnt down, boarded up, or derelict.
Although there was a random procedure for replacing such houses with others of the same general type, interviewing was nevertheless a time-consuming, depressing and occasionally frightening experience.
As inner cities in Britain continue to decay, it seems likely that this problem will be present, though perhaps in a less acute form, in a number of places.
A further difficulty arose from the departure of a large number of middle-class families from the Belfast area to neighbouring dormitory towns, a migratory pattern in line with changes in the demography of British cities generally for the last two decades or so.
As a consequence, any random selection of households in such a city is likely to be skewed heavily in the direction of low-status groups.
This is exactly what happened in Belfast, and the imbalance in the data is probably a fair reflection of the contemporary demographic structure of the city.
Clearly, however, where the overall number of speakers is small as it is in many sociolinguistic surveys, the number of higher-status speakers turning up in a random selection procedure which samples from the entire urban area will be correspondingly small.
In Belfast, this problem was in practice rather severe since most refusals came from higher-status households, so that a large amount of time and effort was expended in recording small numbers of such speakers.
Although this difficulty could be resolved by adopting some kind of stratified sampling procedure (Trudgill, for example, sampled four electoral wards of which the social characteristics were known), a more general question emerges of whether it is always reasonable to take the population of an urban area as a sampling universe, when in fact a high proportion of the higher-status people who work in that city actually reside in neighbouring towns.
This is a question which should probably be considered by sociolinguists working in cities with a demographic structure of the kind described.
4.3.6 The rural hinterland study
This part of the Belfast project does not have an analogue in the  Philadelphia Project on Linguistic Change and Variation.
Its design was motivated by a question of considerable sociolinguistic interest — the relationship between dialects of cities and those of surrounding areas.
Since linguistic change and rapid dialect mixing appear to be a general characteristic of urban dialects (Labov 1972b: 300), it seems reasonable to assume that insight can be gained into the processes of their formation if a set of data from a city is compared with a set from a surrounding area.
Belfast, being a relatively young industrial city, is an excellent site for such a investigation (see Milroy and Milroy 1978 for details).
Map 4.2 Relative locations of Belfast and Lurgan (after Pitts 1985: 66)
The hinterland area selected for study (see Pitts 1983, 1985 for details) was Lurgan, a small rural town in the Lagan Valley, 17 miles south-west of Belfast and outside the urban overspill area (see map 4.2).
It had been noted previously that certain phonological features characteristic of West Belfast where both Clonard and Andersonstown were located were also characteristic of the mid-Ulster dialect spoken in Lurgan (as opposed to the Ulster-Scots dialect of Belfast's northern and eastern hinterland).
Hence, it seemed likely that information on similarities and differences between the five Belfast communities on the one hand and Lurgan on the other could be used for a variety of theoretical purposes.
Apart from the investigation of linguistic change and the typology of urban dialects, a comparison of these sets of data might well have an important bearing on Labov's notion of a speech community as ‘united by a common evaluation of the same variables which differentiate the speakers’(Labov 1966: 125).
Could Belfast be said in this sense to be a single speech community  separate from Lurgan? or do Lurgan speakers show sensitivity to the same sets of variables?
The participant observation techniques in this study were similar to those used in the urban community studies.
The ‘network’ method was adopted as a general principle, and several Belfast University students who were Lurgan residents were located as initial contacts.
On a number of occasions, the fieldworker arranged for subjects to self-record themselves and their friends, with excellent results.
Altogether, 28 speakers were recorded, 16 men and 12 women.
As in the community studies, they fell into two generation cohorts.
Altogether, the six studies which comprised the Belfast project, five from Belfast and one from Lurgan, allowed language variation to be analysed on the following dimensions: rural versus urban; high-status versus low-status (relatively speaking); east of the city versus west of the city.
Methods of analysing this large amount of data are discussed in chapters 5 and 6.
4.4 A Note on Ethics
Some consideration of ethical issues is an important part of any attempt to provide an extensive discussion of sociolinguistic fieldwork methods.
Increasingly, investigators have become aware of a rather heterogeneous range of problems (some of them not particularly easy to formulate) which may be characterized as ethical.
Although the American Anthropological Association's statement on ethics is of some relevance to sociolinguists and is easily accessible as an appendix to a book which deals specifically with ethical problems in fieldwork (Rynkiewich and Spradley 1971), linguists do not in general have recourse to a widely accepted ethical code.
In this they are unlike medical researchers; for example the Ethical Committee of the University of Newcastle upon Tyne monitors research with human subjects from a medical ethical perspective.
Linguistic work comes within its remit only if the subjects are National Health Service patients — for example, adult aphasics, or handicapped children.
And the range of issues with which the Committee is concerned is quite different from those to be discussed here.
Candid recording, for instance, is a troublesome issue for sociolinguists; but I have received the impression that medical researchers are generally less inclined to worry about audio-recording without the speaker's knowledge or permission, provided anonymity is maintained.
Despite linguists' lack of recourse to an agreed code of conduct, ethical issues in the linguistic sciences have sometimes been quite pressing.
For example, in forensic contexts phoneticians and linguists have for some years now used their expertise to assist in voice identification; academically  this is a highly controversial enterprise.
A discussion of the issues may be found in Bolinger (1980: 111), and J. Milroy (1984) where a case of direct relevance to sociolinguists is documented in detail.
In view of the absence of any clear ethical code for linguists working with human subjects, what follows should be interpreted as an attempt to air the major issues rather than to prescribe such a code.
I shall begin by commenting on, and amplifying somewhat, Labov's discussion of sociolinguistic ethics which he organizes under three headings: candid recording, protection of anonymity and access to recordings.
4.4.1 Candid recording
In general the practice of Labov and his research team, adopted by most sociolinguists working within his general paradigm, has been to ban candid or surreptitious recording.
A close parallel to the view that it is wrong to record speakers without their knowledge may be found in the controversy which has surrounded the use of telephoto lenses in photography; these ‘spy’ lenses are capable of taking photographs hundreds of yards away from the subject (Greenhill, Murray and Spence 1977: 18).
The main reason for this caution is that since a magnetic tape or a photograph furnish a permanent record of behaviour, the subject is entitled to be aware that such a permanent record is being made.
But there is another, perhaps rather less obvious, reason to avoid candid recording which is associated with the subject's self-image and is most easily understood by continuing to draw a parallel with photography.
Just as the sociolinguist prizes spontaneous, unmonitored speech, the professional photographer of human subjects prizes unposed photographs; but most people are very chary of allowing themselves to be photographed.
Very few of us like to see pictures of ourselves looking tired, haggard or undignified, or with teeth missing.
As a glance at most family photo albums will show, there are many aspects of their lives which people choose not to reveal to their friends.
The sound of his or her own voice is in a similar way an important part of a person's self-image.
Labov reports (personal communication) that in his early work he once played back to a woman a tape-recording of her own casual speech to prove to her that her image of her accent was inaccurate.
Her subsequent unhappy reaction caused him to regret that he had inadvertently damaged her self-esteem by destroying part of her image of self which she presented to the world.
Because speakers view their voices as an important part of their self-images in this way, they are often unhappy about being recorded without their knowledge.
Linguists not working within Labov's general framework are often less careful than he is about candid recording.
For example, Dixon (1984: 80) quite openly states that some interesting material was obtained from  Aboriginal speakers by candid recording.
Crystal and Davy (1969) are happy to tape-record colleagues, friends and family surreptitiously, requesting permission only subsequently to use the material.
One of the points which might be made here is that Labov sets out explicitly to provide a model for handling communities not known to the investigator.
Crystal and Davy on the other hand are focusing on the language of a few speakers well known to them, and it may well be that in their case the nature of the personal ties between investigator and subject makes candid recording a less pressing ethical issue.
Obviously assuming that his readers will be dealing with subjects to whom they are relative strangers, Labov points out some practical disadvantages of candid recording; first of all, long-term access to a community is likely to be hindered if people think they are being spied on, and second, the quality of such recordings is often poor.
As Labov remarks: ‘A hidden tape-recorder and a hidden microphone produce data which is as dubious as the method itself’(Labov 1981: 32).
Although I personally endorse Labov's views on the matter of candid recording, it has to be admitted that the issues are not always as clear-cut as they seem.
Particularly during successful long-term participant observation, the borderline between overt and covert recording can become blurred and quite difficult problems emerge.
During the Belfast community studies, for example— and no doubt this experience is quite general — conversations were often interrupted by several more people entering the room.
Indeed, sometimes the original participants would leave in the course of a long recording session.
Although the recording equipment was not concealed, and was monitored quite openly by the fieldworker, it was not always clear whether all participants were aware of being tape-recorded.
In situations like this, it was not our practice or the practice of Labov's fieldworkers in Philadelphia to interrupt proceedings in order to renegotiate permission to record; in Belfast such permission was sought at the first contact with each household.
There was moreover a standing agreement that the equipment would never be concealed and that the fieldworker would wipe from the tape before leaving the house any material which subjects or fieldworkers considered sensitive.
In fact, more often than not the fieldworker took the initiative in this matter; investigators who build up long-term relationships with communities frequently hear and record material which they would prefer to remain ignorant about.
It was noted in 3.5 that long-term participant observation, as a consequence both of the relationship of trust which is built up and of a person's inability to remain vigilant for long periods, has the effect of blurring the distinction between covert and overt observation.
Conversationalists do not operate with the idea that their remarks will find their way on to a permanent record and by definition it is usually conversation which a  sociolinguist participant observer is studying, rather than some other more overtly structured kind of talk.
As a natural consequence of the participant observation method, some situations which are highly successful recording sessions can leave the observer feeling unhappy that they have found their way on to a permanent record.
I shall give just one example here.
In one of the Belfast inner-city communities, I built up a strong personal relationship with a very poor family.
Most of the recording sessions, which took place in the evening, were pleasant and party-like; eating, drinking, smoking, chatting and card-playing often continued into the early hours of the morning.
At the end of the observation period, it was extremely difficult to loosen these ties, which of course involved a considerable time commitment.
Much of the conversation had focused on the disastrous and pathetic effect upon the family of the civil unrest in Belfast and its function was plainly cathartic; many recordings resembled therapy sessions more closely than sociolinguistic field tapes.
I sometimes felt that I was taking unfair advantage of the family's need to talk through their problems with a sympathetic outsider.
The main point, however, is that in successful participant observation not only is the borderline blurred between covert and overt observation ; so also is the borderline blurred between covert and overt recording .
It must be stressed that after a certain time has elapsed, individuals will interact with the researcher just as they will with anyone else, notwithstanding the possible inhibiting effect of recording equipment.
Photographers also take advantage of the inability of persons to remain constantly vigilant, often introducing themselves into a situation many hours before they attempt to take pictures (Greenhill et al.1977:18).
As Burton remarks, ‘Respondents who are aware of the researcher's interests do not constantly hold that awareness in mind’(1978:169).
The kind of information which a long-term participant observer receives must be treated with the greatest circumspection, for it depends ultimately not on whether he or she is carrying a tape-recorder, but on the degree of trust, mutual confiding and general affinity which has developed between researcher and subjects.
This discussion of candid recording may be concluded with a brief comment on a related but much less troublesome matter — recording in public places.
Generally speaking, most researchers feel that there is no harm in tape-recording (or, for that matter, photographing) a politician on the hustings or any other obviously public person or event.
But what of the customer in the shop who is talking loudly enough to be overheard?
Or of the heated conversation in a pub or restaurant?
There is little agreement on the ethics of recording without permission in situations like these, but Labov's general principle seems to offer a sensible guideline; it is that the researcher should ‘avoid any act that would be embarrassing to explain if it became a public issue’(Labov 1981: 33).
4.4.2 Preservation of anonymity and access to recordings
There is amongst sociolinguists a general consensus that pseudonyms should be used for both personal and street names in order to preserve anonymity.
Some anthropological researchers, such as for example Burton, and many of those whose work is collected by Cohen (1982), also identify neighbourhoods and even towns by pseudonyms.
Participants should be assured of this anonymity at the outset of the research, and particularly in view of the kind of material which can emerge in the course of participant observation it should at all times be preserved absolutely.
For the same reason, sociolinguists need a firm policy with regard to access to tape-recordings.
Both the Belfast and the Philadelphia projects restrict access to members of the research group or scholars who are temporarily affiliated for the purpose of carrying out a specified piece of work.
If material is required for bona fide research by another scholar, or for public lectures, the Belfast group have available a composite tape, exemplifying various types of speech.
This tape has been carefully vetted for sensitivity of content or for material which can lead to the identification of speakers.
But tape-recordings are by no means freely available as a resource to all.
4.4.3 Some further problems
So far, section 4.4 has dealt with issues which are generally familiar to sociolinguists working in British, American or European urban communities.
But in Britain at least, as more investigators study ethnic minority communities, it will become clear that much of what constitutes good ethical practice is highly culture-dependent.
This point is of course relevant in any field situation where the researcher is studying persons in whose culture he or she does not participate, and the need to avoid offending established beliefs and values is taken for granted in anthropology texts such as that by Rynkiewich and Spradley.
Sometimes, the consequences of failing to attend to local cultural values can be drastic, as illustrated in this account by Dixon of an incident which took place in the early seventies in an Australian Aboriginal community:
Richard Gould had published a book Yiwara, foragers of the Australian desert which unwisely included a photograph of sacred objects, knowledge of which is restricted to initiated men.
An Aboriginal high school girl from a desert tribe had chanced to see this picture — and all hell had broken loose.
She was to be ritually speared for having broken a taboo.
AIAS [Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies]tried to get in touch with Gould and his publishers to ask them to withdraw the book from sale, or at least remove this photo.
Meanwhile, Aboriginal communities in several parts of Australia, alerted by the wide media coverage, began banning anthropologists from entering Aboriginal reserves.
(Dixon 1984: 38–9) As a consequence of this incident (and no doubt others like it), the Australian Institute for Aboriginal Studies has laid down ethical guidelines and imposed strict conditions upon research grant applicants, including linguists.
Several of these emphasize that researchers should attend carefully to the sacred and secret parts of Aboriginal life and language; publication of material whose widespread dissemination offends against Aboriginal religious practice is forbidden.
These restrictions apply not only to the photographing of sacred objects but also, for example, to the recording of songs; many songs are exclusive to men or women, and must not be played to mixed audiences.
Publication in print of certain items is also restricted.
Plainly such a set of guidelines as those drawn up by AIAS is entirely necessary, and to many readers the examples discussed here may seem rather extreme.
But they are intended to illustrate the very general point that we cannot know in advance the belief systems of the communities we are studying; an important part of good fieldwork practice is to get to know them and take them into account at all stages of the research, up to and beyond the time of publication.
The AIAS guidelines deal also with the matter of the researcher's debt to the community which has enabled him or her to carry out research and, in many cases, advanced an academic career.
This is a matter about which many sociolinguists feel sensitive, particularly since a large proportion of the communities which they study are repressed indigenous groups like the Aborigines, or underprivileged ethnic minorities like the American blacks or British Asians.
Fundamentally, the low status of these groups is a consequence of their position in societies whose political systems do not attend to the equal and impartial distribution amongst all citizens of power and advantage.
Generally speaking, academic researchers have no power to alter such a system, and can do little more than respond to their own feelings in a manner appropriate to the norms of the community and their own consciences.
For example, in their linguistic ‘salvage’ work in Australia, many scholars feel that they are assisting by making available to Aboriginal communities a record of their languages which are under severe pressure from English (see for example , Dixon and Blake 1979).
The AIAS guidelines codify this general principle, adding however that grant applicants must provide a summary and appraisal of their work in a form appropriate for submission to an Aboriginal group (AIAS 1980: 5).
The general issue of reconciling with his academic interests the feeling of social commitment to an underprivileged group with whom the researcher has built up a strong feeling of empathy is discussed by Labov (1982b); this  discussion forms a preliminary to his account of the use made of linguistic evidence by the defendants in the famous Black English Trial in Michigan.
Ultimately, the judge found in favour of the plaintiffs, who had argued that the educational authorities were illegally discriminating against their children by failing to take into account their distinctive language and culture.
Labov's quite proper feelings of pleasure are evident to any reader of his article; he plainly views the episode as an example of the opportunities which may arise for linguists to repay a debt to the communities they have worked with.
Readers are also referred to Smith (1985) for a full and very personal account of the broad ethical issues which he feels are raised when white academic researchers study poor non-white minority communities in Britain.
4.5 Conclusion
This chapter, together with chapters 2 and 3, has dealt rather selectively with a number of issues pertaining to fieldwork strategy, many of which are still the subject of controversy.
The initial discussion was at a relatively abstract level, to help readers extrapolate principles relevant to their own particular piece of research.
However — particularly in this chapter — I have also referred freely to the research strategies adopted in specific projects, so that readers might assess how they have been implemented in the field.
The following four chapters move away from fieldwork, to consider various aspects of data handling and analysis.
Analysing Various Data: Speaker Variables
5.1 Introductory
Once a large amount of data has been collected, the question arises of how it should be analysed, and it is understandable if investigators faced with many hours of tape-recorded conversation feel a little daunted.
Traditional dialectologists presented their data on maps — or, in the case of the Survey of English dialects, more accessibly in four volumes of Basic Material which listed informant responses.
But these lists are not organized in any way other than regionally; the methods of dialectology do not address themselves to variation within a single region between the sexes, or between status groups or generation cohorts.
Nor can they handle variation within the language of a single speaker.
Because they provided explicitly for the sampling of a wide range of speaker types and speech styles, the data collection methods associated with Labov's model allowed data to be analysed on all of these dimensions.
The key to direct analysis and systematic comparison of the very large amount of data collected using these methods is the concept of the linguistic variable .
The variant realizations of a linguistic variable do not encode different referential meanings.
They co-vary with other units in the system and/or with a range of speaker variables such as social class, ethnicity, age and sex.
The significance of the concept of the linguistic variable is that it allows quantitative statements to be made about language use, so that Speaker A might be said to use more or less of a particular variant than speaker B, rather than categorically to use it or not to use it.
Equally, speaker A may be said to use more of variant X in situation Y than in situation Z, rather than categorically to use X in either situation.
This kind of statement contrasts very sharply with the maps and lists of traditional dialectology, where elements are generally treated as if they were categorical within a given region.
A small amount of data from two English cities, Bradford and Norwich, shows how the concept of the linguistic variable can be used to describe language patterns in these cities in relation to the social  characteristics of speakers.
Since these social characteristics (or speaker variables) are our main concern in this chapter, we shall focus on the relationships between speaker variables and linguistic variables, deferring until chapter 6 any further discussion of linguistic variables.
The figures in table 5.1 refer to the variable (h), and list the percentages of zero realizations of word initial /h/ (in items like hammer and heart ) recorded for five social class groups in these cities, ranging from Lower-working to Middle-middle class.
It is clear that in both places, the higher the status group the greater the tendency to approximate to the spoken norm of Received Pronunciation, which retains [h].
However, each social group in Bradford uses the zero variant more than the corresponding group in Norwich.
Table 5.1 (h) in Bradford and Norwich: percentage of zero realization
The relationship between use of linguistic variables and various other speaker characteristics is illustrated in table 5.2, which summarizes patterns in the realization of the vowel variable (ai) by Belfast working-class speakers.
The figures represent the amount of fronting and raising to [e?]of the vowel in words like pipe and line , the maximum score being 200, which represents a large proportion of extremely non-standard realizations.
Figures are shown separately for Interview Style — the rather careful speech used in direct response to the fieldworker's questions- and for a more spontaneous style not used in response to questions and often not addressing the fieldworker.
There are also separate sets of figures for three age-groups and both sexes.
Several patterns are apparent from table 5.2.
First, the tendency to use raised and fronted variants of (ai) decreases systematically with the age of the speaker.
Second, within each age group women raise and front the vowel very much less than men; finally all speakers use raised and fronted variants very much more in spontaneous speech than in the relatively formal style of interaction appropriate to an interview.
These findings along with those shown in table 5.1 are fairly typical of sociolinguistic surveys carried out in western, socially stratified cities.
Generally speaking  higher-status groups and women tend to approximate more closely to standardized varieties and all speakers shift away from non-standard forms in a situation such as a formal interview.
Speakers of different age-groups frequently show different patterns of use, which do not necessarily represent a move either ‘towards’ or ‘away from’a standard norm.
Both patterns are reported in the literature.
Table 5.2 (ai) in Belfast
5.2 Speaker Variables and Theories of Change
Labov's quantitative methods (and his interpretation of results) were not originally motivated to provide a statement of the relationship between linguistic structure and social structure.
Although the pejorative term ‘correlational sociolinguistics’ is sometimes used by non-practitioners of the subject who appear to make this assumption, Labov himself has expressed the fear that his methods might give rise to a flood of replicated ‘correlatory’studies of little theoretical value.
As much of his work makes clear (see particularly Labov 1982b), the chief objective was not to describe relationships between speaker and linguistic variables, although this was certainly an interesting by-product of quantitative method which for some might comprise its main significance; it is certainly of great practical interest to a number of professions (see chapter 9).
But Labov's main concern was to obtain insights into processes of linguistic change and to challenge linguistic theories which modelled language as a static entity, identifying homogeneity with structure .
His views on this latter issue are set out in Labov 1975 (and elsewhere).
Evidence of change in progress is often provided by systematic differences in apparent time of the kind shown in table 5.2; that is, differences between generation cohorts.
But a less obvious kind of evidence may, according to Labov, be provided by some kind of irregularity in the  expected pattern of differentiation according to speech style, or sex or social class of speaker.
A clear example of this kind of evidence of change might be found in Labov's famous analysis of the variable (r) in New York City.
This variable shows a stable pattern of stratification according to social class except that one social group, the Lower-middle class, use in their more careful styles more rather than less of the high prestige variant than the status group immediately above them.
Labov's interpretation of this irregularity is that it shows the Lower-middle class to be instrumental in diffusing a change throughout the speech community by adopting and emulating what is in fact an innovatory pattern introduced by a higher-status group (Labov 1972a: 122).
Similar structural irregularities emerging from quantitative analysis might involve a social group unexpectedly using variants associated with lower-status values (see for example Trudgill 1974: 111).
The same principle might apply to relationships between linguistic variables and other speaker variables such as sex (Milroy and Milroy 1985b) or ethnicity (Horvath 1985).
It is clear then that speaker variables are of considerable theoretical importance.
At the sampling stage they are for practical reasons equally important, for it is hard to see how investigators could proceed without some recourse to demographic categories such as class, sex, or ethnicity.
But despite their significance both at this practical level and in understanding processes of change, behind the apparent strength of relationships such as those shown in tables 5.1 and 5.2 lie pervasive difficulties in handling speaker variables.
These difficulties are associated with both definition and interpretation .
Variables which have been examined particularly frequently by sociolinguists are social class ,age ,sex and ethnicity .
Good discussions of these and others may be found in various textbooks, notably Downes 1984 (chapter 6), and no attempt will be made here to duplicate this material.
The purpose of the following sections is to explore the difficulties with reference to a number of rather awkward speaker variables, beginning with social class .
5.3 Social Class and Sociolinguistic Research
5.3.1 Some general comments
In chapter 2 this variable was discussed in relation to data collection and sampling procedures, rather than in relation to data analysis which is our concern here.
It was noted that linguists tended to use the concept of social class rather unreflectingly, primarily as a means of imposing some order on variable linguistic data collected from a large number of (usually urban) speakers.
But despite the obvious appeal of this rather pragmatic use of the social class concept, difficulties emerged in societies with social structures  different from those in which it had been used apparently successfully.
Intractable as these difficulties sometimes are at the sampling stage, they become much worse at the level of analysis and interpretation.
To understand why this happens, we need to begin by looking at what is meant by the term ‘social class’; its definition and application is subject to considerable debate within sociology.
The discussion in the following paragraphs, which is confined to issues of particular importance for sociolinguistic research, draws heavily on Goldthorpe's (1985) balanced introductory account.
5.3.2 competing analyses of social class
We are speaking here of an analytic construct which in a general way is concerned with the (unequal) distribution in societies of wealth, prestige and power, but is approached quite differently by Marxist and capitalist (functionalist) social theorists.
According to the Marxist view, a class is a group of persons with a common relationship to the means of production and so is defined in all societies in economic terms.
Although it may be possible in a capitalist society to distinguish several such classes — for example, farm workers, owners of small businesses and professionals, amongst others — there is a strong tendency for such boundaries to disappear, leaving a sharp distinction  between the bourgeoisie who control wealth and the proletariat who produce it.
This polarization results in conflict between the two large opposing groups which, according to Marxist sociohistorical theory, will lead to a crisis to be resolved ultimately by the workers seizing the means of production.
Hence, class conflict is viewed as inevitable and indeed as the only major source of conflict in capitalist society.
Functionalist (or stratificational) sociologists disagree sharply in a number of respects with this Marxist analysis of social class.
Most importantly they see the social structure of capitalist societies as being based not upon conflict but upon shared values.
Nor do they look for evidence of sharp boundaries between the classes, preferring to operate with the notion of social stratification where  classes are not sharply divided but form a continuum.
The basis of social hierarchy is not contrasting relationships to the means of production, but different values which are placed upon different occupations.
Evidence commonly cited in support of this analysis is the close agreement found between persons who are asked to rank-order according to prestige a list of occupations.
As a consequence of this ‘stratificationalist’ approach, divisions between classes are seen as arbitrary and are drawn, usually on the basis of occupation, for analytic convenience.
Thus, it is argued, people do not agree on the number and composition of classes, nor on the location of the boundaries between them, which are fuzzy and readily crossed by the socially mobile.
A class is thus said rather vaguely to consist of a group of persons sharing similar occupations and incomes, and as a consequence similar life-styles and beliefs.
The emphasis in functionalist sociology is therefore on the values shared within and between classes, rather than on conflict as the basis of class structure.
The fact of class conflict is not denied, but is seen as only one of several sources of conflict within society; and perhaps most crucially of all, the stratificationalist approach to class is unlike the Marxist approach in that it is used in a fairly ad hoc way as an analytic tool, rather than as part of an integrated sociohistorical theory.
It should be evident from this account that most sociolinguistic research which follows the paradigm established by Labov's Social Stratification of English in New York City is adopting, without explicit acknowledgement, a functionalist view of social class.
It is the lack of awareness of the controversial nature and implications of this model which constitutes the problem, rather than any particular property of the model itself.
Without such awareness, we cannot easily address the issue of what constitutes an appropriate social model for sociolinguistics.
A good example of the unacknowledged influence of the model may be found in the ready adoption by many sociolinguists of the notion of prestige to explain the patterns of sociolinguistic stratification which have become so  familiar ; the persistence and spread of low -status forms is then accounted for by the notion of covert prestige (Trudgill 1983a, chapter 9).
However  illuminating such an analysis might be, the difficulty is that if the theory dependence of the whole notion of prestige is not explicitly acknowledged, patterns of linguistic differentiation are seen as emerging inevitably from a supposedly objective analysis of social structure.
Highly theory-dependent explanations of these patterns then appear to be not much more than inspired common sense.
But in fact the notion of class is not well defined, a stratificational analysis is not objective, and a sociolinguistic analysis which is heavily dependent upon the notion of prestige is part and parcel of a stratificational model.
At a slightly more abstract level, the unacknowledged influence of the functionalist model upon sociolinguistic theory is more pervasive even than the widespread use of the notion of prestige suggests; an interesting example is Labov's early definition of a speech community in terms of shared norms and common evaluation of the very linguistic variables which differentiate speakers (Labov 1966: 125); it is the emphasis on shared norms and values rather than on conflict which differentiates quite sharply Marxist and functionalist views of class.
One unfortunate consequence of this rather cavalier approach to the notion of class by sociolinguists is that meaningful debate on the question of how linguistic variability can most pertinently be related to social structure tends not to take place.
For example, a Marxist perspective would be likely to view the individual's relation to the means of production  as a more relevant determinant of attitude and behaviour (including linguistic behaviour) than his or her position in a stratified society.
That in fact is the rationale underlying the concept of the linguistic market where linguistic differences between speakers are analysed in terms of‘the importance of the legitimized language in the socioeconomic life of the speaker’(D. Sankoff and Laberge 1978: 241).
The groups which emerge are by no means identical to those yielded by an occupational index of the type associated with a stratificational model (see D. Sankoff and Laberge 1978 for details).
It is evident from the analysis of Sankoff and Laberge that the Marxist concept of class is less easily operationalized than the stratificational one.
But this apparent methodological superiority does not necessarily spring from any intrinsic properties of the stratificational model.
More probably it results (in part at least) from its general familiarity and widespread use as a descriptive tool in large-scale accounts of demographic structure; in Britain, the decennial Census of Population is an example.
Conversely, because very little substantive empirical work has been based upon the Marxist model, it is not clear from a relatively small-scale study such as that by Sankoff and Laberge whether it offers a potentially more insightful way of analysing variation.
The chief point at issue is not the competing merits of the models; more fundamentally the controversial nature of the social class concept needs to be acknowledged and discussed by sociolinguists in order to give researchers some purchase on the important question of how language relates to social structure.
5.3.3 Interpreting patterns of co-variation between language and social class
I have focused in this section so far on problems of analysing data which spring from the ill-defined nature of the social class variable.
But further, related problems are associated with interpreting patterns of co-variation between language and social class which emerge from the stratificational analyses used in sociolinguistics.
Since a very wide range of personal characteristics and behaviours have been found to co-vary with social class, this is a problem of social research generally, by no means unique to sociolinguistics.
Most descriptive studies in Britain base their classifications on the Registrar-General's ranking of occupations from I to V, according to their supposed prestige, with a major division between middle-class or white-collar workers (I, II, and III non-manual) and working-class or manual workers (III manual, IV and V).
The most fundamental events in people's lives are strongly affected by their social class, ranging from their chances of surviving the first year of life through likely age of marriage and number of children to the kind of diseases they are most likely to die of (Reid 1977).
Social class influences are particularly pervasive in education, showing an effect even at the nursery stage (Tizard and Hughes 1984).
It is not at all clear why a person's life-style, behaviour (both linguistic and non-linguistic) and opportunities should be so radically affected by his or her father's occupation.
Although some differences appear to stem more or less directly from inequalities in wealth and power, others appear to be associated with attitudes and values which cannot be related directly to such inequalities; an example is the preference of British working-class mothers for bottle-feeding rather than breast-feeding their babies.
We must therefore conclude that social class as it is used in stratificational studies is a proxy variable covering distinctions in life-style, attitude and belief as well as differential access to wealth, power and prestige.
The problem here is that unless some attempt is made by sociolinguists to ‘unpack’ the pertinent variables for which social class stands proxy, progress in formulating a satisfying explanation of the relationships between linguistic and social structure is likely to be slow.
This book is not the place to undertake such a task; but one comment that might be made is that an initial distinction between class and status is likely to be important; for it is the evaluative rather than the economic dimension of stratification which seems to be relevant to linguistic variation.
Social class is not the only speaker variable which presents problems of definition and interpretation, but it has been singled out here for detailed discussion for two reasons.
First, it interacts with other variables of interest to sociolinguists; and second, it illustrates in a particularly acute form the ill-defined character of speaker variables in comparison with linguistic variables.
As we shall see in chapters 6 and 7, they present problems also; but these problems tend to be more generally acknowledged, and to be on the whole less intractable than the ones we are discussing here.
Taking the case of social class as an example of a more general difficulty associated with speaker variables, I shall comment in the following sections in rather less detail on sex and ethnicity .
5.4 Sex of Speaker
All known societies appear to use language as one means amongst others of marking out gender differences (gender, strictly speaking, being a cultural and sex a biological category).
The precise form this differentiation takes varies from community to community; for example it is likely to be manifested differently in pre- and post-industrial societies and to vary in accordance with culturally determined roles assigned by societies (see Coates 1986 for a general discussion of the issues).
In bilingual communities undergoing a process of language shift, the sexes are likely to focus on the new monolingual norm at different rates (Gal 1979).
In westernized hierarchically stratified societies, the form this linguistic sex-marking has commonly been interpreted as taking is for women to approximate more closely than men of similar status to the prestige norm.
But such an interpretation of the very salient sex differences which plainly do exist, and are moreover theoretically important, relies on the analyst's capacity to assign a comparable social class index score to both males and females.
In fact one of the problems of a stratificational analysis is that it classifies women in a somewhat arbitrary manner, sometimes assigning to them the class of their husbands or fathers and sometimes determining their class by their own occupations.
Because of this, it is hard to take seriously the various interpretations of linguistic sex-marking which are based upon the notion of prestige .
Perhaps the commonest explanation of the patterns which emerge from a stratificational analysis is that in the absence of opportunities to mark status by occupation, women resort to language.
A number of obvious objections might be made to explanations of this kind (Cameron and Coates 1985; Coates 1986).
For example, it is not clear why, if they are motivated by a desire to mark prestige, wives of men in high-status occupations should not simply imitate the language of their husbands.
Once it has been acknowledged that linguistic differentiation is a particularly salient manifestation of the tendency of communities to mark out gender distinctions by a variety of means, it is difficult, given the general orientation of current sociolinguistics, to progress further in finding a convincing explanation of linguistic sex-marking.
The most fruitful procedure might well be to seek lines of explanation other than those associated with the notion of prestige.
Horvath's re-graphing of some of Labov's data in terms of‘natural’ linguistic groupings even suggests that sex should take precedence over class as the major speaker variable; she remarks that ‘if social class is seen to take precedence, then these other social dimensions might remain hidden or only dimly perceived’(Horvath 1985: 64).
One implication of these comments is that it is perhaps more reasonable to explain class differences in terms of sex, than sex differences in terms of class.
In view of the current state of the art I can do no more here than suggest that alternative approaches are surely possible.
For example, one might reasonably take as a starting point the observation that the characteristic occupations of men and of women are distinctly different, as are the kinds of relationships with co-employees associated with them.
So also are the general patterns of informal social relationships contracted by men and by women (see further Milroy 1980).
Cheshire (1982a) finds the same differences between male and female adolescents .
Yet another avenue of explanation might develop from a comparison of certain properties of the language of care-takers of young children (who are usually women) with the language of women generally (Snow and Ferguson 1979; J. Milroy  1985).
The point of these observations is not to argue the case for any particular line of explanation, but to emphasize that current approaches in sociolinguistics have not taken us very far in understanding linguistic sex-marking.
Unquestioning acceptance of a functionalist model of social structure may even have hindered progress towards such an understanding (see further Milroy  1988)
5.5 Ethnicity
Ethnicity, like social class, presents problems of definition, but can reasonably be described as an individual's sense of belonging to a distinctive group whose members share a common history and culture.
Although ethnicity is not coterminous with regional or racial origin, both may contribute to a more general sense of distinctiveness with which a sense of linguistic distinctiveness is often associated.
This may not correspond to any major structural difference between languages; for example, the spoken forms of Urdu and Hindi are almost identical but are perceived as different apparently because of their strong association with Muslim and Hindu ethnicity (Linguistic Minorities Project 1985: 45).
It is the subjective nature of ethnicity which can make it tricky to handle as a speaker variable.
Frequently ethnicity is maintained or even heightened by physical or political conditions; for example, ethnic minorities of Commonwealth origin in Britain are clearly marked out from the indigenous population by skin colour.
Assimilation is consequently difficult, particularly as the minority groups experience considerable hostility.
Their perceived status is usually low, because of the character of the relationship between Britain and their countries of origin which were once colonies.
The heightened sense of distinctiveness which results from these conditions is likely to be marked by strenuous efforts to maintain linguistic distinctiveness.
Ethnicity is not, however, always marked by linguistic distinctiveness ,Labov's work with Italian and Jewish speakers in New York City shows that such distinctiveness may persist for several generations, or conversely may disappear with the first generation of native-born speakers who nevertheless maintain a strong sense of ethnicity (Labov 1972b: 281).
Similarly, political conditions in Northern Ireland serve to maintain a powerful sense of ethnic distinctiveness which is marked in a number of culturally codified ways (Larsen 1982: 135); but these do not appear to include systematic linguistic differences.
Protestants and Catholics certainly see themselves as different peoples with different histories, and for the most part maintain different cultural traditions.
But where the two groups live together, there appears to be no clear difference in language use, an example being the Protestants and Catholics of working-class East Belfast whose language was analysed during a pilot study designed to investigate possible effects of ethnicity (see 6.2.2).
Systematic differences  between Catholics and Protestants which have been observed are probably best characterized as regional differences, since for example East and West Belfast Protestants each perceive the accents of the other group as distinctive (L. Milroy 1980).
However, in areas with a high level of Protestant/Catholic residential segregation, a clear distinction between regional and ethnic differences in language use is in practice difficult to maintain.
The Northern Ireland case illustrates a critical point hinted at at the beginning of this section which has important methodological implications for any researcher working with ethnicity as a speaker variable: ethnicity is a culturally created category, in no sense objectively ‘given’ or verifiable.
Thus, it is quite possible in Northern Ireland for an ethnic Catholic to be a non-believer, or conversely for an (English) outsider who is an adherent of the Catholic religion to be categorized as non-Catholic.
The point is that religion and ethnicity are not identical; but religion is a culturally accepted marker of ethnicity, and the terms ‘Protestant’ and ‘Catholic’in Northern Ireland refer to ethnicity rather than religion.
Similarly, region of origin is not always co-extensive with ethnicity.
In countries like Australia with large immigrant populations, some groups for various reasons assimilate more readily than others, and lose their sense of distinctiveness (Clyne 1982).
In Britain, the Polish community maintains its sense of distinctiveness through a well-organized network of cultural activities (Linguistic Minorities Project 1985: 68–76); but many individuals of Polish origin have assimilated readily and no longer have a sense of Polish ethnicity.
The final point which needs to be made about ethnicity is that as a speaker variable it cannot usually be isolated from social class.
Because migrant populations are frequently recruited as low-paid workers, they tend in many countries to cluster in the poor areas of inner cities near to their workplaces, and to be concentrated in low-status occupations.
Even members of ethnic minorities who were relatively prosperous in their country of origin and migrated originally as political refugees tend to become occupationally declassed, taking a step down in status relative to their former positions (Linguistic Minorities Project 1985: 74).
It is worth noting that many of the most interesting studies of the language/ethnicity relationship are not quantitative at all, but focus qualitatively on the social meaning which bi- and multi-lingual speakers associate with the codes in their repertoire (see further 8.3).
5.6 Variables Associated with Speaker Identity
All three of the speaker variables discussed so far are associated in some way with the individual's place in intersecting social configurations.
It was noted in 5.3.3 that the much-studied variable of social class appears to be a  proxy variable, and in fact most linguists are probably not primarily interested in the correlation between occupation, educational level or any other social class indicator and language, but in a more general relationship between linguistic differentiation and social differentiation of which the stratification system is only a part.
For this reason a number of researchers have attempted to work with speaker variables which are less abstract than social class, teasing out more specific aspects of the relationship between language and social structure.
The general assumption is that in some sense speakers use language variation, consciously or unconsciously, to signal various kinds of social identity and social aspirations.
This view of the relationship between linguistic and social structure has been articulated particularly forcefully by R. B. Le Page (see Le Page and Tabouret-Keller 1985).
A recent example of a study which attempts to single out a speaker variable of this general type is Holmquist's (1985) account of the influence of political orientation on patterns of language variation in a small, homogeneous Spanish-speaking community.
As with speaker variables generally, there is despite the apparent specificity of this variable still a problem of interpretation; many other speaker variables are associated with political orientation such as, for example , an affinity for peasant rather than urban life.
The difficulty is that in the absence of an explicit theory of sociolinguistic structure which attempts to account for these relationships, there is no principled way of deciding which variable offers the greater insight into patterns of variation.
Similar comments might be made about the speaker variable of social ambition used by Douglas-Cowie (1978) to account for linguistic variation in a Northern Irish village.
Without an explicit theory, it is not clear whether the important underlying variable is indeed of a psycho-social kind, or whether it is (for example) associated with the looser social ties between the individual and the local group which are likely to be congruent with a high level of social ambition.
5.7 Social Network
5.7.1 General principles
One variable of this general ‘identity’ type is social network .
An individual's social network is simply the sum of relationships which he or she has contracted with others, and in that rather obvious sense the concept is universally applicable.
However, the structure and type of interpersonal relationships varies; most importantly, an individual's personal network might be relatively closeknit in the sense that the ties contracted with others are dense and multiplex .
This means that a large  proportion of contacts are also tied to each other, and that individuals are simultaneously linked in more than one capacity; for example X might know Y both as a neighbour and as a workmate.
The idea of using social network as a speaker variable was developed in Belfast in response to an explicit hypothesis concerning the capacity of closeknit networks to function in society as a norm enforcement mechanism.
This means that if an individual is embedded in such a network, s/he is more liable than one whose network is relatively looseknit to be vulnerable to pressure exerted by everyday social contacts.
This pressure may result in the maintenance of a set of norms — including linguistic norms — which then flourish in opposition to publicly legitimized norms.
As this model would predict, individuals in Belfast whose personal networks were closeknit tended to approximate closely to the stigmatized vernacular norms characteristic of the locality, which like other ‘in-group’ norms powerfully symbolized values of solidarity, reciprocity and to some extent opposition to standardized norms along with their associated values.
The capacity of closeknit networks to exert normative pressure formed a basis for using this speaker variable not only descriptively, but to explore more radically patterns of language maintenance and change.
5.7.2 Quantifying network structure
It is possible to assign to an individual a numerical score which reflects the structure of his or her personal network with reference to the key concepts of multiplexity and density.
The measure used in inner-city Belfast to examine the relationship between language variation and network structure was a six-point scale which measured speaker scores on five indicators of multiplexity and density.
These indicators were interpreted as conditions which, if fulfilled, suggested a relatively dense and multiplex personal network.
Each individual was assigned a point for each condition s/he fulfilled, the network strength score being the sum of individual indicator scores (see L. Milroy 1980: 141 for details).
Although the theoretical motivation for positing social network as a speaker variable can be made relatively explicit, its use presents certain problems, the first of which concerns the measurement and quantification of network structure; for like social class and ethnicity, the ill-definedness of the network concept can make it difficult to operationalize.
Fundamentally, it is a social rather than a psychological variable, its main purpose being to enable the researcher to compare individuals in such a way as to focus on differences between them with respect to degree of integration into a set of relationships which constitute a group capable of exerting normative pressure.
The difficulty is that the indicators of this integration which are capable of being treated quantitatively (to enable  such a comparison) are likely to be culturally determined and to vary from one community to another.
This is best clarified by an example.
The indicators in Belfast were all concerned with relationships of kin, work and friendship, contracted within a defined  territorial area where their influence was likely to be considerable.
While it is quite possible that a different range of indicators might have served equally well in this setting as surface markers of an underlying variable of social integration, this particular set was selected in response to two methodological criteria.
First, since the network variable was motivated by a more general social theory, they were intended to reflect conditions which, in a number of network studies, had seemed capable of predicting the extent to which an individual became subject to group pressures.
For example, multiplex ties of work and friendship have emerged as powerful in this respect (see Cohen 1982 for examples and L. Milroy 1980 for further references).
The second criterion adopted was that the measures should be recoverable from data collected in the field and easily verifiable.
This ruled out (for example) affective measures of attitude which might well also be capable of yielding insight into the individual's degree of integration with the group.
But since the data needed to construct such a measure is difficult to elicit and interpret, a more easily verifiable and simpler measure was preferred; for example a point was assigned for ties of kinship contracted in the neighbourhood.
It is clear that the indicators selected in Belfast are not necessarily relevant (or even usable) in all types of community where the language/network relationship is of interest.
This issue will be explored further in 5.7.4, where other sociolinguistic studies, which have selected different indicators, are considered.
Meantime, the important principle which emerges is that the network measure is concerned with an underlying variable of integration to a social group; hence, selection of indicators is motivated by the need to characterize in a principled way differences between individuals with respect to degree of integration.
5.7.3 Looseknit networks
A further major problem associated with the use of the network variable is that it is most readily operationalized to study speakers whose networks are of a relatively closeknit type and cannot easily handle socially and geographically mobile speakers whose personal network ties are not predominantly dense or multiplex; yet, such persons make up a substantial proportion of the population in a post-industrial society.
Looseknit networks are hard to deal with chiefly because a multi-valued speaker variable like social network involves comparing speakers who differ from each other in certain respects — let us say in respect of the multiplexity of the ties which they have contracted at the workplace — but are still similar enough to each other in other related respects to make such a comparison  meaningful.
Looking again at the case of the Belfast inner-city speakers whose network patterns were compared, it is evident that relative to a person who, for example, had changed jobs and houses several times, their networks were all closeknit.
While we might make this general point and follow through its implications when we want to compare, for example, Braniel people with Ballymacarrett people, it is much less easy to see how the relatively looseknit network structures of Braniel people might meaningfully be compared with each other .
Many Braniel people owned cars and telephones, which they used as a means of maintaining important personal ties over long distances, and the capacity of these ties to influence their behaviour (linguistic or otherwise) is not clear.
Other speakers seemed to be relatively exposed to standardizing mainstream influences, in that they had contracted few personal ties which were likely to exert normative pressure on their behaviour; but in any case the geographical spread of the ties contracted by most Braniel speakers made them difficult to investigate.
While we might indeed readily hypothesize that these individuals were generally less likely than Ballymacarrett people to be subject to the pressures of their personal networks and more likely to be subject to a less localized outside influence, it is hard to suggest dimensions on which a number of looseknit networks, which differed greatly from each other, might be systematically compared (but see 5.7.4 for an account of Bortoni-Ricardo's study of rural immigrants to a Brazilian city).
Although looseknit networks are difficult to handle at the operational level, at the level of theory they are likely to be important.
On the basis of evidence from a number of studies of small-scale societies, Mewett (1982) has suggested that class differences begin to emerge as the proportion of multiplex relationships declines, multiplexity being an important characteristic of a closeknit type of network structure.
This observation suggests a framework for linking network studies with larger-scale class-based studies in formulating a more coherent multi-level sociolinguistic theory than we have at present.
Furthermore, Granovetter (1973) has argued that ‘weak’ and uniplex interpersonal ties are important channels through which innovation and influence flow from one closeknit group to another.
This rather larger-scale aspect of the social function of different types of network tie has important implications for a socially accountable theory of linguistic change and diffusion (Milroy and Milroy 1985b).
5.7.4 Applications of the network concept: a brief review
So far we have been concerned chiefly with the limitations of the network concept in sociolinguistic research; its advantages can be stated quite briefly.
First, it forms the basis of a useful tool for studying relatively small, self-contained groups in more detail than is possible within a large-scale  survey framework.
Second, it provides a means of approaching an analysis where the concept of social class is difficult to apply; this is a problem commonly encountered by researchers studying minority ethnic groups, migrants, rural populations or populations in non-industrialized societies.
Finally, network analysis offers a procedure for dealing with variation between speakers at the level of the individual rather than the group (see further 6.8.3).
In the remainder of this section we shall compare the use made of the network variable in three very different studies.
These are V. Edwards' (1986) account of the language of British black adolescents; Bortoni-Ricardo's (1985) account of changes in the language of rural migrants to a Brazilian city, and Schmidt's (1985) study of the language of bilingual Australian Aboriginal adolescent groups.
Since there is no enumerated list of British black persons (even assuming that this is a well-defined category), speakers from the British black community cannot be systematically sampled from a range of social classes.
Even if the use of social class as a speaker variable were feasible in this rather fundamental practical sense, it would be unlikely to yield much insight into the interplay between social and linguistic differentiation (for the rather obvious reason that a social class index cannot distinguish in an illuminating way between members of a group who are mostly unemployed or concentrated in low-status occupations).
But since it seems to be possible to analyse the black community as a whole as consisting of overlapping sets of relatively closeknit groups, the network variable is rather more helpful in describing the relationship between linguistic variability and non-linguistic differences between speakers.
It was suggested in 5.7.2 that the crucial variable (from a sociolinguist's point of view) underlying any measure of personal network structure is degree of integration into a closeknit group.
It was also noted that the same indicators were not necessarily relevant to different groups; for example, membership of groups associated with religious institutions might well be irrelevant in a contemporary northern English coal-mining community, but highly relevant in a Midlands black community.
In fact the indicators used by Edwards were chosen for their capacity to distinguish between individuals who associated themselves to varying degrees with the norms and values of the black community; of particular importance is the distinction between black and non-black ethnicity.
For this reason, Edwards' indicators were designed to measure in various ways the extent to which speakers have contact with black friends and neighbours and participate in black social activities.
Whether or not the speakers were employed at all was also taken into account, since employment will almost always involve fairly extended interaction with non-black individuals.
In fact, the index of integration into the black community which was constructed using these indicators correlated well with the extent to which the individual speakers used the patois characteristic of that community.
Bortoni-Ricardo's account of the sociolinguistic adjustment of rural migrants to Brazlandia, a satellite city of Brasilia, is a particularly interesting and innovative application of the network concept.
A survey based on a stratificational analysis is not appropriate or feasible for a sociolinguistic study carried out in Brazil; the chief objections are that the notion of a continuum is neither congruent with the sharp distinction between rich and poor, nor does it adequately discriminate between the individuals studied, all of whom were relatively poor.
Bortoni-Ricardo did not posit a linguistic movement by the migrants in the direction of an urban standardized norm of the kind familiar in studies using the social class variable (see further 6.3.1); taking the group's own linguistic norms as a starting point, she examined the extent to which speakers had moved away from their stigmatized Caipira dialect.
Bortoni-Ricardo's main hypothesis about change in social structure associated with the change from rural to urban life is that it involves a move from an insulated network consisting largely of kinsfolk and neighbours to an integrated urban network where the links will be less multiplex and associated with a wider range of social contexts.
The linguistic counterpart of this process is analysed as one of dialect diffuseness — a movement away from the norms of the Caipira dialect.
Two separate network indices are used to measure the changing patterns of the migrants' social relationships; the first is the integration index and the second the urbanization index .
The integration index expresses numerically certain relevant characteristics of the three persons with whom each migrant most frequently interacts — for example whether or not they are kinsfolk, or whether the ties have been contracted in the premigration period.
The score assigned to each migrant is intended to characterize progress in the transition from an insulated to an integrated type of network, and as such is a tool capable of investigating looseknit types of personal network structure (see 5.7.3).
As Bortoni-Ricardo shows, integration scores are correlated with a linguistic movement away from the norms of the Caipira dialect.
The urbanization index is designed to supplement this structural measure, representing the extent to which the members of each migrant's personal network are integrated into urban life.
A number of indicators are used to compute this index, two of which are educational level and occupational mobility; the indicators are selected for their capacity to measure the extent to which the persons with whom a migrant customarily interacts is integrated into (i.e. participates in) urban life.
From a methodological point of view, Bortoni-Ricardo's work is particularly interesting, because in developing these two types of index it extends the application of the network variable beyond an analysis of small closeknit groups to an analysis of the extent to which individuals have detached themselves from such groups.
Schmidt's study differs from those discussed so far in that it does not  quantify network structure at all, but uses the concept to account for differences between speakers which emerge from a quantitative analysis of linguistic data.
The language of two small, closeknit groups of young Aboriginal women from a Queensland community (the Rock n' Rollers and the Buckeroos) is studied against a background of societal bilingualism (Dyirbal and English) where Dyirbal is giving way, apparently fairly rapidly, to English.
The young speakers mix the two languages in different ways and proportions and a number of creole-like  characteristics are recorded, such as the Buckeroos' frequent use of bin as a past tense marker.
Schmidt's main interest is in a highly focused peer group norm , which is apparently a linguistically mixed code possessing characteristics both of Dyirbal and of English.
This norm contrasts with that of the groups' careful speech which is very much closer to traditional Dyirbal (see Dixon 1971 for a description).
There is for example more evidence of intrusion from English in peer-group speech, and relatively low frequency of traditional Dyirbal morphological features, such as ergative inflexions.
Thus, speakers who have productive control of Dyirbal morphology tend not to use it in peer-group situations.
Schmidt reports two particularly interesting findings which emerge from a quantitative analysis of this mixed-code peer-group norm.
First, although there is considerable between-group variation, there is very little variation between the language of speakers within each group.
Second, although the peer-group norm is characterized by speakers as Dyirbal rather than English, the extent of its Dyirbal admixture (sometimes only around 50 per cent) corresponds to the extent to which traditional Dyirbal features are controlled by the least fluent Dyirbal speaker in the group.
Schmidt explains the group's ability to maintain this very homogeneous mixed code, the norms of which are apparently pragmatically determined, in terms of the capacity of closeknit networks to exert normative pressures upon individuals.
5.8 Concluding Remarks
This chapter has concentrated on exploring some problems of definition and interpretation which make speaker variables so difficult to handle, with particular reference to the variables of social class, sex, ethnicity and social network.
The role of speaker variables in sociolinguistic theory was assessed, and the practical difficulties of putting into operation the social class and network variables in different types of community was explored.
Since Labov first developed his quantitative methods, a very wide range of different speaker variables has been examined in relation to patterns of variation, and indeed these methods can be used wherever a speaker characteristic is capable of being expressed numerically.
But there is little  point in relating speaker variables to patterns of language variation without also attempting to place the analysis within a coherent theoretical framework.
As Labov and Sankoff point out (1980: xi), the emphasis in recent years arising naturally from the maturing of sociolinguistics as a research area has been less on purely methodological concerns such as measurement techniques and the presentation of correlational relationships between linguistic and social structure.
Increasingly, researchers have attempted to conceptualize speaker variables in such a way as to solve a widening range of substantive problems.
Assuming that this (rather than a purely descriptive correlational approach) characterizes our general orientation, we turn in chapters 6 and 7 to look at principles of handling linguistic variables.
Analysing Phonological Variation
6.1 Introductory
Labov's concept of the linguistic variable (see 5.1), was developed originally to handle phonology rather than syntax.
Of great methodological importance is the principle of accountability , which in essence states that analysts should not selectively pick out from a text those variants of a variable which tend to confirm their argument, while ignoring others which do not.
It is the recognition of this principle and its implications which is particularly characteristic of Labov's approach to data: ‘for the section of speech being examined all occurrences of a given variant are noted, and where it has been possible to define the variables as a closed set of variants, all non-occurrences in the relevant environments’(Labov 1982a: 30).
There are, however, a number of problems underlying this concise and apparently simple statement.
As we shall see, it is often difficult to specify ‘relevant environments’ and, even more fundamentally, to define the input to a given variable; Labov's suggestion that it might sometimes not be possible to define variables as a closed set of variants is particularly relevant to syntactic variation (see chapter 7).
Tables 5.1 and 5.2 illustrate two different ways of quantifying variables once an accountable analysis has been completed.
Both are modelled on Labov's work in New York City.
In table 5.1,(h) is treated as binary , that is as having two variants,[h]and [?].
Variants of binary variables (which are implicitly assumed to be discrete ) are most easily handled as percentages ; table 5.1 for example lists zero realizations of (h) as a percentage of the total number of occurrences of both variants.
As vowel realizations vary along relatively easily specifiable continuous dimensions such as height or backness , and more than two variants can often be identified, vowel variable scores are often (but not always — see 6.3.2) calculated in a rather different way, using a vowel index score.
This involves arranging variants (as many as the analyst is able and wishes to distinguish) along a single phonetic dimension such as vowel height.
It is assumed that social values, which are also placed on a single linear  dimension, might be assigned to each variant.
The index scores in table 5.2 show the amount of fronting and raising to [e?]on a three-point scale of the vowel in words such as pipe and line .
The least non-standard variant is scored zero, an intermediate variant as 100 and the most non-standard as 200.
Scores approaching 200 therefore represent a high proportion of very non-standard realizations.
Since very full accounts are available both in Labov's reports of his early work (Labov 1972b) and in many more recent sociolinguistics text books (see particularly Hudson 1980; Wardhaugh 1986), the original notion of the linguistic variable has been outlined only sketchily here.
Assuming some acquaintance with the concept, this chapter focuses more specifically on a range of practical and theoretical issues associated with the use of the linguistic variable as an analytic tool.
It is organized as follows: first the initial identification of variables is discussed, with attention to their embedding in linguistic structure (6.2); second, some problems (and proposed solutions) are explored, which arise from attempts to analyse data using the concept of the variable as it was originally developed (6.3–6.6); third, some difficulties in establishing lexical input to phonological variables (6.7) are described.
The final section examines some issues associated with quantification of data.
6.2 Identifying Linguistic Variables
6.2.1 The problem
Initial identification of variables has not generally been discussed as a problem, presumably because linguistic elements of English which vary in a socially patterned manner are often very salient and sometimes rather general throughout the English-speaking world.
Such an example is the alternation between [in]and [i?]on the ing form of verbs, which has been studied in a number of places.
But more commonly variables are highly localized.
For example although (h) is socially salient variable in Britain south of the River Tees (cf. table 5.1), it is not a variable north of this point, nor in Ireland or Australia or the United States.
Since speakers do not alternate in a patterned way  between [h]and [?]in stressed syllables, the phonological unit /h/ is simply irrelevant to any account of variation in these areas.
In the case of another much-studied variable,(r), we find in England (but not in many parts of the United States) that absence of post-vocalic [r]is characteristic of high-status speech and is moreover categorical except in some (mainly) western areas.
In Ireland and Scotland on the other hand most speakers categorically pronounce post-vocalic [r].
One particular change in this pattern which has been detected in Scotland is structurally  quite different from the New York City change:
Both males and females seem to be innovating in this Scottish instance and the females are quite clearly the innovators in a prestige [i.e. r-pronouncing]form.
The males…are innovating in a direction away from the local Scottish prestige norm, but in accepting r-lessness their usage happens to coincide with a much larger national norm.
This pattern of differentiation in fact suggests that r-lessness is a separate competing development in Scots and is not being adopted in imitation of a Southern English prestige model such as RP.
(Romaine 1978a: 156) It seems then that (r) is not the ‘same’ variable in Scotland as it is in England or the United States.
Since variables pattern differently in different places, their initial identification is by no means automatic and might not even be particularly easy.
Sometimes if the investigator is a native of the area s/he is studying and is also trained in techniques of phonetic and phonological analysis, s/he is likely to be able to articulate and use intuitions about relevant variables.
But no general account of methodology can reasonably assume that the investigator is a native speaker or has native speaker-like intuitions, and for an outsider at least identification involves finding evidence that a linguistic unit varies in a systematic way between speakers, or between different speech styles of a single speaker.
It also involves identifying linguistic constraints on variation; that is, specifying the manner in which variable elements are embedded in linguistic structure.
The procedure for identifying variables initially adopted in Belfast illustrates some problems which are quite commonly encountered, and some solutions.
6.2.2 Pilot studies: an example
Although they need not be ambitious in scope or very systematically organized, pilot studies are in general a useful preliminary to large research projects as they help to identify unexpected difficulties of many kinds and offer guidelines to overall design.
In Belfast, a small pilot study proved to be helpful in identifying relevant linguistic and speaker variables (see 5.5 for a discussion of ethnicity in Belfast).
Interviews, word-lists and reading passages were recorded with twenty speakers of both sexes and various ages from communities associated with both major ethnic groups in the city.
The investigators had already developed some quite strong linguistic hunches, and while these often turned out to be fairly accurate, pilot work sometimes revealed that they were a little wide of the mark.
It also helped in identifying important variables which had not previously been thought to be particularly interesting.
A number of hazards were revealed which  had not been specifically predicted but which needed to be taken into account in designing the main research project.
For example there were evident differences in lexical incidence between items which had been thought to belong to the same phonological set;get and never in contemporary Belfast vernacular did not pattern in the same way as items such as wet and wedding , and so could not be considered as tokens of the variable (Ε)(see further 6.7).
The general value of a pilot study for helping to assess the importance of information gathered by relatively unsystematic observation and analysis may be demonstrated with reference to the variable (a) in Belfast.
It had already been noted informally that vernacular speakers realized certain items of the /a/ class with a front-raised, lengthened, slightly diphthongized variant;[bΕ? g]is a stereotypical Belfast pronunciation of the item ‘bag’.
However, the initial hunch that Belfast, like New York City, might show innovatory patterns of front raising of this vowel turned out to be wrong.
It became quite clear that the less immediately obvious tendency to back /a/, which had also been observed, was a much more regular process and was associated with young (chiefly male) speakers.
On the other hand, the more immediately obvious stereotypical raising of /a/ to [Ε]emerged as a recessive feature, confined in contemporary Belfast vernacular to syllables closed by a velar consonant.
Real time evidence from more than a century back (Patterson 1860) confirmed that the pattern had once affected the /a/ system in many more linguistic environments, and apparent time evidence obtained during the pilot study reflected this change; for example one eighteen-year-old man normally produced the form [käp]‘cap’, in contrast with his mother's habitual pronunciation [kΕp].
Backing was apparently spreading to items that had once been fronted, but had not yet affected syllables closed by a velar consonant, like bag ,back and bang .
The methodological implications of this combination of historical and contemporary evidence were quite direct; syllables closed by a velar consonant, which were categorically non-back, could not be counted as tokens of a variable which varied on the dimension of backness.
In fact, it turned out that adequate analysis of (a) in the main research projects required some adaptation of Labov's quantitative methods as they were originally formulated (see further 6.4).
There is one particular reason to be cautious of unsystematic observations (even by native speakers) as a basis for adequate identification of variables.
Because most people's range of social experience has become quite limited by the time they have attained adulthood, such observations are nearly always selective and may be hard to interpret or simply misleading.
For example, one local post graduate student involved in the Belfast research was firmly convinced that front-raised pronunciations by working-class speakers of items like cap and rat reflected attempts at correction in the direction of Received Pronunciation; but the  more systematically collected pilot-study data confirmed that this variant was in fact a low-status and recessive feature.
One methodological point of considerable importance in pilot work concerns transcription .
Transcription of any kind is invariably a selective process, reflecting underlying theoretical goals and assumptions (Ochs 1979: 44).
It is therefore unwise at the pilot stage, when these goals and assumptions are still being formulated, to idealize away too much from the data.
Moreover, an over-abstract representation can conceal important information.
When the objectives of the analysis are clearer, a selective transcription will be more useful than a detailed one, which is at that later stage of the research likely to contain much unwanted information.
This principle is valid at all levels of analysis; but the implication for phonological work is that phonemic transcriptions are often unsuitable for pilot studies.
The experience of the Belfast researchers was that a narrow transcription was needed to identify in the first place the range of vowel variation associated with different phonetic environments.
The variable (a)(see above) illustrates this point; the speech of a number of persons was transcribed in some phonetic detail before it became clear that tokens of the vowel in a certain range of environments were never front-raised, and seemed moreover to be implicationally ordered with respect to their tolerance of back-raising (see J. Milroy 1981a for details).
This information was used to construct highly selective word-lists, capable of yielding a great deal of specific information about phonological structure (see for example table 6.2); it was also helpful in determining the lexical input to variables (see 6.7).
As the discussion in this section has implied, a general analysis of the phonological system is a prerequisite to quantitative analysis.
While pilot work is an important means of obtaining the information required for such an analysis, traditional ‘guess and check’ methods (see 1.2.1) which draw on the skill and intuition of the analyst are also important.
James Milroy's (1976) phonological analysis, which provided an essential basis for subsequent quantitative phonological work, drew both on the analyst's intuition and on the pilot-study data.
6.3 The Measurement and Quantification of Variables
6.3.1 Criticisms of the standard method
Much of the value of the method outlined in 6.1 for converting into numbers the phonetic values associated with a variable lies in its simplicity and replicability in a wide range of cases.
But behind the apparently straightforward process of assigning numbers to variants of a variable in such a way as to reflect, reasonably faithfully, their phonetic and social  relationships with each other lies a great deal of linguistic, sociological and mathematical abstraction.
Labov has commented that ‘even the simplest type of counting raises a number of subtle and difficult problems.
The final decision as to what to count is actually the solution to the problem in hand; this decision is taken only through a long series of complicated exploratory maneuvers’(Labov 1972a: 82).
The form taken by some of these ‘exploratory maneuvers’ was outlined in section 6.2.1, and some of ‘the subtle and difficult problems’associated with the quantification process have been discussed in various places, most thoroughly by Hudson (1980:157–67).
In the remainder of this chapter, I shall focus rather selectively on some major difficulties which have emerged and some (partial) solutions.
A wider range of issues associated with quantitative analysis (not necessarily specific to sociolinguistic research) is explored in 6.8.
The notion of the sociolinguistic variable whose variants are assumed to lie on single co-extensive phonetic and social dimensions has been criticized by (amongst others) Hudson and Holloway (1977); Romaine (1978a) and Knowles (1978).
One objection is the loss of potentially important phonological information when phonological elements which vary on more than one dimension (such as vowel height, in addition to presence or absence of diphthongization) are analysed as varying only on a single dimension.
The implications of this problem are explored in detail in 6.5 with reference to the variables (Ε) and (o) in Belfast.
Phonological information of a slightly different kind might also be lost in the sense that the average score assigned to a speaker may reflect either consistent use of a median value or more variable use of extreme values; the phonetic locus of variation may actually be concealed by a single score on a linear scale.
A second, related objection has been advanced of the assumption that variants of a variable lie along a single sociolinguistic dimension of non-standard to standard, which in turn co-varies with a single phonetic dimension.
Rather acute difficulties have arisen in cities like Liverpool, Glasgow, Edinburgh and Belfast (described by Johnston (1983) as ‘divergent dialect’ areas) where there is a sharp discontinuity between the local vernacular and any recognizable supra-local spoken norm.
One consequence of this discontinuity is a difficulty in identifying the prestige forms which are to be placed at the ‘standard’ end of the continuum.
While in Norwich (for example) the influence of Received Pronunciation is consistent and considerable, researchers in Scotland such as Romaine (1978a; see also 6.2 above) and Macaulay (1977) have encountered difficulties in applying the concept of a single prestige norm.
Romaine (1978b) has cited the case in Edinburgh of two locally born upper-middle-class speakers who had attended the same private school but spoke with quite different accents.
One used RP, and the other the local (rhotic) high-prestige accent known as ‘Morningside’.
The situation is similar in Belfast where a range of educated accents can be heard; some of these sound Scottish and some  Irish, while others are apparently modelled on RP.
Educated speakers appear to have available a range of linguistic choices quite different from the range available, for example, to educated Londoners.
A further complication, sometimes leading to rather severe methodological problems, is introduced in some divergent dialect communities by radical differences in phonological structure between the supra-local and the local prestige norm(s).
For example, the assumption of a single non-standard to standard continuum with RP located at the standard extremity led Macaulay in Glasgow to exclude from his analysis of the (a) variable items which belonged to the /a/ class of RP.
Thus psalm and halve would be excluded, but Sam and have counted as tokens of (a).
This seems a rather arbitrary procedure since most Scottish speakers — including educated speakers — do not have in their phonological systems a contrast between front and back low vowels and so would not differentiate these pairs.
In fact, only three speakers in Macaulay's sample differentiated Sam and psalm when reading a minimal pair list (Macaulay 1977: 29).
Researchers have responded to these complexities in different ways.
Knowles (1978), who is particularly critical of Labov, argues that while the assumption that variants of a variable may be placed on a single social and phonetic continuum makes quantification relatively easy, it also oversimplifies the real range of choices open to speakers.
The limitations of a single linear scale are demonstrated in relation to realizations of five phonological variables in the city of Liverpool, of which one is an optionally merged variable (u?) and (o?) as in sure and shore .
Some speakers keep /u? /and /o? /classes distinct, while others merge both classes with the /o/ class (words such as Shaw ).
Knowles suggests that a Liverpool speaker first has to choose whether to merge these classes or not, before further deciding whether to apply a number of lower-level optional rules.
He characterizes this range of choices in the following way, pointing out that the second, third and fourth rules operate mainly in working-class speech.
Table 6.1
It is evident that Labov's methods of characterizing social and linguistic variation on a single continuum are indeed quite inappropriate for someone who wants to describe the phonology of an urban dialect in this kind of detail.
Further, some very salient Liverpool dialect phenomena such as syllable-final aspirated fricatives (e.g. [bu? h]‘bush’) are probably best described not quantitatively, but qualitatively in terms of the articulatory setting peculiar to the dialect, which can account for a number of superficially quite diverse phonetic characteristics.
But Knowles's criticisms of Labov's methods lose much of their cogency if we remember that Labov was not attempting to provide an accurate, detailed and variation-sensitive description of an urban dialect.
Although advances in urban dialectology are certainly a by-product of his methods, his principal objectives were to use variable data as a means of elucidating processes of linguistic change and more generally to contribute to core linguistic theory (cf. 5.2.1).
To criticize his methods for failing to characterize the dialect accurately is therefore to miss their point.
6.3.2 An adaptation to the standard method:(r) in Edinburgh
Although both Romaine and Knowles are critical of some aspects of Labov's method, there is an important difference in their underlying goals and assumptions.
While Knowles is concerned mainly with accurate description, it is clear from Romaine's (1978a) account of the variable (r) in the language of Edinburgh schoolchildren that she shares Labov's general theoretical objectives of elucidating processes of linguistic change (cf. 6.1).
Rather than simply criticizing quantitative analysis as a whole, she adapts slightly the standard method of measuring linguistic variables, pointing out that the three variants of (r) which can be distinguished ([?],[?]and [?]are difficult to place on any rationally motivated social continuum.
The solution is to avoid any implication of a continuum by calculating a percentage score for each of the three variants separately (cf.
Hudson and Holloway 1977).
A further advantage of this method is that it allows the phonetic location of an incipient change to be identified rather precisely, and particular variants to be associated with particular groups of speakers: ‘The main difference between the boys and the girls in the use of (r) is that the girls are almost always rhotic and most frequently use [?], while the boys are less frequently rhotic and tend to use [?]more frequently than the girls’(Romaine 1978a: 150).
Like Romaine's Edinburgh research, the Belfast projects worked within Labov's general theoretical paradigm, attempting to tackle difficulties as they emerged.
Generally, these difficulties were associated with the related assumptions of a single non-standard to standard sociolinguistic continuum and a corresponding unidimensional phonetic continuum (see 6.3.1).
Adaptations to the basic method designed to deal with the Belfast data are illustrated in 6.4 and 6.5 by three examples: the variable (a) as analysed in the household survey, and the variables (Ε) and (o) as analysed in the Braniel and Andersonstown community studies.
6.4 Problems in Quantifying Variables:(a) in Belfast
James Milroy (1982) shows that in Belfast the patterns of middle-class speech cannot satisfactorily be characterized in relation to vernacular speech in terms of phonetic distance on a unilinear continuum; rather, there is a tendency in middle-class speech to avoid the extreme phonetic values at both ends of that continuum.
This pattern is demonstrated in tables 6.2 and 6.3, which compare tokens of the variable (a) on word-lists read by a working-class and a middle-class speaker respectively.
The middle-class speaker converges on the low front area of vowel space in all phonetic environments, while the working-class speaker displays a far greater range of phonetically conditioned allophonic variation, realizing the vowel with back-raised, front-raised and diphthongized variants.
The phonetic details have in fact been simplified in table 6.2; for example, since diphthongized tokens have not been shown separately, realizations such as [m?? n]‘man’ appear in the [?]column (see further 6.5).
Nevertheless, the patterns characteristic of the speakers' respective social groups emerge quite clearly.
Table 6.2 (a) range for a working-class Belfast speaker: word-list style (from random sample survey)
Table 6.3 (a) range for a middle-class Belfast speaker: word-list style (random sample survey)
J. Milroy developed techniques for handling quantitatively data of this kind by assigning to each speaker a range score calculated simply by counting from left to right the number of columns through which the variants ranged, and subtracting 1.
Thus, the speakers represented by tables 6.2 and 6.3 were assigned range scores of 5 and 0 respectively.
This statistic was used in conjunction with a bidimensional weighted index where [a]was taken as the point most distant from the vernacular, and scores assigned for variants on the dimensions both of height and backness.
Quantitative analysis revealed statistically significant differences between working-class and middle-class speakers with respect to both range and index scores; as we shall see, the general sociolinguistic pattern reflected in tables 6.2 and 6.3 is repeated in other vowel variables.
6.5 Problems in Quantifying Variables:(Ε) and (o) in Belfast
6.5.1 Phonetically complex variation
The particular difficulty illustrated by (Ε) and (o) in Braniel and Andersonstown is different from the one discussed in 6.4.
It is not concerned with relationships between vernacular and non-vernacular phonological patterns, but with characterizing vowels as varying on a single phonetic dimension.
In fact, both length and quality appear in these (and other) examples to operate as independent but intersecting phonological processes, and both dimensions are apparently of considerable sociolinguistic significance.
Tokens of (Ε) show a spectacular realizational difference between high-mid variants and low, somewhat centralized variants.
It had been assumed in the first phase of the research (in the inner-city areas) that considerable variation in length could be accommodated within the standard paradigm by assuming that the feature [+low]implied [-long]and vice versa.
But since short high realizations turned up quite frequently, it became apparent that a more complex schema was required.
Interestingly, the assumption of a correspondence between length and quality presented more of a problem in the outer-city areas than in the more strongly vernacular inner-city areas (see further 6.5.3).
Parallel to (Ε) in these respects is the variable (o).
Tokens of this vowel varied on dimensions of height ,backness ,rounding and length .
Again, the correspondence between the dimensions of quality and length was closer in the inner-city areas.
In response to these complexities, the original notion of the sociolinguistic variable with variants which were assigned values along a single phonetic dimension was considerably modified.
The range of variation and the procedure adopted for handling it is illustrated by tables 6.4 and 6.5, where tokens of (o) and (Ε) are shown, taken from recordings of two Andersonstown speakers.
Tokens are listed under the phonetic variant which they realize, and additionally are assigned a label which describes the following environment; these labels are explained as follows:
Environments
T = voiceless stop or affricate, or sonorant + voiceless obstruent.
TS = environment described in T + following syllable in same morpheme.
D = voiceless fricative or any voiced consonant not immediately followed by a voiceless segment.
DS = environment described in D plus following syllable in the same morpheme.
The theoretical and practical issues associated with this kind of analysis of vowel variation is discussed by J. Milroy (1981a) and J. Harris (1985).
Even the small amount of data on tables 6.4 and 6.5 suggests that variants are partly, but not wholly,phonetically conditioned ; in fact the method described here is designed to accommodate this aspect of variation also.
A further point to note is that the extreme left-hand columns in both table 6.4 and table 6.5 are empty and additionally the extreme right-hand column in table 6.5 is empty; this is because these ‘extreme’ realizations  occur only in the inner-city areas.
In light of the discussion in 6.2.3, it seems likely that the tendency of higher-status speakers to converge on a narrower range is rather general.
Speakers in the more prestigious outer-city areas show in their realizations of (Ε) and (o) a  distributional pattern relative to lower-status speakers similar to that shown for (a) in table 6.3.
Table 6.4 (o) in Andersonstown
Table 6.5 (Ε) in Andersonstown
This analytic procedure embodies assumptions rather different from those underlying Labov's original method.
Variants of (Ε) and (o) do not form a continuum along a single linear scale, but each of them may be said to be part of one or more subscales which can be constructed on, for example, the continua of roundness, or backness or length.
Phonological features were eventually assigned to variants in order to construct these subscales, but the first step was to quantify the data in order to compare the patterns which emerged in different data batches.
Table 6.6 shows group scores for (o) in Braniel and Andersonstown, calculated for each variant according to following environment, using as input data of the kind shown in table 6.4.
Insights into variation arising from methodological changes of  this kind can be quite different from (but not necessarily contradictory to) those yielded by the standard method (see 6.5.3).
6.5.2 Phonetic constraints on variation
Since the variation in 6.4 and 6.5 is partly at least phonetically constrained, it is helpful at this stage to try and summarize these constraints: Rule 1 describes the constraints on variation in tokens of (o), using a conventional generative format.
Subrules 1a and 1b specify that in monomorphemic monosyllables (o) will be realized as a raised and lengthened variant before a voiceless fricative occurring either alone or in a cluster; alternatively, it will be raised and lengthened before any voiced consonant either alone or in a cluster.
In other environments the raising and lengthening rule does not apply.
In fact the rule fails to show the full complexity of the morpheme boundary constraint; what appears to happen is that if another syllable intervenes raising and lengthening fails, unless that syllable is an inflectional morpheme.
Thus, the rule predicts raising and lengthening in the following items:John, moss, pod, frost, robbing ; it will however fail in items such as mossy, pot, vodka, comic, Robby .
Rule 1 (o) in Belfast
Not surprisingly, realization of (o) is much more variable than this very idealized representation implies, although (as even the small amount of data in table 6.4 suggests) it is certainly constrained by the factors specified.
But lengthened realizations often turn up in ‘short’ environments, and both long and short realizations often vary qualitatively, as is clear from the figures in table 6.6.
However, these figures provide the basis for constructing a large number of variation-sensitive rules both in terms of segments and in terms of features.
The rules should be interpreted as purely descriptive devices capable of revealing various kinds of pattern in the data, some of which are  illustrated by tables 6.7 and 6.8 a, b and c.
Cumbersome as the formulation in table 6.7 may be, it provides useful information.
First, the predictions of rule 1 are to a certain extent confirmed; for example, environment D overwhelmingly favours lengthened variants in     both communities, although the proportions differ a little .
A long, low, back variant appears 78 per cent of the time in Andersonstown as opposed to 68 per cent of the time in Braniel.
But it is also clear that contrary to the pattern implied by rule 1, lengthening and raising operate to some extent independently of each other.
Note also that the ordering of constraints on the application of the rule is the same in both communities (cf. the predictions of Guy 1980).
Table 6.6 (o) in (I) Andersonstown and (II) Braniel: variant percentages shown by phonetic environment
Table 6.7 Realization of (o) by phonetic environment in Andersonstown and Braniel
Table 6.8 Realization of (o) by phonetic environment in Andersonstown, Braniel and Clonard
Further interesting insights into patterns of variation emerge if the rules are formulated more abstractly, a procedure motivated by the partial conflation in the Belfast phonological system of several separate but related phonological processes (chiefly those of backing, rounding and raising).
Table 6.8 is an example of the many such rules which can be constructed; variants sharing the same specification with respect to the feature [low]are conflated, so that patterns of variation on this dimension may be examined in each community in a range of phonetic environments.
Similar rules may be constructed to examine the operation of processes of lengthening and rounding so that it is possible (for example) to compare in the two communities the distribution of vowel length in four phonetic environments (see J. Milroy et al.1983, and J. Harris 1985 for details).
6.5.3 Interpreting patterns of variation
An advantage of an analysis which accommodates phonetically detailed information is that it allows phonetically detailed generalizations , some of which are of considerable theoretical interest.
For example, table 6.6  suggests that there is a greater tendency in Braniel than in Andersonstown for speakers to adopt raised, rounded realizations.
This is probably best explained in terms of the different dialect backgrounds associated with the two areas (see map 4.1) and the progressive adoption in Belfast of a Scottish pattern which is apparently spreading across the city from east to west (see further Milroy and Milroy 1985b; J. Harris 1985).
Representations of the type shown in table 6.8, interpreted in conjunction with evidence of change in progress, allow us to compare the embedding in linguistic structure of the change in East and West Belfast communities of roughly equal status.
Specifically, it is evident that the main differences between the communities with respect to the process of raising may be located in the T and DS environments.
An insight of quite a different kind emerges from a comparison of table 6.8c with table 6.8a and b.
It is evident that the basic rule constraining variation in realization of (o) is much closer to being categorical in the strongly vernacular, low-status Clonard area than in the outer-city areas; a static representation like rule 1 is apparently not too wide of the mark as a guide to phonological patterns in the Clonard.
This supports Labov's claim that vernacular speech is more consistent and regular than corrected speech (see 3.4); but however reasonable the claim, the original methods were not designed to show up such patterns in the data (cf. 6.2.1).
The contrasting patterns shown in table 6.8 may be interpreted in conjunction with the tendency reported in 6.2.4 for phonological units in low-status speech to cover a wider phonetic range .
It then becomes possible to formulate generalizations on what might be described as the sociolinguistic typology of low-status versus relatively standardized, higher-status phonological systems.
While structural units such as /?/, /Ε/; and /a/ in low-status urban Belfast speech cover a wide phonetic range, variants are constrained by phonetic environment in a highly regular fashion.
Conversely, they tend to converge in higher-status speech on a much narrower phonetic area, but are less responsive to environmental constraints.
Since it is not at the moment clear how general this type of sociolinguistic pattern might be, any attempt at explanation is premature; however, it is probably possible to relate the narrow range characteristic of the higher-status speakers' pattern to parallel structural tendencies in languages which have undergone processes of standardization (Milroy and Milroy 1985a, chapters 1 and 2).
The more general applicability to sociolinguistic analysis of a method which is sensitive both to the phonetically complex and linguistically constrained character of variation is illustrated in tables 6.9 and 6.10.
Realizations of (Ε) by both male and female speakers are compared in the two outer-city communities and in the small country town of Lurgan, seventeen miles from Belfast (see 4.3.6).
A number of inferences might be drawn from the patterns which emerge; but a particular advantage of this  method of analysis is that it points up rather clearly the effect of linguistic environment on variation and allows the main phonetic locus of differences between the sexes in each of the communities to be specified.
It is also evident, for example, that in all environments, variation in (Ε) is controlled by sex of speaker much less in Lurgan than in the urban communities, while sex of speaker has a clearer effect in Andersonstown than in Braniel.
Table 6.9 Women's (Ε) realizations by phonetic environment (%)
Table 6.10 Men's (Ε) realizations by phonetic environment (%)
Interesting and illuminating as these specific sociolinguistic patterns are, the material discussed in this section illustrates a more general point of considerable importance which should not be submerged in the large amount of detailed linguistic material presented: radical adaptations to the standard method of the kind outlined here are capable of revealing different types of pattern in the data and so increasing both our understanding of change and variation and our potential for constructing accountable theories.
6.6 Types of Linguistic Variable
An adaptation to Labov's methods rather differently motivated from those discussed in the last three sections may be found in Paul Kerswill's recent work in Durham City (1987).
Kerswill's interest is in distinguishing  different types of variable rather than in developing methods of quantification which give different kinds of insight into sociolinguistic patterns.
Following Dressler and Wodak (1982) he distinguishes phonological variation resulting from connected speech processes from a more general type of linguistic variation which correlates with speaker variables such as sex or social status and which is not restricted to phonological systems.
Connected speech processes (CSP) are phenomena such as the deletions and assimilations characteristic of allegro speech, which appear to be in some way phonetically motivated rather than linguistically arbitrary variation.
Examples from RP and some other varieties of English are the alternation at syllable boundaries between alveolars and palatals ([d? dju:l– [d? d? u:], ‘did you’) and alternation in similar contexts between alveolar and bilabial ([h? p bi:nz]–[h? t bi:nz], ‘hot beans’).
In both examples the alveolar is assimilated to the place of articulation of the following segment.
Another example of the CSP is variable deletion of both voiced and voiceless alveolar stops in certain contexts ([fas(t)n? s], ‘fastness’;[sen(d) mi:], ‘send me’).
Despite their apparent ‘naturalness,’ these processes are variety-specific.
For example, one common CSP in Durham English is voicing assimilation at syllable boundaries (‘scraped [bd]down’) while the place of articulation assimilation characteristic of RP is not found (Kerswill 1987: 44).
Dressler and Wodak (1982) argue from experimental evidence that the operation of CSPs is dependent on ‘attention’ factors — that is, whether the speaker is articulating slowly and carefully (see further 8.2.2).
Hence, they list both ‘fortition’ rules and ‘lenition’rules, the operation of which enhance perceptibility and articulatory ease respectively.
As well as attempting to distinguish CSPs from a more general type of phonological variable (such as that found in Durham in the long and short /a/ classes), Kerswill examines a certain type of lexical variable, exemplified by parts of two competing pronoun systems found in Durham City (table 6.11).
Lexical variation of this type is widespread in Durham and is not restricted to items belonging to any particular grammatical class; Kerswill reports that it is particularly salient as a sociolinguistic marker sensitive both to the age and social class of the speaker; but unlike either CSPs or other phonological variables, it is affected very little by speech style.
A reasonable assumption is that the traditional dialect lexicon is at present in Durham being replaced rather rapidly by standard lexical items, and the same general pattern of variation is likely to be characteristic of regions such as the Scottish Lowlands where the local vernacular is historically distinct from any supra-local standard.
It is certainly possible that the distinctions between different types of variable drawn by Dressler and Wodak and by Kerswill will turn out to be  methodologically important in as much as they yield new insights into the  principles underlying patterns of variation and processes of change.
But because both CSPs and more general phonological variables are variety-specific, it is difficult to distinguish them clearly enough to apply the taxonomy more generally.
Should we, for example, count the glottalization of /t/ found in many languages and dialects as a CSP?
And what of the deletion of /? /in Belfast English, which can easily be argued to be phonetically motivated?
A very large number of variables described in the literature may be presented as candidate CSPs.
Drawing a line between different types of variable is extremely difficult, largely because of a more general problem of making much sense of the intuitively plausible notion of phonological naturalness (see Lass 1984).
Even if it were possible to draw such a distinction satisfactorily, the advantages of doing so are at the moment not at all clear.
Table 6.11 Lexical variables in Durham City
6.7 Determining the Lexical Input to Phonological Variables
There is a good deal to be added of methodological and theoretical importance to Kerswill's comments on lexical variation, or variation which affects specific lexical items rather than entire phonological or grammatical classes.
Investigators in a number of places have reported sociolinguistically salient variation affecting word-classes which might be described as phonolexical sets .
The composition of these sets is not phonologically predictable, but seems to reflect the existence in the past of distinct sets of items which have merged in modern speech communities (see J. Milroy, forthcoming).
A very clear example is the Belfast variable (u) which alternates between [?]and [ü].
In the urban dialect of Belfast, as in most varieties of English, there is a word-class of /? /consisting of items such as cut ,mud ,fun .
There is also an /ü/; word-class consisting of items such as good ,food ,cook ,would .
There is no word-class corresponding to RP/? /, so that, for example , the two lexical items in the phrase good food are assigned in Belfast to the same rather than to different classes as in RP /g?d fu:d/.
There is however a small set of lexical items which alternates between the phonetically quite distinct classes / / and /?/ .
The total membership of this third class cannot be predicted on phonological grounds, nor reliably specified by appealing to the intuitions of native speakers.
For example,foot, took, shook, look have all been attested as alternating between [?]and [ü], while soot, cook, book, hook seem always to be pronounced with [ü].
The alternating set is sociolinguistically very salient, varying according to class, sex and speech style; all the items in it occur frequently and the [?]variant is a stereotypical vernacular pronunciation carrying strong symbolic value.
Precisely because the composition of phonolexical sets cannot be specified on phonological grounds, it is difficult to find a principled way of specifying the lexical input to the variable (u); eventually eighteen words were assigned to the set simply on the basis of observation.
Since speakers' intuitions cannot be easily accessed to define the membership of sets such as these (see further 8.2.1) it is difficult to see what alternative procedure might have been adopted.
The existence in Scots of many phonolexical sets of the same general type gives rise on a rather large scale to similar methodological problems in sociolinguistic work in Scotland.
Macaulay outlines the difficulties encountered in analysing the variable (u)— initially assumed to have as its input the vowel in words such as school, book, full, fool .
As his comments show, failure to specify with reasonable accuracy the input to any proposed variable is likely to obscure existing patterns of variation between speakers ;
Although Glasgow speakers, like most Scots, do not distinguish fool from full , for some speakers the word class is subdivided because some lexical items may occur with a front unrounded vowel, e.g. [sk? l]for school , and others a with low back unrounded vowel, e.g. [p? l]for pull but * [sk? l]and * [p? l]are not found.
The situation is complicated by the fact that the variable (i) can occur with [?]as a variant.
The figures for (u) were calculated by treating the variation as a continuum with fronting as the sole dimension and this may have distorted the actual situation.
However, a recalculation of the indices for a random sample of the speakers suggests that the same pattern of social stratification would be maintained even if the word class had been more clearly defined.
(Macaulay 1978:134) Problems of this kind are likely to be particularly common in divergent  dialect areas where two identifiable and radically different phonologies have in the past influenced each other, later to become an integrated part of the linguistic resources available to the speech community.
But difficulties of the same general type which spring from the apparently idiosyncratic behaviour of lexical items are reported in the United States also.
For example Neu's (1980) analysis of final stop deletion suggests that some lexical items are affected by the process more than others.
Thus, for example, inclusion of the frequently occurring item and , which shows high frequency deletion, skews the data considerably; for this reason, Labov excluded and from his original study of final stop deletion (Labov 1980: xvi).
Although it is not particularly surprising that and patterns in an idiosyncratic fashion, Neu's comments reflect a rather general failure of items to behave reliably in a comparable way even when they appear to be tokens of the same phonological set.
Also reporting on patterns of final stop deletion, Fasold (1978) has remarked on the idiosyncratic behaviour of the item kept where [t]is almost always deleted.
Because of the frequent  occurrence of kept , this causes difficulties in quantitative analysis.
The lexical norm described by Fasold is probably associated with a rather complicated situation in Scottish and Irish dialects where a set of verbs including keep, sleep, sweep have apparently been recategorized as irregular, without the alveolar suffix as a past tense marker.
Since the normal past tense forms in, for example, Belfast vernacular are kep, slep, swep , deletion is categorical for many speakers.
When the stop is realized in these items it is indistinguishable from the hypercorrect stop insertion attested in, for example,gast , ‘gas’;clift , ‘cliff’;fold , ‘foal’(see J. Milroy 1981b: 11n).
Nor is the general difficulty confined to final stop deletion.
Labov (1972b: 73) has noted that in New York City the subset of short a items which is liable to tensing and raising is not predictable on phonological grounds, while in Philadelphia the behaviour of the items mad, bad, glad is different from that of others in the a word-class.
This fact is crucial to the thrust of Payne's analysis of dialect acquisition patterns by out-of-state children (Payne 1980: 165; see also 2.4).
Trudgill (1983a: 88) reports similar cases in East Anglia.
Although difficulties in reliably specifying the appropriate lexical input to phonological variables are reasonably well documented, they may be more widespread and pose a greater methodological problem than these rather scattered observations in the literature suggest.
Since by definition the composition of phonolexical subsets is not predictable by a general rule, one way of revealing their presence in a body of data is routinely to record as both a lexical item and a phonetic value each putative token of a variable (see tables 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5 for examples).
The advantage of this rather simple procedure is that in a batch of (let us say) a thousand tokens  the anomalous patterning of particular lexical items becomes evident.
Thus, for example, the items get, next, never did not show the phonetic range of variation characteristic of the /Ε/; class in Belfast and so were not counted as tokens of (Ε); in fact, they varied between [Ε]and [?], forming a small phonolexical set of which the total membership cannot easily be specified.
In recent years sociolinguists have shown a fair amount of interest in models of variation and change which are based on the notion of lexical diffusion (Chen 1976; Wang 1969; Labov 1981; J. Milroy 1981b; Trudgill 1986a: 58).
It is therefore likely that the issues discussed in this section are of theoretical as well as purely methodological importance.
6.8 More on Quantification
6.8.1 Some general comments
Much of this chapter has been concerned with specifically linguistic difficulties of quantifying variables.
These ‘subtle and difficult problems’(cf. 6.3.1) are all associated with deciding what should be counted.
But there is a further, less specifically linguistic, type of problem which arises after these decisions have been taken and the counting process is under way.
This concerns the analysis ,presentation and interpretation of the resulting numbers, issues which pertain to the descriptive and inferential functions of statistics .
Sociolinguists who present their data using the simple graphs and frequency tables popularized by Labov in his early work have often been criticized for lack of statistical sophistication.
And it is true that while it is easy to glean rapidly from a representation such as table 5.1 or 5.2 information on relationships between speaker and linguistic variables, the quantitative analysis and interpretation of such data is in fact a complicated matter.
Since it is not possible to handle statistical issues in any detail in a general account of sociolinguistic methodology, I shall concentrate in this section on picking out general principles of particular relevance to sociolinguists, referring as appropriate to more specialist treatments.
Of particular interest are Butler's (1985b) statistical textbook for linguists, and Erickson and Nosanchuk's (1977) presentation of John Tukey's ‘exploratory’ statistical methods.
Before proceeding to discuss quantitative analysis at this more general level, we shall look in 6.8.2 and 6.8.3 at two specific issues which have received some attention in the sociolinguistic literature.
6.8.2 How many tokens of a variable are needed?
This question needs to be tackled if we are to be reasonably certain that  observed variation reflects a speaker's norm rather than random fluctuation in the data.
By implication it is raised, but not dealt with, by Labov's statement of the principle of accountability (6.1.1); simply to note all occurrences of variants without further considering the size of ‘the section of speech being examined’ is plainly insufficient.
For example if we are examining a rather impoverished little text containing only five tokens of (h) of which four are realized as [h]and one as [?], a speaker score of 20 per cent on this variable is hardly meaningful, even within a single social context, as a characterization of normal language use.
It is likely that if five other tokens were considered from a different section of text gathered in a comparable social context the score would turn out to be very different say 80 per cent.
While this might seem to be stating the obvious, the fact is that this issue has not received a great deal of systematic (as opposed to post hoc ) discussion in the literature.
Exceptions to this generalization are Guy (1980) and Romaine (1980: 190–3).
Using a detailed study of final stop deletion to exemplify a more general principle, Guy suggests that 30 tokens per variable is a reasonable goal to aim for.
As he points out, N=30 is an important dividing line in statistics generally between large and small samples.
Different parametric tests of significance are used for samples above and below this figure, which take account of different relationships to the population from which they are drawn (Butler 1985b: 79–97).
In fact the data presented by Guy seem to conform to general statistical laws; if the number of tokens is lower than 10, there is a strong likelihood of random fluctuation, while a figure higher than 10 moves towards 90 per cent conformity with the predicted norm, rising to 100 per cent with 35 tokens.
These observations usefully demonstrate the hazards of working with fewer than 10 tokens; the ideal appears to be around 30, but if this cannot be attained a figure as much as possible in excess of 10 is a sensible goal.
It is however assumed that the total N will not be subdivided to examine the effect of (for example) linguistic environment; in that case the ideal figure would be 30 tokens per environment, bringing the total for the variable as a whole to a figure proportionate to the number of environments examined.
The same is true of a total which is subdivided for any other purpose: for example to examine the effects of style.
In general, more tokens are needed if relationships among several variables at once are to be examined (Erickson and Nosanchuk 1977: 139).
Romaine (1980) has suggested that although Guy's generalizations are very much in line with mainstream statistical theory, they might not be entirely appropriate for sociolinguistics.
Pointing out that his recommendations are based on the detailed study of a single variable, she cites the work of Albo (1970), who concludes from his examination of several different variables in Cochabamba Quechua that the sensitivity of variables to sample size is not constant.
Sometimes a very small N is capable of  revealing patterns quite reliably.
But factors such as the frequency of a particular phonological class in the language (in English, for example, the vowel in words such as house ,out turns up relatively rarely) have an effect on the size of the sample needed.
So also does the linguistic complexity of the variable as characterized by the number of variants which can be discriminated.
6.8.3 Individual scores and group scores
Finding a sufficient number of tokens of a variable for each speaker did not apparently emerge as a problem in the early urban surveys which followed Labov's 1966 model.
This is because figures were usually calculated for groups of speakers rather than for individuals, a practice which seemed to fit in neatly with Labov's theoretical position that the locus of systematic variation was the group rather than the individual.
But following Macaulay's (1977) example, linguists have frequently presented figures for individuals, and a number of objections have been raised to the practice of grouping speakers (see particularly Hudson (1980: 163–7; Romaine (1980: 190).)
There are certainly a number of obvious difficulties which need to be acknowledged; first of all, some groups are  extremely small, and where divisions are made on the basis of two speaker variables (such as social class and sex) it may seem a little unreal to label the persons who fall into one of the resulting categories as something along the lines of ‘the upper-middle-class female group’.
It is hard to see what kind of claims might reasonably be made about linguistic variation expressed as average scores of groups such as these (an additional difficulty being the abstract and contentious nature of social class labels).
A more general statistical point is that the mean , which is the type of average most often used by sociolinguists, is not always the most suitable measure of central tendency within a group; under some conditions the median or the mode are more appropriate.
Measures of central tendency need to be interpreted along with measures of within-group variability that is the clustering of individual scores around a typical value.
The statistic most often used to measure within-group variability is the standard deviation , although there are other possibilities.
Accessible discussions both of measures of central tendency and of variability can be found in Butler (1985b, chapter 3) and Erickson and Nosanchuk (1977, chapter 3).
Since the linguistic homogeneity of groups can vary considerably, it is important for sociolinguists who aggregate individual scores to use these measures carefully.
In particular, group means need to be used rather more circumspectly than was thought necessary in the early studies.
Another reason to be cautious of over-reliance on the mean is that there are certain important between-group differences which a simple  comparison of group means cannot reveal.
Sometimes there is little or no overlap between the scores of individuals in Group A and the individuals in Group B (see L. Milroy 1980: 161 for an example), but more often there is considerable overlap.
This distribution, considered along with within-group variability, tells us quite a lot about the relationship of group scores to individual scores, a matter of some interest to sociolinguists.
Macaulay has concluded from his Glasgow study that individual scores do in fact fall into groups in such a way as to allow Glasgow speech to be characterized as three major social dialects (Macaulay 1978).
Guy (1980) has concluded from his study of final stop deletion that the individual follows the group norm very closely; but since we know that scores for different linguistic variables are not distributed within or between groups in a comparable way, we cannot conclude that all variables will behave in the same way as the syllable-final alveolar stop.
In Belfast, an analysis of variance technique highlighted differences in the distribution of eight different linguistic variables (L. Milroy 1980: 121–49).
6.8.4 Statistical analysis: some general principles
The traditional approach to statistical analysis is to use one of a range of tools to test for ‘significance’ as a means of indicating whether or not an explicitly formulated hypothesis can be upheld; Fasold (1984, chapter 4) discusses the application of this general method in sociolinguistics.
The difficulty with standard significance tests is that their valid and effective use usually depends on the way the data are approached — for example whether the research has been designed with a specific hypothesis in mind or a less focused post hoc analysis is being carried out with a view to revealing underlying patterns.
The logic of significance testing with respect to this type of issue is discussed by Erickson and Nosanchuk (1977, chapter 8) and Butler (1985b, chapter 6).
The use of tests also depends upon certain assumptions about the nature of the data , such as whether or not it is normally distributed, is of roughly equal within-group variability and reflects independent observations.
Some tests such as analysis of variance are fairly robust in that they permit violation of such assumptions, while others are not.
Butler provides a clear account of the assumptions underlying a number of different tests.
It is relatively easy nowadays with a minimum of statistical or computational knowledge to use the facilities of a statistical package for computer analysis (such as the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences or Minitab) to carry out a wide range of tests.
But it is important for users of these powerful facilities to have adequate knowledge of the principles upon which statistical testing is based.
The limitations and advantages of the selected procedure need to be understood, and the purpose of the analysis carefully specified.
Exactly the same comments apply to powerful programs  like David Sankoff's VARBRUL which are designed specifically for sociolinguistic analysis.
Both the mathematical assumptions and the assumptions concerning the nature of the linguistic input which underlie the program need to be appreciated before the researcher can decide on its suitability for a particular analytic purpose.
Guy (1980) gives a detailed account of the logic, limitations and applications of VARBRUL , while a number of papers in D. Sankoff (1978) discuss various details of its design and application.
More recently, Horvath (1985: 59) has provided a useful critical account of the advantages and limitations of VARBRUL , and a comparison of the VARBRUL technique with Principal Components Analysis (see further 6.8.6).
But in assessing the usefulness of VARBRUL , it is important to note that it is at present neither commercially available nor adequately documented for inexperienced users.
The capacity of modern computers to organize huge masses of data in many ways very speedily is, if used with care, as valuable to the sociolinguist as to anyone else.
But computers can also overwhelm the user with numbers very quickly, and cannot give any more help with their interpretation than with the initial selection of an appropriate statistical procedure.
Naive users sometimes assume that the computer can tell them anything that is worth knowing; to quote from Erickson and Nosanchuk, ‘when we plug in the computer we often ‘unplug’ our brains' (1977: 28).
It is important not to allow a mechanical aid, however powerful, to interfere with the careful specification of analytic goals and the selection of appropriate means of attaining them.
6.8.5 Exploratory and confirmatory statistics
The various caveats expressed in 6.8.4 on the use of statistical techniques by sociolinguists are not as negative as they might seem, since recently the overuse of significance testing in social science research generally has come in for some criticism.
Researchers have noted that many data-handling techniques depend upon assumptions which are hardly ever met in the social and behavioural sciences (see 6.8.4).
Data are often dirty , containing errors and gaps, and sociolinguistic data have similar characteristics (see McEntegart and Le Page 1982 for an assessment of the difficulties of applying standard statistical techniques in sociolinguistics).
The problem has arisen in the social sciences because classical statistics were originally developed to meet the requirements of the natural sciences and reflect a deductive style of hypothesis development which is not suitable for exploring dirty data in the context of amorphous and incomplete theories.
It was to fill this need that John Tukey (1977) developed his exploratory statistics.
The general purpose of exploratory statistics, as the name suggests, is to help investigators to take a good look at patterns in data and to search  around for ideas about the form these patterns take.
The techniques are quick and simple to use and learn, intuitive and visually appealing, and resistant to errors and flukes.
One feature of Tukey's techniques is the degree of insight they give into the data.
By displaying numbers in a simple and visually revealing way such as, for example , the graph/table hybrid known as ‘stem and leaf’, it is possible to see obvious patterns quickly and focus harder on more puzzling aspects of the data (Erickson and Nosanchuk 1977: 20).
Exploratory statistics might reasonably be described as highly systematized common sense.
Having used exploratory techniques to ‘ransack’ the data, the idea is then to generate hypotheses which can be tested using confirmatory statistics.
These correspond to the data-analysis tools of classical statistics described in most statistics text-books, but are recommended by Tukey for use only when an explicit hypothesis has been formulated.
This will emerge from extensive application of a range of exploratory techniques, and such a procedure is particularly important prior to using one of the computer packages designed for confirmatory statistics.
Exploratory techniques are extremely well fitted to sociolinguistic research.
Since sociolinguistics is full of incomplete theories and unanswered questions, it is often more important to find ways of thoroughly searching the data for different types of pattern than to generate hypotheses which might well be premature.
In fact, Labov's propensity to set out patterns in his data in a highly visual way is quite in the spirit of exploratory statistics; but the data are not presented as comprehensively nor analysed as thoroughly as they would be using Tukey's principles.
A very wide range of techniques is available, which are capable of revealing different types of pattern in a set of data.
The basic texts which explain them are Tukey (1977) and Erickson and Nosanchuk (1977), who supply an exploratory counterpart to every confirmatory technique.
Chambers, Cleveland, Kleiner and Tukey (1983) deal specifically with graphical methods of exploring the structure of data (see particularly the various types of scatterplot illustrated in Chapter 4).
They point out that well known communication graphic techniques such as pie charts often do a good job of summarising data but are of little use as exploratory tools since they reveal little about their structure.
Hoaglin, Mosteller and Tukey (1985) provide a readable account of a range of useful and simple techniques such as‘stem and leaf’(chapter 1) and boxplots (chapter 3); Lovie (1985) contains a more advanced collection of papers representing recent developments in statistics for the social and behavioural sciences.
6.8.6 Choosing a suitable analytic method
If any benefit is to be derived from statistical analysis, it is important to define the nature of the problem and then set out to find the most  appropriate way of solving it.
Since defining the problem can implicate a whole range of linguistic and social issues such as those discussed in this chapter and in chapter 5, decisions about appropriate methods of statistical analysis cannot be made in isolation.
This is perhaps best demonstrated by citing three specific and very different examples, which should also give some indication of the wide range of problems which can be illuminated by an appropriate statistical analysis.
One part of the Belfast analysis was concerned with the relationship between linguistic variable scores and social network scores, the hypothesis being that the two sets of scores were related.
The statistical test which measures the strength of the relationship between paired sets of observations of this kind is a correlation test, and a large number of these tests were carried out to investigate the relationship (L. Milroy 1980: 149–166; Fasold 1984, chapter 4).
The decision to investigate this relationship in the first place was bound up with theories of the social function of closeknit networks (see 5.7.1).
A completely different problem to which a different statistical analysis was appropriate is reported by J. Milroy and Harris (1980).
Their hypothesis was that the apparent merger of words of the MEAT and the MATE classes (see 3.3.1) in contemporary Belfast vernacular had not in fact taken place.
The chi square test was used to look for differences between tokens of the two word classes in two linguistic environments; but decisions concerning the environments and the type of differences to be examined depended on a great deal of phonological, sociolinguistic and historical linguistic information.
A different approach again was appropriate to a very different problem in the sociolinguistic survey of Sydney, Australia.
Here, a computer-assisted technique known as Principal Components Analysis (Horvath 1985: 53) was used to examine the hypothesis that groups of speakers would show certain similarities in their linguistic behaviour.
The only input to the program was individual linguistic data , and the procedure was particularly suitable in view of the difficulties in Sydney of grouping speakers according to class.
Speaker variables were used to interpret the results of the analysis rather than as an input to it, and in fact speakers did fall into ethnic, status and age groups (cf.
Le Page and Tabouret-Keller 1985: 127ff).
Figure 6.1 illustrates the type of patten revealed by PCA.
Individual speakers are represented by dots, the only input to the program being a linguistic score on five vowel variables (see further Horvath 1985: 70).
The programme plots speakers in terms of their scores on two principal components, represented as axes of the graph.
These components are interpreted in social terms after the analysis by considering the social characteristics of the speakers who have been sorted on the basis of their linguistic behaviour into the two groups (periphery and core) which  emerge in Figure 6.1.
In fact, Principal Component 1 divides speakers by ethnic group, distinguishing non-English accented from Australian English accented speakers.
Principal Component 2, the vertical axis, distinguishes sociolects within the continuum of traditional Australian English accents.
Figure 6.1 The Sydney speech community: core and periphery (after Horvath 1985: 71)
The decision to use Principal Components Analysis in Sydney was related to an awareness of the problems of defining speaker variables (cf. chapter 5), and in fact the Sydney project is a particularly clear example of the interdependence between different stages of the research.
The ultimate analytic method was chosen to take account both of sampling problems in the field and theoretical problems associated with speaker variables.
This discussion of quantification concludes our exploration in this chapter of a number of issues raised by a quantitative analysis of phonological variation in its social context.
We focus in chapter 7 on some special problems associated with analysing syntactic variation.
Analysing Syntactic Variation
7.1 Introductory
For some years now, sociolinguists have attempted to extend quantitative methods to the study of syntactic variation, and have met with a number of problems which are both methodological and of a broader theoretical kind.
Consequently, not all sociolinguistic studies of syntactic variation are quantitative, and not all take as their data base the corpora of naturally occurring speech preferred for phonological work; elicitation techniques of various kinds are sometimes used.
Nor is it always illuminating (or even possible) in syntactic work to adopt the assumption which in quantitative phonological work is taken for granted: that the object of study is a set of surface variants expressing the same underlying semantic structure.
This chapter begins by examining some major fieldwork problems associated with the study of syntactic variation, going on to review in 7.3 some studies which have tackled them by means of various elicitation techniques.
Section 7.4 reviews some quantitative studies which have attempted to take over directly from phonology the notion of the semantically neutral variable, and in subsequent sections analyses of variation which explicitly take into account semantic and discourse factors are discussed.
However, since much published work combines various approaches, there will be a good deal of overlap between different parts of the discussion and it will be necessary throughout to refer to various theoretical and methodological issues which have received a good deal of attention in recent years.
7.2 Data Collection Problems
One characteristic difference between phonological and syntactic systems has far-reaching implications for the study of variation: although phonological systems change through time and so cannot be absolutely closed and finite , they are more closed and finite in character than syntactic  systems.
Speakers make use of a very sharply limited inventory of phonological contrasts, and realizations of any given unit are likely to crop up quite frequently in even a short piece of text.
As we have seen, the difficulty often lies not in obtaining tokens of a variable, but in obtaining the full range of realizations associated with it.
The position with syntax is however different, since it can never be guaranteed that a sufficient quantity of tokens of a given type of construction will ever appear in a piece of spontaneous discourse.
This is partly a consequence of the non-finite or ‘leaky’ nature of syntactic systems, which in turn is associated with the relationship between syntax and speaker meaning (or intention).
This relationship entails that speakers can exercise a great deal of choice in the way they encode their meanings; for example, even if questions (i.e. requests for information or for action) occur in a text, there is no guarantee that they will be realized syntactically as interrogatives; there is no simple isomorphic relationship between function and form.
Although these broader issues spill over into the whole question of extending the notion of the sociolinguistic variable into the domain of syntactic analysis, they are relevant to data collection because they often entail difficulties in obtaining sufficient quantities of a specific type of data.
This problem emerges even where, intuitively, it seems likely that data will be plentiful, as can be demonstrated by the example of a study of variable subject/verb concord in Belfast vernacular speech (Policansky 1980; 1982).
We find in that dialect alternation between standard and non-standard patterns of number agreement, so that a plural subject can co-occur with a singular verb:
1
Her sons was in the Orange Order
2
Them two fellows was hit
After listening to around 100 hours of the spontaneous  speech of 48 inner-city speakers (see 4.3.1) the investigators received the impression that occurrences of examples such as(1) and (2) alternating with their standard counterparts were extremely frequent.
However, this proved not to be the case, since even from such a large corpus, it was possible to extract only 560 utterance tokens — an average of less than 11.7 per speaker.
Investigators have tackled this kind of problem in a number of ways.
Cheshire was able to collect enough data from Reading adolescents to carry out a quantitative analysis of the following: variation in the morphological structure of the third personal singular form of the verb; a separate study of the verbs HAVE, DO and BE; various aspects of the system of negation; the relative pronoun system.
The large amounts of data needed for such an analysis were obtained by means of a participant observation method which allowed the investigator to record speakers over  a long period, returning to collect more data if specific gaps emerged in the course of the analysis (cf. 3.1).
Cheshire notes that even so a number of alternating items and structures did not occur frequently enough for a quantitative analysis, and some of the frequencies for the variables which were analysed are very low.
The relative pronoun analysis, for example, distinguishes five variants, distributionally constrained by four different (linguistic) contextual factors; this complex analysis is based on only 82 occurrences (Cheshire 1982a: 73).
As we shall see, much quantitative syntactic work shows a similar tendency to take account of (and indeed sometimes concentrate on) linguistic rather than social constraints on variation.
This tends to compound problems caused by too few tokens (cf. 6.8.2).
A different approach to data collection may be found in Kallen's (1986) study of the co-occurrence of auxiliary do with main verb BE in Irish English:
3
These pancakes do be gorgeous
4
It doesn't be long coming
The do be construction does not correspond in any simple way to standard English forms of BE (as is clear if an attempt is made to ‘translate’ the second example), but encodes aspectual distinctions which are not always syntactically marked in standard English (Kallen 1986; J. Harris 1984).
Do be constructions crop up relatively infrequently in spontaneous speech, a difficulty which Kallen addressed by obtaining the bulk of his data from rapid and anonymous observations (see 4.2.3).
He wrote down instances of the construction immediately after hearing it, supplementing this data source with material from broadcast speech and a limited amount of tape-recorded data.
This ‘diary’ method is sometimes suitable where the purpose is (as in Kallen's case) to examine linguistic constraints on variation.
But it carries with it the usual problem associated with rapid and anonymous observations, viz. lack of information on the social identity of the speaker.
The occurrence of some kinds of construction is likely to be constrained by pragmatic factors — for example, interrogatives are not likely to crop up very often in the speech of a person who is being interviewed (cf. 3.3).
Rather more subtly, J. Harris (1984) notes that tokens of the hot news perfect (see further 7.6), used to refer to events in the immediate past, were located in spontaneous, casual discourse rather than in the response speech found in interviews.
This, like so many of the methodological issues which emerge in the study of syntactic variation, is part of a wider theoretical question, in this case the embedding of syntax in discourse and the close interrelationships between syntax, semantics and pragmatics (see 7.7).
Some investigators have, however, used these pragmatic constraints on  variation to help obtain, relatively reliably, tokens of a particular construction.
Sometimes an extremely simple technique is sufficient — for example Coveney (1986) reports that he obtained enough data to allow him to study quantitatively different ways of expressing future time in the French verb, simply by asking speakers about their plans for the future.
Similarly, in her study of variation between the conditional, imperfect subjunctive, present indicative and future indicative in the verbs of si clauses in Buenos Aires Spanish, Lavandera developed a set of interview questions (for example, ‘Under what conditions would you feel happier than you presently are?’) which succeeded in eliciting a high proportion of clauses expressing unreal conditions (Lavandera 1975; 1978a; 1982).
She obtained 1,489 tokens of si clauses from 90 subjects, a body of data large enough to be analysed by the VARBRUL program (see 6.8.4).
Rather more elaborately, Sandra Harris (1984) collected courtroom data, using obvious situational constraints on discourse to enable to her to examine the form and functions of questions (cf. 3.2.1).
This particular social context, in which the magistrate's role is that of questioner, ensures a high concentration of naturally occurring relevant data.
Harris's method supplements the general approach used by Lavandera (of selectively directing the conversation) in that it raises the possibility of seeking out situational contexts which are likely to favour frequent occurrence of a given construction.
We may conclude that although elicitation of syntactic data presents methodological problems, those problems are not insuperable and can often be solved by a little ingenuity.
7.3 The Use of Elicitation Techniques
7.3.1 Methods
One solution to the data-collection problems outlined in 7.2 is to supplement a corpus of naturally occurring speech with data gathered by some kind of experimental method.
This involves accessing, directly or indirectly, the intuition of a native speaker.
As part of an investigation of the Irish English perfect (see further 7.6), J. Harris (1983) used experimental techniques to help specify constraints on the Irish English have-NP-V-en type of perfect (PII), as exemplified in 5 and 6:
5
He has the course finished
6
She has the dress made
Examples of this construction were collected from 150 hours of recorded speech.
Although on average it cropped up only once an hour, there appeared to be semantic restrictions on the type of verb with which it occurred; in the majority of cases it occurred with dynamic verbs of activity , the most frequent being do, make, finish, write .
Supplementing the corpus with more recordings of naturally occurring speech would have been very time-consuming, so a questionnaire was designed in order to investigate (amongst other things) the possibility of such a constraint operating.
If it operated absolutely, sentences like 7 and 8 ought to be judged unacceptable:
7
He has his father relied on a lot
8
He has two race-horses owned
To check this, 145 students were presented with twelve sentences, each containing the have-NP-V-en construction with a different verb, as shown in table 7.1.
These verbs had been selected in groups of three from four categories: dynamic verbs of activity; dynamic momentary verbs; stative verbs of inert perception; and stative relational verbs.
They were presented in random order, and the respondents were asked to judge the acceptability of the sentences.
The results, presented in table 7.1, strikingly confirm the nature of the constraints suggested by the corpus data; the structure is very much more likely to occur with dynamic verbs, particularly verbs of activity.
But significantly, table 7.1 also shows that it does not seem to be possible to elicit sharp judgements of acceptability which can be used to divide grammatical from ungrammatical sentences.
We shall return to this point in 7.3.2.
Table 7.1 Judgements by 145 Irish English speakers on the acceptability of 12 verbs occurring with PII
A number of similar experiments are described by Labov (1975); of  particular interest is a series designed to investigate the failure of the negative attraction rule (i.e. the tendency to attach the negative marker to the quantifier) in some English dialects, in sentences of the following type:
9
All the men didn't arrive
10
Every man didn't arrive
11
Each of the men didn't arrive
12
Anybody didn't arrive
Labov had hypothesized that there was ‘a regular gradient of negative attraction to quantifiers, strongest to any , weaker for each and every , weakest for all ’(1975: 19).
This is parallel to the gradient of acceptability which emerged from Harris's results, and Labov attempted to accommodate the tendency of speakers to avoid making absolute judgements by asking them to assign to each sentence a score on a four-point scale, as follows:
4
= No native speaker would say it
3
= Other native speakers might conceivably say it
2
= Awkward, but can conceive of saying it
1
= Would say it without a qualm
As table 7.2 shows, the results of the experiment confirm the original prediction of a gradient of acceptability.
A number of other experimental studies, all using rather similar techniques, are described by Labov in two separate publications (Labov 1972d; 1975).
Table 7.2 The strength of negative attraction to quantifiers
One well-known and very important point about experimental work which emerges clearly from the studies discussed in this section is that in order to frame a specific hypothesis the experimenter needs to have  acquired in advance a good deal of detailed knowledge; Plutchik (1974) emphasizes this in his discussion of the applicability of experimental versus observational methods.
Basic information about syntactic structure cannot be derived from experimentation in the absence of prior knowledge derived from observational methods.
Both Labov and Harris had obtained this knowledge from analytic work on substantial bodies of data.
7.3.2 Some problems in the use of elicitation techniques
Although experimental methods provide a highly economical and efficient method of investigating a speaker's responses to particular items of structure, the main difficulty associated with them is the mismatch which sociolinguists have consistently found between what speakers claim when they are directly questioned, and what they actually do , as evidenced by their linguistic behaviour in naturally occurring conversation.
A good example of this difficulty is provided by Davis (1984), who examined constraints on the for to complementizer in Belfast English, in sentences of the following type:
13
For to do that would be foolish
14
I got up early for to paint the kitchen
15
?
I want for to do that
Davis had suspected that for to could not introduce complements of the verb want , and one particular native speaker, when questioned, had confirmed this tentative hypothesis.
However, a few minutes later in spontaneous conversation, he produced the following utterance:
16
I want for to be helpful
Difficulties in accessing the intuitions of linguistically naive informants are well known to field linguists generally, and have been reported from sources as diverse as the Soviet Union (Kibrik 1977) and Australia (Healey 1974; Dixon 1984).
Dixon reports for example difficulties in obtaining the information he needed to write a grammar of Dyirbal.
Many quite fluent Dyirbal speakers simply represented a dead end in that their intuitions could not be accessed.
In practice, most information was obtained from a single highly intelligent, articulate and linguistically aware speaker, on whom Dixon relied almost totally; his procedure then was to check the data for idiolectal idiosyncrasies against the judgement of one other.
Labov's (1973) account of his investigation of various aspects of the negative attraction rule in Philadelphia demonstrates a further problem, associated with attitudes to particular varieties, characteristically encountered by researchers investigating a stigmatized language or dialect (cf. the  discussion in 1.3 of Le Page's early work in the Caribbean).
Both this difficulty and a more general difficulty of accessing intuitions are illustrated by Labov's experience in investigating constraints affecting so-called ‘positive’anymore sentences such as 17 and 18:
17
We keep the beer here anymore
18
John's smoking anymore
The particular point at issue is that in standard English anymore , along with other items in the any series and a number of adverbials, is in main clauses usually restricted to interrogative or negative constructions; Labov (1973) cites the following dialogue to show the difficulty of investigating by direct questioning of a native speaker his hunch that this particular constraint was less binding in Philadelphia:
Interviewer: Can people say round here We go to the movies anymore ?
Informant: We say show , not movies 
The speaker's failure to comment overtly on syntactic structure here cannot of course be interpreted as reliable evidence that he habitually uses and understands the construction.
The tendency for prescriptive ideologies to inhibit and distort responses in situations where informants are conscious of a competing set of standard norms became evident when Labov pressed his questions with people who had been heard using the construction in conversation.
The usual reaction was confusion, followed by a claim that a ‘mistake’ had been made in not including a negative in the utterance.
In general, responses to direct or indirect questioning about non-standard varieties are always conditioned by speakers' awareness of their social significance and usually reflect knowledge of the standard rules.
Attempts in Belfast to investigate experimentally constraints on the highly stigmatized non-standard concord rule (see 7.4) ran up against these problems, and similar difficulties are encountered with bilingual speakers (8.3.2).
7.4 Syntactic Analysis and the Sociolinguistic Variable
7.4.1 The problem
When the data base for syntactic analysis is a body of naturally occurring speech rather than experimentally elicited material,analysis and interpretation of that data is liable to raise even more problems than finding a way to collect it in the first place (see 7.2).
Labov's comments on the difficulty of applying the principle of accountability to the study of variable syntax  suggest one reason for the problems.
Recall the requirements of this principle (cf. 6.1) that ‘all occurrences of a given variant are noted, and where it has been possible to define the variable as a closed set of variants, all non-occurrences of the variant in the relevant circumstances’(Labov 1982a: 30).
Labov's rider to these conditions is however worth quoting in full:
The requirement as stated is too strict.
There are a number of variables that can be studied now by noting only each occurrence, but not each non-occurrence,since it has not yet been possible to close the possible set of variants [my emphasis].
Studies of the aspect markers of the Black English Vernacular, like invariant be are still at this stage.
The same is true for the distribution of relative clauses, where we can't yet define the set of possible choices that the relative is selected from.
Here, quantitative work is confined to tracing the relative frequency of occurrence in some globally defined section of speech, controlled for length by an independent measure like number of sentences, pages, or hours of speech.
(Labov 1982a: 87) There are a number of examples in the literature of the problem to which Labov is drawing attention here; certainly Kallen's do be variable falls into this category as do the perfective aspect markers discussed by J. Harris (1984).
This seems to be the problem too with perfective done , a feature of Appalachian speech studied by Wolfram and Christian (1976).
Examples of the usage are:
19
We thought he was done gone
20
The doctor done give him up
21
I done forgot when it opened
The authors report the number of occurrences of the surface form done , rather than presenting their information in terms of percentages which give a proportion of possible occurrences.
Chambers and Trudgill (1980: 90) note that it is ‘not possible to set up done as any kind of linguistic variable, since it is not a form which is involved in alternation with other forms that could be considered to be ‘equivalent ways of doing or saying the same thing’ '.
Sometimes, however, the difficulty to which Labov alludes in defining the set of possible choices is of a rather different kind, involving (linguistic) contextual constraints on possible variants.
Recall first the procedure which needs to be adopted in defining a phonological variable, of disregarding linguistic contexts which do not allow variation.
Usually this presents no theoretical problem; for example in a certain range of phonetic environments in Belfast, back variants of (a)never occurred (see 6.2.2).
Similar constraints, many of them much more  obvious, are routinely specified for most phonological variables; for example /r/ is variably deleted in many dialects only pre-consonantally and word-finally.
But what is routine in phonological analysis often presents problems in syntactic analysis.
Consider again the example of subject/verb agreement in Belfast (cf.7.2).
Although sentences of the type illustrated by 1 and 2 occur sporadically throughout the data, a number of lexical and syntactic constraints seem to inhibit the co-occurrence of a singular verb with a plural subject.
Particularly where the subject is a plural personal pronoun no variation seems to be permitted; but in our initial search for invariance (cf. 1.1), we still cannot specify this rule as categorical with the same confidence as we can define a constraint on a phonological variable.
This became clear when, in an attempt to investigate further the nature of the personal pronoun constraint on the non-standard concord rule, all occurrences of they as subject in the speech of 12 speakers were collected (N=310), from which only one example was discovered of a singular verb:
22
He asked how many eggcups she had and what colour they was
Nor were any examples found of we or you co-occurring with a singular verb, and in a very real sense it is this constraint which distinguishes the Belfast vernacular concord system from that of other non-standard varieties.
In London English, for example, singular forms of be (certainly past tense forms) seem to co-occur freely with we and they as subjects:
23
We was living in the other house then
It might be added that in the Belfast data no instances of these (in either its pronoun or determiner function) or of the related form theseuns were found as subjects of singular verbs.
However, the semantically and syntactically equivalent item them (in both pronoun and determiner function) along with the related form themuns co-occurred freely with singular verbs, apparently favouring the application of the non-standard concord rule:
24
Them two fellows was hit
25
Them's the words he used to me
26
Themuns is thieves
Were it not for the single inconvenient occurrence in the data (example 22) of they as the subject of a singular verb, we could set up an initial list of ‘invariant’ environments, which themselves are characteristic of this vernacular system, prior to an investigation of patterns underlying the variability in the many environments which permitted it.
But the problem  which data of this kind present is whether or not contexts where the subject is realized by a personal pronoun or by these are possible ‘variable’ environments.
It is possible to argue that the single occurrence of they in the data with a singular verb is accidental (a ‘performance error’) but equally possible to claim that the non-occurrence of you,we and these with a singular verb is the consequence of an accidental gap in the corpus; the line of reasoning characteristic of generative grammar is of little help to us here in choosing between these alternatives.
Nor are problems of this kind peculiar to the Belfast concord variable; similar indeterminacies are, for example, associated with attempts to specify the precise environments in which the zero form of the relative pronoun can occur.
As in the case of the concord system, constraints seem to differ between one non-standard grammar and another.
Miller (forthcoming) reports that Scottish English, unlike standard English, allows the omission of subject relative pronouns in sentence types where the subject of the main clause is realized as there :
27
There's not many people know of this law
However, constructions like 28, where the subject of the main clause is a ‘heavy’ NP, seem not to turn up in Scottish English, although they are usual in Somerset English:
28
The electrician came to mend the cooker couldn't find the fault (= The electrician who came…)
It is, however, not at all clear what the precise constraints on variable subject relative pronouns in these two vernacular systems might be.
These methodological difficulties are associated with a more general problem of deriving generalizations from corpuses.
Defining relevant environments of a variable has been noted as a particularly serious obstacle to a satisfying analysis of syntactic variation by Lavandera (1978b), by G. Sankoff and Thibault (1980) and by Weiner and Labov (1983).
Earlier versions of both Sankoff and Thibault's study of the French avoir/être variable and Weiner and Labov's study of the English agentless passive variable are discussed in some detail by Lavandera to demonstrate the nature of the difficulties, which in fact have not yet been satisfactorily resolved.
Attempts to specify constraints on the application of the rule by appealing to the intuitions of the native speaker simply raise a fresh set of problems (see 7.3.2).
7.4.2 Quantitative studies of syntactic variation: some examples
Despite the difficulties of knowing what to count when the concept of the  variable is applied to syntactic work, a large number of quantitative studies of syntactic variation are reported in the literature.
To give some idea of their range and diversity, some of them are reviewed here.
G. Sankoff's (1980a) collection of papers on syntactic variation in both Montreal French and the Tok Pisin of Papua New Guinea employs a very wide range of approaches and includes at various points discussions of important theoretical and practical issues.
Although versions of all the papers in the collection have been published elsewhere (but not always in English), they are cited here in these easily available versions except where the date or other details of the original publications are particularly relevant.
The syntactic work of Sankoff and her associates has always been influential.
It was Sankoff's paper ‘Above and beyond phonology in variable rules’(1973; 1980b) which first proposed extending the notion of the linguistic variable to syntax, demonstrating the methods and principles involved with three examples: variable placement of the future marker bai in Tok Pisin; variable deletion of the complementizer que in Montreal French; and variation in the use of French indefinite on .
This discussion, along with Weiner and Labov's later study of the passive variable seems to have stimulated Lavandera's (1978b) critique of the use of the notion of the variable in syntactic studies ( see further 7.5).
By definition, of course, work employing the concept of the variable is quantitative; but as we shall see later in this chapter, much interesting work on syntactic variation (by Sankoff and others) is qualitative , or a mixture of qualitative and quantitative approaches.
Lavandera has pointed out that much work on syntactic variation tends to focus on syntactic rather than social constraints.
Of the three variables discussed by G. Sankoff (1980b), only syntactic constraints on variation are reported for the bai and que variables, the on variable being the only one for which the influence of a speaker variable (age, in this case) is reported.
It cannot of course be the case that syntactic variables do not pattern socially or stylistically; some of them plainly do, as the work of, for example, Cheshire has shown.
But it is certainly true that many of the variables that have been studied do not show a clear effect of social constraints, and it seems reasonable to suggest (cf.
Lavandera 1978b), that the concept of the linguistic variable is not applicable in these cases, since it was originally designed to examine apparently meaningless variation which is in fact of social and stylistic significance (Labov 1972b: 271).
One particularly interesting and detailed quantitative study in G. Sankoff (1980a) which so far in this chapter has received only passing mention is the English-language version of G. Sankoff and Thibault's (1977) substantial analysis of variation between the auxiliaries avoir and être in Montreal French, as in:
29
On est/a déménagé cinq six fois —‘we moved five or six times’
This substantial and carefully argued paper deals with a number of thorny methodological issues, such as defining the scope and relevant contexts of the syntactic variable (see 7.4.1) and problems associated with the low frequency of particular verbs.
An important part of the discussion deals with the difficulty of deciding whether variation can be said to be between semantically equivalent forms which carry social meaning, or to encode an aspectual distinction; this latter issue is treated in the context of a (non-quantitative) analysis of the semantic distinctions underlying tense and aspect marking (see further 7.6 and 7.7).
Finally, a number of quantitative analyses are carried out, including a variable rule analysis of the probability of speakers using one variant or the other, according to their linguistic market indices (cf. 5.3.2).
The paper as a whole is an excellent  source of information on a range of relevant practical and theoretical issues.
Wolfram's (1980) account of variable constraints on prefixing a- to the present continuous form of the verb in Appalachian English (e.g. ‘He got sick a'workin' so hard’) is also a mixture of quantitative and non-quantitative analysis, the latter focusing on the now familiar problems of establishing relevant environments and possible semantic distinctions encoded in a -prefixing.
A range of phonological and other constraints are then examined quantitatively.
Poplack (1980a) reports a VARBRUL analysis of the plural morpheme -s , which is variably realized as [s]and [?]in Puerto Rican Spanish:
30
yo mi(s) hijo(s) le(s) digo- ‘I tell my kids’
She is particularly interested in a possible relationship between choice of variant and communicative function, hypothesizing that the plural morpheme is less likely to be realized as [?]when ambiguity results; compare for example 31 and 32:
31
los reyes —‘the kings’
32
las reinas —‘the queens’ Even if both plural markers in 31 are realized as [?], the form of both the determiner and the noun adequately convey information about number (p l. [lo xeye],sing .
[el xey]).
However, if both plural markers in 32 are realized as [?], ambiguity with the singular form [la xeina]may result (Poplack 1980a: 59).
Interestingly, the results lead to a decisive rejection of a functionalist hypothesis; deletion rates are affected very little by the presence or absence of disambiguating information in the surface string.
The factor which most powerfully predicts deletion is deletion of the first  plural element in the string; if a plural in the phrase is going to be realized by [s], there is a strong tendency for it to be realized on this first element.
Hence, strings of the form?? s are rare or non-existent.
Quantitative syntactic studies do not necessarily take as their data base recordings of live conversation.
Romaine's extension of the quantitative methods of sociolinguistics to the study of variation in relative clause marking in sixteenth-century written texts suggests an approach to the relationship between variation and change different from any we have discussed so far (Romaine 1982b).
Interestingly, the ranking of stylistic and syntactic constraints on choice of relative pronoun variant appears to have changed little in 450 years; zero marking in subject position is preferred in written Scots in less formal styles.
G. Sankoff and Vincent (1980) in a smaller historical investigation come to a parallel conclusion that stylistically stratified patterns of variable deletion of the negative particle ne in French have changed very little since the sixteenth century, when deletion was associated with informal styles.
Nowadays,ne is used only rarely in conversational contexts, but is favoured in certain formal (particularly written) styles.
Both of these studies show that variation does not lead inevitably to change.
Stable variation can be maintained by speakers over many centuries as a stylistic and general sociolinguistic resource.
Kroch and Small (1978) extend the application of quantitative methods in quite a different way, taking as their data base several hours of talk-show (phone-in) conversation from a Philadelphia radio station.
Two variables are investigated: presence versus absence of the complementizer that , and particle movement as exemplified in sentences of the following types:
33
John pointed out the mistake
34
John pointed the mistake out
Their main objective is to study the effect of prescriptive ideologies on listeners' attitudes to the alternating variants.
Also basing his work on media language, written as well as spoken, Bell (1985) studies in real time the spread of a process of determiner deletion in noun phrases which has become common in news reports, as demonstrated in 35 as opposed to 36:
35
fugitive financier Mr Robert Vesco
36
the fugitive financier Mr Robert Vesco
The pattern exemplified in 35 seems to have originated in the United States, with the high-prestige British media tending to favour the pattern typified by 36.
Bell shows, however, that both the British media and the New Zealand media (which at one time followed the British norm) are gradually adopting the American norm.
However, the change is taking  place at a differential rate which seems to be related to the relative prestige of the various media.
Bell's application of the methodology of sociolinguistics in real time to an extensive body of written and broadcast data suggests an interesting and practicable way of studying the gradual diffusion of a linguistic change from an identifiable point of influence.
It is clear that quantitative methodology can be applied, with interesting results, to data bases other than the bodies of naturally occurring spontaneous speech for which it was originally designed.
7.4.3 The role of the computer in syntactic analysis
The capacity of computers to handle text in various ways is particularly relevant to quantitative syntactic work; this is a function additional to their sorting and counting (‘number-crunching’) capacities which are useful in statistical analysis (cf. 6.8.4).
One text-processing function is parsing (producing a syntactic analysis of stored data) using programs such as EYEBALL or, more recently, OXEYE (Butler 1985a).
Another important aid to analysing syntactic variation is the production of a concordance ; in addition to a reference location to word forms in a text which have been previously input, a concordance gives a certain amount of surrounding context.
A very comprehensive and flexible concordance program widely used in Britain is The Oxford Concordance Program (see Butler 1985a for a description).
Analyses such as the Montreal que study which concentrates on specifying syntactic constraints on variation (cf. 7.4.2) will benefit greatly both from a parser and a concordance program — and in fact such a program was used to analyse the Montreal corpus.
It is hard to see how some of this work could practicably have been carried out without computer aid; for example, the input to the analysis of on versus tu/vous realizations of the indefinite personal pronoun was ‘4,300 tokens, each one of which has been carefully studied as to its syntactic and discursive role…’
(Laberge and Sankoff 1980: 287; see further 7.7).
For such a massive study to be feasible, a concordance program which picks out tokens of the pronouns along with their surrounding context is probably a necessity.
Once the text has been accurately input to the computer, there are no particular practical problems associated with running a concordance program to study a wide range of syntactic variables; the major advantage of computer techniques is the ease with which repetitive processes can be carried out and large amounts of data stored which can later be added to.
But the major obstacle to wider use of computers for textual processing is the time taken to input data.
This is partly because of the size of the corpuses needed for syntactic analysis and partly because of the accuracy  required in the transcript, which has to be input in computer-readable form.
Since considerable resources of time are needed to input a large corpus successfully, textual processing by computer is impracticable for many researchers working on tight budgets.
It might be added that when text is input for phonological analysis these problems are if anything magnified, and for these purely practical reasons it was possible in, for example, the Belfast project, to use computers only in a very limited way for text processing (as opposed to computation, where various statistical packages were extensively used).
There are several useful accounts of computer applications available.
Butler (1985a) explains in detail their use in linguistic research generally, with a particular emphasis on textual processing.
Leech and Beale (1984) provide an overview of their applications in English language research and of the computerized corpuses which are available.
Johnson (1986) discusses the practicalities of using the textual processing capacities of computers for a specific research purpose, and Wells (1985) gives a useful (and rather sobering) account of the problems encountered by the Bristol Child Language Project in computer-processing a very large amount of socially and developmentally variable material.
In general it is important for researchers who are seeking a model for their own projects to be aware of the extent to which much innovatory work in the analysis of variable syntax (such as Sankoff's) is computer-aided.
Equally, one needs to be clear on the nature of the practical difficulties associated with computer-aided text-processing.
It is of course perfectly possible in principle to carry out syntactic analysis of large corpuses manually; but the work of extracting tokens and identifying the surrounding environment is then very much more time-consuming.
Some kinds of syntactic analysis require corpuses of data that in practice are probably too large to analyse by hand.
7.5 The Problem of Semantic Equivalence
There is one particular difficulty in extending the notion of the linguistic variable to the analysis of syntactic variation which has received extensive discussion in recent years (see for example Lavandera (1978b), Romaine (1984b) and Coveney (1986)).
It was Lavandera who suggested that the concept of the linguistic variable could not usefully be applied to the analysis of syntactic variation because variants of so-called ‘syntactic variables’ were not semantically equivalent in the same way as phonological variables.
Certainly it is clear that while phonological elements such as(t) or (a) are not in themselves bearers of meaning, syntactic or morphological elements often are.
There is no real difficulty in accepting the functional equivalence of variants such as lt]and [?]if they can occupy the same position in a set of words (such as the syllable final position in bat ,pit ,hot ) without replacement of one by the other altering the semantic form of any item.
But extending the notion of the variable to syntax suggests that we can show that syntactic variants are semantically equivalent in much the same way.
As Lavandera remarks:
Laughing and laughin' or [ga:d]and [go:d]can more convincingly be shown to be used to say referentially the same thing than any pair of postulated synonymous syntactic constructions such as the liquor store was broken into versus they broke into the liquor store .
Such a syntactic difference, as we can see in Labov and Weiner's study of this as a variable, requires quite an ingenious dismissal of possible differences in referential meaning.
(Lavandera 1978b: 175).
Even in the revised version of their paper, which takes account of Lavandera's comments, Weiner and Labov are obliged to argue tortuously and not always convincingly that their alternants are semantically equivalent.
They conclude: ‘We therefore approach the passive with an eye to a bold simplification of the problems of meaning.
We will treat active and passive as truth-conditionally equivalent and used on the whole to refer to the same state of affairs’(Weiner and Labov 1983: 32).
The rather cautious tone of this statement of intent is not sufficient to resolve the conceptual difficulties presented by the notion of a syntactic (as opposed to phonological) variable.
As Romaine (1984b) points out, the notion of semantic equivalence is difficult to work with in practice, even if we attempt, following Weiner and Labov, to limit it to truth-conditional equivalence.
There are many reasons for this, which Romaine discusses at some length.
Particularly, the notion of ‘equivalent ways of doing or saying the same thing’ to which Weiner and Labov obliquely refer (see above) is much less straightforward than it seems.
Because syntax is embedded in discourse, entirely different forms might have similar functions (i.e. be used as equivalent ways of doing or saying the same thing); for this reason it is sometimes difficult to specify a principled way of knowing where to stop counting particular forms as variants of a variable.
This problem may be seen as the converse of the one discussed at the beginning of this section — defining a complete set of alternants for a variable — and is best demonstrated by example.
It is well known that speakers of French have open to them a number of different ways of forming interrogatives; for example, Coveney (1986) has distinguished five different variants of the wh interrogative, two of which are [SVQ]and [QSV].
These may be exemplified as follows:
37
Mais vous êtes en France pour combien de temps?
3
8 Mais quelle heure est-il?
Coveney argues that evidence for viewing such examples as alternants might be adduced from the linguistic behaviour of speakers, citing as an example the following incident where he heard a Frenchwoman asking a younger man the following question, using an [SVQ]variant: ‘Tu es d'où?’
(Where are you from ?).
The addressee, however, failed to respond, even after repetition of the question (possibly, as Coveney suggests, being distracted by an alternative interpretation suggested by homophony with tu es doux (‘you are sweet/gentle’).
Finally, the problem was resolved by the speaker rephrasing the question as ‘D'où tu es?’
[QSV].
This may be said to constitute evidence that the speaker views [SVQ]and [QSV]as ‘equivalent ways of doing or saying the same thing’.
Although it is certainly tempting to use reformulations of this kind as evidence that [VSQ]and [QSV]are variants of an underlying variable, used by speakers in spoken discourse much like successive realizations of pit as [p?]and [p? t]when the first realization is not heard clearly, such evidence cannot consistently be relied upon without further qualification to define a set of syntactic variants.
This is because analysis of speaker meaning (intention) and of linguistic meaning (the patterning of elements in the system) are different enterprises which need to be kept conceptually apart (see Hurford and Heasley 1983 for an elementary exposition of the issues).
When speakers are looking for different ways of accomplishing the same goal (in Coveney's example, successfully requesting information) they are not limited to the various possibilities in the linguistic system for constructing formal interrogatives.
Thus, as Romaine points out, the following utterances might be thought of as functionally equivalent, in that they have the same communicative purpose, even though the surface syntactic forms are not necessarily related:
It's cold in here
I'm cold
Are you cold?
Would you close the window?
Close the window
Certainly, speakers are free to select from a wide range of surface forms in order to achieve a particular communicative purpose, and it is quite likely that they will do so to attain appropriate levels of politeness, solidarity or social distance.
Nor can we easily resolve this methodological problem by appealing to any clear theoretical definition of semantic equivalence based on formal syntactic relations between sentences, since even within generative syntax this is a highly unstable and controversial area of linguistic theory.
Consider, for example, the criticisms of transformations by Bresnan (1982) as a means of handling the active/passive relationship and her  alternative proposals; on the other hand, Gazdar and his colleagues (1985) have proposed a completely different framework for handling these relationships.
This lack of consensus on the way semantically and grammatically related sentences should be characterized is itself troublesome enough to a sociolinguist seeking guidance from syntactic theory; but to make things even more difficult, the very notion of semantic equivalence is a disputed one.
Some linguists argue that such equivalence does not exist (Bolinger 1977) while others like Coveney argue that a weaker kind of equivalence (of a kind which cannot however easily be specified) is sufficient for identifying structures as variants of an underlying variable.
To a number of theoretical linguists who have argued against a separation of syntax and discourse, the issue is irrelevant (Givón 1979a).
Following their general line of reasoning sociolinguists like Dines (1980) have suggested that the notion of the variable should be extended into the domain of pragmatics (see further 7.7).
Despite the cluster of problems which emerges when the notion of the syntactic variable is extended beyond phonology, many investigators feel intuitively that some candidate ‘syntactic variables’ behave in a way more similar to phonological variables than others.
Attempts have been made, presumably on the basis of this intuition, to formulate a taxonomy and a set of criteria for identifying ‘genuine’ variables (see Coveney 1986; Romaine 1984b).
Romaine has concluded that the concept of the variable cannot usefully be applied to any but low-level morphological variation.
Some of the work reviewed in 7.4.2 seems to fall into this category, such as the morpho-syntactic variation examined by Cheshire (1982a), or variation in Montreal French in the use of the negative particle ne (Sankoff and Vincent 1980).
At the other end of the scale, alternations between the active and the agentless passive studied by Weiner and Labov do not seem to be candidate variables in any sense parallel to the concept of the phonological variable.
Far from meeting the equivalence criterion, these alternations express differences in focus which can be explicated only with reference to the discourse matrix in which they are embedded; furthermore, they do not have a systematic social distribution in the speech community.
As Lavandera (1978b) has remarked, one paradoxical consequence of the ‘sea-change’ in the concept of the sociolinguistic variable evident in the Weiner and Labov paper is that the authors seem to be attempting to argue for a function of variation almost converse to that which emerged from Labov's earlier work.
While a major contribution of this work was to show that apparently meaningless differences in form were in fact carriers of social and stylistic meaning, the 1983 paper attempts on the other hand to demonstrate that forms which are referentially equivalent carry neither social nor stylistic meaning, but are constrained almost entirely by their syntactic environment.
7.6 Semantic Equivalence between Standard and Non-standard Forms
The general issue of semantic equivalence is a complicated one which has been much discussed in the literature.
But a different and less well-known set of problems emerges when attempts are made to examine alternation  between standard and non-standard forms.
In fact, a surprisingly small number of studies examine this dimension of syntactic variation; for example, many of the papers in Sankoff's 1980 collection concentrate on grammatical constraints, and the focus of Weiner and Labov (1983) is similar.
J. Harris (1984) points out that an assumption of direct semantic equivalence between standard and non-standard variants involves a further assumption that the variants are embedded in identical grammars and are simply different surface realizations of the same underlying syntactic (and ultimately semantic) structure.
Cheshire's work shows that this assumption is too simple since, for example, main verb DO and auxiliary do behave quite differently in Reading vernacular and in standard English, the patterns of variation in Reading vernacular being quite different for each of the verb-form's two grammatical functions.
A similar difference in underlying grammars is demonstrated by the non-standard concord rule in Belfast, which operates in accordance with certain constraints associated with the structure of the subject of the sentence (see 7.2).
Since these particular constraints do not apparently operate upon variation in subject-verb agreement in standard English, which in turn is affected by a different set of constraints (see Huddleston 1984: 241), we must assume that the surface variants of the verb which occur in the two dialects are embedded in structurally different grammars.
So far, the problem as stated is parallel to the one encountered in Glasgow by Macaulay at the phonological level ( see 6.3.1).
The difficulty here in handling the (a) variable following Labov's model (which assumes an underlying structural identity) is that the (a) systems in RP and in Scottish English are embedded in structurally different phonologies; as a consequence the range of realizations in Glasgow does not correspond in any simple way to the range in RP, where there is a distinction at the phonemic level between front and back /a /rather than at the  subphonemic level as in Glasgow.
But analysing syntactic variation in a situation of similar structural mismatch is even more difficult, largely as a natural consequence of the direct relationship between syntax and semantics.
Taking as our example the range of Irish English perfect constructions, we find an absence of semantic isomorphism between any set of Irish English sentences and any semantically related set of standard English sentences which exemplify the range of perfect constructions.
For example, 39 to 44 below all have a present-tense marked form of have and are quite unremarkable examples of standard English present-perfect  sentence types.
However, all are quite anomalous even in educated varieties of Irish English, and would be ‘translated’ as shown below:
39
I've just seen my father = I'm after seeing my father
40
He has finished his course = He has his course finished
41
I've known him since he was a small boy = I know him from he was a wee fella
42
Have you ever been to Bellaghy? = Were you ever in Bellaghy?
43
I've been waiting here for ten minutes = I'm waiting here ten minutes
44
Have you sold your car? = Did you sell your car?
The striking lack of correspondence between the two sets of equivalents is, however, more than a simple difference in surface realization; the non-isomorphism is semantic as well as formal.
We find, for example, that Irish English example 44 is not only equivalent to standard English example 44 but is also equivalent to the same standard English surface string.
Thus, Irish English does not mark syntactically the semantic distinction expressed by the verb form in standard English between ‘Have you sold your car?’ and ‘Did you sell your car?’
However, an action completed in the recent past is expressed in Irish English by a construction of the type exemplified by 39, while standard English does not mark that semantic category (the hot news perfect) in the verb form at all(see Huddleston 1984: 143 for a summary of recent work on the semantics of tense and aspect in standard English).
Harris points out that the scope of temporal reference covered by the standard English present-perfect is covered in Irish English by no fewer than five forms, as exemplified above.
To make matters worse, two of them, the present and preterite, overlap into other areas of temporal reference which are covered by identical forms in standard English (J. Harris 1984: 313, and cf. 43 and 44 above).
Despite these methodological difficulties, Harris was to a limited extent able to analyse this variation quantitatively, collecting tokens from 15 hours of speech by 24 speakers.
But his procedure was different in an important way from any we have examined so far; rather than counting the variants of a postulated underlying syntactic variable, he examined variation in the surface exponence of four semantic categories:hot news ,resultative ,extended now and indefinite anterior , exemplified by 39, 40, 43 and 44.
These four distinctions are expressed by six different forms in Hiberno-English (see further J. Harris 1984), while standard English uses perfect forms in all cases.
Plainly, the additional methodological problems introduced by Harris's procedure are considerable.
He comments:
In the initial stages of analysis the researcher is faced with the task of  assigning the appropriate semantic category to each token.
The onus on his/her ingenuity is reflected in the wide range of decisions that have to be made about the context in which tokens occur.
For the purposes of quantifying phonological variation it is usually sufficient to take note of the immediate segmental or morphological context.
However, when it comes to analysing higher-level syntactic variation, the scope of conditioning factors is greatly increased.
Account may have to be taken not only of possible syntactic constraints at the level of clause structure, but also of much wider semantic, discourse and ultimately pragmatic considerations.
(J. Harris 1984: 316) The general conclusion is that problems associated with the semantic equivalence issue are compounded in an analysis of variation between standard and non-standard forms.
Since standard English and Irish English syntactic forms do not mark the same temporal and aspectual distinctions, we cannot assume that they are embedded in the same underlying grammar.
Some of the tense/aspect distinctions of American Black English which have attracted the attention of sociolinguists seem to introduce the same problems of underlying structural non-identity as the Irish English perfect — an example is perfective done , illustrated by 19–21.
However, differences between American Black English and standard American English, though acknowledged to be considerable, are usually discussed in syntactic terms rather in terms of an underlying semantic non-equivalence (see for example Labov 1973: 62).
This preference is probably a consequence of the general orientation of American sociolinguistics to the theoretical assumptions of transformational-generative grammar (as implicit, for example, in Sankoff 1980b).
But differences between dialects in underlying semantic structure are real enough, in the sense that they are sometimes reflected in speaker behaviour by cross-dialectal miscommunications and communicative breakdowns (Labov 1972d: 63; L. Milroy 1984).
7.7 Syntactic Variation: The Semantic and Discourse Contexts
Two different strategies seem to have been adopted by researchers in tackling the problems outlined in 7.5 and 7.6, which are associated with the relationship between syntax and various types of meaning.
One is to minimize the significance of possible semantic differences between variants, and the other is to acknowledge and use as a foundation for the analysis the interrelationships  between syntax, semantics and discourse.
Investigators who opt for the first solution may seek out variable syntactic elements where meaning variation does not constitute a serious problem; this is the general approach taken by Cheshire.
Weiner and Labov (1983) on the other hand attempt in a complicated chain of reasoning to argue that although there are indeed different stylistic and discourse meanings associated with the agentless passive and active alternants, and in some contexts different truth-conditional meanings, these differences might reasonably be disregarded.
The second type of solution, which acknowledges the association  between syntax, pragmatics and discourse, is exemplified in John Harris's study of the Irish English tense/aspect system.
But Beatriz Lavandera has adopted this approach to syntactic variation in a much more radical form, and argued for it in some detail.
Her general approach is exemplified in this section with reference to two papers (Lavandera 1978a; 1982; see also Lavandera 1984).
The first is a study of variation in cocoliche , the reduced form of Spanish spoken by Italian immigrants to Argentina; the second is a more general discussion of the appropriate way to study syntactic variation, which includes a re-analysis of the alternation between tenses of the subjunctive, the conditional and the indicative.
These alternants, which are exemplified by 45 to 48 below, had originally been studied in Buenos Aires Spanish as semantically equivalent syntactic variants in si clauses, one of their possible environments (Lavandera 1975).
All of them might be roughly translated as ‘If I have time, I'll go.’
45
Si tuviera tiempo, iria (imperfect subjunctive)
46
Si tendria tiempo, iria (conditional)
47
Si tengo tempo, iria (present indicative)
48
Si tenia tempo, iria (imperfect indicative)
A quantitative analysis of these alternants, taken from 30 one-hour interviews of 15 men and 15 women, had revealed a preference for the indicative and conditional forms in lower-status groups and by all speakers in less careful styles.
As a consequence, the overall frequency of subjunctive forms was relatively low.
However, when she examined her cocoliche corpus (50 hours recorded from 50 speakers), Lavandera noted that the frequency of subjunctive forms in all environments was even lower than that observed in the Buenos Aires Spanish corpus; moreover there was independent evidence that this low frequency did not simply reflect a poor command of Spanish by the immigrants.
A careful examination of the cocoliche corpus revealed not, as one might expect, a higher overall frequency of the non-subjunctive alternants, but rather at the discourse level an absence of appropriate contexts for the subjunctive.
Lavandera illustrates this point, using as an example the tendency for cocoliche speakers to avoid indirect speech , which in certain types of Spanish clause is an obligatory environment for the subjunctive.
Spanish speakers alternate between present and imperfect subjunctive in sentences of the following type:
49
Nos dijo que nos quedemos/quedáramos quietos hasta que el vuelva/volviera —‘He told us to stay quiet until he came back’
Cocoliche speakers, however, despite showing an independently established ability to handle the subjunctive ‘simply refrain from using indirect discourse, and use direct discourse instead, i.e. quotations preceded by a form of the performative ‘to say’(digo ,dice )’(Lavandera 1978a: 399).
This is interpreted as a group specific discourse and stylistic preference, of the kind discussed by Gumperz (1982; see also 8.4.1).
Lavandera makes the point that the standard procedure in quantitative sociolinguistics would have been to start the analysis from the forms themselves rather than to examine initially the discourse contexts in which they were used.
The procedure then would have been to express the frequency of the imperfect subjunctive in relation to all the contexts where its occurrence was possible.
But such a procedure would simply have led to the conclusion that the investigator had failed to elicit environments where the variable could be studied, and would miss the point that speakers were in fact making use of an entirely different range of choices to express stylistic differences.
The standard solution to this ‘data-collecting problem’ would be the one adopted by Lavandera herself in her 1975 study, of structuring interview questions so as to encourage the appearance of linguistic contexts which required the subjunctive (cf. 7.2).
But this strategy, however successful, would not reveal the ability of cocoliche speakers to converse fluently and spontaneously without recourse to those contexts.
Lavandera's response to these difficulties is to propose an initial examination by the analyst of discourse function rather than of surface grammatical form, followed by consideration of the functions which are served by the form — the subjunctive in this case.
Such an approach, as is demonstrated by the example of cocoliche speakers' avoidance of indirect speech, permits the important insight that the function fulfilled by the subjunctive in Spanish is fulfilled in cocoliche by quite other means.
The enterprise of attempting to specify exhaustively the range of possible surface variants of a variable is thus argued to be irrelevant to a satisfying and explanatory account of syntactic variation.
In a more explicitly theoretical paper, Lavandera (1982) presents the general argument that syntactic variation can be studied only at a superficial level if the analytic method does not take account of the use which speakers make of variation for stylistic and discourse purposes; frequently they exploit subtle differences in meaning of the kind which (for example) Weiner and Labov deliberately simplify.
This point is exemplified with reference to tense and mood variation in Spanish si clauses (see 50–52 above); Lavandera points out that although the alternants may be defined as variants of an underlying variable in the sense  that they are truth-conditional semantic equivalents, and pattern according to external social factors, they differ in modal meaning (see Huddleston 1984: 165 for a discussion of these semantic issues).
But in her earlier study where she had viewed the alternants as being ‘equivalent ways of saying the same thing’ she did not attempt to ‘account for the interplay between the differences in modal meaning and the social conditioning in the use of these forms’(Lavandera 1982: 90 — her translation).
In fact, although frequency of the forms correlated with age, sex and educational differences between speakers, different modal meanings appeared also to be associated with the verb forms  as follows: imperfect subjunctive/ [UNREAL]; conditional/ [POSSIBLE]; present/indicative/ [FACTUAL].
This correlation can be demonstrated by the following examples:
50
Si pudiera volver el tiempo atrás, me preocuparia mas en eso [UNREAL]—‘If I could turn time back I'd worry more about that’
51
Si tendria que hacer una cosa como ésa, me gustaria [POSSIBLE]—‘If I had to do something like that, I'd like it’
52
Si el tiene un disgusto, no viene y me dice, mirá, me pasó esto y esto, nada, se lo calla [FACTUAL]—‘If he has a problem, he doesn't come and tell me, look here, such and such happened to me, nothing, he doesn't say anything, he keeps it to himself’
An examination of the Buenos Aires data reveals interesting interplays between variation of this kind in modal meaning and variation (associated with various extra-linguistic variables) in overall frequency of particular forms.
The variables of age, sex and educational level interact in their influence on speaker choice of variant; for example sex of speaker emerges as influencing choice of variant in the less educated groups, but this difference  disappears in the highly educated groups.
The patterns could be interpreted in different ways; one possibility is to argue that the correlation with extra-linguistic variables constitutes evidence that the forms are simply different ways of saying the same thing, that differences in modal meaning which do not affect truth-conditions are merely stylistic and so may be ignored.
This is the type of argument proposed by Weiner and Labov (1983).
A second possibility, which Lavandera proposes, is that the analyst should account for, rather than ignore, the interplay between meaning differences and social distribution of variants.
Such a position, however, involves accepting that the appropriate units of analysis are not surface forms, but higher-level semantic and discourse elements.
The interplay between semantic and social conditioning factors may then be interpreted as reflecting differential preferences by social groups for certain communicative styles which involve different degrees of assertiveness .
These differences in assertiveness (which, for example, contrast a speaker's stated  commitment to the truth of a proposition with a tentative expression of opinion) are reflected in differences in modal meaning.
It is evident that Lavandera's arguments entail a very different conception from Labov's of the theoretical assumptions underlying the study of variation.
Like Gumperz, she examines initially the use made by speakers of linguistic variation, rather than following Labov in examining, in terms of speaker characteristics, the patterning of variable elements in the system (cf. 1.2; 8.4.1).
Furthermore, an analysis which attempts to account for the interrelationships between syntax, semantics and discourse involves quite a different relationship between sociolinguistic and syntactic theory than is implied by one which attempts to demonstrate that alternation takes place between semantically equivalent surface forms.
Although many of the studies collected in G. Sankoff (1980a) fall within Labov's standard quantitative paradigm (see 7.4.2), others resemble Lavandera's approach in focusing on the stylistic and discourse preferences of the speaker.
Laberge and Sankoff's study of the indefinite pronoun in Montreal French (1980) and G. Sankoff and Brown's study of Tok Pisin (1980) examine the data from both perspectives.
Sankoff and Laberge are interested principally in the alternation between on on the one hand, and tu/vous on the other in their function as indefinite personal pronouns (cf. 7.4.3).
However, since on can alternate also with first and third person pronouns, which like their second person counterparts can also have definite reference, it is not particularly easy to specify tokens of the alternative class (see Laberge and Sankoff 1980: 272ff for a large number of examples).
An extended analysis of the functions of on with respect to all these alternating categories is an essential preliminary to the main (quantitative) analysis of syntactic variation.
The discourse constraints which favour indefinite reference are complex; the formulation of morals and truisms is one example discussed by the authors (cf. 53), and in this discourse function on is overwhelmingly preferred.
Also considered are purely surface syntactic constraints, as in 54; it is noted that ‘indefinite tu or vous cannot be used in contexts where there is a definite ‘you’ immediately to the left, for fear of confusion with the latter’(p. 289):
53
Mais je me dis, des enfants c'est des enfants,on peut pas les faire penser comme des adultes,on peut pas —‘I tell myself, children are children; one can't make them think like adults — one just can't’
54
Vous [+def.]me demandez de vous raconter une partie de ma vie là, mais il y a des choses qu' on [-def.]peut pas expliquer pourtant —‘You (the interviewer) ask me to tell you part of my life, but there are things that one just can't explain’
The study takes into account constraints of the types exemplified in 53 and  54, assigning probabilistic weightings to characterize differences in their social distribution.
The authors observe that analysis of this variable leads to a very broad consideration of the place of the constructions in discourse, of a large number of other constructions serving similar discourse functions and of speaker strategies similar to those considered by Lavandera.
The study as a whole is an impressive combination of quantitative and non-quantitative types of reasoning.
Sankoff and Brown's study of relative clauses in Tok Pisin concentrates overwhelmingly on discourse function, syntactic structure being viewed as a ‘component of, and derivative from, discourse structure’(Sankoff and Brown 1980: 211).
One important issue illuminated by the analysis is the manner in which ‘syntactic complexity’ in a creole language develops in relation to the expanding discourse needs of its users.
Like Lavandera's work, this long and complex paper demonstrates that an analysis sensitive to discourse and meaning illuminates patterns of variation which an analysis of surface syntactic variants cannot reveal.
The particle ia , which functions as a relativizer, bracketing off relative from main clause, as in 55, is shown to have developed from an earlier deictic function, as in 56:
55
E, yupela lukim meri ia bipo em istap ia?—‘Hey, did you see the woman who used to live there?’
56
E! man ia toktok wantaim husat?—‘Hey!
Who's this guy talking to?’
Conclusion
The work reviewed in 7.6 and 7.7 reveals a tendency to define the goals and methods of studying syntactic variation rather differently from those defined for the study of phonological variation.
The relevance of the Principle of Accountability, the cornerstone of Labov's original quantitative method, is far from clear, and there is radical disagreement amongst investigators on even quite fundamental issues.
The entire field of syntactic analysis in sociolinguistics is characterized by diversity, and there are many important areas where agreement has not yet been reached on appropriate goals and methods.
While we find as a consequence a range of possible approaches, there are also a number of theoretical and practical difficulties additional to those encountered in analysing phonological variation (cf. chapter 6).
Many of these difficulties are related to the natural characteristics of syntactic systems — for example, their openness relative to phonological systems, and their interrelationships with semantic and discourse patterns.
Yet others are associated with the difficulties of accessing informants' intuitions; this particular difficulty of course surfaces in phonological work in a somewhat different form (see further 8.2.1).
In phonological work, however, it is usually  possible to obtain the material needed for a substantial and illuminating analysis of variation without being obliged to resort to direct elicitation.
But in syntactic work it frequently is not.