

1924–8
1924
Wendell Harvey regarded his daughter thoughtfully as she rearranged the big vase of flowers one of the servants had just carried into the room.
She was still wearing her riding-clothes and the bright-pink polo-necked jersey matched the colour in her cheeks.
‘Harry not back yet?’ he asked, as he seated himself by the open fireplace.
Cora-Beth turned and came across the room to plant an affectionate kiss on her father's head.
‘He's worried about Gairloch so he's waiting for the vet.’
Wendell nodded.
‘Sometimes I think that boy's too conscientious,’ he said.
‘Dillon doesn't need supervising.
After all, I don't pay my head stallion man the kinda wage he gets for being incompetent.’
Cora-Beth sat down in the chair opposite her father and stretched out her long legs to the welcome blaze.
On this cold January afternoon, it was already dark outside, and a bitter wind was blowing from the north.
‘You know Harry?
I think he loves the horses more than anything in the world.
Sometimes I wish…’
‘That he didn't spend quite so much time with them?’ her father finished quietly.
‘I guess so.’
Cora-Beth gave a rueful smile.
‘Now tell me I'm jealous, Poppa.’
Wendell's voice was quiet and matter-of-fact as he said, ‘I guessed some time ago that you'd fallen for Harry.’
Cora-Beth's head shot up and her expression was full of anxiety.
‘Oh, Poppa, does it show?
I thought I was managing to hide it.’
‘I don't think Harry's aware of it, if that's what's worrying you,’ her father said.
‘It's only because I know you so well, Peachcake.
Used to be a time when Mammy had a job to get you into one of those pretty dresses of yours, remember?
All you wanted was to look like your brother.’
‘I don't think Harry notices what I look like,’ Cora-Beth said with a catch in her voice.
‘He treats me like a kid sister.
Darn it all, Poppa, I'm only six months younger than he is.’
‘I think it's just in Harry's nature to be chivalrous and friendly,’ Wendell said.
‘You were the one who set the pattern when he first came to live with us, remember?
You made him a replacement for Judd.’
‘That's just what he was, at first,’ Cora-Beth admitted.
‘Then…then it happened.
We'd been to a party with Nancy and Frank.
On the way home, Frank was driving and Harry and I were in the back seat, and Harry put his arm round me.
I was half asleep against his shoulder and then…suddenly I realized that I wanted him to kiss me.
He didn't, of course— at least , only on the cheek, the way he does every night.
Poppa, if…if he did come to feel the same way about me, would you mind?
I mean, you wouldn't disapprove, would you?’
Wendell Harvey drew a deep breath.
‘All I want is for you to be happy, Peachcake.
Whether or not Harry is the right man for you, it's not for me to say.
I like the boy…very much indeed.
As you know, I don't hold it against him that his father wasn't married to his mother.
I explained all that to you and Judd when his guardian wrote and asked me if I'd have him here.
We know who his father was, my second cousin, Gervaise Harvey, but no one has ever revealed the name of Harry's mother.
She could have been a kitchen maid for all we know and your children…
Well, they could be throwbacks to either parent.’
He looked enquiringly at his daughter's thoughtful face.
‘You understand what I'm saying, don't you, honey?
Growing up as you have on a stud farm, you know how important breeding is.
Mind you, there's a danger in too much interbreeding and it's no different with human beings.
The aristocracy have found that out to their cost and that's why they're often willing to turn a blind eye to the occasional by-blow, provided it's handled discreetly.
Nevertheless, Peachcake, if you marry this young man, you're bound to come up against prejudice from time to time.
There'll be sections of society who won't accept you, no matter how charming or rich you are.
Not that Harry has a penny to his name, but thankfully one thing we're not short of in this family is money, and if that's what is keeping Harry from showing his hand, then you've no worries on that score.
What does concern me is that you're both very young.
I know Harry is coming of age tomorrow, but you've never had any experience of being in love with anyone else, so one has to ask oneself, how can you be sure this is the real thing?’
‘Poppa, I just know it,’ Cora-Beth said quietly.
‘As for Harry — he has been in love before.
To be honest, I'm not sure if ‘before’ is the right word.
I think he may still be in love with this English girl, Madeleine.’
‘You sure about that, honey?’
Cora-Beth shook her head.
‘I'm not sure about anything, Poppa.
It's just that whenever he gets a letter from her, he won't open it.
He takes it away to read in private.
If it's from Aubrey Debrace, or that other girl, Alice, he opens it straight away and reads out bits of news to me.
He talks quite a lot about the family he grew up with and he's always buying postcards to send them.
He tells me endless stories about Alice, and talks about his school quite a bit too.
But when he's describing his life at the Debraces’, he hardly mentions Madeleine at all.
There was just one time when he did.
He said that when he was very young, he'd made up his mind to marry her, but that it was a crazy idea and he'd been stupid ever to think of it and Alice had been quite right when she told him so.’
‘Sounds like a young boy's adolescent dream to me,’ Wendell said as his daughter fell silent.
‘At least you have the advantage of being here on the spot to sweet-talk him.
Perhaps you should open your heart a little to him, honey, make him aware you've grown into a very pretty young lady.’
Cora-Beth jumped up from her chair and flung herself into her father's arms.
‘Have I, Poppa?
Really?
I know I'm not a wallflower — other boys keep asking me for a date — but Harry just doesn't seem to notice me.
When I went to that rodeo with Jerry and I wasn't home until after midnight, Harry didn't even ask me why I was so late — and he knew the time because he'd been down to see if Islay's foal was better.
And I only went out with Jerry to make him jealous.’
Wendell put his arm round his daughter and hugged her.
‘You go buy yourself a really pretty dress to wear for Harry's coming-of-age party, Peachcake.
Cheer yourself up.
‘Poppa, you know I chose something really special the day after we decided on the party,’ she reminded him with a smile.
‘Then go buy yourself a necklace or something to wear with it,’ Wendell replied with his customary generosity.
‘Meanwhile, I'll have a word with Harry, let him know I've planned to give him a really dandy pay rise.
I'll say this much, the boy's earned it.
He's as knowledgeable as any man I've got working for me, and Dillon was saying so only last week.
He's a natural, and he studies hard.’
Cora-Beth was smiling now.
‘You really like Harry, don't you, Poppa?’ she said.
‘Sure do.
Reckon you two would make a good team — both of you mad about horses!
You know, Cora-Beth, with Judd so crazy about aeroplanes and flying, he's never going to want to settle down and run Blue Ash Farm the way I'd hoped.
It wouldn't bother your brother one jot if I handed the place over to Harry when I got too old to  manage it.
The pair of you could live here and look after me in my dotage.’
‘Poppa, you're not even within trotting distance of your dotage.
Even so, it's a swell idea and I know Harry's crazy about the farm.
He's always talking about finding a way to get rich so he can start up a place of his own one day in England.’
‘I'll have a word with Judd when he's next on furlough.
If he's in favour of the idea, I'll let Harry know what's in my mind.
At the same time, Peachcake, if worries about the future are what's been keeping him from showing his feelings for you and he's as much in love with you as you appear to be with him, there's to be no hasty wedding.
I'll settle for a good long engagement — to give you both time to be sure.’
‘Sure of what?’
Harry asked as he came unexpectedly into the room.
‘More secrets about my party, Cora-Beth?’
He smiled at Wendell.
‘I hardly dare go into a room without permission, let alone open a drawer without your daughter throwing a fit and shouting at me, ‘Don't look — it's a surprise!’’
He ruffled Cora-Beth's hair in an intimate but casual fashion.
‘Just wait until you're twenty-one in the summer,’ he teased her, before turning back to speak to Wendell.
‘The colt's doing fine, sir,’ he reported.
‘Jefferson reckons it was just a touch of colic.
I must say there was a moment yesterday when I though we were going to lose him.’
‘Never a dull moment, eh?’
Wendell commented.
He rose to his feet and put an arm affectionately round Harry's shoulders.
There was no doubting that this young relative of his made a fine figure of a man, he thought, as he announced that he was going upstairs to change for dinner.
He could well understand why his daughter was so smitten with the boy.
With his broad shoulders, bright cheerful countenance and easy manner, Harry made an excellent companion and was popular with everyone.
The somewhat shy, reserved young man who had arrived from England two years ago had long since disappeared  although he had not lost his English accent.
He'd gained a great deal of self-confidence.
In some ways, Wendell decided as he went upstairs, he had more in common with Harry than with his own son, Judd.
Much as he loved Judd, he was unable to understand the boy's passion for mechanical objects like aeroplanes in preference to living creatures like horses; nor see how Judd could possibly justify equating the two as he did.
Not that it would stop him buying his son a small biplane, a Gypsy Moth, for his twenty-first.
Judd was doing exceedingly well as an air cadet and he, Wendell, had good cause to be proud of him, but he could see that they were growing apart.
It was very different with Cora-Beth.
Since she had grown up, they had become the best of buddies.
Although he was worried for her, it made him happy to think that she could confide in him her feeling for Harry.
Since money had long since ceased to be a matter of concern to Wendell Harvey, he never stinted on spending it.
Generous to a fault, he had booked the ballroom suite at the best hotel in Lexington and a popular jazz band to entertain the several hundred guests whom Cora-Beth had invited for Harry's party.
Caterers from Lexington were providing a banquet, and the local bakery had designed a huge oval birthday cake.
In the centre in chocolate icing was the shape of a horse about to jump, and twenty-one candles were to form the perimeter fence-posts of the dirt track.
This was but one of Cora-Beth's surprises.
Her present to Harry was to be a pair of racing binoculars in a fine leather case with his initials stamped on it; Wendell's, a handsome cheque, since he was aware that Harry had opened an account at the bank and was trying to build up a reserve of cash.
Ignorant of what lay ahead of him, Harry woke on the morning of his birthday with a feeling of pleasurable excitement.
Cora-Beth had told him the night before that there were letters and cards awaiting him from England, all of which had ‘Not To Be Opened Until 5 Jan.’ on the  envelopes, so she had extracted a promise from him to leave them on his bedside table until this morning.
Now he sat up in bed and looked eagerly at the different handwritings.
Leaving until last the one which he knew was from Madeleine, he opened Aubrey's.
Dear Old Thing,
So you've finally made it to manhood!
You'll see I've used the term ‘old’ advisedly.
Can't say I feel any different this year from last.
I did, however, meet a few rather comely lasses during the Christmas festivities and managed a kiss or two under the mistletoe.
Despite this, I am still fancy-free.
How about you?
I keep expecting to hear you and Cora-Beth are making a go of it?
Perhaps you're just playing your cards close to your chest and the first we'll know about it is your engagement.
Somehow I managed to remember that it will shortly be your birthday, so Many Happies, as we used to say at school.
I've sent you a perfectly useless present — to wit: a fountain pen — as a small token to mark the Big Day.
I dare say you can get far better versions out there!
Life has perked up a bit since The Grange was sold and we moved to Brighton.
Pater's as busy as ever, of course, but the mater has kept on the house in London since Madeleine's season, so I spend quite a lot of time in the Great Big City seeing shows, etc. etc.
There's a really good train service to Brighton so it's easy to nip between the two.
Pickles is as hopeless as ever!
She discards her admirers as often as she discards gloves, and poor Mama spends most of her time comforting the latest reject.
I warn them all not to take her seriously, but they all do, poor chaps!
The latest is an army officer known to us as Pogo.
(Has there been a craze for pogo sticks out there?)
Dunbar's a jolly sort of fellow but he's got a bit of a stutter so I don't suppose he'll last long as Pickles makes fun of him!
Thought I might pop down to Grafton again this spring — see if our Peg is still alive and kicking.
I think she really took a fancy to you — talked about you all the time when I saw her last summer.
I passed on your news.
That's about the limit of my writing endurance time, so you'll have to make do with it!
Have a good birthday!
Yours ever, Aubrey P. Debrace.
Smiling, Harry put the letter back in its envelope.
It might not have been a very long missive, but it brought Aubrey into the room as if they had not been apart for two whole years.
There was a brightly coloured card from Mrs Appleby, and another from Jenny, signed by all the family.
Jenny was helping out in the newsagent-cum-sweet-shop in the village.
She and Jack, the boy she had been walking out with, were saving up so that they could buy the shop from old Mr Peabody, who wanted to retire.
Poor Elsie had died of the whooping cough just after Harry had gone to America, so now there was only Edna at home in the daytime to help her mother.
The boys, of course, were still living at home, Arthur working as a plumber's apprentice and Ted and Sam still at school.
The second letter was from Alice and was, as always, long and full of news.
Having expressed her good wishes for his twenty-first birthday, she turned to an account of her own life.
I shan't be coming to New York this spring as I'd hoped because Monsieur Félix has decided to open a branch of the Maison de Verveine in London instead of New York!
I'm just so excited, because he says I can be in charge of it.
Of course, Madame Duvalle will come over every month to see that I'm doing things the right way and Monsieur Félix intends to spend quite a lot of time in London.
He's going to rent an appartement (I'm going all French and should have  said, a flat!) where I can live and he can stay when he's in England.
We'll be going to London for a few days next month to find suitable premises, so I'll be able to go down and see Mum and Dad and the children.
I'm a bit nervous because I'm not sure I'm really ready yet to take on such a big responsibility.
Monsieur thinks I am but I know Madame Duvalle doesn't agree.
After all, I've only been here five years!
It's a great honour and I only hope and pray I won't let Monsieur down.
He's had a bad time lately as Madame Verveine has had to go into the nursing-home again.
I still do some entertaining for Monsieur Félix when he wants guests at home.
It doesn't bother me the way it did the first time.
That seems such ages ago, I can barely remember it.
Enough about me — I want to know about you.
You said in your last letter that you were just friendly with Cora-Beth but you don't ever write about any other girls, so I do wonder if you aren't more fond of her than you let on.
Please tell me the truth.
Are you still going to try to get back to England this summer?
If you are, and I really do hope so, you must let me know as soon as ever you can so I can get home the same time as you.
It would be so wonderful to see you again.
I keep the snapshot you sent me by my bed, but although I can see it is you, you look different — so much older.
I keep having to tell myself you are grown up now.
I really wish I could see you.
From your ever-loving Alice.
Harry felt a glow of pleasure — not least because his darling Alice was making such an obvious success of her career.
She deserved no less, for she was the kindest, sweetest, dearest friend he had in the world.
He wished very much that she was his real sister.
There were times when he felt the need for family ties and the fact was, he had none — unless he could count Wendell Harvey.
Not long after his arrival in Kentucky, they'd sat down together one evening with the Harvey family tree  and worked out that they were second cousins.
‘But for that youthful aberration on your father's part, you and not I would be the Earl of Kinmuire,’ Mr Harvey had said.
Slowly, savouring the moment, Harry opened the letter he knew was from Madeleine.
He had read her letters to him so many times that he could recognize her large, childish writing at a glance.
Dearest Harry,
This is to wish you many happy returns.
I don't have to tell you it was Aubrey who reminded me you'd be twenty-one on the fifth.
I hope you have a nice party and lots of fun with that horsy girl you live with.
I know you say she's very nice but she can't be all that special or you'd have fallen for her donkeys' years ago.
I've fallen in love again — this time it's with a really nice army officer called Pogo.
(That's a nickname, by the way.
His real name is Lionel Dunbar.)
Mummy approves for once.
I may decide to marry him.
He's mad on polo so he takes me to the Hurlingham Club to watch him play.
He's almost as good as you on a horse!
Of course, being in the army, he may get posted abroad one of these days and I don't know if I want to leave London — it's such jolly good fun now I'm out.
Aubrey says you might come home for a visit this summer.
I do hope you do.
We could go to dances and things.
He said he forgot to put in his letter that your hero, Steve Donaghue, won the Derby for the third time last year but you probably knew that ages ago.
Have you heard the song ‘I'm Just Wild About Harry’?
I think of you every time I hear it.
Pogo gave me a lovely Mah Jong set for Christmas and ‘I'm just wild about’ the game.
Everyone here is.
Do you play it in Kentucky?
Just before Christmas, Pogo invited Aubrey and me to go up to Melton Mowbray to hunt.
The Prince of Wales was staying in a suite of rooms at Craven Lodge  in the middle of the town.
Do you know it?
Aubrey wanted to drive over to see Maythorpe House but there wasn't time.
Your Mr Harvey could easily let it if he wanted as the whole place was full to bursting.
Pogo says it always is.
Pogo's family have invited us to go up to Scotland for some salmon fishing in February.
Aubrey's keen to go but I'll probably be bored.
I've got to go now as it's time for me to get my new dresses fitted.
Do, do, do, do try and come home for the season.
Heaps of love from,
Madeleine.
The ending left Harry's heart soaring, until he recalled the earlier content.
This new chap, Dunbar, seemed to have become very much a part of Madeleine's life; Lady Debrace approved of him and obviously Aubrey liked him.
Was this going to be the man who won Madeleine's heart?
The very thought left him feeling as if there was a great pit where his stomach should be.
Part of him accepted that one day she would get married — and not to him.
He had nothing to offer her, whereas a fellow like Dunbar obviously had everything.
But the other part cried out against the mere idea of her being someone else's wife.
No one could possibly love her as much as he did.
Did that mean nothing to her?
He knew that it did not, and yet she continued writing to him; continued sending her love; continued her demands, repeated in every letter, that he should go back to see her.
He had by now enough saved up to pay his passage and his expenses.
He could go, but did he really want to?
Madeleine was his sole reason for wanting to return to England — although naturally he'd love to see Alice if she happened to be in London.
If, however, he were to arrive only to find Madeleine promised to someone else, he would have to suffer again those bitter pangs of regret he'd endured before he came out to Blue Ash Farm.
He'd been happy here; he'd settled down and loved the new life he  led.
He got along splendidly with Wendell Harvey and with Cora-Beth.
Thinking of the girl who would probably be up and dressed and waiting for him to go downstairs, Harry frowned uneasily.
He would have to be blind not to have noticed that something in Cora-Beth's manner towards him had changed; that the looks she sometimes gave him were no longer open and friendly but questioning, as if she expected, or was hoping for, something more.
She tended to jump like a nervous thoroughbred if he touched her arm or kissed her cheek.
She was no longer the easy-going tomboy with whom he had had such a simple and uncomplicated relationship.
He'd hoped that it meant no more than that she was growing up and had become aware of herself as a young woman; that as a consequence it was not quite the done thing for her to rush across a room and hug him like a kid sister, or trip him up in the haybarn and fling herself on top of him like a puppy spoiling for a game.
He supposed that he too had changed in his attitude towards her.
He'd become more aware of her as an attractive girl with a very feminine figure that the fashionable flat-chested dress styles could not conceal.
Now that she was wearing skirts above the knees, as fashion demanded, he'd noticed her long, slender legs and admired her ankles.
There had even been times when he'd found himself imagining her with no clothes on at all— the way he had once seen Peggy Podmore — and felt the same keen desire well up in him.
He was fast reaching the conclusion that Cora-Beth wanted him to feel more than a friendly affection for her; that perhaps she even wanted him to fall in love with her.
Could he fall in love with anyone else but Madeleine, he asked himself as he got out of bed and started to get dressed?
If he kissed Cora-Beth — not on her cheek as was his custom, but on the lips — would he feel that same passionate desire he'd experienced when he'd kissed Madeleine that night in the schoolroom at The Grange?
Nearly all Cora-Beth's friends were what they called  ‘dating’, although many were even younger than she was.
He'd seen Nancy and Frank embracing in the back of the car, so closely entwined that it had been impossible to guess what else they were doing.
Perhaps he should let Cora-Beth make the running this evening at his party.
Perhaps he was being absurdly English to treat girls like Cora-Beth as precious pieces of china not to be touched.
He was twenty-one — a man — and it was high time he started living his life to the full.
If Madeleine was enjoying herself with her ‘Pogo’, he could enjoy himself with Cora-Beth, who probably cared about him far more than Madeleine ever had.
By the time Harry went downstairs for breakfast he was in excellent spirits, heightened by an underlying feeling of excitement.
This was the day when his adult life was going to begin, he told himself.
Cora-Beth was already at the breakfast table.
‘Sorry if I'm late,’ Harry said as he sat down.
‘I was reading my birthday letters.’
For once Cora-Beth was not in riding-breeches.
She wore a linen knee-length frock the colour of sand, and it suited her.
She was, Harry thought, really pretty when she chose to be so.
As he admired her dress, she smiled.
‘All in your honour, Harry.
Today's special.
Your every wish granted.’
‘Then I'll wish for the first and last dance tonight and as many as you can spare in between,’ Harry rejoined, and was pleased to see that Cora-Beth was actually blushing.
When he had finished eating, she followed him into the drawing-room and watched him open her present.
Harry rested a hand gently on her shoulder.
‘It looks as if this is going to be one of the best birthdays I've ever had,’ he said.
‘I'm awfully pleased with my binoculars — and I'm really looking forward to the party tonight.’
Cora-Beth tilted her head sideways so that for a brief moment her cheek rested against his hand.
‘Are you, Harry?’ she said softly.
‘I am too.’
Wanting this girl to be as happy as he was, Harry put his  hand beneath her chin and raised her face to his.
Her lips were parted and he could feel her heartbeat against his chest.
She was waiting for him to kiss her, he realized, and it seemed suddenly to be the natural thing to do.
He was unprepared for the urgency of her response as his mouth touched hers.
Her arms tightened around his neck.
‘Oh, Harry, Harry,’ she whispered when finally they drew apart.
‘I've been waiting and waiting for you to do that.
Kiss me again, please.’
With only the briefest moment of hesitation, Harry willingly gave way to the heady temptation of holding this vibrant, passionate young girl in his arms.
He too had been waiting, he thought, but he had not realized before that it was for Cora-Beth.
1924
Wendell Harvey drew a sigh of satisfaction as, together with a number of other older parents, he prepared to leave the party.
It was after midnight and the youngsters might well continue enjoying themselves into the early hours.
There was no doubt that Harry's twenty-first celebration was proving a phenomenal success.
Lexington society were present and the newspapers had been busy taking photographs and writing up their accounts for the morning editions.
When Wendell had been interviewed, he had refused to say how many dollars the shindig was costing him but he admitted it was a lot.
It was worth every cent, he thought, recalling his daughter's happy, excited face and Harry's marked attention to her.
Even without his rose-coloured glasses, he realized that dressed in a pretty, long frock with her hair freshly waved, Cora-Beth could hold her own against any other young girl in the room.
As his chauffeur drove him back to Blue Ash Farm in the Lincoln, he decided it was love which gave her that special glow, that sparkle, that vivacity which drew the young men round her like flies.
Was it possible, he wondered, that by breakfast time the two youngsters would be reporting to him that they were in love?
Despite Harry's obvious attraction for most of the unattached girls in the room, it was in Cora-Beth's company he was most often to be seen.
He, himself, would not be sorry.
The family connection between Harry and his daughter was sufficiently diffused not to matter and they were very well matched.
Cora-Beth was thinking the same thing as she watched  Harry partner one of her former school friends on the dance floor.
If only Harry were to fall in love with her they could have a wonderful life together.
Remembering the kiss he had given her after breakfast it seemed as if their relationship might at long last have changed.
She felt her cheeks flush with a mixture of excitement and anxiety.
Surely tonight, when they went home, she would discover the truth?
She would definitely not make the first move.
Judd said half the fun of being with girls was when he was doing the chasing.
She had never expected it would be so hard to pretend lack of interest when her very heart and soul were longing to demonstrate her love.
With an effort she walked across the room to Jerry, who had so often asked her for a date and who, given any encouragement, would have been a frequent visitor to Blue Ash Farm.
He beamed with pleasure at her attention and, hoping Harry would notice, Cora-Beth began flirting with him.
Her efforts did not escape Harry's notice and when the dance ended, he excused himself to his partner and went across to her side.
Jerry ignored his greeting.
‘Jolly good party, don't you think?’
Harry said, for he had met Jerry once or twice and rather liked him.
‘Oh,jolly good!
Absolutely ripping, what?’
Jerry parodied Harry's English voice.
For a moment Harry looked as if he might hit the other boy, but before Cora-Beth could intervene, he relaxed and smiled.
‘Sure is lickin'-spittin' swell !’ he said good-naturedly in a poor imitation of a Southern drawl, whereupon all three burst out laughing.
‘You'll never make it as an American, that's for sure,’ Cora-Beth said as she tucked her arm through Harry's.
‘Let's see if you can waltz better than you can speak our lingo.
See you later, Jerry.’
As Harry led her towards the dance floor, she said, ‘For one moment I thought you were going to knock poor Jerry sideways.’
Harry smiled down at her.
‘What, and ruin this wonderful party you've arranged for me?
Actually, I like Jerry.
I was just a bit jealous, I suppose.
I mean, it's pretty obvious he's crazy about you.’
‘Is it?’
Cora-Beth asked demurely.
‘I don't feel that way about him.’
‘I'm glad to hear it,’ Harry said truthfully.
‘I was looking on you as my date tonight.’
The band was playing a new haunting melody, ‘What'll I do…when you…are far away…’ in a slow waltz rhythm.
Cora-Beth melted into the circle of Harry's arms.
They were both good dancers and gradually the other couples drifted off the floor and stood in a circle watching them.
There was a great round of applause when the dance ended and, flushed with excitement, Cora-Beth responded eagerly to the pressure of Harry's hand as he kept possession of hers.
‘I shall always remember this evening, that dance, that song,’ she murmured.
‘Especially if ever you do go back to England.
Do you really think you'll go this summer, Harry?’
He nodded.
‘I'd like to go.
It's such ages since I saw my foster family and…and friends, but I'll be back, Cora-Beth, you can be sure of that.
I love it here.
I love the countryside, the horses, the farm, the people.
Everyone has been so friendly.
I don't feel like a stranger any more.’
‘You aren't a stranger any more,’ Cora-Beth said vehemently.
‘Poppa says you're part of our family now.
I know your roots are in England, but don't you think you could put down roots here in Kentucky?’
A part of Harry wanted to agree that it was possible, although it would be a very long while yet before he had enough money to buy even a small farm of his own and start up his own line of  thoroughbreds .
Yet despite this being his long-term plan, he still thought of England as ‘home’, of Alice and the Pritchetts as his ‘family’, of Aubrey as his best friend.
And there was Madeleine…
According to Aubrey, Madeleine was still unattached, even if she did have that army officer dancing attendance on her.
Might there be a chance that if he went back to England, he could make her care for him?
Even were he able to persuade her to marry him, somehow he could not envisage her being content to live on a ranch among a whole lot of strangers and without the luxuries she took for granted.
Perhaps, after all, he should put Madeleine out of his mind.
Even to imagine she could love him was absurd.
It would be far more sensible to concentrate his thoughts on the lovely girl at his side.
This morning he had felt her attraction and just now, as they danced, he had been convinced it was mutual.
He wished suddenly that he and Cora-Beth could be alone together.
He badly wanted to kiss her.
Somewhat to his surprise he heard himself telling her so.
Cora-Beth's eyes were sparkling, almost luminous, as she squeezed his arm.
‘Birthday or no birthday, you'll just have to wait, Harry Keynes,’ she said softly, ‘and so will I.’
It was a promise of sorts and one Harry found himself constantly remembering as the hours passed.
He was surprised by his impatience for the party to end.
Finally, the last goodbyes were said and they were free to climb into the family Studebaker and begin the drive back to Blue Ash Farm.
Cora-Beth had a warm travelling-rug wrapped round her legs, and they were both muffled in heavy, fur-lined coats and caps.
The night sky, brilliant with stars, was not yet touched by dawn, although a bright half-moon was low in the eastern sky.
A mile or two short of Blue Ash Farm, Harry stopped the car and pulled on the brake.
Somewhere in the distance, a dog barked.
Simultaneously they turned to face one another and a moment later they were locked in an embrace.
Cora-Beth reached up her arms and clung to him as Harry started to kiss her.
Soon his lips left her mouth and he covered her eyelids, the tip of her nose, the warm base of her throat with soft, butterfly kisses.
She gave little moans of pleasure and Harry felt the quick, fierce  response of his body.
His senses told him that Cora-Beth was as eager as he for closer intimacies, and she made no attempt to draw back when he unbuttoned her coat and felt for the soft warmth of her breasts.
He felt them  tauten against his palms and suddenly she slid her body over his right knee so that she was lying against him, between his legs.
The tension inside him was almost beyond bearing.
She began to kiss him and, between kisses, she was murmuring endearments.
He silenced her with more kisses as he tried to remind himself that this young girl was not only innocent but trusted herself to his care; that her father trusted him, and however uninhibited she might now appear to be, he must not abuse that faith.
‘My dearest girl,’ he said, his voice husky with longing, ‘we've got to stop this.
We've just got to.’
Cora-Beth clung to him more tightly.
‘I don't want it to stop…not now…not ever.
Oh, Harry, if you knew how I've longed for this,’ she said in a breathless little voice.
‘There've been so many times when I've lain awake at night longing for you to kiss me, make love to me.
I'd almost given up hope that you'd ever see me as a girl…a woman.
I might just as well have been Judd.’
She gave a short, excited laugh.
‘I've been pretty blind, haven't I?’
Harry said with a rueful smile.
‘The first time I ever saw you, you were in breeches with your hair all over your face and again the next day when you took me out riding.
I suppose that set a pattern.
It seemed quite enough just to have you as a friend.
Besides, I was still feeling a bit cut-up about…about the girl I'd left behind in England.’
For a moment, Cora-Beth was quietly thoughtful.
Then she said, ‘I don't see how she could have turned you down — knowing how you felt about her.’
Harry sighed.
‘It wasn't like that.
She was still terribly young and anyway, I think I was just a boy to her…any boy…and she wanted to know what it felt like to be kissed.’
‘But you don't love her any more?’
‘I don't think so.
That's to say, Madeleine is really just a memory now — and not a very happy one.
I'm certain she never loved me.
According to her brother, she has dozens of admirers.
I dare say she'll marry one of them some day soon.
At the moment, Aubrey says she's having far too good a time to want to settle down.’
It crossed Cora-Beth's mind that this girl's feelings towards Harry might well change if she were to meet him again after an absence of two years, but she bit back her words, fearing that the suggestion, were she to make it, might put the idea into his head.
Let it suffice for the present that he thought he'd been silly to nurture romantic thoughts about his first love.
‘Maybe everyone has to suffer the pangs of calf love before they can recognize when it's the real thing,’ she said lightly.
‘I was head over heels in love with our English teacher when I was about fourteen or fifteen.
I guess he never noticed me.
I was disgustingly fat and clumsy and exceedingly plain.’
‘I don't believe it,’ Harry said sincerely.
‘If you were, you've certainly made up for it since.
I think you're very, very attractive.’
‘Do you really, Harry?’
Cora-Beth asked breathlessly.
‘I want you to feel that way about me.
I wish we hadn't got so many clothes on.
I wish we could be close — really close.
Do you think that's awful?’
‘Of course not.
It's natural!
But it's also dangerous.
A chap may think he's in control of himself but if he's really attracted to a girl, it's not so easy to stop at…well, just kissing.’
‘You mean, you might want to make love to her?
Go all the way?
Some of the college girls allow petting on a date, but I don't know anyone who's actually done it, other than married people, of course, but they don't tell you about it.’
‘Because there's no need for you to know, probably,’ Harry said.
‘But if you don't know, how can you be sure when  you're really in love and when you just think you are because the person you're with is so attractive?’
‘I'm not sure what the answer is to that,’ Harry answered truthfully.
He was thinking of Peggy Podmore as he added, ‘I knew a girl once who I was attracted to — but I didn't love her.
I liked her, though.’
Cora-Beth nodded.
‘I once asked Judd to explain things to me.
All he'd say was that nature meant men and women to be attracted by each other and if they weren't, the species wouldn't reproduce themselves.’
Harry felt a deep rush of tenderness well up inside him.
He had not thought it possible that an innocent girl like Cora-Beth could think about such things, let alone voice them.
‘It's hard to believe that I could have spent two whole years walking round with blinkers on.
Trouble is, I'm not going to be able to see you as a jolly, good-natured tomboy any longer,’ he said huskily.
‘I'm glad,’ Cora-Beth whispered.
‘I thought you never would see me as a perfectly ordinary girl.
You do care about me a bit, don't you, Harry?’
‘A great deal more than ‘a bit’!’
Harry said, smiling.
‘And anyway, Miss Harvey, how do you know I'm not falling in love with you?’
Cora-Beth reached out and touched his cheek.
‘You mustn't pretend, Harry, not to please me.
You can't be in love with two people and I haven't forgotten your English girl, even if you have.
She still writes to you, doesn't she?’
This girl's straightforwardness both surprised and unnerved Harry.
He knew instinctively that this was no casual conversation and that for Cora-Beth's sake he must be honest.
He had always liked her, had grown very fond of her and now he was finding her intensely desirable.
But did these feelings constitute love?
It had been so different with Madeleine.
He had worshipped her, adored her, and even in his dreams, he had desired her.
‘Yes, she still writes to me,’ Harry answered Cora-Beth's question, ‘but the way I feel about you is different  and I don't think I can explain.
Love's a funny thing, isn't it?
I mean, I love Alice — but that's in a different way too.
All I am sure of is that right now I don't want to be anywhere else in the world but here, with you.’
With a little cry, Cora-Beth threw herself back into his arms.
‘Then let's not think about — worry about — anyone else but us,’ she said between kisses.
‘Let's just be together as often as we can,really get to know each other.
Let's pretend we've only just met and this is our first date.
Oh, I just can't tell you how happy I am!’
Her mood of euphoria was infectious and for the moment anyway Harry knew that he was every bit as happy about this new relationship as the girl in his arms.
He loved kissing her; loved the warmth of her response; loved the feel of her body.
Her lack of reserve delighted him and he could not help but be flattered by her attention.
When at last they broke apart, he took both her hands in his and kissed each of her palms.
‘I don't think either of us will forget tonight,’ he said, ‘but it will be another day tomorrow and we've got to decide how we're going to behave.
If we suddenly start holding hands like this your father is going to wonder what's going on.’
‘Oh, Poppa will be pleased,’ Cora-Beth said ingenuously.
‘He knows how I feel about you, and he's very fond of you.’
‘Then he'll surely expect some sort of explanation from me,’ Harry said quietly.
‘After all, I'm in no position financially to buy a place of my own; even to think about getting married for several years yet.
Then there's…there's Madeleine.
I think I ought to see her again — just once, to reassure myself that all the old feelings really are as dead as I believe.
Can you understand this, Cora-Beth?’
There were tears in her eyes as, withdrawing her hands from him, she nodded.
‘I asked you to be honest so I've no right to complain because you've spelt it all out.
I keep forgetting that…that what's been happening tonight is all new to you.
It's  not to me, Harry.
I've known for months that…that what I feel for you is special, very special.
I'll just have to wait and hope.
And if you do find you still love this girl, I'll take it on the chin, as Judd would say.
Perhaps we shouldn't say anything to Poppa yet.
There's nothing really to say, is there?’
‘I think there's quite a lot we could say if we wanted to,’ Harry replied.
‘Your father will probably guess, anyway.
I shan't be able to treat you now as if you were my foster sister, Jenny.
She was always a tomboy like you, though I dare say she has changed now she's grown up.’
As he drove slowly back towards the farm, Cora-Beth seemed to regain her equilibrium and, taking his cue from her, they talked lightly about Harry's childhood with the Pritchetts.
As Blue Ash Farm came into sight, the Pritchetts were forgotten because, to their astonishment, they saw that every window was ablaze with light.
‘I can't think what Poppa's doing up at this hour,’ Cora-Beth said with a frown as she peered through the windscreen.
‘He said he was feeling tired and was going home to bed.’
As they drew to a halt outside the house, old Peter came hurrying out to meet them.
Tears were streaming down his black cheeks.
All but incoherent in his distress, he said, ‘It's Massa Judd, poor Massa Judd!
Doctor's with your Pappy now, Miss Cora-Beth, and he's ill with grieving and Jake went off on horseback not half an hour ago to fetch you and Mr Harry back from your party and we's been waitin' and waitin' for you…’
Cora-Beth's face was so pale Harry was afraid she was about to faint.
She ran indoors, past the old servant, and hurried into the drawing-room.
Wendell Harvey was slumped in one of the armchairs and the doctor was standing over him.
‘Poppa, what is it?
Has Judd had an accident?
Is he all right?
Are you all right?
What's happened, Poppa?’
Knowing that it could only be bad news, Harry, who had been standing in the doorway, stepped forward and put his arm round Cora-Beth's shoulders.
Wendell stared  down at the glass of brandy which someone had put into his hands.
He seemed unable to speak.
‘It couldn't be worse, Cora-Beth,’ the doctor said in an undertone.
‘I'm afraid Judd has had an accident — in an aeroplane.
Your father had a telephone call an hour ago from Judd's commanding officer.
We don't know any details yet, but…well, I'm afraid you have to know.
The aeroplane crashed and your brother was killed instantly.
I'm so very, very sorry.’
‘Oh, no.
Not Judd.
Not Judd,’ Cora-Beth cried.
‘It can't be true.
It isn't true, is it?
Not Judd!
Not Judd!’
Helplessly, Harry stood silent as Cora-Beth threw herself into her father's arms.
The doctor came over and drew Harry to one side.
‘I'm afraid this has hit Harvey pretty badly.
His only son!
And Cora-Beth, poor child.
Judd was her twin and they were so close as children.
I'll give her a sedative before I leave.
Meanwhile, there's nothing much either of us can do for them.
In cases like this it's sometimes best to leave people alone to grieve.’
As he led Harry out of the room, he patted him on the shoulder.
‘Glad you're here, boy.
Harvey thinks very highly of you and you'll be a great comfort to him.
Terrible way for young Judd to die.
It'll help Harvey if he hears his son didn't suffer none.
Seems the boy was flying too low, hit one of those darned electricity cables.
It was out in the wilds somewhere and it took a while to find him.
Dreadful business, dreadful!
Harvey was right.
He always did say those new-fangled machines were dangerous.’
The doctor stayed for another hour, gave Cora-Beth the promised sedative and a tearful Becky put her to bed.
Disregarding the proprieties Harry went in to see her.
She was already quite drowsy.
Her eyes were red and swollen with crying as she stared at him wretchedly.
‘It was such a wonderful evening, Harry.
I was so happy…so happy…and now…now this!’
He knelt by the bed and put his arms round her.
‘One of the first things I had to learn by heart when I  went to Maythorpe House was a poem by an Englishman, Laurence Binyon.
He wrote it for the young men who were dying in the war, but the words may offer a little comfort.
I'll quote a few lines, which you could think about when you think of Judd.
It goes,
‘They shall not grow old, as we that are left grow old; Age shall not weary them, nor the years condemn.
At the going down of the sun and in the morning We will remember them.’
’
Tears were streaming down Cora-Beth's face as she clung to Harry's hand.
‘But Judd was so young.
It's so pointless!
I can't believe I'll never see him again…’
‘Try not to think about that.
Remember all the good times you shared.’
‘I'll try.
I will try,’ Cora-Beth whispered, her voice slow and indistinct as the sedative took effect.
Harry stayed with her until her eyes closed and then went to see if there was any way he could offer some comfort to the grief-stricken man downstairs.
He had completely forgotten that this was his twenty-first birthday and that he had finally come of age.
1924
Jules Bellaire sat opposite Alice at a white, wrought-iron table on one of the large terraces outside the Château de St Denis.
A sun umbrella sheltered them from the wan May sunshine.
On the table lay several large swatches of fabrics which Jules had brought out from Paris for Alice's inspection.
‘When will Monsieur Félix be back?’ he enquired.
‘Not until after lunch,’ Alice told him.
‘You're to stay until he returns, Jules.
He has gone to see Madame Verveine at the nursing-home.’
Jules nodded.
He knew le Maître went every Tuesday to see his wife, although from all accounts her condition had deteriorated so much she was unable to converse with anyone and, at times, did not even recognize her husband.
He visited her none the less, although Jules had no doubt that it was duty rather than love that prompted his assiduous attention.
‘Will you be returning to Paris with me, Alice?’ he enquired.
She shook her head.
‘No, I'll be going tomorrow morning.
Monsieur has guests tonight.’
Jules did not look surprised for Alice now frequently stayed at the chateau.
Rumours abounded at the salon regarding the relationship between Alice and le Maître all of which he vehemently denied whenever he heard the gossip.
The difficulty of convincing the rest of the staff lay in the fact that Alice did not have a particular admirer or male friend, as most of the girls did.
Even he had been forced to admit that it was strange for so lovely a  young woman to be leading a life devoid of romance.
Moving a pattern of material out of the shaft of sunlight, which might cause it to fade, he said now, ‘Are you certain it is wise to be so single-minded about your career, Alice?
I speak as your friend.
It seems to me that you should leave a little time for romance.’
Alice smiled.
‘In the first place, I'm far too busy, and in the second, I've yet to meet anyone I'd want to marry.
Anyway, Jules, it would be silly to form attachments here in Paris when I'm going to be living in London.’
Jules smiled.
‘Ah, yes!
But we have known each other for five years, Alice, and I count myself your friend.
Therefore I know that it is not a matter of you using good sense in rejecting advances from young men because you would soon be parted from them.
You do not allow such advances in the first instance.’
‘I am perfectly happy as I am, Jules, so why should you worry?’
‘Because I am devoted to you, as well you know, and I wish to understand you.’
How could she explain her feelings to him, Alice wondered, when even she herself knew that there was not one hope in a million that Harry would ever want to marry her.
His letters from Kentucky were painfully clear — he thought he was in love with Wendell Harvey's daughter, Cora-Beth, and Mr Harvey was encouraging the match because he very much wanted Harry to live permanently in America.
It was now four months since the twin, Judd, had been killed and, so Harry had explained, Mr Harvey had felt it his duty to find out whether, now his son was dead, the family title would die with him or, as he now seemed to think, it could be passed through the distaff side to his daughter.
If this proved to be the case, then by marrying Cora-Beth, Harry would share her right to the Kinmuire estate.
Harry denied in his letters that this fact was influencing him in any way.
He was coming home in July, when he would tell her all about his long-term plans to buy his ranch in America.
There had been no mention of Alice  going out there to keep house for him.
Nor would she wish to do so if he were to marry Cora-Beth, no matter how nice the girl was.
It one thing to accept that she had no future with Harry and quite another to force her heart to give up hope, to stop loving him.
It was this she could not begin to try to explain to Jules.
‘You'll just have to accept that I am not like other girls,’ she said lightly.
‘I am not a romantic, my dear Jules.’
‘But I think you are.
Moreover, it would be a shocking waste if you were not.
You've grown into a very beautiful young woman, Alice, and I do not like to see beauty wasted.
You would make some man very happy.’
‘I shall be perfectly happy living in London with you, Jules,’ Alice said.
‘You introduced me to Paris and it will be my turn to introduce you to England — not that I know very much about London.
We shall have to explore it together.’
‘If we have the time,’ Jules said with a laugh.
‘There will be so much to do in the new salon .
I am very excited about it.’
‘I still can't believe it's really happening,’ Alice said.
‘I owe so much to Monsieur Félix.
But for him, I would never have risen to these heights.’
Jules nodded.
‘That is for certain.
I think his reasons are two-fold.
One, he has from the start recognized your talent; and two, he is in love with you.’
The statement was so matter-of-fact, so unexpected, that Alice gasped.
‘You are joking, of course.
Monsieur treats me like a daughter.’
Jules fluttered his long, dark lashes.
He was grinning impishly.
‘That he does not, Alice.
When you are in a room with him, his eyes follow you everywhere.
He is enchanted by you — and indeed, why not?’
‘But I'm just his protégeé,’ Alice protested.
‘I think he's pleased because I've justified his faith in me.
I'm not even sure that his main pleasure has not been in proving to Madame Duvalle that he was right about me.
It irritates  him beyond measure that she is nearly always right about everything.’
Jules laughed, but then added more seriously, ‘Nevertheless, you may find yourself in a difficult position before much longer, Alice.
It has surprised me that Monsieur has not spoken out before now.’
‘Spoken out about what?’
Alice asked.
‘Even if you were right — an absurd idea — what is there he could do about it?
He's a married man, and a Catholic.’
‘He could not propose marriage, but he could propose an alternative alliance,’ Jules said quickly.
‘For very many years he has had mistresses.’
‘Really, Jules, you shouldn't be talking like this about Monsieur,’ Alice protested.
She could not believe he was serious.
‘C'est la vie, n'est-ce-pas?’
Jules continued, shrugging his shoulders.
‘Monsieur is a man with normal appetites, after all.
You are not only desirable but you have become the inspiration for many of his most successful designs.
Like all artistes , he is a sensitive man and you never offend his sensibilities.
I am not in the least surprised that he has fallen in love with you.’
For a moment Alice was shocked into silence.
Then she said, ‘Even if you are right, Jules, Monsieur Félix's personal feelings are not my concern.
You can't seriously be suggesting that I…that I should become his mistress if he were to…to want me as such?’
Jules's eyes narrowed thoughtfully.
‘Why not?
He is kind, he is good, he is very, very rich — and he loves you.
In society as it is today, you would be accepted nearly everywhere.
Few would snub the acknowledged mistress of Monsieur Verveine.
Your future would be entirely secure.’
Alice tried to laugh.
‘This is just your usual nonsense, Jules,’ she remonstrated.
‘'Security’ may be important to you, but it is not so important to me that I would…that I would live with a man who was not my husband.
Besides, I would have to love him if…if I were to live like that.
Anyway, this is quite ridiculous.
Le Maître always behaves towards me with the utmost propriety, whatever people may be saying to the contrary.’
Jules smiled.
‘I do not doubt your word, Alice.
But you must not mislead yourself as to his feelings towards you.
Do you not agree that he is exceedingly attractive?’
‘You really are talking nonsense,’ Alice said quickly.
But almost immediately followed the thought, was Jules really so far from the mark when he described Monsieur Félix as a very attractive man?
She had seen for herself the effect he had on many of his clients; had herself been impressed by his ability to amuse them with his quick wit and entertaining anecdotes.
And had she not felt elated when he praised her in that soft, beguiling voice?
Flattered when he had looked at her in that particular way which was both critical and yet admiring at the same time?
Nevertheless, Jules could not have been serious in his suggestion that she might for one single instant consider becoming Monsieur's mistress.
Her cheeks flamed even at the thought.
Not only was her employer old enough to be her father, but he was a married man, and even if he were not, such a relationship would be totally foreign to her upbringing, if not her very nature.
‘You really do talk nonsense at times, Jules,’ she repeated in a tone which she hoped sounded mockingly reproachful.
‘And what is more, we're wasting a lot of valuable time.
Monsieur Félix will expect us to have made our choices and we have not even looked at the velvets yet.’
It was past four o'clock before Félix returned from the nursing-home.
He looked tired but nevertheless managed a smile as he caught sight of his two employees and walked over to join them.
‘What a charming picture you both make,’ he said, sinking wearily into the chair Jules had drawn back for him.
‘'Spring afternoon in le jardin ’.
It would make a delightful Renoir.’
‘How is Madame Verveine?’
Alice asked.
‘Did she like the flowers?’
Félix shook his head.
‘I'm afraid she was not aware of  them…or, indeed, of me.
However, I should have expected no more.
As you know, the doctors have warned me Madame can only regress.
Now, let's see what the pair of you have selected.
This one I approve immediately — such a delicate green!
It would look well on you, Alice.
Do you not agree, Jules?’
A servant arrived with some freshly made jus de citron and for the next half-hour the three of them remained with heads bent over the materials which would do so much to enhance Félix's English collection.
He was quite determined to open the new salon in Albemarle Street with a fashion display that would be the talk of London society.
‘The lease for the tenancy of the flat in Charles Street arrived yesterday and I have signed and returned it to the agent,’ he told Alice.
‘As soon as I can spare you, you are to go over there and make the place habitable.
It is quite adequately furnished but I wish it to be in really bon ton .
Jules, you can accompany Alice and familiarize yourself with London.
You must also buy a copy of Debrett and familiarize yourself with the names of those people in society we hope will become our clients.
Some, of course, you already know.’
‘And the new salon , Monsieur?’
Jules enquired.
‘Work is progressing very well.
As you know, I decided to keep the same colour scheme as we have in Paris.
I think it will make our international clientele feel at home.
I have been assured that the décor will be completed by the end of July, so we shall be able to keep to the schedule we have arranged and open in September.
One of your tasks, Alice, will be to engage suitable mannequins .
You know the kind of girl I like to have.
It is not so much the face as the figure and deportment I consider of paramount concern.’
Alice waited until after Jules had departed before raising the subject that was at the forefront of her mind.
‘I have been meaning to speak to you about my going to London,’ she said.
‘I will, of course, be happy to go in a week or two's time, but if it's at all possible, I very much want to be in London in July.
You see, Harry is coming  over from America for that month and I so want to see him.
It's quite likely he will be returning to America to live there permanently, and so it could be my last chance.’
Félix Verveine regarded Alice's flushed cheeks speculatively.
‘Ah, yes.
Harry!
This is the young man who grew up in your family as your brother?’
Alice nodded.
‘He and I have always been very close.
I really do want to see him.’
Félix drew a deep sigh and leaning back in his chair, raised his dark eyebrows in a wry half-smile.
‘You know, Alice, you would not make a very good actress,’ he said softly.
‘Whenever you speak to me of this Harry of yours, your face and, indeed, your voice reveal that he is of special importance to you.
You may tell me that your personal life is not my concern and that it is not for me to comment — and you would be justified however, I cannot help but make it my concern because I have your future very much at heart.
Therefore I now ask you one simple question, do you love this young man?’
If it had been anyone else who had probed into her private feelings, Alice might have been angry, but this man had become a kind of father-figure to her these past years, and despite the motives Jules might attribute to him, she truly believed her employer had her well-being at heart.
Besides which, she reminded herself, he had chosen to put her in charge of his new London branch and, naturally, he needed to know if she was single-minded about her future job.
Not that he need be worried, she thought with a brief pang of bitterness.
Whoever Harry chose to marry now, it would not be her!
Suddenly, she felt the need to confide, to be able to tell some other person that when she was not actually working, her mind and heart were dominated by thoughts of Harry.
She did love him, she had always loved him, but now that they were both adults the love she felt for him had taken on a far greater significance.
She wanted to mean everything to him — everything a woman could mean to a man.
Had he asked her to marry him, she would have  sacrificed everything to that end.
Would Monsieur Félix — her friend and mentor — understand how powerful her feelings were?
At least he had a right to know.
Haltingly she attempted to express her emotions and, not least, the sense of finality and despair she had known when Harry wrote so affectionately of the American girl, Cora-Beth.
‘The death of her twin brother somehow brought Harry and her closer together,’ she ended her story.
‘I think the only thing now which would prevent his marrying her was if he discovered he was still in love with your niece.’
Félix nodded.
‘That is a possibility!
The little minx seems to have half the young men in London at her feet.
I saw her at Christmas, did I tell you?
Such a pretty little thing — very much the coquette!’
‘I would prefer, if he must marry one or the other, that he chose this Cora-Beth girl,’ Alice said softly.
‘I think Madeleine might end up breaking his heart.’
‘Then we must hope that your Harry goes back to America,’ Felix said, ‘not only for his sake, Alice, but for mine.
I do not want your heart broken, which I fear it might be if you saw him unhappy.’
‘Then you do understand?’
Alice said gratefully.
‘I know there's no hope for me, but I shan't be at peace unless I know he is happy.’
Félix reached across the table top and took Alice's hands in his.
‘Would it surprise you to know that is how I feel about you?’ he asked softly.
‘Would it surprise you to know that in the five years since I first set eyes on you, I have not looked seriously at another woman?
There is not one night I have not fallen asleep wishing that I were free to ask you to marry me.
No, please do not take your hand away.
You have nothing to fear from me.’
He gave a sudden, unexpected laugh.
‘Oh,ma petite , you should see your face!
I cannot believe that you were quite unaware of my growing affection for you.
I have tried to hide it, but I did not imagine I had been entirely successful.’
No, not entirely, Alice thought, remembering Jules's  reference to the gossip that had circulated among the staff at the salon .
Nevertheless, until Jules had put the thought into her head,she had not once considered the reason for Félix's numerous kindnesses to her.
How naive and stupid she had been!
On the other hand, why should a successful man, who could doubtless have any woman he fancied, be interested in her — plain Alice Pritchett from a simple working-class background?
He even had a title!
Félix was regarding her with a look of amused tenderness.
‘Let me make something quite clear to you, Alice,’ he said.
‘My personal feelings for you have nothing whatever to do with my admiration for your abilities.
Even if I did not like you very much, I should still want you to be manageress of the Maison de Verveine in London.
My dear child, what I am now offering you is a future which might not otherwise be available for you to enjoy.
In my wife's absence, I would like you to become mistress of the Château de St Denis and to share my Paris house.’
So Jules was right and had once again proved his astuteness, Alice thought.
Félix Verveine was suggesting she become his mistress.
‘I fear I have shocked you, Alice,’ he was saying, albeit with a slight smile lifting the corners of his mouth, ‘but as you know, the option of marriage is not open to us.
You are, if I am not mistaken, twenty-five years old, which is an age when, I am well aware, you could still meet and fall in love with a far younger man than I. However, from what you have told me, you have already given away your heart and have set aside any thought of another such love.
What better arrangement, therefore, than to allow me to take care of you?
I am a very wealthy man and I should greatly enjoy providing you with all the beautiful things you should have by right.’
His smile deepened as he added, ‘I have been told that I am a good lover and I can think of nothing in this world that would give me greater pleasure than to teach you the plaisirs d'amour .
You would, of course, be free to break off our association at any time you chose.
How is it you say in English — no strings attached?’
At last Alice found her voice.
‘I couldn't do as you suggest.
You know I don't…can't…
I do like you very, very much.
It's just that I wouldn't consider it was right…fair…feeling as I do about…about another man.’
Félix nodded.
‘You must not misunderstand me,ma petite !
I am not suggesting une affaire du coeur .
I am suggesting an arrangement which I believe might bring both of us a great deal of pleasure.
For example, it would make me very happy if I could see you every night across my dinner table; if when I woke in the morning, I would hear you wish me ‘Bonjour, chéri!’ in that so charming accent of yours.
It would delight me to be able to buy you presents; to take you with me to my friends' houses, to the theatre, to Biarritz, to Cannes — wherever it pleased you to go.’
‘Aren't you concerned about the distress such an arrangement would cause Madame Verveine?’
Alice questioned uneasily, conscious of the fact that this man belonged to a society whose conventions differed greatly from her own and that by questioning the moral issues, she sounded unworldly, unsophisticated.
Without being aware of her movements, she had withdrawn her hands, as if to distance herself from him.
‘My wife is unaware of the real world any more.
If you think it should be on my conscience that I take advantage of her ignorance, then it is only fair that I should tell you she has, in the past, been unfaithful to me.’
He gave a wry smile.
‘Although I pity my wife, I do not feel under any obligation to remain faithful to her.
Do you understand my sentiments?’
Alice nodded.
‘I suppose so, but I'm not sure if you understand my feelings.
You said that you were not expecting ‘an affair of the heart’, but the relationship you suggest…
I don't know myself if I am capable of it.
I know nothing about that kind of thing…’
Her cheeks were suffused with colour and Felix's voice was very gentle as he said, ‘Surely you must have been lonely at times?
Thought how wonderful t would be to  have a man's arms around you; someone to hold you, touch you, bring you to life?
Have you not read novels, been to the cinema and watched the hero and heroine embracing and realized you have been missing a great deal?
I hope to initiate you into this important part of life…to teach you about such things.’
For a moment, Alice was silent.
Then she said hesitantly, ‘Suppose I was unable to respond?
I could be a big disappointment to you.
Have you thought of that?’
‘If I were not able to give you pleasure, ma petite , and thus give myself great happiness, then the fault would be mine,’ Félix said, smiling once more.
‘I have observed you very closely, Alice, and I do not believe you lack a passionate side to your nature for all you choose to appear so cool and so calm.
There have been some most tempting glimpses of it when you have become excited about a design or angry with yourself for a failure to meet your own high standards.’
How well this man knew her, Alice thought.
She had imagined that she could always at will appear poised and in complete control of her emotions.
Nevertheless, she couldn't imagine herself in any form of intimacy with her employer, much as she liked him.
Although she did not deny that he was handsome and in many ways attractive, she could not envisage herself in an intimate relationship with him.
She had never felt the slightest stirring of her senses when he had embraced her, kissed her in French fashion on both cheeks.
She had only ever felt this physical response in Harry's presence.
To defy convention, surrender her virginity, to a man she neither loved nor desired must be quite out of the question.
On the other hand, did she wish to end up a spinster — like poor, dried-up Madame Duvalle, whose very raison d'être would end when she retired and no longer had her position at the salon to sustain her?
If she, Alice, could not be married to the man she loved, did it really matter who became her partner?
Félix, who had been watching her face intently, now touched her cheek tenderly with his fingertips.
‘Chéri , this will not do at all,’ he said lightly.
‘You are looking worried, sad, anxious, confused, whereas my intention is to make you happy, to make us both happy!
We could enjoy life, amuse ourselves, together.
We could have what you English call ‘fun’…and I do not think there has been a great deal of that commodity in your life so far.
Now, if for no other reason than to give me pleasure, will you please smile?’
Despite herself, Alice did so, but her moment of lightheartedness did not last for long.
‘Please don't think me ungrateful,’ she said tentatively.
‘I know you mean well, but, try as I might, I can't think that what you are suggesting would be right — not for either of us.
It's not simply a matter of defying conventions although I admit I have been strictly brought up and I think it would break my parents’ hearts if ever they came to know I was living with a man who was not my husband.
It's that I'm afraid I would disappoint you.
I respect you and I am very fond of you and shall always, always be grateful to you; but that isn't enough, is it?
You would expect me to respond and I…
I don't believe I could.
I'm very sorry.’
Félix looked unconcerned.
It was almost, Alice thought, as if this was the answer he had expected.
‘I had made up my mind to put this proposition to you today,’ he said, ‘but I see now that this was not the right moment to approach you,ma petite .
Your thoughts, understandably, are with the young man who is shortly returning from America.
Naturally you will not want to make any commitment until you are certain that there is no chance he will change his mind and discover that it is after all you he loves.
So we shall not speak further of this matter until after you have seen your Harry again.
I should have realized the folly of my timing.
It is not like me to lack perception and I can only suppose that my enthusiasm overruled my common sense.
Let us await the outcome of your reunion with this boy you love.’
This kindly man was certainly not lacking in perception now, Alice thought.
Although there was not one single  reason why Harry might suddenly see her not as a sister or friend but as a woman he might fall in love with, deep down inside she still hoped that this unlikely miracle could occur.
Suddenly aware that the afternoon sun had cooled, she shivered, an inexplicable feeling of depression engulfing her.
She stared at the beautiful garden beyond the terrace, fighting the inclination to weep.
She had every justification not to lose hope, she reminded herself.
Jules had told her she was attractive, Félix found her so, and she would have had to be blind not to see the admiring glances of strangers when she went to a café or on a promenade with Jules.
All Félix's guests who came to dine at the château paid her extravagant compliments.
She would be falsely modest not to acknowledge the fact that she had come a very long way since those days when she had been a thin, gawky adolescent.
She not only had the figure of a mannequin but she had learned from the girls at the salon how to walk, how to hold her head up, how to appear perfectly poised.
Her dress sense was faultless and Félix had taught her that she could wear eye-catching colours that she wouldn't have thought of choosing for herself.
Whatever her beginnings in life, she could now carry herself in the most élite company without the slightest fear of revealing her true origins.
If Harry's circumstances had changed so vitally, so too had hers.
With a sense of shock, Alice now realized that the revelation of Félix's feelings for her had, in fact, radically changed her opinion of herself.
She was suddenly seeing herself as a desirable young woman — a woman the famous Maître of the Maison de Verveine might have wanted to marry had he been free.
Since Félix was not going to oppose her wishes to meet Harry in London in July, then there was still a chance — however remote — that she could change Harry's mind about the American girl.
As to his feelings for Madeleine, nurtured since he'd been a little boy, even were they to be revived, it seemed unlikely Madeleine would respond to him.
She'd been the most sought-after debutante of her year and, according to the  occasional letter Alice had had from Lady Debrace, was forever receiving proposals from faithful admirers who danced constant attendance upon her.
She very much doubted Madeleine would be prepared to give up the good time she was having to settle down in the country on Harry's salary.
She became suddenly aware again of the man sitting beside her.
If he was disappointed by her rejection of his proposal, he was giving no indication of it.
She must do what little she could to soften her refusal.
‘I will do everything within my power to make the new London salon a success,’ she said aloud.
‘I wouldn't want you to feel that I am any less dedicated than I have ever been.’
Félix acknowledged this somewhat childlike offer of recompense with a genuine smile.
‘Ah, but, Alice, suppose this young man were to invite you to return to America with him?
What then,chéri?’
Yet again, the colour flared into Alice's cheeks.
‘I would consider it my duty to remain at the salon until you had found a suitable replacement for me,’ she said primly.
‘I would have expected no less of you, Alice.
I was only teasing, for I am well aware you would never let me down,’ Félix said with a pretence at seriousness.
‘Come now,chéri , my guests will be arriving before long and we are not yet changed for dinner.
Let us go in, shall we?’
He rose to his feet and offered Alice his arm.
His manner seemed to have reverted to normal.
It was as if he had never raised the possibility that she might become so much more to him than his personal assistant.
‘Tell me about Jules,’ he said as they approached the stone steps leading up to the arched doorway into the château.
‘He has no qualms about going to live in England?’
Alice shook her head.
‘On the contrary, I understand he is greatly looking forward to it.’
‘I have it in mind to promote Jules to a more prominent  position in the firm one of these days,’ Félix commented.
‘In his own way, he is very talented.’
‘He has taught me a great deal about the business,’ Alice proffered, ‘and I know he is totally loyal to the Maison de Verveine.
I like him very much.’
‘Such types as Jules are invariably sympathique to women,’ Félix replied.
‘I am glad you get along so well with him, Alice.
It is important to have good relationships within the business.’
They had by now reached the foot of the staircase.
‘A bientôt!’ he said with a smile.
‘I shall see you presently, looking, as always, quite ravishing in one of my creations — the oyster-pink crêpe de Chine with the russet chiffon cape, is it not?’
It did not occur to Alice to question Félix's interest in the dress she was wearing until, her toilet completed, she finally went back downstairs.
As she joined him in the petit salon he came towards her with a prettily wrapped package in his hands.
‘This is a small cadeau for you,ma petite ,’ he said.
‘I happened to see it on my way back from the nursing-home and I thought it would go particularly well with the dress.’
Alice unwrapped the parcel with a sense of unease.
If this was jewellery, she could not possibly accept it, no matter how appropriate it might be for the gown she was wearing.
Opening the lid of the box, she gave an involuntary cry of pleasure.
Toning exactly with the colour of her crêpe de Chine dress was a long,pliqué-à-jour necklace of geometric metal links filled with various shades of pink enamel, interspersed with cornelians.
‘It's lovely, Félix, really perfect,’ she said.
‘But I could not accept…’
‘Believe me, Alice, it is of very little value,’ Félix interrupted her.
Deliberately, he refrained from remarking that she had called him by his Christian name for the first time.
‘A pretty bijou , no more.
If it makes you feel any happier, I will tell you that it did not cost me as much as a bouquet of flowers would have done.
So put it on, my dear.
Allow me to help you.’
Although not entirely convinced that the necklace was without real value, Alice did not protest as Félix fastened it around her neck.
Placing a hand on her shoulder, he led her to an ornate, gilded mirror hanging above the carved stone fireplace.
‘There!
Was my choice not perfect?’ he asked, staring at their reflections with a satisfied smile.
‘Thank you,’ Alice said, turning to him.
‘It was very clever of you to find it.
It's really lovely.’
‘As, indeed, is the wearer,’ Félix replied, taking care not to touch her.
‘Whatever pleasure it gives you cannot match the pleasure it gave me to buy this trinket for you.’
He gave a wry smile.
‘It is not good being a wealthy man and having no one to spend one's money on, you know.’
Suddenly Alice found herself able to laugh.
‘Having heard your accountant exclaim at your expenditure on the new London salon , I cannot believe you are having difficulty in disposing of your wealth,’ she said.
‘If the sums he mentioned are to be believed, it puts a most terrible responsibility on my shoulders.’
‘One you are quite capable of carrying, Alice,’ Félix said, ‘and I shall be behind you if you have any problems.
I look on this as our joint enterprise.’
Had she not known Félix so well, Alice thought, touching the necklace at her throat, she might now be feeling as if there were some kind of trap closing slowly about her.
Fortunately, she told herself, she had no cause to mistrust him.
He had never been anything but completely honest with her, as indeed she was with him.
As to the necklace, who was to be the judge of its value?
In her early childhood, a threepenny piece had seemed like a fortune, whereas Félix Verveine's rich clients thought nothing of paying 3,000 francs to be dressed by him.
The value of money was relative and it was becoming an increasingly difficult task for her to reconcile those early years of poverty with her present position.
It seemed terribly wrong that her family were still struggling even now to keep their heads above water, that many like them were close to starvation, when the clothes she, Alice, was  wearing would have kept them in food for at least half a year.
A long time ago, Alice thought, as she heard the arrival of the first of Félix's dinner guests, she and Harry had longed to be rich in order to buy themselves a house which they could share.
Now, she decided, if ever she had that kind of money, she would first ensure that her family would never again, for as long as they lived, be in need.
It was therefore with mixed feelings that Alice managed to give a welcoming smile to the couple who now entered the room and gracefully acknowledged the compliments of the wife of the Belgian ambassador, who was admiring her unique Verveine gown.
1924
‘Oh, Pogo, do let go of my hand.
You're all sticky,’ Madeleine said as the taxi cab turned into Charlotte Street.
‘S-sorry, M-Maddy!
Deuced hot.
N-not so b-bad for you in that dress.’
‘Don't be so ratty, Pickles,’ Aubrey said.
‘Honestly, Dunbar, I don't see why you put up with her.
She does nothing but bait you.’
Captain Lionel Dunbar looked reproachfully at the young man seated opposite him.
‘M-Maddy's perfectly j-justified,’ he said with his intermittent stutter.
‘Should've kept my gloves on, what?’
‘I think we've arrived,’ the girl sitting next to Aubrey remarked.
She looked adoringly at her fair-haired escort.
One of this year's debutantes, Primrose was pretty but still far too much of a schoolgirl to interest Aubrey.
Madeleine, however, had insisted he bring along a girl to make up a foursome and Primrose was the only girl available at the last minute.
Poor old long-suffering Dunbar, Aubrey thought, as Pogo climbed out on to the pavement and paid the driver.
He was Pickles's slave and she treated him like one.
It was high time someone took his young sister down a peg.
Either that, or she made up her mind to marry the wretched fellow.
They had been to the Maxwells' for drinks and afterwards to see Shaw's Saint Joan .
His sister had been restless and Dunbar had had to fight queues of people at the bar to buy drinks in the interval.
Now, at Madeleine's insistence, they were going to while the night away at the  Cave of Harmony nightclub, where they would all get even hotter dancing the shimmy, the foxtrot or the black bottom.
At least the club had a good jazz band, and a first-class cabaret.
With a bit of luck, Ernest Milton would be doing his Pirandello ‘Man With the Flower on His Lip’ act.
Really, he was stupid to have agreed to come here, Aubrey thought as Pogo led the way indoors.
The atmosphere was like a Turkish bath and the fumes from people's cigarettes aggravated his asthma.
However, once Pickles and Pogo started dancing, they would probably not notice if he slipped quietly away with the goggle-eyed Primrose.
‘It's my first time here,’ she whispered as they squeezed into a table and a waiter took their orders for drinks.
‘I suppose you've been here lots of times, Madeleine?’
‘Dozens,’ Madeleine said.
‘It's our favourite place, isn't it, Pogo?’
‘C-certainly is,’ he said instantly.
Madeleine was still very much an enigma to him.
Sometimes she could be quite sharp and critical, and then, when he was about to give up all hope that she would ever accept one of his frequent proposals of marriage, she would suddenly become very affectionate, even allow him to kiss her.
Tonight, he thought, she was looking particularly stunning.
The diagonal hem of her pale-blue frock reached nearly up to her knees on one side, and her shoulders were bare, the flimsy bodice held only by narrow sequinned straps no wider than his shoelaces.
Her small, rose-bud mouth was a bright cherry red and her huge, sapphire blue eyes were alight with interest.
‘Enjoying yourself, M-Maddy?’ he asked as Aubrey invited his partner to dance.
‘I know you didn't m-much like the p-play.
Everyone s-said it was…ripping.’
Madeleine appeared not to have heard him.
‘Do look, Pogo.
Over there by the pillar.
I think that's H. G. Wells!
One of the reasons I'm mad about this place is because you always see someone really interesting here.
Last time we came, we saw Tallulah Bankhead, remember?’
‘If you say so, Maddy,’ Pogo said.
‘I d-don't usually notice other p-people.
I'm too busy looking at you.’
Madeleine laughed.
‘You know, you really are quite nice sometimes, Pogo,’ she said.
‘Sorry if I was beastly to you earlier.’
‘You c-couldn't be b-beastly if you tried,’ Pogo said.
He was about to take her hand but, remembering she had found his unpleasantly sticky, he thought better of it.
The difficulty was, Maddy made him nervous, and the more anxious he became, the stickier became his palms.
‘I know you t-told me not to p-propose again and I p-promised, but I h-had some rather b-bad news today.
I'm being p-posted, so…’
Madeleine now gave him her full attention.
‘Oh, do tell, Pogo.
Where to?
When?
I thought you were going to be here in London for ages.’
‘S-so did I,’ her companion said mournfully.
‘But the p-powers that be have decided I'm to go to Jamaica.
D-decent p-place, actually.
Lots of chaps would like to go in my p-place, but…my commanding officer says it's not on.
D-don't want to leave you, you see.’
‘You mean you tried to get out of it?
Jamaica?
The West Indies?’
Madeleine cried.
‘But that's a wonderful place to go, Pogo.’
Yes, I know, g-good place for cricket, sailing, f-fishing and p-polo, but you wouldn't be there to watch me p-play.
H-have to admit it, old thing, I'm h-head over h-heels in love with you.’
‘Oh, Pogo,’ Madeleine breathed.
‘I do wish you weren't.
I mean, I do like you, you know I do.
Better than anyone else actually.
But I'm not in love with you.
At least, I don't think I am.’
Pogo regarded her longingly from beneath sandy-coloured lashes.
The summer sun, to which he was so often exposed during his many sporting pursuits, had accentuated his freckles.
‘Couldn't you t-try?’ he suggested.
‘I m-mean, is there honestly no h-hope?’
‘Well, I'm not in love with anyone else, if that's  anything to go by,’ Madeleine said.
‘And I'd miss you a lot if you went away.
Are you really going to Jamaica?
I mean, it's certain?’
‘Absolutely, although I d-don't know when.
The CO just said it was advance n-notice.’
The thought of going to live in the West Indies was exciting, Madeleine thought.
One of her schoolfriends had married a Bermudan and wrote in the most glowing terms about the life there.
It all sounded like one big, never-ending party, and the climate was wonderful all the year round.
Pogo's family were very well connected and he had an entrée to every branch of society.
He was, moreover, an extremely wealthy young man who thought nothing of taking a string of polo ponies wherever he went.
The Dunbar family had houses in London, Scotland, Ireland and a villa in Biarritz, as well as their own yacht.
Pogo was even on Christian name terms with some members of the Royal Family.
If she were to marry him as he wanted, and, indeed, as her mother wanted, she would enjoy all these assets.
Pogo was six foot two and, although not exactly good-looking, he had a pleasant, friendly face and was a keen athlete.
Why, then, was she not in love with him?
As Primrose and her brother rejoined them at the table, Madeleine continued to pursue her own thoughts.
She knew it was silly of her and that her mother would be the first to tell her so, but she had never quite forgotten Harry Keynes.
There had been something about him which had affected her deep down inside.
She had sensed something more than mere adoration in the way he had kissed her and been aware of her body's response.
Neither Pogo nor any other of her various escorts had ever aroused that same sensation of longing.
Could that have been love, real love? she asked herself now, as she had many times before.
When Harry replied to her letters, her heart never failed to miss a beat as she recognized his handwriting.
No one knew of it, but she had a snapshot of him standing beside Aubrey in the garden at The Grange hidden in her handkerchief sachet.
Sometimes, when she had been to a romantic film, or had been kissed good-night by Pogo, she had sat on the edge of her bed, staring at that dark, handsome, boy's face and tried to conjure up the memory of his living presence.
It was a long, long time since he'd gone off to America and now, at last, he was coming back on a month's holiday.
In two days' time, she thought, she would actually see him.
Would he still be able to arouse in her that same strange feeling that was part sweetness and part pain?
He must have grown up now just as she had done.
Would they find each other much changed, or would it be like it was when he had come back from school for the holidays?
According to Aubrey, he had a girl in Kentucky he was keen on.
Would that have altered the way he'd always felt about her ?
He'd asked her to wait for him, and although she'd been too angry at the time to say that she would, she had nevertheless avoided marriage to anyone else despite the many proposals she'd had.
Once she had seen Harry again, she would know if she'd only imagined that special magic between them.
Meanwhile, Pogo would just have to wait for an answer.
Despite her parents' invitation to Harry to stay with them in London while he was back in England, he'd written to say that he had already promised to go to Bertie Alcott's home in Cadogan Square.
He'd sounded regretful but pointed out that he had committed himself and felt it would be ill-mannered to tell his hostess he had now made other arrangements.
He was, however, anxious to see as much of Aubrey and Madeleine as time allowed.
His only other commitments were visits to the Pritchetts.
It struck Madeleine that this was surely a waste of time.
It was many years since he'd had anything in common with his foster family and she would have expected him to use his sojourn in America as a tactful method of ending the association, of breaking ties that could have no conceivable advantage for him.
One was simply not on friendly terms with people like gardeners and their offspring.
It was no fault of Harry's that he had been  mistakenly put in the care of such people, although there was nothing to be said against the Pritchetts — a decent, hard-working family — other than their class.
According to letters her mother had received from Uncle Félix, Alice Pritchett had done quite amazingly well and was going to be given the new London branch of her uncle's fashion house to manage.
She, Madeleine, would have to buy some clothes there once it opened.
Everyone seemed to be talking about Verveine creations as being ‘the thing’.
But Alice was the only one of the Pritchetts who had, from all accounts, risen above her station in life.
as if guessing the trend of his sister's thoughts, Aubrey said suddenly, ‘One of my great friends, Harry Keynes, is coming over from the United States next week, Dunbar.
I'll introduce you.
You two should get along like a house on fire as he's by way of being quite an authority on horses these days.
You can show him that string of polo ponies you're so proud of.’
‘Splendid!
N-nothing I'd l-like more,’ Pogo said with his usual enthusiasm.
‘Take him down to Hurlingham, eh?’
‘Why not?’
Aubrey agreed good-naturedly.
‘I've booked some centre-court seats for Wimbledon too.
He's not a bad tennis player, though cricket's really his game.
Thought we might go down to Grafton for the Old Boys’ match against the first XI.
Too late to get him in the team, though.’
‘Keynes, you say?’
Pogo asked.
‘Can't say I've m-met anyone of that name.’
Madeleine laughed as a feeling of excitement coursed through her.
‘He's vaguely connected to the Harveys,’ she answered.
‘He's been living with the Earl of Kinmuire in Kentucky.’
‘Wouldn't surprise me if he marries the old boy's daughter,’ Aubrey said.
‘We'll know more about that when we see him.
Thought I'd go and meet the boat — docks at Southampton.
Want to come along, Dunbar?’
‘Oh, do let's go, Pogo.
I'd love the drive down there.
It'ud be fun,’ Madeleine said quickly.
‘Then we'll g-go in my Bentley,’ Pogo suggested.
‘Do the old girl good to have a d-decent s-spin.’
‘Thought you said the other day you felt sick in a Bentley,’ Aubrey said.
The look Madeleine gave him would have withered anyone other than her brother.
‘Oh, well, please yourself,’ he said and, worried lest Primrose should have felt excluded from the conversation, as well as the trip to Southampton, he offered to give her two of his tickets to Wimbledon.
‘Oh, I say, Aubrey, that's jolly decent of you,’ she said, beaming at him from round, blue eyes.
‘Daddy's been trying like mad to get hold of some.
He's frightfully keen.
Thanks an awful lot!’
Later, when Aubrey had left to take Primrose home, Pogo said, ‘She c-couldn't hold a candle to you, Maddy.
I n-never know what to say to g-girls like that.
Get hopelessly tongue-tied.
It's d-different with you — you've always g-got something to t-talk about.
W-will you think about it, M-Maddy?
Marrying me and coming out to Jamaica, I mean?’
‘I don't see how there'd be time,’ Madeleine prevaricated.
‘You can't get married in five minutes.
Weddings take ages to prepare.’
‘But we could get a special l-licence,’ Pogo persisted.
‘I d-don't suppose we'll go for at least a m-month.
We c-could h-have our honeymoon out there.’
When Madeleine did not reply, he continued eagerly, ‘They'd give us m-married quarters, but if you d-didn't like them, we could rent a house — whatever t-took your fancy.’
This suggestion more than any other caught Madeleine's interest.
It was all very well living in London, or, when her mother insisted, at the house in Brighton, but they were not her houses, and although she was almost twenty she was still very much subject to her parents' control.
She could never go anywhere without her mother's permission and prior vetting of her escort.
It was only because her mother approved so strongly of Pogo that she was allowed to go out with him to places like this, and  then, as often as not, her mother insisted that Aubrey went too.
If she married Pogo, she could do exactly as she pleased and she would be mistress of her own home.
Pogo never refused any request she made if it was in his power to satisfy her.
‘I'll think about it,’ she said.
‘But you're not to count on it, Pogo.
You do understand that, don't you?’
‘Oh, yes, I d-do!
Good L-Lord, Maddy, you've no idea how happy you've m-made me.
I m-mean, it's absolutely splendid just knowing you'll think about it.
S-seriously, I mean.’
‘Well, don't go on about it,’ Madeleine said irritably.
‘It's more than likely I won't want to do it.
So you're not to talk about it to anyone.
I absolutely forbid it.
If you get all serious, I'll begin to wish I hadn't said anything at all.’
Pogo looked suitably crestfallen.
‘I really am a s-silly ass s-sometimes, aren't I?’ he said apologetically.
‘C-can't think why you p-put up with me.’
‘Now you're being utterly futile,’ Madeleine told him.
‘Come on, let's dance.
I'm getting bored sitting here.’
Conscious of the fact that his palms were sweating even more markedly than usual, Pogo hurriedly pulled on his white gloves and led his impatient partner on to the floor.
When Harry had kissed Cora-Beth goodbye in Kentucky a week ago, he had been convinced that he loved her.
Now, having met Madeleine again, he knew that he loved them both!
It had been a wonderful surprise seeing Madeleine with Aubrey and their friend, Lionel Dunbar, on the quayside.
She had thrown herself into his arms and hugged him as if she were still a schoolgirl.
However, when she disappeared into the powder room at the hotel where they stopped for lunch on the way back to London and Dunbar went off to book a table in the restaurant, he and Aubrey had a moment alone together.
Aubrey had laughingly referred to Lionel as Madeleine's ‘intended’.
They did not appear to be engaged, nor was Madeleine sporting a ring, but Harry had had no opportunity to discover if the army captain was really her fiance.
He was  on his way to dine with the Debraces in their London house, where, he assumed, he would discover the facts.
When he reached number six, Cavendish Street, he was shown by a maid into the drawing-room, where Sir Philip and Lady Debrace stood waiting to welcome him.
‘Be damned if you haven't grown a few more inches, m'boy,’ Sir Philip said, shaking Harry warmly by the hand.
‘Filled out too.
Hope you haven't acquired one of those Yankee accents in the States?’
Harry laughed as he shook Lady Debrace's outstretched hand.
‘No, sir.
If anything, I'll have acquired a Southern drawl.
Before I forget, Mr Harvey and his daughter have asked me to convey their very kind regards.’
‘Deuced bad business, losing his boy like that.
Very tragic.
People got used to it in the war but now…well, time will soften the blow.
It usually does.’
‘Do sit down, Harry,’ Eloise said as she sat on the sofa, patting the cushioned seat beside her.
‘Aubrey and Madeleine will be here presently.
They are still changing.
They went to see that new celluloid ’ Plastigram’film at the Coliseum and were late back.
I haven't seen it yet, but I am told it's quite spectacular.
You have to wear these strange spectacles to obtain a kind of three-dimension effect.’
‘New-fangled nonsense, if you ask me,’ said Sir Philip as he poured Harry a drink.
It was the first time Harry had ever seen him do such a thing for himself, but then he had heard that staff were far less easy to come by since the war.
Perhaps he no longer had a butler.
‘Did the children give you all the news?’
Eloise asked.
‘I expect you remember Sally, our maid?
She married Frederick and they manage our house in Brighton.
Poor Frederick, it took him two years to get over Alice's departure to France.
You know about her, of course.
My brother-in-law is making her manageress of the London salon he's opening in the autumn.
Isn't it quite splendid?’
‘I'm meeting her tomorrow off the boat train,’ Harry replied, ‘and we're going down to Calking together.
I  expect she'll tell me all about the new job then.
Despite our interchange of letters, I feel we've rather lost touch over the years, so it'll be wonderful to see her again.’
Before Eloise could comment, Aubrey came into the room.
‘Sorry we're late, old boy,’ he said.
‘Pickles ran into some friends and was trying to make up a party to go dancing tonight.
Thank goodness, they couldn't make it.
I don't think I could stand another evening just yet at that nightclub she and Dunbar seem so crazy about.’
‘You've met Captain Dunbar, haven't you?’
Eloise said to Harry.
‘Such a very nice young man.
Don't tell Madeleine I said so because she'll deny it just to be contrary, but I'm very much hoping the two of them will soon be getting engaged.
Captain Dunbar's been around now for over a year and most of Madeleine's suitors last only a few months, so we think it's serious.’
‘Oh, the fellow's smitten all right,’ Sir Philip said jovially.
‘It's that little minx of mine who won't make up her mind to settle down.’
‘She's still very young, dear,’ Eloise said.
‘Give her time.’
‘I married you before you were twenty,’ Sir Philip said.
‘Haven't regretted it, have you, m'dear?’
‘No, of course not, my love,’ Eloise replied, smiling.
‘But things have changed now.
Young girls have so much more freedom than we had in my day.
Madeleine does more or less whatever she wants.’
‘Mummy, that simply isn't true,’ Madeleine said as she came hurrying into the drawing-room.
‘You and Daddy always want to know where I'm going, what I'm doing, who I'm with.
I'm sure American girls don't have all these silly rules, do they, Harry?’
‘I can't answer for anyone but Cora-Beth,’ Harry said.
‘I suppose it's different for her, but she doesn't very often leave Blue Ash Farm and it's way out in the wilds.
Mr Harvey does want to know about it if she goes into Lexington — that's our nearest town — but then someone  has to drive her there and back, so she's never without an escort.
It's different here in London.’
‘Very different,’ Sir Philip said.
‘All you young people think about these days is ‘having a good time’.
You'd think there was no tomorrow the way you behave.
Aftermath of the war, I suppose.’
‘Oh, let's not harp back to the war, Daddy,’ Madeleine said as she reached up to plant a kiss on his cheek.
‘You haven't told me if you like my new dress?’
They all turned to look at her, but it was Harry's reaction for which Madeleine was watching.
Pirouetting in the beaded chiffon dress with its daring low back, she gazed questioningly at him.
‘Like it?’ she said.
‘You shouldn't ask for compliments, Pickles,’ Aubrey reproached her.
‘I don't think I've ever met anyone more vain than you.
Other girls wait to be told they look halfway decent, don't they, Harry?’
Harry laughed.
‘I see you two still bicker as much as ever,’ he said.
‘However, you really do look very nice, Madeleine.
It's a lovely dress.’
She did indeed look more stunning than he had ever in his dreams imagined.
He could feel his heart thudding furiously and hoped desperately that he'd succeeded in making his voice sound casual.
Madeleine left her father's side and came to tuck her arm through his.
‘Don't pay any attention to Aubrey,’ she muttered in a voice still audible to her brother.
‘He's just jealous because each time the telephone rings it's for me and not for him.
And because you're much more handsome than he is.’
‘Sucking up now,’ Aubrey said, laughing.
‘Watch her, Harry!
She's an incorrigible flirt.
Must have every swain at her feet.
I can tell you this much, if I were Lionel Dunbar, I'd have packed her in months ago.
Can't imagine why he actually wants to marry her.’
‘That's quite enough, you two,’ Eloise broke in.
‘Harry is our guest.
He'll think we have no manners at all.’
‘Oh, Mummy, he's not our guest.
He's almost one of the family.
You seem to have forgotten we were all children together.’
‘Then it's high time you stopped behaving like a child, young lady,’ her father said.
‘Now then, Harry, m'boy — let's hear about this stud farm you're running.
Done pretty well for yourself, I gather.
You going to marry Harvey's girl?
He wrote and told me it was on the cards.’
‘I…
I don't know.
I mean, I'm not actually sure,’ Harry said, feeling acutely embarrassed.
‘I mean, I haven't exactly proposed or anything.’
‘So she hasn't turned you down, eh?
Well, good luck to you, boy.
You're very happy out there, aren't you?
Good move sending you off to prove yourself.
Pretty sure you could, of course.’
Harry glanced swiftly at Madeleine, but she had turned her back on him so he was unable to see her reactions to father's comments.
Surely she could not be jealous of Cora-Beth, he thought?
Aubrey was probably right — she just wanted to be able to number him among her many admirers.
By all accounts, she was going to marry Lionel Dunbar.
I'll make her tell me outright, he told himself as the maid rang the gong for dinner.
I won't believe it unless she tells me herself.
Maybe I'm not too late after all, and there till a chance.
As he took his hostess's arm and led her into the dining-room, he did not glance again at Madeleine.
He dared not do so for he knew one thing for certain— that he had never really fallen out of love with this stunningly beautiful girl.
1924
Alice's heart seemed to be thumping in time with the train wheels as she looked at Harry's glowing face opposite her.
His dark eyes were bright with excitement as the train steamed out of Victoria Station on its way to Burgess Hill.
‘Do you realize it's two years, six months and six days since I saw you on to a train — possibly this very one — the day before I went to America?
It's so wonderful to see you, Alice.
You look marvellous.
A bit thin, though.’
‘I need to be thin, to do justice to Monsieur Félix's clothes,’ Alice said, glancing down at her low-waisted frock of indigo-blue jersey.
With its large, carved buttons running diagonally from shoulder to hip, it was one of her favourites and so becoming, Félix had told her she might keep it.
‘Well, you certainly look very dashing,’ Harry said with genuine admiration.
‘You know, I wanted to take you to lunch at the Ritz, like we did last time, but it would have made us so late in Calking.
Still, there'll be another chance, won't there?
You said you'd be in London for several weeks and I'm here for a month.’
‘I do have a certain amount of work to do,’ Alice said, ‘but I can fit in with your plans, Harry.
I'm due some holiday time.’
‘That's really good news.
And talking of news, Alice, you might be interested to hear that Madeleine may be getting engaged to an army officer called Lionel Dunbar.
He's really absolutely the right choice for her,’ he ended ruefully.
‘I mean, he's from the right kind of background  and he has more money that he knows what to do with.
I can't begin to tell you how beautiful she is these days.
She always was pretty, of course, but now…
Well, she takes one's breath away.’
Alice looked down at her handbag and fiddled meaninglessly with the clasp.
‘Are you still in love with her?’ she forced herself to ask.
Harry sighed.
‘Regrettably, yes!
The trouble is, she's got this chap in tow.
He's being posted out to the West Indies and he's asked her to marry him and go with him.
With my background, I'm not exactly eligible, am I?
Not to mention my impecunious state.’
‘Is she going?’
‘That's just it — she can't make up her mind.
Last night, after her parents had gone up to bed, and Aubrey very tactfully made himself scarce, I had a chance to ask her.
First she said she was going to marry Dunbar and then…
Well, she asked me to kiss her, which of course I did, and then she said maybe she wouldn't marry him; that she thought she might be in love with me.
Honestly, Alice, I simply don't know what to believe.
I told her I still loved her and asked her how she'd feel about going out to Kentucky.
She said she wouldn't want to do that — live on a stud farm, miles away from anywhere; that she'd be lonely and miss all her friends.’
‘So she doesn't love you enough,’ Alice said thoughtfully.
Harry gave her a boyish grin.
‘That's what I thought but then, when I kissed her again, she said she did love me; that she was fearfully jealous of Cora-Beth.
She hadn't known until Sir Philip mentioned it at dinner last night that I'd been thinking about marrying her.
I feel so dreadfully sorry for Cora-Beth, Alice.
She's been terribly cut up about her brother.
Mr Harvey is devastated too.
Thank goodness he has Cora-Beth to comfort him.
Do you know, he didn't even care when Mr Riddle agreed to let his stallion, Man o'War, cover one of our mares?
That's been one of his life-time  ambitions.
Man o'War is probably one of the best race horses the world has ever known.
Alice, am I boring you with all this?’
Alice smiled.
‘No, of course not.
I want to know everything about your life out there.
You're going back, aren't you?’
Harry nodded.
‘For a while anyway.
I promised Mr Harvey I would.
Of course, he's terribly anxious for me to settle down out there, marry Cora-Beth and become an American citizen, the way his father did years ago.
Do you realize that according to some strange Scottish law about dynasties, Cora-Beth is now heir to the title and the Kinmuire estate?
Mr Harvey is waiting for confirmation, but it seems pretty certain although it's very unusual.
I wonder what my father would have said if he'd known his illegitimate son might yet marry one of the Kinmuires.’
‘But you wouldn't marry Cora-Beth for that reason alone, would you?’
Alice asked.
‘No, certainly not,’ Harry said emphatically.
‘I'm not interested in titles, and even if I were, it wouldn't be fair to marry Cora-Beth just for that reason.
I'd have to be sure I loved her, and I'm not!
It was different when I was actually with her — we always get along so well.
In a way, it's a bit like being with you, Alice; I can say anything I want to her and she always seems to understand, just like you do.
If it wasn't for Madeleine…’
‘It seems to me as if Madeleine is going to decide matters for you,’ Alice said quietly.
She was surprised to find how calm and reasonable she sounded, for although she had expected no different, to hear Harry speaking so ardently of his love for another girl felt as if an icy hand were clutching her heart.
‘If this army fellow is leaving London, he's sure to want an answer before he goes.
If Madeleine does decide to marry him — or get engaged to him — then you'll know where you stand.
I suppose not everyone in this life is able to marry the person they love most in the world.’
‘Why, Alice,’ Harry said, staring at her curiously, ‘you  sound as if you've fallen in love with someone you can't have.
Is that true?’
For a moment, Alice toyed with the idea of denying it.
Then she said, ‘I suppose so.
The man I love is in love with someone else.
He…he only sees me as a…a dear friend.
I don't think anything will ever change that so it's very stupid of me even to hope…to live in the hope that he…that it'll ever be different.
I dare say in the end I'll settle for second-best.’
‘Second-best,’ Harry repeated.
‘You mean there really is someone special?
Why didn't you write and tell me all this, Alice?
I tell you all my secrets.’
By now Alice had regained complete control of herself.
She forced a laugh.
‘Because there's really nothing to tell,’ she said.
‘I'm much too busy with my career to bother about such things.
Are you pleased with me — that I'm to manage the London branch of the Maison de Verveine?’
‘Pleased — and tremendously proud,’ Harry said fervently.
‘In a way,— I'm not in the least surprised, but on the other hand, I somehow can't see you as one of these modern, independent career women.
I think of the way you used to help Mum when we were kids — how kind and efficient you were even when you were quite small.
Somehow I think of you as…well, as a mother, I suppose.
Now, seeing you sitting there, looking more like a film star than the Alice I used to know, I'm not so sure.
Which is the real Alice?’
‘This is,’ Alice said quickly.
‘I don't think I shall ever marry and have children.
I love my work.
I enjoy what I do.
Isn't that enough?’
‘Yes, of course,’ Harry said, ‘but I still think you should have someone to take care of you.
You may like what you're doing, but it must be awfully lonely at times.’
‘Perhaps!
But I have friends — people who do care about me.
And there's Jules…and Monsieur Félix.’
‘That isn't what I meant,’ Harry said.
‘I meant everyone needs someone to love and to love them.’
‘Well, I love you for a start — and there's Mum and Dad  and the kids.
I told you Jenny wanted to get married, didn't I?’
It reminded Harry of his plan to give Jenny and her boy some money towards the shop they were saving to buy.
Alice thought it a wonderful gesture, and for the remainder of the journey they discussed their joint wish to make Will and Martha Pritchett financially secure for the rest of their lives.
‘Although I'm very far from being a rich man as yet,’ Harry said with a smile, ‘by Mum's and Dad's standards I am.
I'm paid an incredibly generous salary and as I have no living expenses, I've been able to save nearly all of it.
Then there's the money I've made at the races.
Mr Harvey always take us to the Kentucky Derby and we stay in Washington for the Preakness meeting, then go on to some friends of the Harveys in New York.
Twice when we were there, I backed the winner of the Belmont Stakes.
And, of course, we go to all the Lexington race meetings, being so nearby.’
He grinned as he saw Alice's doubtful expression.
‘Don't look so shocked,’ he said.
‘I haven't become an inveterate gambler like Uncle Cosmo.
We only bet when Mr Harvey tells us who to back, and nine times out of ten he's right, so I've nearly doubled my savings.
That's how I could afford my passage to England and this holiday.
On top of everything, he gave me 500 dollars for my twenty-first birthday and it's this I intend sharing between Jenny and the family.’
‘It's a lovely idea, Harry, and very generous of you,’ Alice said warmly, ‘but you know how proud Dad is.
He won't take charity.’
‘Then you'll have to make him see sense if I can't, Alice.
He'll have to agree for Mum's sake.’
It proved to be the right approach.
Martha had been far from well for some time and was in need of another operation.
Will, now approaching his seventies, wanted to retire but their savings were insufficient to allow him to do so.
Bent almost double, he was still spending forty hours a week gardening for the new owners of The Grange.
It was Martha who finally made the decision to accept Harry's gift.
She surprised all of them, not least her husband, when, after listening to Alice's persuasions and Will's stubborn refusal to give way, she said, ‘You been master of your house ever since the day I married you, Will Pritchett.
I ain't never argued with you but once and that were when you said it'ud be wrong for us to keep Harry.
T'was you, surely, who let me have my way then, so I'm not saying, as I could, that you was wrong and I was right.
Seems I was right all the same, and if Harry's got money to spare as he doesn't know what to do with, then it's not for us to deny his right to spend it any  whichaway he pleases.
I'd be more'n happy to move out of this tied cottage and have the comfort of our own place, and I reckon with what Harry's offered, we'll soon have enough to buy summat small in Calking village, and if'n you doant want to come with me, Will Pritchett, then you can stay on here by yourself.
I'll not be wanting to live with a man what's too proud to take a helping hand from someone as was like our own son, and that's a fact.’
Will got up and, as fast as his old body would allow, stormed out into the garden, leaving his children, mouths agape, behind him.
‘Oh, Mum, you shouldn't have said them things, surely,’ Jenny gasped when she could find her voice.
‘Supposing Dad…supposing he says he'll stay on here?’
‘Wait and see, girl,’ Martha said without moving from her chair.
‘Just give him a bit of time.
Alice, you and Jenny can get the table laid.
I've made Harry's favourite coconut cake and there's cold ham and one of your Dad's lettuces all ready.
Arthur, go and wash your hands, and you, Ted…go upstairs and see what Edna's up to.
She can't still be curling her hair.
She's been at it all afternoon.’
She turned to look at Harry and suddenly she smiled.
‘Wouldn't have known you if'n I passed you in the street,’ she said, ‘'cepting those eyes of yourn.
They haven't changed none, nor've you lost them curls.
Right handsome little boy you was and now you're a right  handsome gentleman.’
She looked away, her faded blue eyes resting now on Alice.
‘Reckon as how our Alice's another as I can be proud of,’ she said.
‘Right little tearaway you was, Alice, when you was a little'un, stamping your feet and your eyes blazing if'n you couldn't get your own way.
Happen you doant remember back that far, but when I was nursing Harry that first day we had him, you was the one what was going to choose a name for him.
You was the one what was going to tek care of him.
He were yourn, you kept saying, though he weren't no more yourn than mine.’
‘That was a long time ago, Mum,’ Alice said quickly.
‘A very long time ago.
Do you realize I'm twenty-five now, coming on twenty-six?’
‘I does know it — and it's high time you was thinking of getting wed, my girl.
You get any thinner and there won't be a young man as'll look at you twice.
You doant eat enough in those foreign parts, surely.
Now here comes your father, so sit yourself down and eat a decent meal for a change.’
As Harry sat down in the chair Martha indicated, he glanced at Will, who, looking rather hot and red-faced, was now taking his place at the head of the table.
‘'matoes is coming on well,’ he said.
‘I've brought a few in for tea.’
‘That'll be nice,’ Martha replied, as if there'd been no earlier ruction.
‘Ain't no one as can grow better ‘matoes than yourn, Will.
Remember her ladyship saying so?
Now sit down, Edna, and eat your tea.
You remember Harry, doant you?’
‘Yes, Mum,’ the girl said, smiling at Harry.
Will harrumphed.
‘She doant remember nothing,’ he said conversationally, ‘but she ain't no trouble — does what her mother tells her, no trouble.
More'n I can say for you, Harry, when you was a lad.’
He gave one of his rare smiles as he looked at his own two sons.
‘Wouldn't think it now, would you?
A good beating like I gave young Harry now and agin don't do you nothing but good.
Remember that when I next take my belt to you.’
So that was the end of the argument, Harry realized.
Martha had taken a stand and Will had given way.
He felt an enormous sense of gratification mixed with affection for his two foster parents.
This visit, he told Alice as the train took them back to London later that evening, had been a very happy one and it was his intention to go down to Calking to see them all again very soon.
‘Will I see you tomorrow, Harry?’
Alice asked, as the train slowed down on its approach to the station.
‘Oh, Alice, I'm afraid not.
I promised Madeleine last night I'd go with them to see Dunbar playing polo.
In the evening, Aubrey's got tickets for Covent Garden.
How about the day after?’
Alice bit back the tears of disappointment that were pricking her eyelids, and parodied a smile.
‘Let's see how it goes, shall we?’ she said.
‘Here's my address.
The telephone isn't connected yet but you can drop a note in.
If…if there's time, I'd like to show you the new salon in Albemarle Street.’
‘And I'd love to see it,’ Harry said.
‘I really am sorry about tomorrow, Alice.
I'm sure the day after will be fine, but I'll do as you say and leave a note.
Maybe one evening we could all go out together — you, Aubrey, Dunbar, Madeleine and me.
I could bring along Bertie Alcott too.
He's at a loose end and I'd be enormously proud to introduce you.
You'd like him.’
‘I'm sure I would if he's a friend of yours, Harry, but I think it's not such a good idea for you to include me with Aubrey and Madeleine.
It could be awkward for all of us.
Have you forgotten that I was once their mother's maid?’
Harry had forgotten.
Those days seemed such a very long time ago, and seeing Alice now, so chic, so elegant, it was almost impossible to remember her in her grey-and-white-striped uniform and white cap, calling Madeleine ‘Miss’ and Aubrey ‘Master’!
He'd all but forgotten his own early childhood at The Grange, when he had been the gardener's scruffy little lad, graciously permitted by Lady Debrace to play with her son.
Would the Debraces have forgotten, he wondered?
What would they say if he were  to ask Sir Philip if he could marry their daughter?
And Madeleine — had she forgotten?
He felt suddenly deeply depressed.
It was all very well for him to have told himself that he no longer minded about his illegitimacy.
In America, with the Harveys, it somehow had not mattered; nor had they been in the least concerned about how he had been raised, judging him for what he was now.
Could the Debraces be as open-minded?
‘Alice, they aren't snobs,’ he said.
‘If they had been, they'd never have allowed me to mix with their children.
I honestly don't think they would object to my marrying Madeleine on the grounds of my birth.
I know I haven't anything to offer her and that it might be years before I could afford to run a house and give her the kind of life style she's used to, so I wouldn't expect Sir Philip to agree to it for a long while.’
Alice bit her lip.
‘It's different for you, Harry.
They know your father was of their class.
I'm not, nor ever will be.
Goodness knows how many years ago, when you first told me you were going to marry Madeleine, I warned you that the gentry don't marry working-class folk.
They don't accept them socially either, and, unlike you, I belong to the working classes.’
‘It used to be like that, but times have changed,’ Harry argued.
‘People like Mrs Harry Brown are accepted in society simply because they have enormous sums of money.
Aubrey was talking about her only yesterday.
She rented the Duchess of Norfolk's mansion in St James's Square and filled it with red and white roses for a party.
Everyone was scrabbling to get invited.
Dunbar took Madeleine and they had a marvellous time, or so Aubrey said.’
Alice stood up as the train slowed at the platform.
‘Maybe I take after my Dad, Harry — too proud to risk a rebuff!
And if I don't mind not meeting up with them, why should you?’
Why, indeed, should it bother him so much, Harry thought, as he escorted Alice back to the rented flat in  Charles Street?
He found it deeply offensive to think of Alice-his beautiful Alice — being rejected by anyone.
Maybe he really would introduce her to Bertie Alcott.
Although his friend must be a few years younger than Alice, he was fancy-free, and Alice was so lovely to look at these days, the age difference wouldn't be noticed.
Despite everything Alice had said about never marrying or having children, he didn't entirely believe her.
She was a sweet, loving person and would make someone a wonderful wife.
It wasn't right for her to be spending all her time with this pansy Jules fellow or her elderly patron.
Despite his good intentions, however, all thought of Alice slipped from his mind next day when he accompanied Aubrey and Madeleine to the polo match.
Although he was obliged to ‘share’ Madeleine with Dunbar during lunch and after the game — which he found incredibly exciting — there were long periods during the chukkers when he had her undivided attention.
When she thought no one was looking, she reached out and touched his hand and her eyes were soft and inviting.
She appeared quite uninterested in Pogo's exploits on the field, even when he scored several goals.
‘For goodness’ sake, Pickles, stop flirting with Harry,’Aubrey said testily.
‘Dunbar's coming over and he'll have fifty fits if he sees you holding Harry's hand.
Or are you trying to make the poor fellow jealous?’
‘Don't be such a nincompoop,’ Madeleine retorted, apparently not in the least disconcerted.
‘Harry's an old and dear friend.
Why shouldn't I be nice to him?
Anyway, if you weren't so futile, you'd know jolly well I've no need to make Pogo jealous.’
Aubrey frowned.
‘Oh, we all know he's your adoring slave.
But you don't have to be so beastly to him, Pickles.
Come on, Harry, let's go to the bar for a drink and leave Pogo the field.’
Ignoring his sister's furious gaze, he dragged Harry away.
‘Pickles really is absolutely hopeless,’ he said as they walked over to the crowded marquee.
‘She simply can't  stand the thought of any eligible male not being crazy about her.
Ever since the pater told her you might be going to marry Cora-Beth, she's been determined to win you back.
You used to be such an ass about her in the old days.
Of course, she gets away with it most of the time because she's so pretty.
‘You're making her out to be a bit heartless,’ Harry protested awkwardly.
‘I'm sure she has no idea how…how attractive she is.’
‘Well, take it from me, she knows exactly what's she doing.
Now then, old chap, let's have some champagne.’
Despite Aubrey's warning, Harry became convinced that Madeleine was not simply flirting with him.
During the next fortnight, she divided her attentions equally between him and Dunbar, but, she whispered to Harry one evening in the back of the Bentley, she would much prefer to be with him and she was being nice to Pogo only because she didn't want to hurt his feelings.
‘Can't you find an excuse for us to be alone together, Harry?’ she asked.
‘Then I'd have a chance to explain everything.
We never see each other on our own.
I'm sure Aubrey tags along on purpose to annoy me.’
‘You know that isn't true,’ Harry reproached her, although his heart was beating with excitement at the thought that Madeleine was as anxious to be alone with him as he with her.
‘It's Aubrey or Dunbar who buy the tickets and arrange things, so naturally they're both around.’
This past fortnight had been crowded with activity.
There'd been a whole day's racing at Goodwood, two afternoons at Wimbledon for the semi-finals and finals, the Eton and Harrow cricket match, a day at Henley and invitations to lunch and dinner parties, the theatre, the opera and then on to one of the nightclubs.
Harry was able to fit in only two further meetings with Alice — one when she had taken him to see the very impressive new branch of the Maison Verveine, and the other when she had invited him back to the flat to meet Jules.
Somewhat surprisingly, Harry thought, he liked Jules.
He found the  young man witty, intelligent and obviously devoted to Alice.
His holiday in England was flying by, Harry thought on his way back to the Alcotts.
Perhaps he should extend it, for he had not yet taken Alice to the promised lunch at the Ritz, or been up to Leicestershire to see Mrs Appleby, or fulfilled his promise to Jenny to go down to Calking to see the shop and meet Jack and his family.
He had also promised Mr Harvey that he would go to Maythorpe House and make sure that all was being kept in order there.
Somehow all these less exciting duties had had to take second place to the social events Aubrey and Madeleine were constantly arranging for his entertainment.
It was Lionel Dunbar who inadvertently solved two of Harry's problems for him.
On hearing that Harry wished to go up to Melton Mowbray for the day, he offered to drive him in the Bentley.
He then remembered that he was on duty and said he would be more than willing for Harry to borrow his car.
Madeleine immediately insisted that Harry do so.
Aubrey, she said, was committed to a lunch party with Primrose and her parents, but she would love the drive into the country and would happily accompany Harry since she had nothing better to do.
‘You really don't mind — lending me the car, I mean?’
Harry asked the good-natured army officer.
‘I've been driving a great deal in the States but it was either a Packard or a Studebaker.’
‘Absolutely n-not, old boy.
Shan't need it m'self!
Orderly Officer, you s-see!
The old girl's insured so you d-don't have to worry if you d-do have a b-bump.’
‘You're a darling, Pogo,’ Madeleine said, throwing her arms round his neck and kissing his cheek.
‘I'll have to ask Mummy, but I'm sure she won't mind.
It's such a bore the way she always wants to know where I am and what I'm doing.’
Although Harry's conscience kept him awake that night until the early hours, the temptation of a day alone with Madeleine dulled his feeling of guilt about borrowing  Dunbar's car to further his own pursuit of the girl they both loved.
He knew he ought to feel guilty about Cora-Beth, to whom he had not yet written the promised letter, but with a telegram already despatched to Mrs Appleby, advising her of his visit and that he would be bringing a young lady, he told himself that it was too late to change the arrangement.
Lady Debrace seemed more concerned about Harry's ability to drive her daughter safely in so powerful a motor car than about Madeleine's reputation.
She was, furthermore, suffering a mild migraine and did not feel able to enter into one of the now familiar arguments with her headstrong young daughter about ‘conventional behaviour’.
Moreover, having read between the lines of Wendell Harvey's letters to her husband, she was certain that Harry and the Harvey girl were going to make a match of it.
As for her daughter, Madeleine had shown no signs of dropping Lionel Dunbar, and a quiet word with his mother had confirmed that he had every intention of marrying Madeleine if only she would agree to accept him.
‘Enjoy yourselves, my dears,’ she said as they prepared to leave.
‘And don't be too late back, Maddy.
Your father will be home for dinner tonight, and I'm sure he'll expect you to be here.’
As soon as they were out of the traffic and heading northwards up the main Al trunk road, Madeleine snuggled closer to Harry.
‘A whole day to ourselves,’ she said, starry-eyed.
‘Do you know, I hardly slept last night I was so excited.
What are we going to do, Harry?
We're not really going to see that old cook, are we?’
Harry eased the big car past a large furniture van and glanced uneasily at the girl beside him.
Dressed in a summer frock patterned all over with scarlet poppies, a scarlet silk scarf wound round her head, she looked devastatingly pretty.
‘It's a must, I'm afraid– Madeleine.
Actually, I'm quite looking forward to it.
Mrs Appleby's awfully nice and I think you'll like her.’
His eyes were back on the road and he did not see Madeleine's mouth turn down in a pout.
‘But I don't even know her — and anyway, what on earth can you talk about?
I mean, you can't socialize with a cook!’
‘Madeleine, Mrs Appleby is a person, not just a cook; and in the days when I lived at Maythorpe House, she was enormously kind to me,’ Harry said.
‘What's more, you probably won't have to do any talking — she'll do it all!
There's nothing she likes better than to reminisce about the days when my…my father was a boy.
She was with the family for years and years.
Besides, I've already told her we'd have lunch with her.’
‘Lunch,’ Madeleine said as if he'd suggested something outrageous.
‘Well, I shan't go in with you.
I'll wait in the car.’
It was a moment or two before Harry plucked up the courage to say, ‘I do hope you won't do that, Madeleine.
She'd be terribly hurt.
She's sure to have got out the best china and baked a meat pie or something.
I'll have to stay at the very least an hour.
I can't possibly disappoint her.’
Madeleine was frowning.
‘You're as bad as Mummy.
She's always on about ‘doing one's duty to those who have served one well’!
Honestly, I don't see why one has to bother.
I mean, they get paid for serving you, don't they?
Daddy's just as bad spends half his life visiting patients, most of whom were never able to pay their bills.
Oh, well, I suppose if we must…’
Madeleine was still very young, Harry told himself as they drove the next ten miles in silence.
It was unreasonable of him to expect her to know what it meant to people like Mrs Appleby to receive a visit from an employer.
He could remember what a flurry Martha Pritchett used to get into when Lady Debrace stopped in for a cup of tea, and how afterwards she would tell them proudly how her ladyship had sat down and chatted as if she were no grander than Nurse Wilks!
It was for just such occasions that Martha kept her best china locked securely in the  glass cabinet and saved to get the front room furnished ‘fit for visitors’.
Madeleine, however, did not sulk for long.
The fact was, she'd been unable to get to sleep the previous night for thinking about Harry.
There would surely be lots of occasions during the day when she could get him to kiss her, she told herself.
The mere thought brought a tremor to her legs.
One of the French girls at her Swiss boarding school had told her that boys liked a girl to have a ‘poitrine ’ and they became very excited when they touched a girl's breast; this, she had maintained, explained the fashion for dresses which made a girl look flat-chested — so that as many as possible would not inflame men's passions and would thereby remain virgins.
Deliberately, Madeleine had selected a dress to wear which buttoned down the front to the waist.
It should not be too difficult, she thought, to allow one of those buttons to become undone.
This, surely, would inflame Harry and make him want to make love to her.
Not that she wanted to lose her virginity — nothing as drastic as that!
But she wanted to experience again that lovely swooning feeling only he seemed able to invoke.
Harry was not like Pogo, she reflected.
For ages now she had been able to make Pogo do whatever she wanted.
Although she was reasonably sure that Harry was still in love with her, she was concerned at all the talk there had been about him marrying the American girl.
American girls were said to have much more freedom than English ones, and Cora-Beth was older than herself.
Was it possible that she had allowed Harry to make love to her?
That Harry was now obliged to marry her?
He certainly did not seem to be missing her and, unless someone else mentioned her, he never did.
Today, somehow, she would find out which of the two of them he really loved.
Not wishing to antagonize Harry, when finally they drew up outside the little cottage in Melton Mowbray to which Mrs Appleby had now retired, Madeleine allowed herself to be persuaded inside.
At least the place was clean, she thought, as Mrs Appleby fussed round her and Harry.
‘It's that good to see you, Master Harry,’ she said when at last they were all seated comfortably round the dining-table.
‘And the young lady, of course.
Your favourite Melton Mowbray pork pie, Master Harry, and Farmer Bates let me have a nice piece of Stilton special.
Now, let me have a good look at you.’
Beaming, she clapped both hands to her cheeks.
‘You're more'n ever like your father, may he rest in peace,’ she said.
She glanced at Madeleine and added falteringly, ‘You're not the young lady from America Master Harry wrote about then, Miss Debrace?’
‘No, that's Cora-Beth — Miss Harvey,’ Harry said quickly.
‘Miss Debrace is the daughter of the family I went to live with after I left Maythorpe House.’
Mrs Appleby nodded as she cut into the pork pie.
‘I thought as how the name was familiar.
It was your father, weren't it, Miss, as sent Master Harry out to America to his relatives?’
‘I really don't know much about it,’ Madeleine said vaguely.
‘I was at school in those days, so things like that weren't discussed in front of me.’
‘Likely not,’ Mrs Appleby said.
‘So you know Master Harry's sister then — Alice Pritchett?’
‘Yes, she was my mother's maid,’ Madeleine replied.
‘And as a matter of fact, she isn't Harry's sister.
She runs a fashion house now.
I've not seen her for ages.’
‘Seems she's done right well for herself,’ Mrs Appleby commented.
‘Real nice girl, she was.
I took a real fancy to her.
Remember that day, Master Harry, when she came up to see you and the two of you hid in that there pavilion?’
The reminiscing had begun and, although she paused briefly to hand round the plates and a bowl of crisp salad to go with the pie, there was no way Harry could stop her.
He was conscious of the fact that Madeleine was toying with her food and looking increasingly bored.
Finally, Mrs Appleby noticed it too.
‘Really, I do go on so,’ she said apologetically.
‘It's just that I don't see that many people these days and when  there's company…
Likely you'll not want to stop for a cup of tea?
I dare say you've things to do, and I mustn't keep you.’
Reluctantly, Harry stood up.
‘I promised Mr Harvey — he doesn't care to use his title, Mrs Appleby — that I would go and see if all was in order at Maythorpe House.
Miss Debrace has never seen the place.
It's a long drive back to London, so perhaps we should be on our way.’
Madeleine was already on her feet and was drawing on her gloves.
‘Thanks for lunch,’ she said.
‘I really do think we should go now, Harry.
You know Mummy said I  mustn't be late back.’
‘Yes, of course.’
Harry helped the old cook to her feet and put his arms round her.
‘You're getting my postcards, aren't you?’ he asked as he kissed her on both cheeks.
There were tears in her eyes as she gazed up at him.
‘I've kept them all, Master Harry — and the snapshots.
I put them in the family album your father gave me — you'll remember the one.
When the day comes for me to pass on, it'll be yours.
I've made sure of that.’
Madeleine was already at the door and, reluctantly, Harry drew himself away.
‘It was a lovely meal,’ he said as he lifted his hand in farewell, ‘and I don't have to tell you — nobody in the world can make a pork pie like yours!’
Had he been on his own, Harry thought as he drove out of Melton Mowbray market town towards Saxby, he would have taken Mrs Appleby with him to Maythorpe House.
She would probably have enjoyed the ride in Dunbar's big Bentley.
It was such a beautiful day and suddenly he became aware of a surge of relief not to be in London.
He was a countryman at heart, and although these past weeks had been tremendous fun, it was lovely to see the grass and trees and a blue sky unclouded by smoke.
On an impulse, he removed his cap and threw it on to the back seat.
As he turned into the lane leading to the Maythorpe  estate, he became aware of Madeleine's hand, now ungloved, ruffling the back of his head.
‘Your hair's gone all curly, Harry,’ she said teasingly.
‘It reminds me of when we were little.
I used to hate it when Nanny put rags in my hair and, whenever I had a wish, I used to wish that mine was curly like yours.’
‘Oh, but you've such beautiful hair, Madeleine,’ Harry said.
‘I was so sorry when you had it cut.
But it still looks lovely.’
He was acutely conscious of the touch of Madeleine's hand, which she seemed disinclined to remove.
It rested now on the nape of his neck.
‘Look, there's the house,’ he said quickly in an attempt to divert his thoughts from the effect she was having on him.
‘I did send a telegram to the caretaker to tell him to be here to let me in.
The place looks terribly deserted.’
‘Good,’ said Madeleine quietly as he stopped the car and pulled on the brake.
‘Now we really can be alone.’
1924
Harry switched off the engine and sat staring at the big, grey, stone-built mansion with a sense of shock.
When he had first come to Maythorpe House as an ignorant thirteen-year-old who had never before lived in anything grander than a tiny gardener's cottage, he had felt awed and frightened, and unable to grasp that this huge place was now his home.
For over two long, deeply unhappy years, it had been a prison.
Now, however, almost a decade later, it did not seem nearly so large and he found himself remembering the good things — the warm, cosy atmosphere of Mrs Appleby's kitchen; the wonderful view across the garden and pastures from all the south-facing windows; the pungent smell of the horses, so well loved by Uncle Cosmo, in the well-kept stables; the fascinating portrait of his handsome father in the gallery; the stamp collection and lead soldiers that had once belonged to his father in the shabby old nursery, where he, a homesick boy, had secretly penned so many letters to Alice.
But for his guardians and his lack of friends, he could have been happy here, he thought as he went round the front of the car to open the door for Madeleine.
He could be happy here now — if by some miracle Madeleine were to agree to get married and live in this house with him.
Even if the miracle happened, would she entertain the idea of living in the Shires?
Kentucky had not appealed to her but in Leicestershire she would be in more or less familiar surroundings — and Mr Harvey had said he might live here if he so chose.
He glanced down at the girl beside him.
‘What do you think of the place?’ he asked anxiously.
Madeleine shrugged.
‘It's bigger than I'd imagined — but terribly isolated.
Look, there's the caretaker.’
An old man in corduroy breeches and cloth jacket came round the side of the house and touched his cap.
‘Mr Keynes, sir?
I bin expectin' you.
D'you want I should show you round, sir?’
Harry gave him a friendly smile.
‘There's no need for you to do that.
I'm familiar with the house.
We may be here for an hour or two so you can go on home if you wish.
I'll drop the key in as I go past the lodge.’
After the caretaker had unlocked the big front door and disappeared down the drive, Harry took Madeleine's arm and led her into the drawing-room.
Dustsheets covered all the furniture and were draped over the pictures stacked against the wall.
The rugs had been rolled up and smelt strongly of moth balls.
Despite the hot sunshine burning through the windows, which Harry now flung open, the room seemed cold and cheerless, and Madeleine shivered.
‘I hate empty houses,’ she said, clinging to Harry's arm.
‘Let's go and look upstairs.
I want to see your room…the one where they locked you up.’
Harry laughed as he refastened the windows and led Madeleine back into the hall.
‘I wasn't locked up.
I did have a gaoler, though — a horrible valet called Hicks, whose job it was to make sure I didn't mix with anyone outside the family.
I was the black sheep, you see, and Aunt Pamela didn't want the neighbours suspecting I was my father's son.’
‘I think your past is terribly romantic,’ Madeleine said as they walked slowly up the staircase.
‘Aubrey told me all about it when you went off to America.
He said your father was the Earl of Kinmuire but he didn't know who your mother was.’
‘No more do I,’ said Harry, surprised by Madeleine's broad-minded approach to the circumstances of his birth.
‘Weren't you a little shocked to hear that I was born out of wedlock .’
‘I suppose I was a bit, but as Aubrey said, it was hardly your fault, was it?
Anyway, lots of really famous people had illegitimate children.
Just look at William IV.
He had ten children, the FitzClarences, by Mrs Jordan.
So why should you care?’
‘I don't any more,’ Harry said quietly.
‘I would mind though if you thought less of me, Madeleine.’
They had reached the door of his room now and, as Harry opened it, Madeleine went past him and sat down on the edge of his old brass bedstead.
Her eyes were bright with excitement as she gazed up at him.
‘You do love me a little bit, don't you, Harry?’ she said.
‘I know you try to pretend you don't, but I can tell.’
She held out her hand with deliberate provocation and, drawing him down on the edge of the bed beside her, she gave a little laugh which came from deep in her throat.
‘Remember that time I came to your room for a midnight feast and got into your bed?
Wouldn't Mummy have been horrified if she'd known?’
‘And rightly so,’ Harry said huskily.
‘I don't think you've any idea just how attractive you are, Madeleine.’
She lay back against the heaped pile of pillows and smiled at him.
‘Aren't you going to kiss me, then?’ she asked softly.
Harry needed no second invitation.
As he gathered her into his arms and pressed his mouth to hers, he had a sudden swift memory of the nights he had lain here in this bed dreaming of her.
Now she was no dream, but a warm, trembling reality who seemed as anxious for his embrace as he was to caress her.
‘You do love me, don't you?’ she whispered.
‘You don't have to be shy with me, you know.
I've been wanting you to kiss me for absolute ages.’
She took one of his hands and drew it towards her breast.
‘Does that feel nice?’ she asked.
‘Say you love me, Harry.
Say it.’
‘I love you, I love you!
I've always loved you — ever since  I can remember,’ he murmured.
‘I've never felt like this about any other girl.’
‘Not even the American girl in Kentucky?’
‘No, not even her,’ Harry admitted.
‘It's different — the way I feel about Cora-Beth.
She's really nice and we're the best of friends, but…’
‘But I'm the one you love best,’ Madeleine said.
‘Oh, Harry, isn't this exciting?
I think I'm in love with you.
It's never like this with poor old Pogo.’
She reached up and pulled his head down, her lips parted expectantly for a renewal of his kisses.
She was aware of Harry's quickened breathing and realized that she had ‘inflamed’ him, just as the French girl had foretold.
She thought that perhaps she had inflamed herself as well, for she was longing to press her body closer to his; to feel his hands on her waist, her legs — even, she thought with a slight shock, between her legs.
The swooning sensation was growing stronger with every moment.
‘Please, Harry, please…’ she murmured, unsure what exactly she was pleading for.
‘I do love you…
I really do!’
With a groan, Harry tightened his arms around her and struggled to keep control of himself as he felt her response.
He must take care of her.
Madeleine was entirely innocent and had no idea of the strength of his physical need of her.
He moved away from her and swung his legs back over the side of the bed.
‘My darling girl,’ he said, ‘much as I hate the idea, we must stop this.
Trouble is, I love you far too much.
You do understand, don't you?’
‘No, I don't,’ Madeleine said, frowning.
‘Don't you want to go on kissing me?’
‘Of course I do —of course !’
Harry said.
‘But kissing is only a step towards making love and I've no right to do that.
Only the man you marry has the right to…to touch you.’
He turned to face her, his dark eyes burning as he stared down at her.
‘Will you marry me, Madeleine?
Did you mean it when you said just now that you loved me?
Do you love me enough to marry me?’
Madeleine sat up, her dreamy, expectant mood shattered by Harry's question.
She did love him, there was no doubt about that, but did she want to marry him?
‘I don't want to live in America,’ she said.
‘Not on a ranch.’
Harry caught hold of her hands and held them tightly in his own.
‘I know that.
We wouldn't have to live there, Madeleine.
I could get a job over here in England if that's what you want.
I've gained a great deal of experience these psst two and a half years and I think I could manage a stud farm quite easily now.
In time I hope to have my own stables.
We could live here — at Maythorpe House.’
‘Here!’
Madeleine repeated.
‘But it's miles and miles away from London.’
‘It's not really so far,’ Harry said persuasively.
‘And the house is big enough for you to have as many friends as you want to visit you.
I know I couldn't begin to give you the kind of life you'd have with Dunbar, but I'd do everything in my power to make you happy.’
‘I am happy when I'm with you,’ Madeleine said thoughtfully.
‘I suppose it could be quite fun — to be married, I mean.
Would we be very poor?’
‘I'm afraid we would — for a few years anyway,’ Harry admitted.
‘I've really no right to ask you to marry me.
I don't think your mother and father would be at all keen on the idea.’
Madeleine's face took on a new expression.
She laughed.
‘Oh, I don't pay any attention to what they think is best for me.
They're so old-fashioned.
I'll marry whom I please.’
‘My darling Madeleine, you aren't yet twenty, so it'll be a year before you come of age.
We couldn't be married without their consent.’
‘I don't see why my parents should be against our marriage,’ Madeleine said cheerfully as she snuggled against him.
‘Daddy's always thought the world of you, and I know Mummy likes you.
So does Aubrey.’
She gave  a sudden giggle.
‘He'll be against it because he won't think I'm nice enough for you.
He says I only ever think of myself, but it isn't true.
I've thought and thought about us — about us being together like this, and whether you really loved me and how it feels when you kiss me.’
‘Oh, darling,’ Harry said huskily, ‘I've thought about us too.
I never dared hope you might love me, so I tried very hard to forget you.
I can't believe this is happening, that you aren't going to marry Dunbar.
Aubrey seemed to think…and I can see that in so many ways it would be a far better match for you.
Are you really willing to wait if your parents object?’
‘Oh, do stop worrying, Harry,’ Madeleine said, ruffling his hair and covering his face with light, teasing kisses.
‘I can always talk Daddy round.
He's not all that crazy about Pogo anyway — he says he isn't a strong enough character to keep me in order!
You're so different from all the other young men I meet.
Daddy says it's quite remarkable the way you've always managed to overcome the obstacles in your life.
I mean, nobody would ever believe you'd been brought up as a gardener's boy!
It must give you the pip every time you think about those days.’
‘I was very happy with the Pritchetts,’ Harry said quietly.
‘They were very good to me, especially Alice.’
‘Oh, you were her pet.
She was always talking about you.
Isn't it amazing — her getting on so well with Uncle Félix?
Mummy says she's going to run the London salon .
I shall go and buy some dresses there.’
It crossed Harry's mind that on the kind of salary he received — even if he was lucky enough to be paid as well by an English employer as he was by Wendell Harvey — Madeleine would not be able to afford designer dresses, or any other of those expensive luxuries she took for granted.
He felt a sudden deep wave of depression, coupled with uncertainty.
Would Madeleine be happy married to him?
Could she be happy once the novelty of being a married woman wore off?
Was he being indescribably presumptuous even to suppose that Sir Philip might consider allowing his only daughter to share her life with a man who  could pay for little more than the bare necessities?
Moreover, how could he be sure Sir Philip would disregard his illegitimacy, as Madeleine appeared to do?
It was one thing for his guardian to tell Harry to forget the circumstances of his birth, but would he do so if it meant his beloved daughter had to share that stigma?
He stood up abruptly.
‘I'm going to take you home,’ he said.
‘I must speak to your father.
I owe it to him to explain what's happened between us, to get his permission to go on seeing you.’
Madeleine's brows drew together in a scowl.
‘You mean we aren't even going to get engaged?’ she asked.
Quickly, Harry put his arms round h*.
‘But of course, if your parents will permit it,’ he said.
‘I'll talk to your father tonight.’
‘I suppose you've got to,’ Madeleine said sulkily, but her mood quickly changed.
‘All right.
But kiss me again before we go, Harry.
We mightn't have another chance to be alone like this for ages and ages.’
As Harry's lips met hers, Madeleine gave a long, trembling sigh.
She did not want to have to think about problems, whatever they might be.
She wanted to stay in Harry's arms and feel the magical thrill his kisses aroused in her.
His body was so warm and strong and exciting!
She could feel the muscles of his arms jump where her hands were touching him and exulted in the power she seemed to have over him.
It was a power he too seemed to possess, she thought, as his kisses became more ardent and her body leapt to life.
‘Must we go?
Must we?’ she whispered.
‘Let's stay here all night.
Let's sleep together in the same bed, hugging each other like this.
Wouldn't it be ripping?’
‘I doubt if your parents would think so,’ Harry said, forcing himself to draw away from her.
‘No more midnight feasts until we're married!’
He eased her arms from around his neck and, smiling, planted a quick kiss on the end of her nose.
‘There,’ he said, ‘that will have to last you until we get back to London.’
Madeleine had no intention of agreeing to this suggestion and, throughout the long journey back in the car, she remained as close to him as the gear lever allowed, and whenever an opportunity presented itself, leant over and kissed his cheek.
Only when Harry warned her that he might collide with a passing vehicle if she continued to do that, did she finally desist.
His mood was both euphoric and anxious as he parked the car outside the Debraces' house.
He had no doubt now that Madeleine loved him, but would Sir Philip consider their shared love sufficient grounds for them to marry?
It was Aubrey who brought Harry back to his senses.
Seeing the couple's arrival and the manner in which Madeleine was clinging to Harry's arm as they left the car, he persuaded his friend up to his bedroom on the grounds that he must want a wash and brush-up after the long journey.
As soon as they were alone, he said awkwardly, ‘Look, old chap, you've every right to tell me to mind my own business, but unless I've made two and two equal five, then I think as your friend I ought to speak up.
Something's happened between you and Pickles, hasn't it?’
Harry put down the hairbrush with which he had been trying to smooth his unruly curls, and turned to face Madeleine's brother.
‘I don't know how you guessed, Aubrey, but you're absolutely right — Madeleine and I love each other.
Of course, I've always loved her but I'd no idea she felt the same way about me until she told me this afternoon.
I can still hardly believe it.
I'm going to tell your father this evening; ask his permission to get engaged.
You…you don't mind, do you?
I mean, you yourself don't have any objections?’
Aubrey remained seated in the armchair by the window, his eyes thoughtful.
‘I've absolutely nothing against you personally, old chap,’ he said.
‘On the contrary, it's because…dash it, I'll say it even if it does sound sloppy!
It's because I'm so deuced fond of you that I've got to speak out.’
‘About what?’
‘About Madeleine!
Despite the way I sometimes rag her, she is my sister and I do love her, so don't take this as being disloyal.
The fact is, Harry, it simply wouldn't work and, if you weren't so blinded by love, you'd see it for yourself.
She may say she loves you and perhaps she does in her way, but Pickles doesn't think or feel deeply about anything.
She never has.
All she thinks about is being happy — and that means having the things she thinks will make her happy.’
‘And you don't think I can supply them?
Harry asked, unable to hide an edge of bitterness in his voice.
‘Look, Harry, it's as simple as this.
I don't think you could afford to do so.
You told me you have to manage on what you earn — dashed bad luck, I know — but for your own sake, you need to face facts.
However well they pay chaps like you to look after horses, it can't be all that much!
Do you have any idea how extravagant that sister of mine is?
The pater gives her fifty pounds a year as a dress allowance and she has nearly always spent it by the end of the first month.
From then on, she just buys what she wants and charges it to one or other of the parents’ accounts.
The pater pays for holidays and he's about to buy her a car, though she can borrow the family car and chauffeur whenever he doesn't want them.
Her escorts pay when she goes out to restaurants or parties, so Pickles hasn't the foggiest idea about money.
Mother sees to the housekeeping expenses and organizes the servants' wages and so on.
Pickles never has to lift a finger.
I doubt she has ever in her life packed a suitcase!
I don't suppose for one moment she has given a thought to what life might be like if she had to ‘make do’ married to someone who wasn't too well off.
Now, having said my bit, I'll shut up.
I'm sorry if I've upset you, old thing.’
Harry gave a deep sigh.
‘Someone had to knock some sense into me.
What you're really saying is that I've no right to ask Madeleine to make sacrifices.
I suppose I hadn't let myself think it through — I mean, I was so happy when she said she loved  me, I never stopped to think seriously about what I had to offer her.
I was more worried…well, about the circumstances of my birth.’
Aubrey waved this aside.
‘If that were the only stumbling-block, I'd put all my weight behind you if it came to a showdown with the pater.
No, Harry, it's your future happiness that bothers me.
I know how difficult Pickles can be when she doesn't get her own way.
I'd give the two of you a year of happiness at most.
I hate talking like this.
I know you love her — always have done, haven't you?
But you'd be much better off with someone else.
When you told me about the American girl, I hoped it meant you'd got over Pickles.
She'll probably end up marrying Dunbar.
I suppose she simply couldn't resist adding your scalp to her belt.’
Harry flushed.
‘It isn't like that.
She really does love me,’ he said.
‘If you'd seen how she was today, you'd know it was true.’
Aubrey stood up and rested a hand on Harry's shoulder.
‘Far be it from me to stand in the path of true love,’ he said lightly.
‘Perhaps I'm quite wrong and Pickles is serious.
I just don't want you having to face the pater only to find that she didn't mean half she said.
I don't think she has the faintest idea what it would mean to marry a chap without private means, and if she did, I'm afraid she'd change her mind.’
Harry's mouth tightened.
‘You have a low opinion of her,’ he said.
‘I don't.
But which of us is right can easily be put to the test.
You're her brother, you go and talk to her.
Tell her what you've been telling me; explain all the pitfalls.
If I'm right about her feelings for me, it will do no harm.
If you are right…
Well, better I should face the consequences before there's harm done.’
Aubrey raised his eyebrows, a look of surprise on his face.
‘D'you really mean that, old chap?
It's not actually any of my business and I'm half regretting I said anything.
I'd  hate it if Pickles changes her mind and you thought I'd prejudiced her against you.’
‘Piffle!’
Harry said bluntly.
‘We've been close friends for donkey's years and I know you better than to think you'd try to queer my pitch.’
Aubrey grinned.
‘Personally, I can't think of anything I'd like more than to have you as a brother-in-law.’
His smile faded as he added, ‘I just wish I could believe Pickles would make you happy.
I'll have a word with her before dinner.
You'll stay for a meal, won't you?’
Harry shook his head.
‘Your mother isn't expecting me — and anyway, I think it would be best, under the circumstances, if I push off.
I'll come round first thing tomorrow morning and we can have another jaw then.
If you've changed your mind, I can talk to your father then.
What d'you think?’
‘I'm not sure what to think,’ Aubrey said doubtfully, ‘other than that I hope I am wrong.
If Pickles really does love you, maybe the pater would give her a decent allowance and you'd manage somehow.
At least you've got a house to live in.
How did you find Maythorpe, by the way?’
‘In pretty good condition, as far as I could see.
It was strange going back there after all this time.
I hated the place when I lived there and yet today I had the odd sort of feeling that the house was just waiting for me to go and live in it again.’
‘Well, it was your family home, wasn't it?’
Aubrey said.
‘Still is, I suppose.
Are you going to say goodbye to Pickles before you go?’
After a moment's pause, Harry answered, ‘I don't think so.
You can explain to her why I rushed off, that I want to give her time to think things over without me around to distract her.
If she's still sure she wants us to get engaged, I'll speak to your father tomorrow.’
He followed Aubrey on to the landing, where, by mutual impulse, they shook hands.
Not allowing himself to glance down the passage in the direction of Madeleine's  bedroom, Harry descended the big staircase and went out of the house.
He would take Dunbar's car back to the barracks and then walk to Cadogan Place, he decided.
Aubrey's warnings had unsettled him far more than he had permitted his friend to see.
He'd had doubts even before Aubrey had spoken out but, not wishing to acknowledge them, he'd allowed his heart to overrule his head.
If only he did not love Madeleine so totally, so hopelessly, he told himself as he drove down Oxford Street towards Marble Arch.
He was a poor man, by the Debraces' standards, and he might never be able to keep Madeleine in the manner to which she was accustomed, let alone do so in the foreseeable future.
He felt a sudden desperate need to see Alice — to tell her of the momentous happenings of the day and ask her advice.
Even if Madeleine were able to convince Aubrey that she loved him and was willing to wait for him, had he the moral right to ask her to do so?
Wouldn't she be far better off with Dunbar, who could give her everything she wanted?
But not the depth of love he, Harry, could give her, he told himself, as he turned back towards Charles Street in the hope of finding Alice there.
Alice knew about love — she was in love with some fellow who did not return her affection.
Poor Alice!
It was beginning to seem as if neither of them was ever to achieve their heart's desires, even while making a success of other aspects of their lives.
If Alice were not otherwise occupied, he would take her out to dinner somewhere.
They had not seen nearly enough of each other during this holiday — and the fault was his.
He'd make it up to her this evening, take her somewhere really special.
Unaware of Harry's plans for her, Alice was getting into a taxi with Jules, who, after a long, tiring day getting things straight at the salon, had decided they both deserved a really good meal.
‘I could take you to this Hotel Ritz you have spoken of,’ he suggested.
Alice's rejection of the idea was instant and Jules did not  question it.
Although she had never said so, his instinct had told him immediately he'd seen her with Harry that she was in love with the young man — a devastatingly handsome young man — whose manner towards Alice had been affectionate but certainly not lover-like.
He did not volunteer any further suggestions but took her to one of the few French restaurants he knew in Soho, where hopefully she would not be reminded of the man she loved.
Aubrey, meanwhile, was perched on the edge of his sister's bed while she sat at her dressing-table, twisting her head in front of the triple mirror as she tried to place two matching clips in her hair.
Dissatisfied with the effect, she tugged them loose and placed them finally in position on either side of the V-neckline of her dress.
Her mouth was set in a stubborn line, and she was scowling.
‘I don't see why Harry had to go,’ she protested.
‘I wanted him to stay.
He was going to talk to Daddy — about us.’
Aubrey sighed.
‘I'm well aware of that, Pickles.
He told me all about it.
That's why I want to talk to you.
I'm far from sure you know what you're doing.
Harry said you'd told him you loved him, but only a fortnight ago you sat here telling me you might well go to Jamaica with Dunbar.’
Madeleine avoided her brother's eyes.
‘That's different.
I didn't know then that I'd fall in love with Harry.’
‘Pickles, this is a serious business.
It isn't a matter of choosing between one frock and another.
Do you have any idea what you're talking about?
Marriage is for life and a wife has got to share her husband's life, for better or for worse.’
‘So why shouldn't I be happy married to Harry?’
Madeleine's voice took on an accusing note.
‘I thought he was your friend — that you liked him?’
‘It's because he's my friend that I don't want to see him hurt.
Look, Pickles, he hasn't two beans to rub together.
Can you honestly see yourself being poor — really poor by  our standards?
It's different for Harry, he grew up without any money behind him.
You've always had everything you ever wanted.
You'd certainly not be able to live the way you do now.
I very much doubt if you'd be able to afford even half the number of servants we have to run this house.
Just look at the state of this room.
You take it for granted one of the maids will come in and tidy it for you.
Can you honestly see yourself managing without your own maid for a start?’
‘Harry said he'd have his own stud farm one of these days — and Mr Harvey owns a stud farm and he's a millionaire.’
‘For heaven's sake, Pickles!
It's because Mr Harvey was already a millionaire that he was able to indulge his fancy to have a stud farm — not the other way round.
His family made their money from investment in the railways.’
Madeleine's scowl deepened.
‘We only want to get engaged.
Anyway, Harry seemed to think we could manage.’
‘I dare say he could, with the right wife.
But not with you, Pickles.
It would be different if you really did love him, but I don't think you do…certainly not enough to make the kind of sacrifices that would be necessary if you did marry him.’
‘You can't know how I feel,’ Madeleine protested.
‘Besides, how do you know how much money Harry has?’
‘Because he told me.
The pater told me his former guardians had frittered away the money his father left him, and Harry told me the amount of the salary Mr Harvey pays him.
That's all he has, and it's not all that much more than your dress allowance, Pickles.
You might as well face facts.’
For a few moments, Madeleine was silent, then she said truculently, ‘Harry should have told me.’
A faint smile crossed Aubrey's face.
‘My dear girl, you'd have thought him very ill-bred if he'd talked about money to you, and even if he had, you wouldn't have understood the relevance of what he was saying, any more than he understands how well off we are.
I can tell you one thing — the pater won't give you his blessing.
When he hears what's in the wind, he'll probably insist Harry goes back to live in America while you both take time to think it over.
Is this love you have suddenly discovered going to weather that kind of separation?
I very much doubt it.’
‘You mean you think Harry will go back and marry that Cora-Beth girl?’
‘No, I don't mean that — and you know it!
Harry's the faithful type.
Dash it all, Madeleine, he's been in love with you since he was a kid.
No, it's your so-called devotion I'm doubting and, if you're honest, I think you'll agree with me that it wouldn't weather a long separation.’
‘I could go back to America with him.’
‘No, you couldn't.
The pater wouldn't give you the money for your passage and anyway, even if you found the fare, he could force you to come home.
You're being utterly childish and well you know it.
Besides, you wouldn't want to live in America — you've already said so.
Nor would Harry go against Father's dictates.
He's very conscious of the fact that he's indebted to him, not just for rescuing him from those awful guardians but for getting him into Grafton Abbey and then arranging for him to work for Mr Harvey.
Come on, old girl, be reasonable for once and admit it would be a mistake.’
As Madeleine listened to her brother's quiet, sensible voice, her emotions seesawed from rebellion to anxiety.
Part of her refused to accept that, after all, she couldn't have what she wanted.
The other part questioned whether in fact she really did want to get engaged to Harry if it meant leading a dreary life waiting for him to make his way in the world.
Aubrey's revelations had shocked her, but she did not doubt he knew what he was talking about.
Despite his brotherly teasing and criticisms, he was devoted to her and would not be speaking in this fashion unless he felt it was for the best.
Remembering now how she had felt lying on the bed with Harry's arms around her, his mouth against hers, she felt like crying with frustration.
She could wait for him — no one could stop her marrying him once she was twenty-one.
Yet she knew it was unlikely that Harry's circumstances would have changed to any great degree by then and she certainly had no wish to live in near poverty.
Why, oh why, wasn't it Harry who could offer her the life Pogo could give her?
It simply wasn't fair!
Tears of self-pity escaped from her eyes and she brushed them away angrily.
‘I won't give him up, I won't.
I love him,’ she protested.
Aubrey rose slowly to his feet.
Knowing his sister so well, he was aware that despite her denial, her decision to abandon the idea of marriage to Harry had already been made.
1924
Cynthia Merstam watched in silence as the nurse arranged the big bunch of gladioli she had brought with her to the nursing-home.
The news she had just received from Dorothy's doctor had come as a dreadful shock, and for the moment she could not trust herself to speak.
‘They're beautiful, Cynthia,’ Dorothy Copley murmured.
‘My room is beginning to look like the Chelsea Flower Show.
I'm being so spoilt.’
She glanced at Cynthia's face and a look of pity crossed her own.
Poor Cynthia, she thought.
Doctor Milford must have told her sister the truth and she was taking it very hard.
It was strange how other people seemed to mind about her approaching death far more than she did.
Her husband, her stepchildren, and now Cynthia.
When the nurse left the room, she held out her hand and touched her sister's cheek.
‘Honestly, dearest, I'm not in the least frightened,’ she said.
‘I don't feel resentful that God has decided to take me before my allotted span.
I mind for Norman, of course, and for you and the children, but not for myself.’
Tears rolled down Cynthia's cheeks.
‘I don't think I can bear it, Dorothy,’ she said in a choked voice.
‘I shall miss you so terribly.’
‘I know.
We've always been so close, haven't we?
You've been a wonderful sister to me, dearest.
All those years ago, but for you…’
‘No, don't talk about it,’ Cynthia broke in.
‘Don't even think about it.’
The dying woman closed her eyes.
She was well aware  of her sister's reluctance ever to speak of that fateful year when she had borne Gervaise's child.
In a way, it was best forgotten.
She had been relatively happy married to Norman and caring for his children.
Only occasionally, on the anniversary of her baby's birth, had she allowed herself to think, to regret, to remember.
Now, however, she was dying of tuberculosis and, with only a few weeks of life left, the past was very much on her mind.
‘So many people have said to me over the years that it is very sad I never bore Norman a child, that I only ever had stepchildren to love.
I've wished then that I could say honestly, ‘But I did have a child of my own, a little boy by the only man I have truly loved.’
You know, Cynthia, despite all we went through, my only sorrow is that my baby died.’
‘But it was for the best that it didn't survive,’ Cynthia said quickly.
‘You were so anxious to keep it and…’
Dorothy shook her head.
‘I know, dearest.
I would have been disgraced, and you too.
But you can't imagine how many times I've thought, ‘If I'd kept him, he might have lived.’
I shall die with that feeling of guilt, that it was I who robbed him of life.’
‘But that's not true.
It was I…
Dorothy, I'd no idea you felt this way.
You must not…you cannot regret…’
Dorothy gave a rueful smile.
‘He was Gervaise's baby, Cynthia, and with Gervaise dying, it would have meant part of him lived on.
But for this thought, I truly believe I could die in peace.’
Cynthia stood up and walked across to the window, where she stared out across the busy London street.
On top of the news she had received, the thought of her beloved sister dying with regrets and a sense of guilt was more than she could bear.
How easy it would be to confess that the baby had survived; that he had, according to Sir Philip Debrace, grown into a strong, good-looking boy.
Would Dorothy hate her for having deceived her all these years?
Would she want to see the boy?
He must be a man now, and she, Cynthia, had not the slightest idea where in  the world he was.
Perhaps Sir Philip knew his whereabouts.
But what of Dorothy's reputation, which she herself had guarded so zealously all these years?
as if her thoughts had been transmitted to her sister, Dorothy said, ‘I know my son would have grown up to be a fine, good-looking man.
How else would he have been with such a father?
I wonder sometimes who he would have resembled.
Both of us, perhaps.
I suppose if he'd been alive, I'd be afraid now to meet him.
We'd be like strangers and I couldn't bear that, but at least I could have made some redress.’
Tears filled her eyes as she added, ‘My stepchildren are all well placed in life.
When Norman dies, they'll be very well off and therefore have no need of my money.
Had my son lived, I could have left it to him.
I thought of leaving it to you, Cynthia, but you have no need of it.
When Father died, he left us both enough to live in comfort for the rest of our lives, regardless of our husbands’ support.
I've never needed it, and over the years it has accumulated.
To whom shall I will it?
An orphanage, perhaps, like the one where we were going to leave my new-born baby?’
O God, help me!
Cynthia prayed.
What should I do?
Should I tell her?
If I don't tell her now, it will soon be too late and I shall have it for ever on my conscience.
She returned to the bedside and took both Dorothy's thin, blue-veined hands in hers.
‘Why have you never spoken of this before?’ she asked.
‘Why didn't you tell me how you felt?’
Dorothy regarded her with a great love and tenderness.
‘Because I didn't want you to share my distress.
You've always been such a wonderful sister to me.
You risked so much for me.
I wanted you to believe that I was as grateful as you that the baby had died and solved the problem for us of concealing the birth.
I remember the look of relief on your face when you told me it was all over-that I could return home and forget it ever happened.
I suppose to be honest, I too was relieved at the time.
But afterwards, especially when I heard Gervaise had died…’
Cynthia wiped the tears from her eyes.
‘I wish I'd known.
Oh, Dorothy, my dearest, how shall I tell you?
You shouldn't feel grateful to me.
You should hate me.
I lied to you.
I thought it was for the best.
All those years ago, I lied!
Will you ever forgive me?’
Dorothy's thin, flushed face paled as she regarded her sister's abject figure.
‘You say you lied.
In what way?
What are you trying to tell me, Cynthia?
Are you saying that my baby lived?’
Cynthia could not speak for the sobs that now came from her throat.
She nodded.
Dorothy let out a deep sigh.
‘Perhaps you'll think this one of those strange fancies of a dying person, but somehow I'm not surprised.
I think I've always felt deep within me that my child was alive.
I used to tell myself that it was because I wanted so much to believe it that I felt that way.
Oh, Cynthia, darling; please don't cry.
You can have no idea how happy you've made me.
As to blaming you, how could I?
You have always shown your love for me in the best way you knew how.
I can understand why you lied.’
Tears streaking her face, Cynthia looked up.
‘You really mean that, Dorothy?
Nursing the secret all these years has been very, very hard for me.
If I did wrong, then I have suffered for it.
Yes, your baby lived.
He grew up strong and healthy.
Gervaise knew of his existence before he died, and although he wasn't able to acknowledge his son, he left him quite a fortune.’
Urged on by Dorothy, she related the story of Harry's early years with the Pritchetts, the criminal way in which Gervaise's wife and her brother had dissipated the boy's fortune, Sir Philip Debrace's interest in him.
‘The last I heard was that he was to be given a good education at the public school which Sir Philip's son was attending.
If I were to contact Sir Philip, I might discover more recent news.’
Dorothy lay back against her pillow exhausted.
The excitement of Cynthia's revelation had been too much for her and Cynthia now anxiously rang the bell for the nurse.
However, before she herself was dismissed so that Dorothy could rest, her sister extracted a promise from her that she would set about finding out the boy's address and, moreover, that Cynthia would contact her own solicitor and have him draw up a new will making Dorothy's son her sole beneficiary.
‘You will have to lie once more, Cynthia — not for either of our sakes but to save my husband the pain of knowing the truth.
No one but he, my son, must know I am his mother.
You must make him understand the need for secrecy.
Perhaps I could tell Norman he was a godson with whom I'd lost touch when his real mother died?
You'll think of something.
You must make your solicitor realize that I cannot allow Norman to be hurt.
He has been such a good, kind husband.’
By the time Cynthia had discovered that Harry Keynes, now twenty-one years old, was living in Kentucky in the United States, Dorothy had but a few days to live.
Grasping Dorothy's hand in hers, she said, ‘He's employed by Gervaise's relative, the current Earl of Kinmuire, on his stud farm in Kentucky.
The earl, so Sir Philip informed me, is greatly attached to your boy.
Sir Philip, himself, is likewise full of praise for your son, for whom he has the highest regard.
Understandably, he was curious as to the reason for my enquiries, so I told him you were a distant relative, a spinster who had no other relatives and who might wish to get in touch with him.
He said his ward was earning his living as an assistant to a stud-farm manager.’
Dorothy gave a weak smile.
‘So Gervaise's son takes after him,’ she said happily.
‘He always had a special affinity with horses.’
She gave a small sigh.
‘You have made me so happy, dearest.
If it is of any consolation to you, I shall die now in peace.
Please arrange for the solicitor to come as soon as possible so that I can sign the necessary papers.
I wish I'd not had to lie to my poor Norman, but he didn't question my story about a long-lost godchild and assured me he had no need of my money.
I shall leave token sums to his dear children.’
The remainder of Cynthia's visit was spent in supporting Dorothy's arm while she wrote a letter that was to be given to the solicitor — a Mr Graham Lytham of Messrs Granby, Hemingford and Bowles — and handed in person to Dorothy's son when he received his gift.
Mr Lytham, however, when he called at the nursing-home to obtain Dorothy's signature to her will, was far from happy when his client told him the content of the letter.
‘The very last thing I would wish to do in the, er…present circumstances,’ he said awkwardly, ‘is to create any difficulties for you, Mrs Copley.
However, your sister, Lady Merstam, is my client and I must point out to you both that, no matter how unlikely you may think it, Mr Keynes could betray your confidence.
Lady Merstam has explained to me her lifelong desire to protect your reputation, Mrs Copley, and I fully understand your own wish to protect your husband from information which would, a…hurt him.
There is also the question of your sister's reputation if her part in this, er…concealment were ever to be made public.
Neither of you knows personally the young man to whom you intend to entrust your, er…secret, and I feel it is my duty to caution you.’
As Cynthia was about to protest, Dorothy held up her hand.
‘Mr Lytham is quite right, dearest.
We cannot be sure.’
As Cynthia fell silent, the lawyer stole a quick glance at the dying woman and, shocked at the wastage of so young a life, he hastened to lighten Dorothy's obvious distress.
‘There is no reason why your, er…son should not receive the money you intend to leave him.
It could come from ‘an unknown relative’.
It is the letter revealing your true relationship to him which poses the possible danger to your family and to Lady Merstam.’
‘No, Cynthia, Mr Lytham's advice is sensible,’ Dorothy said as Cynthia once again seemed on the point of protest.
She gave a wan smile.
‘I was being self-indulgent…wishing to make a confession and to beg my child's  forgiveness for abandoning him.
To do so at risk to you or Norman would give me no happiness, dearest.
I will leave this letter in your care and you shall decide when and if the moment is right and you feel you can pass it on.’
She gave a long, painful sigh.
‘You know, Mr Lytham, I am rapidly coming to the conclusion that my bequest might also wait a few more years.
My son has only just reached his majority, and I understand he is in no immediate financial need.
It might benefit him the more if the money were to be withheld until he is older.
My husband has always maintained that it destroys a young man's ambition to succeed in life if he is financially indulged too young.
Robert, my stepson, is not to be given his grandfather's inheritance until he is thirty.
As Mr Lytham nodded his approval, Cynthia looked anxiously at her sister.
‘Are you sure about this, Dorothy?
It places the responsibility on my shoulders and…’
‘On whose better?’
Dorothy broke in gently.
‘There's no one in this world in whom I have greater trust.
Come now, Mr Lytham, let me sign these documents while I still have the strength.’
The solicitor gave an embarrassed cough.
‘I am afraid they are no longer appropriate, Mrs Copley.
That is to say, the wills of individual persons are open to public scrutiny and, in many cases, details are published in the newspapers.
Your son — Mr Harry Keynes, is it not?— would therefore know the name of his benefactor.
The alternative might be to arrange with your bank manager to transfer these funds into a separate account in your sister's name, er…before…while you are still, er…in a position to do so.
Lady Merstam tells me you have your husband's agreement to what was to have been the bequest.
I presume he would not therefore question your method for disposing of your money before, er…your demise?’
Dorothy smiled.
‘Really, Mr Lytham, it's no secret that I am dying, so please don't feel embarrassed to use the word ‘death’.
It  doesn't frighten me.
What does frighten me is that there may not be sufficient time left to me to do as you suggest.
Will it take long?’
‘A day or two at most, Mrs Copley.
Under the circumstances…’
‘Of course we shall use the utmost expediency,’ Cynthia said.
‘Mr Lytham will come with me now to your bank, Dorothy, will you not, sir?’
‘I'm at your disposal, Lady  Merstam ,’ the lawyer said.
‘I need only a letter from you to your bank manager instructing him of your wishes.
There will, of course, be papers for you to sign.’
After he had bowed himself out of the room, Cynthia remained behind and, taking pen and paper, took down Dorothy's letter to ha dictation.
‘You are quite sure about this, Dorothy?’ she said as she handed it to her for her signature.
‘Absolutely,’ Dorothy said.
‘This way is best.
You have always taken such care of me, dearest.
Now I know that when I am gone, you will be watching over my son's welfare.’
There were tears in Cynthia's eyes as she held the thin, wasted body of her adored sister in her arms.
It was the first time in their lives that Dorothy, although younger by ten years, had ever felt the stronger of the two.
Wiping away Cynthia's tears, she urged her to be on her way and perform this last task before it was too late.
‘I'm dreadfully sorry, Harry, I really am.’
Alice's voice held genuine regret, for although she had never thought Madeleine the right girl for Harry, she would have done anything possible to forward a marriage between them if she truly believed it would make him happy.
‘I suppose you aren't particularly surprised,’ Harry said as he regarded Alice miserably from the armchair in the living-room of Monsieur Verveine's spacious London flat.
Jules had tactfully made himself scarce on the pretext of work to be done at the new salon and now, two days after  his visit to Maythorpe House, Harry was at last able to unburden himself.
‘Aubrey was decent enough to bring Madeleine's letter round by hand,’ he continued.
‘He realized I'd be knocked out and did his utmost to persuade me it was all for the best.’
Biting his lower lip in an effort to control his emotions, he added wretchedly, ‘Despite what he says, I know Madeleine does love me.
That day we spent together at Maythorpe House — everything was perfect.
Of course, I knew it might be ages before we could actually marry, but she said she'd wait.
She said she wanted to get engaged, so you see, she can't love Dunbar.
Aubrey seemed to think she probably would marry him, but I just don't believe it.’
He looked so dejected, Alice's heart twisted as if the pain were her own.
‘Madeleine's still very young — for her age, I mean.
Perhaps she doesn't really know what she wants.’
‘She wanted me.
She wanted me to make love to ha.
Alice, you can't believe how sweet she is, and how innocent.
I love her so much.
Life doesn't seem to have much meaning any more.’
Alice crossed the room and rested a hand lightly on Harry's shoulder.
‘It'll get better in time,’ she said, although even as she spoke, she knew that in ha own case it would never get better.
In a way she was happy that Harry had chosen to come to her in his distress, yet it highlighted his attitude towards her.
She was, as she always had been, a kind of benign, elder sister.
He never saw her as other men did as a woman.
Only this afternoon, one of the Maison's new fabric suppliers had asked her out to dinner and made it perfectly plain that he found her attractive.
Then there was Félix, who telephoned from Paris every other day because, he said, he missed her so much.
‘I suppose you're right,’ Harry said gloomily.
‘Aubrey said I'd get over it, but I won't, Alice.
I dread going back to the States.
I know Cora-Beth wants us to get engaged and now Madeleine's turned me down, she'll expect me to  propose.
But I can't, not feeling the way I do about Madeleine.
I'm fond of Cora-Beth, very fond, but it isn't the same as I feel for Madeleine and somehow I'll have to explain that to her.
She's been hurt enough with poor old Judd getting killed in that wretched accident.’
‘I'm sure she'll understand,’ Alice said, willing herself not to touch Harry's dark curls, not to draw his head against her breast for the comfort she so longed to give him.
‘You can still be friends — and if that proves too difficult, then you can come home.’
‘Home,’ Harry repeated in a harsh voice.
‘Where is my home, Alice?
It used to be with Mum and Dad and you and the kids in Calking.
Then it was Maythorpe House, and then The Grange.
Finally, it was Blue Ash Farm.
I don't really belong anywhere, do I?’
Yes, yes, yes, you belong with me!
Alice ached to say.
Anywhere I was with you would be home to me.
For a moment she hated Madeleine Debrace for making him so unhappy.
‘Why?’ she asked.
‘Why did Madeleine turn you down?’
Harry drew a deep sigh.
‘She said in her letter that she didn't think we could be happy living at Maythorpe House, that she'd be lonely and probably wouldn't make me a very good wife.
How can she know that?
She said she'd given it a lot of thought and decided she'd just got carried away because it was all such fun.
I can't believe that's all our day together meant to her — fun!
Aubrey is convinced Madeleine's priorities are ‘getting her own way’ and ‘having a good time’— and that she wouldn't be able to indulge either if she married someone without considerable private means.
That would make her so mercenary, and I don't believe she's like that.
Maybe she was just trying to cover up the fact that she minds about my being illegitimate.’
‘If that were true, then she couldn't love you very much, Harry,’ Alice said quietly.
‘If you were happy together, why should she mind about a few snubs from social snobs who barred you from their visiting-lists for such a reason?
Such people aren't worth knowing in the first place.
Tell  me, does Cora-Beth care that your parents weren't married?
I take it she knows?
Harry nodded.
‘It's all a bit different in America, Alice,’ he said.
‘People are less formal, or the people the Harveys know.
No one bothers about Mr Harvey's title and nor does he.
It's what you make of yourself that matters out there.’
‘It's what you are that matters to me,’ Alice said impulsively.
Afraid lest she had revealed too much, she added quickly, ‘Tell me about your visit to Maythorpe House.’
Successfully diverted, Harry said, ‘It's a funny thing about that house, Alice.
I really hated it when I was there, but this time…
I sort of felt as if it was where I belonged.’
‘Home?’
Alice questioned meaningfully.
‘I suppose in a way that's what it did feel like.
Yet I never knew my father when he lived there — only the stories Mrs  Appleby used to tell me about his childhood.
Do you know, his lead soldiers are still in the nursery toy cupboard.
And his stamp collection.’
‘I'd have thought all those things would have been packed away,’ Alice said.
‘What does Mr Harvey plan to do with the place?
It can't stay empty for ever.’
‘I don't think he knows, or cares.
Whenever I speak of it, he just says it can stay as it is in case I ever want it.
I did think that Madeleine and I…
But I wouldn't want to live there on my own, Alice.’
‘I could always come and look after you — keep you company,’ Alice said in a casual tone.
‘Remember how we used to plan the future, Harry?’
He gave a disparaging smile.
‘We were kids, weren't we, and about as unrealistic as only kids can be!
But then we couldn't have foreseen your future, or mine.
Here you are, about to be launched in your own right as a successful couturière and I'm living in a country thousands of miles away, helping to manage a thoroughbred farm.’
Alice drew a deep breath.
‘We could give up our jobs and start something new at Maythorpe House.’
Harry laughed, not believing Alice might be serious.
‘I'd need a great deal more money before I could start up my own stud farm here.
And the last thing in the world you'd want would be to give up this opportunity Monsieur Verveine has given you.
I'm so proud of you, Alice.
I know you must deserve this chance.
It's taken five years of your life, but at least you're getting your just rewards now.’
I was silly even to put one toe in the water, Alice told herself angrily.
Of course Harry would not want to be burdened with her, even if he could afford to start up his stud at Maythorpe House.
Young though he might be, he was going to need a wife, a family, and it was not her, Alice Pritchett, he wanted to marry, not now, not ever!
Somewhat to her surprise, Harry was smiling.
‘You know, Alice, when I walked in here I was feeling pretty suicidal.
Just talking to you somehow makes me feel better.
I'm not quite sure why!
I know you never considered Madeleine was the right girl for me and no one in this whole world knows me as well as you do, so I can't ignore your opinion, even though I'd like to.
Now that I'm feeling a bit calmer, I can see that it was amazingly presumptuous of me even to imagine that Madeleine might love me enough to sacrifice all the luxuries she's used to, just to be with me!
I don't feel poor — not when I remember our childhood!— but of course I am by her standards.
I suppose I was conceited enough to imagine that the amount of love I have for her would make up for the deprivations.
You'd be quite right to call me an idiotic, romantic fool.
It's much to your credit, my darling Alice, that you haven't done so.’
He drew her towards him and planted an affectionate kiss on her forehead.
‘Where would I be without you to knock some sense into my thick head?’ he said tenderly.
He was suddenly aware of her body trembling and, misunderstanding the  reason, he added contritely, ‘Why, you're cold!
It's that flimsy frock you're wearing, and now I come to look at you, Alice, you're much too thin.
Come on, let's go out and have a really good meal somewhere.
If you like, I could try and get tickets for The Merry Widow .
It's on at the Lyceum and is supposed to be frightfully good.
I think Dunbar has seats for next week and we were all going as a party, but I shan't go with them now.
I don't think I could bear to see Madeleine again.
It's probably just as well I'm leaving for the States on Saturday week.’
‘So soon?’
Alice whispered.
‘I wish you could stay longer.’
Harry released her and once again his expression was downcast.
‘If things had gone differently, I'd thought of extending my holiday, but now there doesn't seem much point.
Here in London I'll be bound sooner or later to run into Madeleine.
Aubrey says Lady Debrace is taking her down to Brighton for some sea air, but I don't suppose they'll go for long.
No, Alice, I'll leave as soon as I can, so let's you and I make the most of today.
You're not doing anything?’
Alice shook her head.
She had nothing planned, unless it was to go to a cinema show with Jules, and even if she had, there was nothing she would not have cancelled in order to be with Harry.
It would, as always when she was with him, be part pain and part pleasure.
The effort of concealing her love was almost impossible even though it was imperative.
If Harry were ever to know how she felt, he would never again be able to show the same natural affection, albeit of a brotherly nature, which was all she had of his heart.
At least now, today, she could ease his suffering, help him forget Madeleine for a little while, make him see that he could still find happiness of a kind without her.
Somehow she managed a smile as she said with deliberate casualness, ‘Sounds a wonderful idea, Harry.
Give me a moment or two to change my clothes and leave a note for Jules, then we'll go out on the town.’
‘We'll think of something to celebrate,’ Harry said, returning her smile.
If it can't be the present, we could celebrate our unknown futures.’
‘Why not?’ said Alice softly.
‘One never knows what the future will bring.’
1926
It had taken a long while, Harry thought as he glanced fondly at Cora-Beth, before he had got over Madeleine's rejection of him and the shock of her marriage to Dunbar.
Aubrey and Cora-Beth had not long returned from a lengthy ride across the lush, undulating pastures and were still wearing jodhpurs and cool, open-necked shirts.
Not only had Cora-Beth been incredibly patient and understanding about his reluctance to become engaged these past two years, but during that period of his life she had somehow made it possible for them to renew their old easy friendship.
At first he had suggested it might be fairer to everyone if he were to leave Kentucky and find work elsewhere — perhaps even return to England — but Cora-Beth had succeeded in making him see that there was absolutely no need for him to do so.
‘You're happy here at Blue Ash Farm, and Poppa would be heartbroken if you left,’ she'd said.
‘You told me you can't afford to start your own stud yet, and so what would you do if you did go home?
We're both still young and there's plenty of time to make up our minds about the future.
I'm in no hurry to get married, and anyway, it wouldn't be right while you're still wishing you could be married to someone else.
Why don't we go back to the way we used to be?
Surely we can be friends, can't we?
I'm perfectly willing to try, if you are.
Who knows, you may feel different in time.’
Cora-Beth had been quite right.
Time had to a very large extent proved the cure he needed.
If occasionally he still dreamed of Madeleine, of holding her in his arms, kissing her, he had reconciled himself to the belief that marriage between them could only have ended in disaster.
He felt both older and wiser now.
Gradually he and Cora-Beth had grown close again until suddenly, at Christmas, he had realized what an indispensable friend and companion she was.
There'd been ever more frequent occasions, when he took her to dances and held her in his arms, that he had once more become acutely aware of her in a physical sense.
Slowly but inevitably they had drifted back into a loving relationship, culminating three months ago in their engagement.
When Aubrey had accepted one of their many invitations to come on a lengthy visit, it did cross Harry's mind that his resemblance to his sister might bring back painful memories, but although Aubrey had now been here over a week, he, Harry, had felt no desire to wish himself free of his engagement.
On the contrary, Aubrey's instant approval of his choice of a wife had added to his own conviction that he had finally made the right decision for his future happiness.
It pleased him too that Cora-Beth seemed to be getting on so well with his best friend.
It was probably a very good thing in far more ways than one, Harry reflected, that Aubrey would be living with them here at the farm for several months.
It would limit the amount of time he and Cora-Beth could be alone together.
The problem was, Cora-Beth could see no reason now that they were engaged why they should not make love.
‘We're young and in love and it's natural,’ she said in her open, uninhibited way.
‘You want to, don't you?’
Of course he did.
Sometimes he could not sleep at night for thinking about the one time it had happened.
Cora-Beth's ill-disguised eagerness for a repetition of their lovemaking had become increasingly difficult to resist.
‘I suppose you think me shameless for telling you I want you so badly,’ she'd told him shyly.
‘I know nice girls don't talk about such things.’
It was impossible to be euphemistic about the basic facts of nature when one lived on a stud farm, Harry told  himself as he watched Cora-Beth rise from the swing seat where they were sitting and walk across the veranda into the house to fetch a fresh jug of lemonade.
It was not unusual for topics such as mating to be discussed at the breakfast table despite Cora-Beth's presence!
A fortnight before Aubrey's arrival, he and Cora-Beth had watched the stallion, Warrior, cover the new roan mare.
Sherry, as she was called, had proved as eager for the mating as Warrior and the coupling had been quick and undoubtedly successful.
Without being particularly conscious of where they were going, he and Cora-Beth had ended up in the big barn containing bales of straw for the loose boxes.
Cora-Beth's foot had slipped between two of the bales and she had tumbled backwards, dragging Harry down on top of her.
Their coupling had been as quick and inevitable as that of the two horses, and although Cora-Beth had cried out once in momentary pain, she had professed herself entirely happy and not in the least guilt-ridden by their union.
His own pleasure had been of shorter duration for he was very well aware that he ought somehow to have protected this trusting girl from himself.
With a great effort of will, he'd resisted her pleas to go to her bedroom after everyone was asleep.
It disturbed him to think of her father perhaps waking to hear him tiptoe down the passage like a shifty thief afraid of discovery.
Aubrey's arrival had augmented the difficulty since he had been given the guest room adjoining Harry's.
‘Of course I want to meet him,’ Cora-Beth had said before Aubrey's arrival.
‘I know what a big part he has played in your life and I'm sure I'll like him, but I just wish he wasn't going to stay quite so long.
I want to be alone with you, Harry.’
Over the past few days, however, Harry noticed that she seemed reconciled to the fact that they were fast becoming an inseparable threesome.
Returning now with the lemonade, she gave Aubrey a quick glance of appraisal.
‘You know, you sure are different from the way I'd  imagined you,’ she said in her slow drawl as she poured out fresh drinks for them both.
‘So what did you imagine?’
Aubrey asked with a smile.
‘I dunno.
I suppose after those stories Harry told us about you being an asthmatic as a child, I'd expected you to be delicate, a thin undersized weakling!’
Aubrey laughed.
‘I probably was.
Fortunately, I've outgrown those days.
I haven't had an attack for years.
I get a bit bronchial if I stay in London in the winter.
The smoke and fog seem to get on my lungs, but apart from that I'm as fit as Harry now.’
And in a different kind of way, every bit as good-looking, Cora-Beth decided as she bent her head over her glass and sipped the refreshing drink in her hand.
The two young men were opposites, Aubrey as fair as Harry was dark.
Harry's charm lay in his quick, almost mischievous smile and impulsive eagerness for life; Aubrey was quieter, more placid, with an easy-going, lazy slowness about his movements.
In a funny kind of way, she thought, it was like having Judd back.
Aubrey had much the same rather dry sense of humour.
Poppa loved having him around and they would both miss him when he went back to England.
‘Do you realize, it has taken me two whole years to get you out here?’
Harry was saying to his friend.
‘Small wonder Cora-Beth was beginning to doubt if you really existed.’
‘You know what life's like at home,’ Aubrey said.
‘One gets caught up in the old social whirl.
Anyway, I'm here now and I'll say this much, Harry, old chap, you weren't exaggerating when you said it was beautiful…and everything so vast, so spacious.’
‘It can also be lonely, living miles from anywhere,’ Cora-Beth reminded their guest.
‘If it wasn't for Harry…
’ She looked fondly at him and, as he took her hand in his, her cheeks flushed a deeper pink.
‘I'd been expecting for ages to hear you two were getting engaged.
Can't think what took you so long to get around to it, old chap,’ Aubrey said.
Harry gave him a friendly shove on the shoulder.
‘It was on the cards for ages, so it was really only a question of making it official,’ he explained.
‘Now we've got to decide on a wedding date.
We'd thought perhaps this time next year.’
So there was no urgency in this love match, Aubrey mused.
Was it possible poor old Harry was still carrying a torch for Pickles?
It was well over a year since his sister had married Dunbar and gone off to the West Indies, where, according to her spasmodic letters, she was having ‘an utterly marvellous’ time.
He'd relayed the news to Harry, hoping it would put his fickle sister out of his friend's mind once and for all.
Now that he'd met Cora-Beth, he was in no doubt that Harry stood a far greater chance of happiness with her.
Although perhaps not in the strictest sense of the word ‘beautiful’, the American girl had a very pleasing appearance, and despite her height and strong build, an attractive feminine figure.
She was good fun to be with and easy to talk to, and in the short time he'd known her she had shown a ready sense of humour.
‘We've decided to go on living here at the farm with Poppa,’ she was saying.
‘There's no point buying another place.
Poppa's letting Harry build up his own stud.
Did Harry tell you he'd bought a stallion and four mares of his own?
Poppa seems to think he bought very well.’
Harry gave a self-deprecating grin.
‘I'd never have got such a bargain on my own,’ he said.
‘Your father was the one who struck the deals; all I did was choose the animals.’
Cora-Beth laughed.
‘For all there's no need, Poppa can't resist bargaining,’ she said.
‘I sometimes wonder what people must think to hear him haggling over a few dollars.
Yet there's nobody more generous.
He'll give hundreds away at the drop of a hat.
He's a guaranteed soft touch for anyone genuinely out of work or in real poverty.’
‘My father's much the same,’ Aubrey said.
‘He was very much against my inclination to break the recent general  strike, as most of my friends were doing.
He said the miners were being asked to accept wages that were even lower than they'd been before the war and that their working conditions were appalling.
My mother helped to run soup kitchens in Brighton for the starving.’
Harry nodded.
‘Jenny wrote and told me about it.
Fortunately, none of the family was too badly affected.
Did you know that poor little Edna died in the influenza epidemic?
I was shocked to hear of her death and of so many others all over the country.’
‘It affected the rich as well as the poor,’ Aubrey said.
‘Two of the mater's friends died, but what really devastated her was the death of my Aunt Rosamund.
Personally, I think it was a merciful release both for my aunt and for my Uncle Félix, seeing that she had been a helpless invalid for so long.
But I suppose the loss of a sister is always sad, whatever the circumstances.’
‘You went to Paris for the funeral, didn't you?’
Harry said.
‘Alice wrote and told me she'd seen you.’
Aubrey's expression changed to one of amusement.
‘I must say, Alice really has made something of herself!
I simply didn't recognize her at first, and to tell you the truth, I was a bit embarrassed when Uncle Félix came over to talk to me with this perfectly stunning girl on his arm.
I just stood there like a goof waiting for him to introduce her.
I supposed she was one of his mannequins , although her face did look extraordinarily familiar, and then Uncle Félix said, ‘You know Alice, of course,’ and the penny dropped.’
Harry laughed.
‘I told you Alice had changed two years ago, when I saw her in London,’ he said.
‘I gather she's making a great success of the English branch of the business.’
Now it was Aubrey's turn to smile.
‘There's no doubt about that.
Uncle Félix never stopped singing her praises.
You know, Harry, I get the impression he takes far more than a professional interest in Alice.
There was something about the way he looked at  her.
That would be a turn up for the books, wouldn't it, if my uncle married your foster sister?’
Harry grimaced.
‘You can't be serious, old chap.
Your uncle must be years and years older than she is, and anyway, I rather gathered she'd got her sights set on some fellow whose name she wouldn't tell me.
You must have been imagining things.
Too much champagne, I suspect.’
‘Honest to God, Harry, I'm not joking.
I know it was a funeral and I'm certainly not suggesting Uncle Félix behaved improperly in any way, but you couldn't help noticing how his eyes kept following her.
I'm not surprised.
She really did look fearfully glamorous and so…well, I suppose the word is sophisticated.
As for her French — she's bilingual.
I think she'd make my uncle a jolly good wife, and it would be a splendid match for her, wouldn't it?
I believe he's awfully well heeled.
The pater was saying something to that effect only the other day.
There's talk of him opening two new salons in New York and Milan.
The mater says everyone who's anyone in society wants Verveine clothes these days.
They're internationally famous.’
Cora-Beth now joined in the conversation.
‘Even I know about them,’ she said.
‘I've seen them in the fashion magazines and I must say, they sure are special.
Poppa says I can go to London or Paris and have them make my trousseau if I want.’
She looked at Harry and grinned.
‘Not that I think Harry will appreciate how I look.
Half the time, you don't notice what I wear, do you, honey?’
‘That's not true,’ Harry protested, although on reflection he knew that it was.
It wasn't so much Cora-Beth's looks which appealed to him as her character.
Cora-Beth's voice gave him no time to consider the matter further.
‘Hey, you guys, it's time we went up to change.
I forgot to tell you, Poppa's invited the  Simkinses to dinner.’
‘Simkins,’ Aubrey repeated.
‘Wasn't that the name of your old guardian, Harry?’
Harry laughed.
‘No, that was Simcox, numskull!
Cosmo Simcox!’
‘Does anyone know what happened to him?’
Aubrey asked curiously.
‘Your father told me he'd gone to Australia and Aunt Pamela had joined him there,’ Harry replied.
‘I think it's unlikely we'll ever hear from them again.
I doubt if anyone could have been much more unhappy than I was living with them at Maythorpe House.
But for Alice, I might have remained there indefinitely.’
Realizing that time was passing, the subject was dropped until later that evening when, after the dinner guests had departed, they were enjoying a nightcap with Wendell before going to bed.
Alice's name cropped up once more in the conversation.
‘I can't wait to meet this Alice you both speak of so often,’ Cora-Beth said thoughtfully.
‘She sounds a remarkable person.’
Aubrey nodded.
‘My mother thought the world of her.
It was Mother who arranged for her to go to Paris to train in Uncle Félix's salon .
I suppose when we were younger, we all rather took Alice for granted, but looking back, one can see what a strong character she had even then.
I wonder if Uncle Félix will marry her?
What do you think, Harry?’
Harry frowned.
‘I think you're way off the mark,’ he said.
‘Monsieur Verveine must be old enough to be her father!
Why on earth should she want to tie herself to someone like that?’
‘I don't think he's all that old!’
Aubrey said laughing.
‘I suppose he's in his late forties, early fifties, and Alice is older than you, isn't she?’
‘Only by four years,’ Harry protested.
‘That makes her twenty-seven.’
‘The difference in their ages does not seem unduly large to me,’ Wendell interposed.
‘On the contrary, mature men can make better husbands than younger ones.
At least they are established, and they know their own minds.’
‘But it's Alice I'm thinking of, sir,’ Harry argued.
‘It just wouldn't be right.’
‘But you can't know that, Harry,’ Cora-Beth joined in the debate.
‘From what you and Aubrey have told me about Alice's life, she has always had to fend for herself.
Perhaps she would welcome security.’
Harry fell silent.
Cora-Beth's comment had touched an unexpected core of unease.
It hadn't occurred to him that all those years Alice, who had looked after him so persistently and unobtrusively, should have had no one to look after her.
At the same time, he wouldn't feel at all happy were she to marry someone she could not possibly love simply to make her life easier, more luxurious.
Perhaps if he were to send her money…but the thought died almost before it had crossed his mind.
He certainly couldn't afford to keep Alice in comfort for the rest of her life.
Were it not for the fact that he and Cora-Beth were to continue living here at Blue Ash Farm with her father, he couldn't even have afforded to get married.
‘…really mustn't look so worried, old chap,’ he heard Aubrey saying.
‘It's more than likely I just imagined something was going on behind the scenes.
Dash it all, we were attending poor Aunt Rosamund's funeral.
Even if my aunt had been mentally lost to Uncle Félix years ago, as the mater said, he'd hardly be thinking about marriage to another woman at such a time.
It's just that Alice looked so gorgeous, I really wouldn't have blamed him.’
‘It sounds very much as if you were the one who was smitten,’ Cora-Beth laughed.
‘Isn't it time you were thinking of settling down, Aubrey?
You're older than Harry, aren't you?’
‘Only by a year.
But I'm in no hurry to tie the knot.
Apart from anything else, I've not met a girl I'd want to spend the rest of my life with — at least, not until I met you, and Harry's pipped me to the post.’
They all laughed, although Aubrey added, ‘Honestly, old chap, I'm not joking.
I think you're a very lucky fellow — and I just hope you appreciate your good fortune.’
‘You bet I do,’ Harry said with a warm glance at Cora-Beth.
‘Sometimes I think I was born lucky.
Remembering the circumstances of my birth, life could have been very different for me, couldn't it?
If the Pritchetts hadn't taken me in, I'd have probably been put in an orphanage and never had the educational advantages or been given the opportunities that have come my way.’
‘I've always maintained that most of us get what we deserve in this life,’ Wendell said.
‘Most of the time, we make our own luck.
Speaking of luck, there's a colt I want to buy not far from Lexington — came up for sale just when I was thinking of getting in some new blood.
Care to come along, Aubrey?
See the town?
Have a bit of lunch?’
‘That's a first-rate idea,’ Harry said, ‘because I shall be tied up tomorrow.
I promised Dillon I'd be around when the architect brings the plans for the new extension.’
Wendell nodded and turned to his daughter.
‘You'll come along, won't you, Peachcake?’
‘I don't think I will.
I've got things to do, Poppa,’ Cora-Beth said vaguely.
‘Time we all turned in, don't you think?
It's long past midnight.’
Her father's belief that people made their own luck was true, Cora-Beth thought, when by lunchtime the following day Harry had finished his business with the architect and her ruse to have him to herself for a few hours paid off.
‘I'll walk back to the stables with you,’ she suggested.
Delighted to have her company, Harry linked his arm through hers and they strolled in a leisurely fashion down the shady drive.
Suddenly Cora-Beth stopped and put her arms round Harry's neck.
‘Do you realize we haven't kissed — not properly — for days and days?’ she said.
She drew him with her into one of the paddocks bordering the drive.
‘I know you find it embarrassing to show your feelings in front of anyone, especially Aubrey,’ she said with a mischievous smile, ‘but that's just being terribly English.
No one will see us here.
Anyway, even if Aubrey could see us, I can't believe he'd be shocked.
I guess he's wondering why we don't kiss more often.’
Harry smiled as his arms tightened around her.
‘Knowing Aubrey, I doubt he's given it a thought,’ he said.
‘Perhaps you're right about it being ‘English’.
At school, it simply wasn't done to show you cared about anything other than cricket.
You could get as worked up as you liked about sports.’
‘Then imagine I've just scored a century for your side,’ Cora-Beth said with a husky little laugh.
‘You know, I sometimes wonder whether you do still really and truly love me.’
To prove that his feelings for her had in no way changed, Harry kissed her as she wanted, his tongue probing her mouth, which was raised so invitingly to his.
His desire for her was instantaneous and of their own volition his hands began to search and caress her body.
Her breasts were taut against his palms and he could feel their rise and fall as her breathing quickened.
When their lips parted, he said, ‘Now do you doubt I love you?’
He had expected her denial but she clung to him saying, ‘But not enough, Harry.
Don't you want me?
Don't you know how much I want you?
I'm beginning to think you didn't enjoy it that time we did it properly, that you wish you hadn't!’
Tears of mortification were dripping down her cheeks and, horrified, Harry bent to kiss them away.
‘That's crazy, Cora-Beth.
Of course I want you.
It's been torture sometimes being so close to you and unable to touch you, kiss you.
I dare say if you could quantify such a thing, my need is far far greater than yours.’
‘Then prove it,’ Cora-Beth whispered.
‘Here, Harry, now!
Here, in the long grass.
No one will see us.
I've always wanted to make love out of doors, in the sunshine.
I'm sure nature didn't mean us to have to wait till we get into a bed!
And we are engaged.
That makes us almost married, doesn't it?’
Harry was touched by her honesty and, as always, aroused by the way she spoke so openly about her physical desires.
The fact that he found it less easy to talk about such things to a young girl did not mean he was less  impassioned than she was.
On the contrary, were she to change her mind now, he would be unbearably disappointed and frustrated.
As Cora-Beth had so truly argued, they were engaged and it could not be so wrong to anticipate their actual marriage.
‘I do love you, I really do, Cora-Beth,’ he said huskily as his arms tightened around her and he kissed her again.
Her tears dried as suddenly as they had appeared.
She pulled him down beside her in the long grass, and smiled shyly at him as she undressed.
‘You too,’ she said.
‘Look how tall the grass is.
No one will see us.’
Harry's hesitation was short-lived.
After all, he told himself, if the worst did happen and she conceived a child, they could advance the wedding.
Maybe they should do so in any event.
If they were married, they could make love as often as they pleased.
‘Let's get married quickly,’ he suggested, his arms around her, his lips against her soft cheek.
‘What do you think, darling?’
‘I don't want to think about anything but this,’ Cora-Beth murmured as her hands caressed his shoulders and moved down his body until, with a little gasp, she held his in her cupped hands.
Harry could see the sun glistening on the naked patches of her body although she had not yet removed her undergarments.
Thoughts of Wendell Harvey, of possible passers-by, of wedding dates, receded from his mind as his desire for this lovely, passionate girl matched hers for him.
The sun was on his back as he swung himself over her and her long legs parted in expectation.
Nothing as beautiful as this could be wrong, he told himself.
Cora-Beth was right — this was what nature intended and he would prove his love.
When finally they rolled apart and lay, hands entwined, staring up at the cloudless blue sky, Cora-Beth's voice was soft with contentment as she whispered, ‘You do love me, I know it now!
I was so afraid you'd changed.
I thought — it was silly I know, but I thought perhaps seeing Aubrey had reminded you of Madeleine and that it was going to be  as awful as it was when you came back from England after that holiday.
Harry, I know I've no right to ask, but I want to know — you never did this with her, did you?’
Harry shook his head.
‘No, I didn't.
To be honest, I suppose I did want to, but…well, Madeleine was very young and uncertain of herself, her feelings.
I wasn't at all sure if she really did love me — and, as you know, it turned out she didn't.
But let's not talk about her — not now.
She belongs to the past.
I don't even think about her any more.’
That was not entirely true, he realized as he and Cora-Beth straightened their clothing and tidied their hair.
One evening after dinner Wendell Harvey had demanded that Aubrey tell them about his childhood at The Grange, and how Harry had become involved with the family.
Inevitably, Madeleine's name had cropped up and Harry had felt a pang of nostalgia remembering the little girl with her white dresses and long, golden plaits, laughing or stamping her foot if her brother didn't give her her own way.
He had a deep yearning for those long-ago summer holiday afternoons spent on the lawns or down by the lake with the two Debrace children.
No, he would not allow sentimental memories of the past to mar his present happiness, Harry determined, as, with his arm around Cora-Beth's shoulders, they resumed their walk.
Those early years were best forgotten and he would not allow himself to dwell on them if he could possibly help it.
But the past could raise its head in other ways, he realized, when two days later a letter arrived with a London postmark, bringing him news of the most extraordinary nature.
He showed it to Wendell, who was equally mystified.
The letter read:
Dear Mr Keynes,
We have to inform you that you are the beneficiary of a large sum of money which our client is holding in trust for you.
There is, however, a crucial condition attaching to  the gift which must be met before the necessary documents can be finalized.
We are aware that you are currently residing in the United States and must inform you that it will be necessary for you to come to London and report to our offices with appropriate means of identification.
While it might be to your advantage to do so at the earliest opportunity, there is nevertheless no legal urgency for you to make the journey other than at your convenience.
We look forward to hearing from you regarding the above in the near future.
The letter was signed by a Mr Graham Lytham and had been written on notepaper with the heading Granby, Hemingford and Bowles, Solicitors.
‘I've never heard of the firm and simply can't imagine what this is all about,’ Harry said.
‘What's your opinion, sir?’
Wendell smiled.
‘For a start, I go right along with the ‘never look a gift horse in the mouth’ proverb,’he said.
‘If you're to come into money, then it couldn't be at a more appropriate moment, could it?
At the same time, I'm curious as to what this ‘condition’ is.
Why, I ask myself, this legal reticence?
The solicitor names neither your benefactor nor his client, nor does he explain why you should be the beneficiary.
No one from your past comes to mind who might want to do you a good turn?’
Harry shook his head.
‘There's no one in my foster family who could afford to give even a few pounds away,’ he said, ‘and I certainly don't have any rich friends.
It's a mystery to me.’
Wendell lit a cigar and puffed on it thoughtfully for a few minutes before saying, ‘Those guardians of yours, Harry — the ones who filched your father's legacy from you.
Any chance one or other of them has had an attack of conscience and decided to pay it back?’
Harry frowned.
‘I suppose Uncle Cosmo could have made good in  Australia.
Somehow I can't imagine him ever giving money away — except by mistake on a race course or at the gambling tables!
As for Aunt Pamela, she never liked me and in a way I can understand why she resented my existence.
I was hardly someone for her to be proud of, was I?
I suppose it just could be Uncle Cosmo, although I'd be sad to hear he'd died.
He was kind to me in his way.’
‘One thing anyway is clear,’ Wendell said emphatically, –you will have to go to England and find out what it's all about.
Now, when is it that Aubrey goes home?’
‘In six weeks’ time.
D'you think I should travel with him?’
‘I think we should all go,’ Wendell replied jovially.
‘For one thing, I know Cora-Beth is crazy to buy her trousseau from that fancy couturier she's always on about.’
He handed back the solicitor's letter.
‘For another, if it isn't too far ahead for you to enquire into this, Harry, then I might take up an invitation I've received to attend Newmarket races at the beginning of October.
Strathavon covered one of John Bambridge's mares, before your time I think, and he's entering the filly for the Champion Stakes.
Bambridge thought I might like to see her run.
From what he tells me, she's in with a good chance.’
‘Newmarket isn't all that far from Melton Mowbray,’ Harry remarked.
‘We could go and see Maythorpe House.
After all, sir, it is your family seat.’
Wendell grinned.
‘Be yours and Cora-Beth's when I turn up my toes,’ he said.
‘Let's go tell the others what we plan to do.
My bet is Peachcake'll be pleased as punch.’
When Cora-Beth heard the news, she threw her arms round her father's neck and hugged him.
‘Poppa, it's a splendid idea,’ she said.
‘Will your Alice be in London, Harry?
I've heard so much about her, I'm just longing to meet her.
She can help me choose my trousseau, and Harry, I'll want to meet your foster family and the old cook who was so kind to you.
Do you think she'll approve of me?’
Harry smiled.
‘Mrs Appleby will approve of anyone who has Kinmuire blood in their veins.’
Aubrey, watching the three excitedly making plans, was sensitive enough not to mention the news he had received a few days' earlier from his mother — that Madeleine and Dunbar were coming home with the regiment.
They were expected to arrive in London early in December.
No matter how well matched Harry and Cora-Beth appeared to be, Aubrey was rapidly coming to the conclusion that Harry still harboured romantic memories of his sister.
If ever her name was mentioned, he quickly changed the conversation with a too obvious show of lack of interest in Pickles's affairs.
That she appeared to be having a marvellous time in Jamaica and was being hopelessly indulged by Dunbar had elicited no more than a shrug of Harry's shoulders and a vague comment about his being delighted she was having such a good time.
Perhaps he was just imagining the undercurrent of nostalgia, he told himself as he looked at Cora-Beth's flushed, excited face.
She was such a lovely girl and had such a sweet nature that he would be distressed to think Harry might not be able to give her the depths of love she deserved.
She had looked unnaturally pensive, uncertain, when he'd spoken of their childhood days at The Grange and Harry's face had lit up with a special glow.
Despite the material and social disadvantages that Harry had suffered as a child, he still seemed to think of those early years as happy ones.
Was it because Madeleine had adored him, tagging along behind, begging to be allowed to share their boys' games?
She'd thought Harry was wonderful because he was able to mend her bicycle chain; make bows and arrows and catapults; shin up trees to collect birds' eggs for her collection; find dormice nests, badger setts and squirrel dreys.
Most of all she had admired him because he was afraid of nothing, and because he invariably treated her like a princess.
Madeleine, Aubrey thought — although he was far too loyal to his sister ever to say so to anyone — was vain, egotistical and spoilt.
It was not altogether her fault.
Their father had always indulged her every whim, and she was so pretty that all her life she had been admired and given her own way.
Harry was far better off with a really nice, loving girl like Cora-Beth.
It was a good thing he had finally come to his senses and realized it for himself.
Six weeks later, unaware of what the future held in store for him, Harry boarded the Berengaria with Aubrey, Cora-Beth and her father.
As he checked into the first-class cabin of the big liner, he had never, he thought, felt happier in his life.