

What is Social Policy?
INTRODUCTION
One way to answer the question ‘What is social policy?’ is to provide a list of the areas of public policy included under that heading.
Another way is just to try to define its scope by explaining what it is that distinguishes it from other kinds of policy.
Social policy is a difficult subject to define in this way, however.
Perhaps it is best just to list the policy areas to be discussed.
However, because the process of declaring certain kinds of policies to be social policies, while disregarding others having a considerable impact on the well-being of our society, seems a particularly arbitrary exercise, it is necessary to look a little at the rationale for doing this.
It is also necessary to examine what studying social policy implies.
Readers may be familiar with textbooks that set out to define their subject in the first chapter.
These discussions are often tedious and pedantic.
They frequently appear to have been written for some private academic argument rather than to inform prospective students.
It is hoped that this chapter will not be dismissed as an arid academic ground-clearing exercise, since it has important things to say about the most appropriate way to approach the subject of the book.
WHICH POLICIES?
The policy areas covered in this book are set out in the titles of chapters 5 to 10.
The first three of those chapters deal with policy areas that everyone seems to include within their definition of social policy — social security, the personal social services and health.
These are the policies that are the responsibility of the Secretary of State for Social Services and of his department, the Department of Health and Social Security.
Whilst most people have no doubt about recognizing these as ‘social  services’, even here the terminology causes some confusion.
Notice how the  secretary of state has a different title from his department.
This is most confusing since, in England and Wales, there are local government departments — the social services departments — that are responsible for the personal social services but are not directly concerned with health or social security, the main concerns of the secretary of state.
Chapter 10 looks at housing policy.
Most books and courses on social policy deal with housing, though with some uncertainty about the extent to which they are concerned with the private sector.
There are important questions in relation to housing policy concerning the extent to which a free market can operate and the extent to which public housing authorities should act as if they were private business concerns.
This chapter, together with chapter 9, on employment services, has to give particular attention to the issues, seldom far away in any discussion of social policy, of the impact of economic policy, and of the relevance of economic and commercial considerations.
These are major problems in identifying, and separating off from other policies, a specific area called ‘social policy’.
The other chapter on a particular area of policy deals with education.
This is much less often included within social policy.
The very fact that it is difficult to find reasons either for including it or for excluding it tells us something about the peculiarly arbitrary process involved in categorizing policies as ‘social’.
Clearly, the field of education is one in which there is a considerable amount of public expenditure upon services that contribute to public welfare.
But is the hallmark of social policy expenditure its contribution to public welfare, and what does this really mean?
Let us just accept that the inclusion of education within social policy is the consequence of a comparatively arbitrary decision by the author, and move on to look at the difficult problems that would have to be faced if we were to define social policy in terms of public expenditure which contributes to public welfare.
We need to do this to clear out of the way, before we go any further into the study of social policy, a most misleading and widespread false assumption about the character of our subject.
T. H. Marshall, in his book on social policy, has an opening chapter with the same title as this one.
In it he proclaims that ‘the avowed objective of twentieth-century social policy is welfare’.
Readers will find a central concern about the factors that influence social welfare a characteristic of many writings on social policy.
Indeed, some of the British contributions to the study of this topic assert theirs to be a distinctive academic subject, ‘social administration’, which has this concern as its hallmark.
However, a concern to understand social policy may be distinguished from a preoccupation with the determinants of welfare.
To equate this  ‘avowed objective’ of social policy with its real objective, as Marshall seems to do, involves an acceptance of a particular ideology about the ‘welfare state’that has been challenged by various writers.
Moreover, to see policies as having objectives may involve confusing the character of the policies with the motives and purposes of the people who advocate, adopt and implement them.
Several recent discussions of social policy have suggested that welfare policies are promulgated not from humanitarian concerns to meet need but as responses to social unrest.
Piven and Cloward, for example, argue as follows about social security policies:
The key to an understanding of relief-giving is in the functions it serves for the larger economic and political order, for relief is a secondary and supportive institution.
Historical evidence suggests that relief arrangements are initiated or expanded during the occasional outbreaks of civil disorder produced by mass unemployment, and are then abolished or contracted when political stability is restored…this view clearly belies the popular supposition that government social policies, including relief policies, are becoming progressively more responsible, humane and generous.
Piven and Cloward are primarily concerned to explain relief policies in the United States, but they draw on British data too, and they clearly intend their analysis to apply to other countries.
Other writers have analysed British policies in similar terms.
In particular, Marxists have argued that advanced capitalist societies require an infrastructure of welfare policies to help maintain order, buy off working-class protest and secure a work force with acceptable standards of health and education.
Clearly, perspectives like these give a very different meaning to ‘welfare’.
To the Marxist ‘welfare capitalism’ is a  pejorative term.
Policies that promote welfare are explained in terms of social control; they are measures to combat disorder and crime just like police and penal policies, measures to legitimize and prop up the capitalist system.
But it is not necessary to accept totally this interpretation of public policy in order to agree that there may be circumstances in which social control motives mingle with humanitarian motives in creating what we describe as ‘social policies’.
Moreover, the two extreme interpretations of the origins of social policies that have been mentioned do not exhaust the range of possibilities.
Joan Higgins has suggested that both rest upon rational models of political action, in which actors have motives and are able to frame policies that accurately reflect their intentions.
Contemporary studies of both policy making and policy implementation suggest that we need to give attention to some very complex relationships between the mixed goals of those able to influence policies and the varied consequences of their interventions.
Outcomes may be the  unintended results of policy inputs.
Most policy is incremental in character, involving marginal adjustments to what has gone before, and is motivated to correct what are seen as undesirable consequences of previous policies.
Accordingly, social policy need not be interpreted in terms either of the continuous evolution of a welfare state inspired by humanitarian ideals or of a conspiracy to manipulate a powerless proletariat.
Yet the rejection of these interpretations need not imply either that individuals with altruistic motives play no part in the evolution of policy, or that manipulative and social-control motivated actions are not involved in the policy process.
This discussion implies three things for the definition of social policy: first, that the policies that are identified as ‘social’ should not be interpreted as if they were conceived and implemented with only the welfare of the public in mind; second, that other policies, not conventionally identified as social policies, may make a comparable, or even greater, contribution to welfare; third, that public policy should be seen as a whole in which social policies are significantly inter linked with other public policies.
Just because it is convenient to single out some policies for special attention, and just because there are courses on social policy that require the study of a specific and limited range of public policies, we should not therefore fall into the trap of seeing these as the main government contributions to welfare, or the ‘general good’.
Let us look at the implications of these arguments a little more by examining the implications, for welfare and for social policy, of policy developments in those important policy areas that no one defines as social policy: foreign and defence policy, and economic policy.
It is important to recognize that the origins of the modern nation-state lie in the achievement of a monopoly of force within a given territory.
The central policy preoccupations of the government of any insecure nation are with the defence of its boundaries, the recognition of its integrity by other nations and the maintenance of order within its territories.
It is only too easy for British students of public policy to lose sight of the importance of these issues.
They are the daily fare of our news bulletins, but we rarely stop to think about their relevance for our own state.
Incomprehension over events in Northern Ireland and a propensity to underestimate the intensity of the feelings of some people in Scotland on the issue of devolution stem from our tendency to take the integrity and security of the nation for granted.
Yet without a secure nation-state the scope for development of what is conventionally identified as social policy is severely limited.
These facts have three implications for the study of social policy.
First, social policy expenditure has to compete with other public expenditure dedicated to the defence of the realm.
The case against heavy defence expenditure cannot rest simply on arguments that some  of that money would be better spent on social policy; it is necessary to prove that some of that expenditure is inappropriate or irrelevant, or to face the argument that without it no social policy would be secure.
Second, the forms of this defence expenditure have a wide range of social effects in creating employment, disrupting family life and so on.
Readers may like to think about the sort of policy interactions involved by asking themselves what would be the effects upon social life and social policy of the reintroduction of a two-year period of compulsory national service.
The important effects they should be able to identify will nevertheless be insignificant by comparison with the effects of mobilization for war itself.
Third, while social policies do not have, except in some very marginal ways, an impact on relations with other states, it is important not to lose sight of the contribution they make to integration and harmony within the nation.
It is this that has led students of social policy to draw attention to the significant impact of war upon policy.
Thus Titmuss has argued: ‘The aims and content of social policy, both in peace and in war, are thus determined — at least to a substantial extent-by how far the co-operation of the masses is essential to the successful prosecution of war.’
The development of the role of the British state in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries is often portrayed as the establishment of ‘the welfare state’.
To present it in this way is to emphasize social policy developments.
But it is perhaps more important to give attention to the growth of the British economy over that period, and to the role played by government in relation to that economy.
Two apparently conflicting political interpretations of these events lead us to ask some broadly similar questions about the relationship between social policy and economic policy.
To the followers of the ‘classical economists’, who argued that the industrialized state would make the greatest possible contribution to public welfare if competition were to remain unshackled, the period between the middle of the nineteenth century and the present day has been marked by increasing government interference with the economy.
Some of this interference has been seen as necessary where competition has been impossible or illogical, in the public utilities and the railways for example.
Some of it has been seen as justifiable because it seeks to ensure competition and prevent monopoly.
But much of it has been regarded as stemming from forces eager to interfere with and undermine the free economy, shifting the locus of decision from the market place and into the political arena.
Marxists, on the other hand, interpret the same evidence the other way round.
They argue that as the industrial state has grown so the ‘contradictions of capitalism’ have increased.
Government intervention has been prompted, therefore, by a desire to save capitalism, not from a  desire to undermine it.
Regulation has been introduced to prevent the logic of competition from destroying the system.
State interventions to protect the working class have been designed, according to this view, to stave off revolution and help the capitalist system to survive.
Late capitalist society, it is argued, experiences a form of ‘welfare capitalism’ in which those who originally gained so much from competitive industry are still dominant in our society.
Both of these views of the relationship between government and the economy stress the extent to which social policy should be seen as dependent upon, or even a derivative of, economic policy.
The key internal political issues of our age are who controls our economy and how the rewards that stem from our industrial achievements are to be distributed.
The implications for social policy are as follows: first, that the main determinants of welfare are economic; second, that the government's role in diverting resources into social policies must be seen to be closely interrelated with, even dependent upon, the role it plays in the management of the economy; third, that social policies will be determined by views about the way the economy does, or should, operate.
Specific social policies need therefore to be understood in terms of their relationships to economic policies.
The following are some examples of important questions frequently asked about social policy which are essentially about the relationship between social and economic policy.
Are social security policies redistributive?
How far do the redistributive effects of social security operate beyond minimal insurance limits?
How does any redistribution by this mechanism compare with redistribution that occurs through other economic mechanisms — the effects of competition, the impact of unemployment and the results of wage bargaining, for example?
What are the effects of public housing upon the market of housing?
How far are market forces in this area more influential in determining who gets what housing than state intervention?
It is important to take a wider view of social policy development relating it to economic policy.
To what extent are there limits to the growth of public expenditure in a mixed economy, and therefore what impact may such limits (or the belief that there are such limits) have upon social policy expenditure?
Similarly, what is the impact upon the economy, and also upon the whole political system, of the pattern of employment that has emerged as social policy has become ‘big business’?
Unlike those stressed above, these are questions about the impact of social policy upon economic policy rather than the other way round.
Nevertheless, the key decisions about resources for the social policy sector will be regarded as economic policy decisions.
It has been suggested, then, that, while certain policy areas, subject to a few difficult boundary problems, are defined as social policy, any  proper understanding of the forces that determine outcomes in these areas must rest upon considerations of other policies not social policy conventionally considered.
STUDYING SOCIAL POLICY
Social policy may be studied in a number of ways.
We may merely set out to determine the main policies in the areas in which we are interested.
What is our system of social security?
What benefits does our health service provide?
How has the government intervened in the housing market?
These and similar questions need to be answered by those who want to understand social policy.
They can also be related to many other points about the way the services are organized and administered.
Hence the simplest approach to the study of social policy is to describe the policies and institutions that together make up the British system of social services.
Many accounts of the system of social policy include comments on the strengths and weaknesses of specific policies.
They relate what there is to what, in the authors' views, there ought to be.
The study of social policy, as it has developed in Britain, has been concerned to examine the extent to which the welfare state meets people's needs.
Often, indeed, students of social policy go further and explicitly analyse the extent to which it contributes to social equality.
In this sense an academic discipline has been built up with an explicitly political stance.
Social policy is seen as concerned with the alleviation of social ills; its objectives are accepted at face value; and it is analysed in terms of its success in achieving such goals.
Many who have written about social policy have done so from the standpoint of Fabian socialism, concerned with incremental social change to create a more equal society.
The few who have dealt with this subject from an alternative political standpoint have mainly been liberal Conservatives, concerned to meet the needs of casualties of the social system but suspicious of the claims of the state to regulate many aspects of our lives.
The writings of the late Richard Titmuss, perhaps the most important British student of social policy, deals very fully with arguments between these two viewpoints, the case for his moderate socialist position against those who extol the virtues of the market.
In recent years there has been among social scientists an extensive debate about the extent to which the analysis of society and of social institutions can be ‘value-free’.
Broadly, there is today a consensus that there are limits to the extent to which those who study and write about society can set aside their own commitments and prejudices.
Some go  on to argue, however, that value-freedom within the social sciences as a whole may be achieved by the interplay of arguments and evidence, each biased in different ways but contributing to the advancement of unbiased knowledge as a whole.
Others are more sceptical about the extent to which a body of systematic unbiased knowledge is built up, and they argue that the value problem is ever significant.
The study of social policy has been particularly conspicuous for the specific political or value commitments of those who write about it.
The strong normative bias in the study of social policy has led at times to a greater preoccupation with criticism of policies than with attempts to discover why they take the forms they do.
In fact, if one believes that policies are wrong or ineffective it is important to understand why this is so, particularly if one's objective is to change them.
The view that it is sufficient to point out that policies are ‘wrong’ is often linked with a view of policy making in which men and women of good will are believed to be responsible and are anxious to rectify the unwitting mistakes made in the past.
This approach to the understanding of the policy system was criticized above.
At this stage an author who is arguing that the study of social policy in Britain has been strong on criticism and value judgement but weak on analysis should make his own position very clear.
Since he believes that students may be aided in drawing their own conclusions if writers make their own value biases explicit, it is particularly important to do this.
Broadly, I am deeply concerned about the content of social policy and have contributed (particularly on social security policies and on measures to help the unemployed) to the ‘Fabian’ critique of policy outlined above.
I should not pretend that my personal motivation in studying social policy is not linked with a commitment to non-revolutionary movement towards social equality.
However, I feel increasingly strongly that a concern to influence the content of social policy must be supported by an understanding of how social policy is made.
This book is, therefore, concerned with what social policy is, how it was created and how it was implemented, as well as with its weaknesses and arguments about what it should be.
An understanding of the factors that influence the character of social policy must rest upon several foundations.
Some attention must be given to the social and economic conditions that create the need for social policies.
This is a difficult chicken-and-egg issue.
One cannot simply look at the kinds of problems thrown up by particular social structures and economic situations and analyse policies as responses to those problems, since policies themselves influence the character of the societies in which they are adopted.
For example, government provision of housing may be seen as a response to the inadequacies of the market as a provider of houses, but it has also transformed the character of that  market.
Interactions between policies and society are complex.
It is important, therefore, to draw upon economics and sociology to help with the understanding of what occurs.
It is also necessary to keep in mind the historical dimensions to these issues.
But social policy making must also be seen  as a political process.
It has already been stressed that social policy cannot be analysed on its own, without reference to other activities of the state.
Policies must be understood as products of politics, and attention must be given to the policy creation roles of politicians, civil servants, pressure groups and the electorate.
Policies must also be seen as to a considerable extent products of other policies.
There is a cumulative process to be analysed in which policies create needs for other policies, opportunities for other policies and new social situations for further political responses.
It will be clear that to understand social policy considerable attention must be given to the findings of political science.
An often neglected part of the study of policy is the examination of its implementation.
The actual impact of any policy upon the public will depend upon how it is interpreted and put into practice by government officials.
The implementation process throws light on the strengths and weaknesses of a policy, and experience at the implementation end (by junior officials and the public) gets fed back into the policy process to influence future policy change.
A particular characteristic of a state in which extensive social policies have been adopted is that it is a bureaucratic state.
The organizational complexity of such a state necessarily complicates the implementation process.
An understanding of these issues requires the student of social policy to give some attention to organization theory and to the study of administrative law.
The portrait of the study of social policy as presented in the last few paragraphs shows that it is a subject that draws upon a number of different academic disciplines.
The problem of defining the extent to which it is necessary to delve into these disciplines is like the problem discussed earlier of ascertaining the boundaries between social policy and other kinds of public policy.
There is a need to make what we can of an essentially applied subject, hoping that we can gain what is required from other disciplines without going too deeply into them.
The boundaries between all the social sciences are unclear.
Sometimes this is a necessary feature of subjects that put some parts of the human experience under the microscope and have to abstract this from other parts.
But in other cases it is a result of historical accidents in the development of the disciplines, and if the study of society were to be initiated all over again it would surely be divided rather differently.
The study of social policy particularly hives off a specific area of social activity in a way that must violate subject boundaries.
If it is important to understand a number of practical policies, because of a concern about  their effects upon society, it is necessary to accept studies that cannot be defined in terms of a discrete intellectual discipline.
In setting out to examine what social policy is, and how it may be studied, some answers have been suggested to the question, ‘Why study it?’
Many who are required to study social policy are, or expect to be, involved in its implementation.
That part of a social policy course that is concerned with describing policies and the institutions responsible for them has a clear face value to the social policy ‘practitioner’.
But equally it is important for the member of a department to understand something of the way in which it works, and the internal and external forces that shape its policies.
It may also help to understand other agencies to which that department has to relate, particularly as a great deal of policy depends, or is intended to depend, upon successful co-operation between organizations.
It has been stressed that no policy area is discrete, that policies in one area affect those in others.
This is particularly true of social policies, where their impact upon the public depends upon the way they interrelate.
Successful treatment of the sick requires attention to their housing and income maintenance problems; the care of the neglected child depends upon co-operation between health service workers, personal social services staff and schoolteachers; the homeless often face income maintenance problems as well as housing problems; and so on— the examples are legion.
Hence the most obvious case for studying social policy is a need for the staff of the various social services to understand the system in which they operate.
But that is not all.
One of the characteristics of many of the people who are drawn to work in the social services is a strong commitment to those services.
In this sense it is not surprising that the study of social policy has been deeply concerned with the improvement of policies.
Many social services staff care considerably about the inadequacies of the policies they administer.
But achieving policy change is never an easy process, particularly if one is a comparatively junior participant in a large organization.
To make a contribution towards this end requires not only knowledge of alternatives and commitment to putting them into practice but also an understanding of how social policy is made and implemented.
These arguments for studying social policy have been addressed to people likely to be employed in the social services.
However, they have implications for all citizens who want to influence social policy.
The underlying justification for this book is that participation in policy making for a group of public services of considerable importance to us all must rest upon understanding: understanding of what the policies are, of how they are made and implemented, and of the implications of the many prevailing suggestions on how to change those policies.
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
This has been an introductory chapter in which it has been suggested that students do not need to delve deeply into the debate about the definition of the field of study of social policy.
The essay by Carrier and Kendall (see n. 2) explores that debate, and arrives at a more positive stance on the distinctive character of the subject as an academic discipline than that suggested here.
Joan Higgins's book (see n. 5) contains a chapter on ‘Social Policy and the Conspiracy Theory of Welfare’, which effectively reviews the debate between the Marxist and the ‘liberal’ explanations of social policy.
The Marxist view is argued in the writings by O'Connor and Gough (see n. 4), while Kincaid has provided a very readable descriptive and historical treatment of the development of British social policy from this perspective.
Richard Titmuss was the outstanding exponent of the liberal socialist standpoint on the study of social policy; indeed, he can be said to be virtually the founder of the systematic study of social policy.
His main essays on social policy have recently been put together in a single volume.
Marshall (see n. 1) has produced the other major elementary discussion on this subject in the same tradition.
Good overviews of the competing perspectives on social policy can be found in two books by Mishra.
The History of Social Policy
INTRODUCTION
This chapter deals with some of the key events in the development of British social policy, relating them to social, economic and political trends in our society.
It is not intended as a comprehensive potted history of the subject; it is, however, important to have a historical perspective, particularly on the relationship between social and political change, in order to understand the character of British social policy today.
At one level the story is simple.
The growth of state involvement with the social welfare of its citizens can be related to the development of an industrial society, and its subsequent maturation, or perhaps decline, into what some writers have described as ‘post-industrialism’.
Alongside this industrial development are political developments, associated with the extension of the suffrage, involving citizens more thoroughly with the activities of the state.
The result is a package of developments — of the state's role, the character of the economy and the nature of political processes — which those without a very dogmatic belief about the motive forces in political development find difficult to disentangle in cause-effect terms.
This version of the story of the development of the state's role in social welfare can be applied to a number of industrialized nations-to the United States, to most of the other countries of western and northern Europe and to Australasia — as much as to Britain.
But while these ‘broad brush’ features of the story must not be forgotten it is important also to try to single out characteristics of Britain's development that help to explain the particular shape of its own social policies.
A proper understanding of this subject requires consideration of the general factors, which may apply to a distinct group of nations; of the special factors, which are perhaps unique to one nation; and, furthermore, of a number of factors that do not fall neatly into either of these categories.
Included in this last group is, for example, the ‘insurance  principle’ in social security, adopted in variety of ways by various governments who clearly attempted to learn from each other 's experiences.
DEVELOPMENTS BEFORE THE TWENTIETH CENTURY
It is always very difficult, in dealing with the relationship between past events and contemporary policies, to know how far back to go in time.
To understand British social policies some consideration of the history of the poor law, with its roots in Elizabethan legislation, is necessary.
The Tudor age saw considerable population movements, with changes in agriculture, the growth of towns and some rudimentary developments in manufacturing.
The government found it necessary to try to impose a centrally determined framework on what had hitherto been entirely local, and often monastic, charitable initiatives.
It placed responsibility for the poor upon each parish, with the requirement, under the Acts of Settlement, that the itinerant poor should be returned, if necessary, to their parishes of origin.
The parishes were required to levy rates to provide for the relief of the poor.
The history of the poor law between the sixteenth and twentieth centuries was one of attempts to make this formula work — for local initiative with broad guidelines laid down centrally — despite social changes.
As Britain became industrialized and urbanized a strictly local system of administration came under strain.
Population movements  gradually rendered the Acts of Settlement obsolete.
The tasks of the poor law became more complex as parishes had to cope with, for example, trade recessions and outbreaks of infectious diseases, each affecting large numbers of people in the new towns and cities.
By the middle of the nineteenth century developments in medicine offered a new challenge to the parish ‘guardian’, who had previously provided only the most rudimentary care to the sick.
The most significant nineteenth-century attempt to modernize the poor law was the Poor Law Amendment Act of 1834.
This set up a national Poor Law Commission to superintend the system, and formed the parishes into groups known as poor law unions.
This important step towards the development of a national system was only a limited success.
However, its main contributions to the development of policy were the ‘workhouse test’ and the doctrine of ‘less eligibility’.
The aims of these were to curb indiscriminate outdoor relief; if the poor were not sufficiently desperate to enter the workhouse they could not be really in need.
The system was intended to ensure that those who received help were worse off (‘less eligible’) than the poorest people in work.
In  practice many poor law unions did not strictly enforce the workhouse test, and as the years passed the elderly and the sick were increasingly given outdoor relief.
Nevertheless the elimination of the workhouse, and the abolition of the means test adopted to confine relief-giving, became an important preoccupation of twentieth-century critics of the poor law.
The principle of less eligibility has continued to influence decisions about relief until the present day.
While the basic nineteenth-century response to poverty was to try to strengthen older institutions, some of the consequences of urbanization and industrialization posed problems for which entirely new responses were necessary.
Measures were taken to curb the hours worked by women and children in factories, and to improve safety and working conditions.
This significant development in state intervention in the economy seems to have come about as a result of a mixture of growing humanitarian concern and embryonic working-class pressure.
The enforcement of this legislation was put into the hands of a central government inspectorate, the first of a number of such inspect orates to be set up in the nineteenth century and to operate, according to Roberts, as an important source of pressure for further social reform.
The rapid spread of infection in areas where people were crowded together was, like the exploitation of child labour, not a new phenomenon.
But in an increasingly urbanized society it took new forms more apparent to political opinion and more threatening to life and industry; and there were very many more large populous areas devoid of the most elementary arrangements for disposing of waste or supplying pure water.
Furthermore, it was only during this period that scientific advance identified the main links between insanitary conditions and disease.
In a few areas local government agencies took some steps to tackle this problem, but real progress did not come until central government gave local authorities powers to act effectively, and also required them to take such action.
Here, then, was an important area of government intervention, pushing local authorities to tackle some of the problems of their own areas.
The local government system of the time had been given some shape by the Municipal Corporations Act of 1835, but it was not until the end of the century that it acquired a structure that would enable it to take on the range of functions it has today.
In the nineteenth century, therefore, some reforms required local authorities to take action and to employ professional staff, such as the medical officers of health required by an Act of 1871.
Others, however, set up ad hoc authorities to take on functions delegated by central government.
The evolution of state education during the nineteenth century provides a good example of a series of ad hoc responses.
Religious societies had begun to become involved in the provision of cheap basic  education for the children of the poor early in the century.
By 1833 they had persuaded the government to provide a small grant towards this work.
In 1839 the government set up an inspectorate to further central supervision of the way the growing state aid was being spent.
It was not until 1870, however, that the government moved really forcefully into the provision of primary education.
Motivated, it is widely believed, by a concern about the illiteracy of the growing electorate (the franchise had been considerably widened in 1867), but also undoubtedly by a recognition of a need for a better educated work force, Parliament provided that school boards, to set up state-financed schools, could be established where there was a clear educational need and the voluntary schools were  insufficient in number.
In 1880 a further Education Act made schooling compulsory for children between five and ten, and in the 1890s it was established that most elementary education should be free.
During the last years of the century some of the school boards even became involved in secondary education, producing a confused pattern of educational growth that was to prompt government action at the beginning of the twentieth century.
Reference has already been made to the way in which developments in medicine began, in the late  nineteenth century, to render inadequate the traditional poor law approach to the care of the sick.
Alongside the development of poor law hospitals many voluntary hospitals, assisted by charitable funds that enabled them to provide cheap or free services to the poor, were founded or grew in strength from their earlier origins.
The local authorities were also given powers to establish hospitals to fulfil their duties to contain infectious diseases and to care for the mentally ill.
Medical care outside the hospitals grew in importance in the second half of the century, becoming more than the prerogative of the rich.
This was partly a poor law development, partly the extension of the services of the voluntary hospitals, and partly an aspect of the growth of insurance against misfortune widely practised by the more prosperous of the working classes.
In all, a very mixed package of health care measures was evolving.
This complex mixture, dominated by a powerful medical profession firmly established during the nineteenth century, posed problems for subsequent attempts to rationalize the health services, and therefore influenced the shape the national health service eventually achieved.
At the end of the nineteenth century the verdict of the legal philosopher Dicey was that laissez-faire had given way to collectivism; that government had begun to assume a role in society that had taken Britain well on the way to becoming a socialist state.
The factory legislation and the government intervention in the cause of health and safety implied important changes in the role of the state.
The educational system at the primary (or, as it was known then, the elementary) level had received a crucial injection of public enterprise.
The poor law, on the other hand, had been changed but little.
A need for new policies in that area was just beginning to become apparent at the end of the century, as scientific surveys and journalistic investigations charted the existence of severe problems of poverty caused by factors, in particular sickness and old age, largely outside individual control.
It was suggested earlier that the agencies set up during the nineteenth century to implement social policies were often ad hoc bodies.
While local government was responsible for public health, and for the rudimentary planning, housing and hospital functions required to help achieve more sanitary urban areas, education was made the responsibility of separately elected school boards.
The poor law, of course, came under yet another kind of authority, the boards of guardians, descendants of the former parish officials.
However, legislation late in the century provided a new local government structure much better able to take on a wide range of functions.
Local government Acts in 1888 and 1894 set up a system of local authorities that was to remain almost unchanged until the 1970s.
They gave a shape to local government, with a split between the highly urbanized areas and the rest of the country, that dominates local politics to this day.
The less-urbanized areas acquired a two-tier system of county government, accompanied by lower-tier urban and rural districts.
In many urban areas county boroughs were set up as single all-purpose authorities.
London acquired a special two-tier system of its own.
It is very convenient, for the presentation of historical accounts, when a specific date can be identified as a watershed.
It further adds neatness when that date is the beginning of a century.
While there is always an arbitrary aspect to the choice of such dates, particularly in social history, the dividing point between the nineteenth and twentieth centuries seems a particularly significant one.
At this time the large working-class element added to the electorate in 1885 was just beginning to influence political thinking.
The Labour Representation Committee was set up in 1899 to try to get more working men elected to Parliament.
This body was to turn itself into the Labour Party in 1906.
The major political parties, the Conservatives and the Liberals, were increasingly aware of the need to compete for working-class support.
For the Conservatives the formula was an interesting blend of imperialism and social reform.
The Liberals had a radical wing, temporarily disadvantaged by the jingoism of the Boer War but ready to push the party towards acceptance of a package of new social measures.
Late in the nineteenth century Britain had begun to discover that an advanced industrial nation is vulnerable to alarming economic fluctuations, owing to the uncoordinated nature of much business decision making and the international complications of the trade cycle.
New  competitors had also emerged as other nations — Germany, France, the United States — industrialized rapidly.
The Empire still looked secure, but the competition for new trading outlets was increasing dramatically.
At the same time as doubts were beginning to be felt about Britain's economic vulnerability, the working people were increasingly organizing in trade unions to try to secure, or guarantee, their share of the progress.
The political price of economic failure was being raised.
New initiatives to preserve the unity of the nation were required.
1900 TO 1914
The period immediately before the First World War was dominated by a series of reforms adopted by the Liberal government after 1906.
However, before those reforms are considered two earlier events require comment.
In 1902 the Conservatives enacted an important Education Act.
This passed the responsibility for state education from the school boards to the county and county borough councils, and devised a formula for the comprehensive financial support of the church schools that preserved a measure of voluntary control.
The other important feature of this Act was that it legitimized expenditure on secondary and technical schools, and thereby stimulated the growth of this element of state education.
The other significant event was the Boer War.
This rather inglorious episode in British imperial history had a considerable significance for social policy.
In general it led to a concern to examine what was wrong with Great Britain that it should have been unable to fight effectively against apparently fragile opposition.
In particular, politicians sought to examine why so many volunteers to fight had been found to be unfit to do so.
Hence as Fraser argues:
In that bizarre way which again and again seemed to link imperialism and social reform (sometimes as allies, sometimes as competitors), it seemed to some that Britain would only be able to sustain its Empire if she ensured that the new generation of children, tomorrow's Imperial Army, was properly nourished.
An Interdepartmental Committee on Physical Deterioration was set up.
It reported in 1904, urging the establishment of a school medical service and the provision of school meals within the public education system.
Both these measures were adopted by the Liberals and implemented soon after they came to power.
Before they lost office the Conservatives also responded to the growing evidence on the extent of poverty, and the inadequacies of  existing measures, by setting up a Royal Commission on the Poor Laws in 1905.
The report of this body, which did not appear until 1909, contains a most thorough discussion of British social policy at that time.
There was both a majority and a minority report, and the latter provided a well argued critique of the system.
However, without waiting for the Royal Commission the Liberal Government decided to promote two pieces of legislation that significantly modified the role of the poor law in the provision of social security, the Old Age Pensions Act of 1908 and the National Insurance Act of 1911.
These two pieces of legislation provide interesting contrasts in approaches to the provision of social security.
The old-age pension was non-contributory and based upon a simple test of means.
It was an extension of the outdoor relief given by some boards of guardians, but its means test was a personal and not a family one.
The national insurance scheme, on the other hand, was contributory but not means tested.
It provided cover against sickness and unemployment for some, initially limited, categories of workers.
The contribution was to come jointly from the employee, the employer and the state.
The sickness scheme provided not just cash benefits but also medical treatment, from a ‘panel’ doctor who was remunerated on a ‘capitation basis’in terms of the number of patients he accepted on his panel.
The Friendly Societies and insurance companies, who were already involved in the provision of sickness cover for many working people, were allowed to participate as agents for the scheme and providers of additional benefits.
The scheme protected only employees themselves and not any members of their families.
The National Insurance Act is most important for introducing the ‘insurance principle’ into British social security legislation.
A number of European countries had adopted state or municipal insurance schemes during the last years of the nineteenth century.
The British policy makers were particularly aware of the German scheme.
Heclo provides, in the following passage, an interesting account of the role played by Beveridge, one of the architects of the new scheme, in introducing insurance ideas:
In his first column for the Morning Post, February 16, 1906, he had dismissed contributory social insurance on the German pattern, as had all British investigating committees, with the standard view that it would require an ‘un-British’ amount of regulation of the individual.
Beveridge, however, studied the German experiment more closely during the next year and concluded that the contributory insurance principle could not only reduce costs; it could also eliminate reliance on means tests.’
This adoption of the insurance principle had important consequences for the development of social policy.
In various measures after 1911  governments extended benefits in ways that undermined the true insurance basis of the scheme; but the contributory principle remained an important political symbol, and from time to time attempts were made to return the scheme closer to its roots.
It is always difficult to combine the hard-headed actuarial principles of insurance with a concern for effective and comprehensive social security; yet, as Beveridge recognized, when the only viable political alternative is means testing the contributory principle has a great appeal.
Beveridge was to play an important part in the 1940s in maintaining the insurance approach to social security.
The 1911 National Insurance Act had implications for more than social security policy, in two ways.
The provision of medical services under the sickness benefit scheme used a model for the state payment of general practitioners that has continued in the National Health Service to the present day.
Abel-Smith has pointed out that before 1911 the doctors were in conflict with the Friendly Societies about the conditions under which they were hired to care for members.
Hence they were predisposed to secure contracts under the state scheme which preserved their freedom.
This right to operate as independent contractors rather than as salaried servants of the state has been zealously preserved by general practitioners.
It is also important to perceive the National Insurance Act as the sort of response to the problem of unemployment that has remained dominant in Britain.
The earlier years of the twentieth century saw a number of small experiments in combating unemployment by providing publicly subsidized work.
Yet these did not achieve any great scale, perhaps because of suspicions of their implications for state involvement in the economy.
There was, however, one measure, adopted in 1908, the Labour Exchange Act, that came to assume importance.
The National Insurance Act gave the newly set up exchanges the role of administering the system of unemployment benefit.
This was the activity with which they came to be most closely identified in the first fifty years of their existence.
The hallmark of the British response to defects in the working of the labour market became the provision of relief to the unemployed, and not either the creation of special work programmes or measures to facilitate movements of workers between jobs.
Not until the 1970s was this emphasis really challenged.
The Liberal government could, of course, have developed its social security measures as direct measures of redistributing incomes without either means tests or contributions.
Neither the Liberal measures nor any of the social security measures that have succeeded them have involved the wholesale redistribution of resources.
However, both of the early measures required quite large subventions from taxation.
It is important, therefore, to bear in mind the significance of the budget that  Lloyd George introduced in 1909 to finance both social welfare reforms and increased government expenditure on other matters such as defence, by increasing taxation and making it more redistributive.
This seems to have been the first occasion on which a British government's annual budget was presented, or perceived, as an instrument for the redistribution of income.
This in itself is of note.
Lloyd George, whose penchant for the rhetoric of class warfare gives a misleading impression of his readiness for the reality of such conflict, described the budget as follows: ‘This is a war budget.
It is for raising money to wage implacable warfare against poverty and squalidness.’
The most controversial part of the budget was a group of measures to tax land.
Lloyd George defended them by an aggressive verbal attack on the privileges of landowners:
The ownership of land is not merely an enjoyment, it is a stewardship.
It has been reckoned as such in the past, and if the landowners cease to discharge these  functions , the time will come to reconsider the conditions under which land is held in this country.
No country, however rich, can permanently afford to have quartered upon its revenue a class which declined to do the duty which it was called upon to perform.’
Such was the populist rhetoric of the time.
It did not usher in a revolution, but it helped to change the tenor of British politics.
Inside Parliament the working-class interest was advanced by a comparatively cautious radical Liberal group, supported by an equally cautious small caucus of Labour MPs.
Outside, Marxist socialism was beginning to be given attention by orators, and syndicalist trade unionists were beginning to flex their industrial muscles.
Against all this the land owning interests — not, it must be noted, the industrialists — fought a rear guard action.
The House of Lords threw out Lloyd George's budget.
The consequence was a Parliament Act, with which the Lords eventually  acquiesced after two general elections and the threat of mass creation of peers, which curbed the power of the Lords to block Commons legislation.
The events of 1909–11 have been given comparatively lengthy attention.
The political balance in Britain tipped quite markedly at that time, with important implications for social policy.
Such was the ferment of the times throughout Europe, and such was the rising volume of political controversy within Britain (bear in mind also the Suffragette agitation and the conflict over the future of Ireland), that a more dramatic tipping of the balance than actually occurred in the next few years might have been expected.
Certainly many new social policies were shortly to come, but these did little to disrupt the status quo; indeed, many must be seen as designed to preserve it.
1914 TO 1939
It is important not to regard the development of social policy in Britain as simply involving two dramatic jumps forward in the periods 1906–11 and 1944–9.
Between these a great deal happened to influence policies and to give them a character they often retain.
In the First World War Britain experienced conscription for the first time, and the mobilization not only of the whole work force but also of many women, hitherto not in employment, to assist the war effort.
The war economy produced many domestic shortages.
Initially the government was reluctant to impose controls and rationing, but its desire to curb wage rises and industrial unrest forced it to intervene.
In general, then, the ‘collectivist state’ advanced considerably during this period.
Civil servants learnt to carry out, and members of the public came to expect, government policies in areas of life never before influenced by state action.
This was the general impact of war upon public policy.
Its specific impact upon social policy was more limited.
The imposition of controls upon private rents was a rare, but significant, example of social policy innovation in this period.
However, during and at the end of the war the government made many promises for a better future.
Even before the war ended an Education Act was passed which recognized the case for state support for free education up to the age of fourteen.
At the end of the war Lloyd George promised ‘homes fit for heroes’, and one of the first pieces of postwar legislation was a Housing Act that provided government subsidies to local authorities to build houses for the working classes.
This Act, known as the Addison Act after its sponsor the minister of health, while not the first legislation to allow local authority house building, was the first to subsidize it.
It effectively initiated a programme of council-house building that has continued, albeit subject to regular modification as governments have changed the subsidy arrangements, until the present day.
After the Addison Act both of the minority Labour governments, in power in 1924 and in 1929–31, extended the local authority house-building programme by means of further subsidies.
In the 1930S there was a shift in housing policy, with the government encouraging local authorities to put their emphasis in house provision upon clearing the slums.
The strict rent control, introduced in the war to protect private tenants, was partly lifted during the inter war period.
But with this, as with council-house building, no real attempt was made to turn back the clock on processes that were ultimately totally to transform the character of Britain's housing market.
The evolution of relief policies for the unemployed in the inter war years is an interesting story.
Unemployment was a recurrent problem  throughout this period.
Immediately after the war the government mismanaged the discharge of servicemen back into civilian life, and unemployment rose rapidly.
Then the economy picked up and the problem abated.
But this proved to be a temporary respite, and by 1921 registered unemployment was over 2 million.
It remained over a million throughout the period, falling back a bit in the middle twenties but then rising steeply in 1930.
By 1931 it was over 2.5 million, and it did not fall below 2 million until 1936.
The 1911 National Insurance Act provided unemployment benefit only for workers in a limited number of trades, ones at that time not liable to extensive and prolonged unemployment.
It also contained strict rules to protect the insurance fund.
Benefits were dependent upon past contributions, and the duration of weekly payments to individuals was limited.
The scheme was not designed to provide widespread relief in a period of mass unemployment.
Gilbert, in his detailed study of social policy in this period, has shown that politicians were alarmed by the reports they received of unrest and agitation among the ranks of the unemployed.
They were particularly conscious of the expectation among ex-soldiers that they would receive generous treatment from the government.
Hence the government faced a dilemma, which it resolved by breaching the strict insurance principles and extending the scope of the unemployment benefit scheme.
It would be inappropriate here to set out all the convolutions in public policy on relief for the unemployed.
What a whole succession of ministers and official committees had to try to resolve was the conflict between the demand for economy in government expenditure and the rising cost of an insurance benefit scheme no longer entirely restrained by insurance rules.
Broadly, the compromise reached was extended but not unlimited insurance benefits, the operation of strict and quite unrealistic tests to ensure that people were ‘genuinely seeking work’, the use of additional means-tested benefits known then as ‘doles’, and acceptance that the poor law authorities would give extensive ‘outdoor’ relief to the unemployed.
Eventually rationalization came in 1934 when a unified national means-test scheme for benefits additional to insurance benefits was devised, to be administered by the Unemployment Assistance Board (UAB).
This new organization was the forerunner of the National Assistance Board set up in 1948, and therefore of the Supplementary Benefits Commission that operated until 1980.
The UAB provided a model that enabled central government to take over the functions of the poor law agencies.
It transferred responsibility for means-tested benefits for the unemployed to this national organization in 1934, added similar benefits for the elderly to its responsibilities in 1940, and added most other cash aid in 1941.
By 1948, when it was finally killed, the poor law was all but dead already.
The demise of the poor law was also assisted by another piece of legislation in this period, the Local Government Act of 1929.
This handed over responsibility for the poor law from the boards of guardians to the local authorities.
As far as the administration of relief was concerned, this made little difference; the public assistance committees of the local authorities could be regarded as broadly the guardians under another name.
However, the handover of powers brought the institutions that had evolved from the old workhouses into the hands of authorities that could more effectively bring them up to date.
This was particularly important for the hospitals, since now a unified public service could be provided.
This was an important step towards a national health service, though in practice few authorities did much to modernize their facilities.
Instead, the transformation of the hospital service awaited the special arrangements that were made to co-ordinate their activities with those of the voluntary hospitals during the Second World War.
While little attempt was made to alter the character of the patchwork of health services available in the inter war period, all the parties that were to be involved in their transformation in the 1940s were beginning to examine the weaknesses of the existing provision and to formulate alternatives.
In view of the importance of medical  acquiescence in the system eventually adopted, it was probably necessary for many doctors to become aware of the need for change.
Education services similarly went through a phase of detailed examination of their weaknesses and future potential during the inter war period.
Here, however, the roles given to the local authorities by the Acts of 1902 and 1918 left scope for innovation where money allowed.
The teaching profession grew in strength at this time, developing a formal system of training to replace the nineteenth-century pupil teacher system.
Education beyond the primary stage grew in various ways, and this part of the system was ready for rationalization by the end of the.
1930s.
This section has described the inter war period as a period of consolidation in social policy.
But at least one really significant innovation occurred, the development of a public housing sector, and the inroads made into poor law were of considerable significance for the future.
One other element of this that deserves a brief outline was the adoption in 1925 of a contributory pension scheme to run alongside the non-contributory one.
This period is often thought of as a failure in British politics, of failure to cope with the rise of Hitler and Mussolini abroad and a failure to deal with unemployment at home.
It was, however, also a period when complete adult suffrage was achieved, and in which a political consensus was built up that enabled the Labour Party to establish itself alongside the older parties, so that an element of  working-class power developed without turning into a revolutionary force.
The key Conservative politicians of that age, Baldwin and Chamberlain, were very much men of the ‘consensus’, eager to promote cautious innovation in social policy.
The key Labour politician, Ramsay MacDonald, was equally eager to occupy the middle ground.
Some readers will no doubt regard this consensus politics as another of the failures of this age, urging that the compromises by the Left prevented radical change from occurring.
Its significance for social policies, however, was that it created a platform for changes to occur in the 1940s, changes that secured very widespread social and political acceptance.
THE 1940s
The government was very much more ready to mobilize all the nation's resources in the Second World War than it had been in the First.
Regulation and rationing were not adopted reluctantly but as measures essential to the war effort.
Politically, at least after Churchill replaced Chamberlain as prime minister in 1940, the nation was more totally united.
The Labour Party regained its self-confidence, lost after it had been deserted by its leaders, who formed a National government and then heavily defeated it in a general election in 1931.
It regarded attention to social policies as one of the conditions of its involvement in a wartime coalition government.
Although Churchill sometimes appeared to be unhappy about it, planning for the peace was widely accepted as a legitimate political task during the war.
But before looking at the two most important examples of planning for peace, the Beveridge Report and the Butler  Education Act of 1944, it is important to note a number of ways in which peacetime policy changes were foreshadowed by ad hoc wartime measures.
In the last section reference was made to the way in which the Unemployment Assistance Board, which was renamed the Assistance Board in 1940, took over various functions from the public assistance committees in the early part of the war.
Mention was also made of the integration of the hospital services during the war, under the Emergency Hospital Scheme.
The evacuation of children called for the development of special services, foreshadowing developments in child care practice after the war.
Rents were again strictly controlled, and empty houses were requisitioned.
The wartime state had many of the characteristics of the ‘welfare state’, which is popularly regarded as having been created after the war.
The Beveridge Report was the report of a committee on Social Insurance and Allied Services, published in 1942.
This recommended  the adoption of a contributory social security system which improved on the existing system by protecting all citizens in sickness, unemployment and old age.
The new system should, it was argued, include family allowances, maternity benefits and provision for widows.
The contribution principles should be insurance ones, involving the employee, the employer and the state as before, but the coverage of the scheme should be universal and therefore involve a national pooling of risks.
There was, in the arrangements for depend ants and widows, inevitably built into the scheme certain assumptions about the male breadwinner and his relationship to the family unit, which have left a difficult legacy for attempts to balance the interests of men and women in our own age.
Otherwise it is still possible to evaluate the British system of social security in terms of the extent to which it matches up to the model outlined by Beveridge in 1942.
Beveridge argued that other social policies were necessary to underpin his insurance scheme.
Support for children would be necessary through a universal ‘family allowance’ scheme.
A system of means tested assistance would be necessary as a ‘safety-net’ for the minority whose needs were not adequately covered by the scheme.
The maintenance of full employment would be essential to enable social insurance to work properly.
A national health service should take over the provision for medical care in the old insurance scheme and effectively underpin the new one.
Beveridge's insurance scheme was broadly put into legislation.
Family allowances were provided by one of the last measures of the coalition government.
The rest was enacted by the postwar Labour government, though there was one crucial departure from the insurance principle in that the qualifying period for full pension was very short.
This deviation from Beveridge's plan made the scheme expensive to general taxation, and probably tended to prevent the adoption of benefit levels sufficient to provide subsistence incomes to those with no other resources and to inhibit subsequent increases to keep up with the cost of living.
The Education Act passed in 1944 and often identified by the name of the minister responsible, R. A. Butler, provided the framework for the education system we have today.
The Butler Act provided for universal free state secondary education, but did not specify the form it should take or rule on whether or not there should be selective schools.
At the end of the war the coalition broke up.
In the ensuing general election both parties promised substantial social policy reforms, but the electorate swung strongly towards the Labour Party, rejecting the old war leader Churchill in favour of that party's clearer commitment to a vision of the ‘welfare state’.
The social security reforms embodied by the Labour Party in the National Insurance Act of 1946 and the National Assistance Act of 1948 have already been mentioned.
With the adoption  of these measures came the abolition of the poor law, its income maintenance responsibilities going to the National Assistance Board and its responsibilities for residential care and other welfare services going to local authority welfare departments.
In 1946 the creation of the National Health Service provided another crucial innovation in social policy.
General practitioner and hospital services were provided free for everyone, in a complex structure designed to unify the hospital sector while leaving general practitioners as  independent contractors and other community services in the control of the local authorities.
This structure was achieved after hard bargaining between the minister, Aneurin Bevan, and the doctors, who were deeply suspicious of state medicine.
The scheme was funded out of general taxation, though an element of payment for the health service remained in the national insurance contribution, creating a confusing illusion that this was what paid for the service.
The notion of a totally free service did not last for long.
Very soon chancellors of the Exchequer, exploiting concern that demand for services was much greater than expected, secured first small payments for spectacles and dental treatment, and then prescription charges, as ways of raising revenue.
In among these widely publicized social policy reforms came another measure, with much less impact upon the general public but nevertheless with important implications: the Children Act of 1948.
The origins of this reform of the services for deprived children seem to have been in a child care scandal, the O'Neill case, which led to the setting up of the Curtis Committee to investigate contemporary practice.
The Children Act consolidated the existing child care legislation, and created departments in which professional social work practice would develop in child care, and in due course in work with families.
The Labour government of 1945–51 did not alter the system of subsidizing local authority housing developed in the inter war period, but it did, by the Housing Act of 1949, substantially extend the subsidies available.
The Act formally removed the limitation confining local authority provision to housing for the ‘working classes’.
The government's concern throughout the late 1940s was to stimulate building to make up the deficiencies in housing stock arising from bomb damage and the wartime standstill in house building.
However, postwar shortages of materials made it difficult to accelerate new building.
The Labour government laid its emphasis upon local authority housing rather than on private building for sale.
It also involved itself, as no government ever had before, in an attempt to secure effective land use planning and to curb land speculation.
The Town and Country Planning Act of 1947 provided a grand design for this purpose, though one of limited success, which was subsequently dismantled by the  Conservatives.
Another crucial planning innovation, with major implications for the provision of public housing, was the New Towns Act of 1946.
This provided jobs and houses in new communities for people from overcrowded cities and run-down industrial areas.
Government involvement in the planning of the use of national resources, which had been one of the necessities of wartime, was continued by the Labour government as a matter of principle.
This in itself was important in enlarging the involvement of government with many aspects of life in Britain.
There was a commitment to the maintenance of full employment, with the Keynesian doctrine that budgetary  management could achieve this now a matter of economic orthodoxy.
In the 1940s such economic management was slightly inflationary, but this was broadly seen as a reasonable price to pay for full employment and economic growth.
In retrospect it is hard to judge the extent to which the success of this policy (and, for all the worries it caused at the time, it was a success by comparison with the economy management disasters of the 1960s and 1970s) was due to good management, and the extent to which it was due to external and internal economic factors outside government control, in particular to the postwar recovery and the stimulus provided by the continuing military activity of the ‘cold war’.
The 1940s were, in both war and peace, crucial years for the building of the system of social policy Britain has today.
But it has been shown that few of the innovations of this period were without precedent in the policies of earlier years, and that much of the crucial thinking about the form these new institutions should take had been done in the inter war period.
Continuity is also evident in the behaviour of the two major political parties.
The Butler Education Act and the Family Allowances Act were both measures of the Conservative-dominated wartime coalition.
Preliminary work had also been done during the war on the ideas for the social security scheme, and plans had begun to be drafted for a national health service.
The political continuity is also apparent in the fact that the Conservatives did comparatively little, on returning to power in 1951, to dismantle the ‘welfare state’.
The Labour Party policies that they did contest, and partly reverse, were nationalization policies not social welfare ones.
Otherwise, they shifted the house-building emphasis from public to private building but by no means eliminated a substantial public element from their enlarged building programme; they were marginally more ready to increase health service charges; and they were, perhaps, rather slow to raise social security benefits.
In the later 1950s they encouraged education services to flourish; and some local authorities began to innovate in this policy area in ways that in due course came to be regarded as radical and politically contentious.
SINCE THE 1940S
The presentation of policies in this section will be sketchy because they are generally covered more fully in the appropriate detailed chapter later in the book.
The aim here is to give the flavour of the key developments in this period as part of the history of social policy.
Broadly the period 1951–87 can be divided into four parts: 1951–64, a period of comparatively little social policy innovation which may be regarded as a time of consolidation or stagnation, according to one's political viewpoint; 1964–74, a period of fairly intense policy change stimulated by both political parties, in which considerable difficulties were experienced in translating aspirations into practice; 1974–78, a period in which rapid inflation and government by the Labour party without a parliamentary majority administered a severe shock to the political and social system, and to all who believed that there was still a need for developments in social policy; and 1979–87, when much more explicitly anti-welfare state Conservative administrations reinforced that shock by deliberately treating inflation as more deserving of its attention than unemployment, attacking public services which were seen as inhibiting economic recovery and seeking ways to ‘privatize’ public services.
Bearing these points in mind let us look at developments in each of the main policy areas over the whole period.
The period 1951–64 was a boom period for house building, both private and public.
It was during this time that two kinds of tenure began to dominate in Britain, owner-occupation and local authority tenancy.
The decline in the size of the privately rented sector was rapid, and towards the later part of this period it was accelerated by slum clearance.
In 1957 the government, believing that the private renting market could be revived if rent controls were removed, passed a Rent Act that allowed some decontrol.
The main impact of this measure was that many landlords used the freedom to evict allowed under decontrol to sell previously let properties into owner-occupation.
In the 1960s the Labour government legislated to restore security of tenure and to allow rent levels to rise only to levels that fell short of market prices.
When Labour returned to power they were committed to reversing the emphasis upon building for owner occupation within the building boom, but otherwise they wanted to produce even more houses per annum.
The use of restraints upon building investment as an economic regulator to prevent excess domestic demand made it difficult for them to achieve their targets.
By the end of the 1970S the additions to the housing stock had been so considerable that arguments were increasingly heard that Britain had enough houses.
What complicated this debate was the question of whether there were enough houses of the  right kind in the right places.
Certainly some of the earlier building activity may have been misplaced effort.
In particular, many local authorities has acquired high-rise flats which were hard to let.
Another of Labour's policy commitments was to try again, like their predecessors in 1946, to do something to rationalize planning and curb the activities of the land speculators.
While the central problem here was the unrestrained inner-city office and commercial development, the concern about this issue also had implications for owner-occupied housing.
Politicians of both parties have become increasingly concerned in the last twenty years about the problems of house-buyers, in the face of spiralling land and building costs and high rates of mortgage interest.
When they came to power in 1970 the Conservatives decided that public expenditure on local authority housing needed to be curbed.
Their Housing Finance Act of 1972 set out to adapt the ‘fair-rent’ principle, which Labour had applied to private rents in the 1960s, to the local authority sector.
They linked this with a national rent rebate scheme, rationalizing the variety of local schemes that had been set up over the previous decade, to offset the costs to the poorer tenants.
This Act was designed to reduce the general subsidy to council tenants; it was linked to changes in the system of national subsidies to local authorities designed to phase out indiscriminate help of this kind in due course.
Labour opposed this measure and limited its impact, but on returning to power in 1979 the Conservatives, by reducing new expenditure on public housing, modifying the subsidy formula and encouraging rents to rise, set out to eliminate most subsidies to public housing.
At the time of writing this goal is quite close to achievement.
In addition legislation enacted in 1980 to give local authority tenants a ‘right to buy’ has also made extensive inroads into the system of public housing.
At the time of writing, after the Conservatives under Mrs Thatcher have returned to power for a third term, further legislation is being considered which could completely dismantle the system of local authority owned public housing.
It would be replaced by a mixture of housing associations, tenants' co-ownership schemes and further individual ownership.
The Conservatives did little to change the social security system in the period 1951–64.
Towards the end of the period the two parties began to produce competing plans to superimpose an earnings-related pensions scheme on top of the inadequate flat rate system.
In 1959 the Conservatives introduced a very limited graduated pension scheme.
In 1964 the Labour Party came to power committed to a much more comprehensive scheme.
However, they failed to complete the preparation of this before they lost office in 1970.
The Conservatives then took the idea up in a slightly more limited way, but Labour returned to power to put their own scheme on the statute book in 1975.
This scheme provided for a mixed system of public and private pensions, with many of the better  paid and more secure groups of workers able to ‘contract out’ into private schemes so long as they were at least as good as the State Earnings Related Pensions Scheme (SERPS).
Conservative legislation in 1986 has extended the scope for contracting out, allowing schemes which do not necessarily compete favourably with the state scheme and also reducing the benefits available under SERPS.
In the early 1960s a number of academic studies were published showing that the ‘welfare state’ had by no means abolished poverty.
This ‘rediscovery of poverty’ would seem to be a function of an academic and political interest that had emerged, concerned to look at the adequacy of social policies.
Indeed, it can be said to be a consequence, but also a cause, of the growth of the academic subject with which this book is concerned.
It was not, at that time at least, a consequence of any particular social or economic change between the late 1940s and the early 1960s, except inasmuch as increased affluence for many heightened the ‘relative poverty’ of those left behind.
The emphasis upon the weaknesses of existing social security policies for the relief of poverty led to a reappraisal of those policies.
The Labour government of 1964–70 made a number of changes, therefore.
Some of the changes raised some people's incomes, and there were a number of increases in benefit rates.
Inflation was, however, increasing, and public resources were, as ever, limited and in great demand for a wide range of policy objectives.
The main social security policy changes in this period were the introduction in 1965 of earnings-related supplements to sickness and unemployment benefits and of a redundancy payments scheme.
Also, in 1966 ‘national assistance’ was replaced by ‘supplementary benefit’.
This reform was designed to remove the stigma of assistance by making rights to these means-tested benefits much clearer, particularly for pensioners.
One particular focus of attention in the debate about poverty was family poverty, and particularly the problems faced by the low wage earner.
The principle, adopted in 1834, that wages should not be subsidized had been carried forward in social security legislation, but the margin between the income of those in work and those out of work sometimes made the principle of ‘less eligibility’ appear under threat.
The Child Poverty Action Group, a pressure group set up in the 1960s, urged governments to deal with this problem by increasing family allowances.
These had fallen in value, in real terms, since little effort had been made to update them properly.
However, the conventional political view was that family allowances were an unpopular and indiscriminate handout.
The ‘poverty lobby’ sought to persuade the government that family allowances could be increased at the expense of child tax allowances.
This approach was gradually accepted, though not before inflation had reduced the tax threshold so low that most poor  wage-earners were also benefiting from the tax allowances.
In the 1970s the Conservatives floated an alternative approach, a form of negative income tax called ‘tax credits’, and implemented a means-tested benefit for poor wage-earners, ‘family income supplement’.
Labour, on return to power, decided to press on with the development of a new family allowance scheme, called ‘child benefit’, designed to replace the older allowance, extended it to the first child in each family, and offset it against the abolition of tax allowances.
On first returning to power in 1979 the Conservatives set out to make piecemeal adjustments to the social security system.
They reduced the value of contributory benefits by altering the procedure for inflation related increases, and by extending the taxation of benefits.
They shifted the responsibility for provision for sickness absence for the first twenty eight weeks from the national insurance scheme to a statutory sick pay scheme to be run by employers.
They attempted also to rationalize the burgeoning supplementary benefit scheme by developing a stronger rule-based structure, and introduced a housing benefit scheme.
However, in 1983 they decided more radical reform of social security was necessary.
It was an element in public expenditure which they were finding very hard to control, not surprisingly in the face of an ageing population, rapidly rising unemployment and government measures designed to shift the subsidy of housing on to the social security scheme.
Proclaiming themselves to be engaged in the most radical review of social security since Beveridge, they set up a number of ministerially dominated committees to explore options for reform.
The eventual outcome was the 1986 Social Security Act.
This legislation modified SERPS (in the way outlined above), replaced supplementary benefit by ‘income support’ and family income supplement by ‘family credit’.
These two new schemes operate with much simpler rule structures than had supplementary benefit.
Housing benefit was altered to bring it in line with these other two benefits.
Some anomalies which had been arising as a result of the previous piecemeal evolution of means-tested benefit were eliminated.
The maternity grant and the death grant, two benefits initiated in the Beveridge era but not properly updated in line with inflation, were abolished, to be replaced by means test-related benefits for the very poor.
The system of single payments available to help people on supplementary benefit with specific needs was replaced by a much more limited system, in which all most people could get were loans.
Overall the 1986 Act made many detailed changes, it extended and rationalized means tests, but it did not take social security in the radical new direction that ‘negative income tax’ or ‘social dividend’advocates were suggesting.
In the period 1951–64, of all the policy areas with which this book is concerned, it was probably education that saw the most innovation.
The Butler Act had, as was stressed, laid the foundation for the creation of a  sound secondary education system.
At that time the orthodox view was that such a system should be selective and tripartite, with children routed at eleven-plus into grammar, technical or secondary modern schools according to their aptitudes and abilities.
However, as time passed this doctrine was increasingly questioned and an alternative, non-selective, comprehensive model was championed.
Various local authorities began to introduce comprehensive schools in the 1950s, motivated sometimes by political and educational ideology but sometimes, particularly in rural areas, by a recognition that such schools were a more realistic response to local needs.
It was not until the 1960s that battle-lines began to be drawn, with Labour in favour of comprehensivization and the Conservatives against; and even then the Conservatives in central government were not hard-line opponents of this policy in the way that, by the end of the decade, Labour had become hard-line advocates.
Nevertheless Labour legislation requiring local authorities to introduce comprehensivization schemes, enacted in 1976, was repealed by the Conservatives in 1980.
In a variety of other ways the Conservative governments of the period 1951–64 rapidly increased the resources available to state education.
In many respects this was a necessary response to the child population ‘bulge’ created by the ‘baby boom’of the immediate postwar years.
This in itself created a need for new schools and teachers, and therefore provided a platform for educational innovation.
But clearly governments were ready to encourage innovatory thinking.
Advisory groups were created to look at various educational issues.
These produced a memorable series of reports: on early leaving; on education between fifteen and eighteen; on the education of less academic children; on higher education; and on primary education.
The crucial policy changes influenced by all this committee activity were the rapid expansion of higher education in the 1960s, the raising of the school-leaving age to sixteen in 1973 (after delays in implementing a change first announced in 1964), and a distinct shift away from streaming and selectivity at all stages before the teenage years.
But it was the change in amounts of public money spent on education that was most important.
By the mid-1970s the ‘bulge’ had nearly worked its way through the system, and this, together with disillusion with innovation in education, brought to an end the role of the education service as an expenditure growth-leader among the public services.
This reversal was extended in the 1980s to some extent, particularly in the case of higher education, in advance of the fall in the size of the relevant generation.
At the same time education-based expenditure on meals, milk and transport came under attack.
The late 1970s also saw the initiation of the questioning of the value of educational growth.
Controversy grew about some of the bolder experiments in egalitarian education, and it was increasingly alleged that basic  education, the ‘three Rs’, was being neglected.
Some people put some of the responsibility for the growing youth unemployment on educational inadequacies, giving sustenance to the Manpower Services Commission's bid to control low-level post-school education.
Once the Conservatives came to power in 1979 the unrest began to be translated into policy form.
The completion of the comprehensivization programme was arrested, and new opportunities were created for state-financed places at private schools.
The 1980 Education Act, which extended parental choice of schools, was seen as creating pressures for the raising of academic standards.
At the time of writing the Conservatives are taking these developments much further; they plan for a centrally determined basic curriculum, with obviously a strong emphasis on the three Rs, a system of testing at various stages in the educational process, and the development of centrally funded schools removed from local authority control.
In the 1950s the principal government concern about the health service was the difficulties in controlling costs.
No substantial changes resulted from this preoccupation.
The relationship of the doctors to the government was, and remains, a sensitive area.
A great deal of attention was given to their terms of service and remuneration.
The only major item of legislation in the health field between 1951 and 1970 was the Mental Health Act of 1959 which altered the procedures for the compulsory admission and retention of the mentally ill in hospital, abolishing the old ‘certification’ procedure.
The treatment of mental illness was advancing considerably at that time, and it probably contributed more than the legislative change to reducing both the use of compulsory procedures and the incidence of long stays in hospital.
In the 1960s, as part of the wholesale review of the institutions of central and local government, proposals were introduced for the reorganization of the National Health Service.
Two green papers were produced, suggesting different ways of doing this.
Eventually the change was effected by the Conservatives in 1974.
This change created a new structure, with the former local authority health services integrated with the rest of the service.
Lay participation in the running of the service was reduced; in its place community health councils were created to represent the public.
The new structure was criticized as over-elaborate — with its three tiers of regions, areas and districts — almost as soon as it was created.
Discontent over the operation of the new service was one of the factors that led the Labour government to set up a Royal Commission on the National Health Service in 1976.
This reported in 1979, recommending the removal of a tier; the government responded, by eliminating areas but enlarging some districts, in 1982.
Two important stimuli to the search for the right structure for the NHS throughout this period were a concern about effective policy control in the face of professional domination, and anxiety about the extent of  inequalities in health between social classes and between regions.
These two concerns were brought together during the 1970s with the development of a system for the allocation of resources between regions and districts based upon health indices (RAWP, see chapter 7).
They, and particularly the former, also fuelled a concern to strengthen management.
In the Griffiths Report, published in 1983, a hierarchy of general managers was advocated for the NHS, weakening the influence of the nominated regional and district ‘authorities’.
This proposal was enacted.
The development of the personal social services between the 1940s and the 1970s is a story of steady consolidation and one important structural change.
At the end of the 1940s local authorities organized these services within two or three departments.
Children's services were the responsibility of one department, required by statute.
Children's departments built up a body of social work expertise, and gradually extended their activities, from work to deal with the acute child care problems into work designed to prevent child neglect and abuse and work with delinquent children.
Two Children and Young Persons Acts, in 1963 and 1969, legitimized and encouraged these changes in emphasis.
The other local authority welfare services, or personal social services, were organized by welfare departments and by health departments (or by departments that combined these two functions).
A social work career was developed in connection with this work, but not so effectively as was the case in the children's departments.
A government report in 1959 made recommendations that influenced developments in the training of social work staff of this kind.
But the activities of these departments were growing in other ways, too.
Their legacy from the poor law was a stock of homes, for the elderly and disabled, that were ex-workhouses.
A central task, therefore, was to phase out these institutions, replacing them by smaller, more welcoming and civilized homes, and also to seek to develop ways of caring for people within the community.
Developments in day care, the home help service and other domiciliary services were the currency of growth in these departments.
In 1970 the Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act placed obligations upon the local authorities to identify and help the disabled.
But progress in this area of policy should not necessarily be measured by statutes.
Earlier, permissive legislation had already enabled some authorities to innovate in services for the disabled.
The important structural change for all these local authority services was an Act passed in 1970, on the recommendations of the Seebohm Committee, which created integrated ‘social services’ departments in authorities in England and Wales.
In Scotland the Social Work (Scotland) Act of 1968 had already created integrated ‘social work depart  ments’, in that case including the probation officers, who remained in a separate service independent of local government in England and Wales.
The structural change in England and Wales was accompanied by a change in central government organization, whereby the Home Office's responsibility for children's services was passed over to the Department of Health and Social Security, which was already responsible for other welfare services.
These changes represent another example of the statutory creation of a ‘platform for growth’.
This duly occurred, but by the 1980s had been checked.
With that check came renewed questioning about the balance between services provided by the social services departments and the many forms of family, neighbourhood and commercially purchased care that they supplemented.
Within social work the quest continued for the best way to organize a service that could be responsive to community need.
From outside social work doubts were increasingly raised about the adequacies of that profession, particularly in the face of a growing number of child abuse ‘scandals’.
During the period 1950–87 the local government structure, within which many of the social services are based, came under review.
In 1972 the Local Government Act made the first major change in the local government system of England and Wales (apart from the restructuring in London, which took place in 1963), since the nineteenth century.
This reform created a new two-tier system of local government.
In the metropolitan areas the model, like the earlier one adopted in London, was of lower-tier authorities for most purposes and of top-tier counties responsible primarily for structural planning.
Outside the metropolitan areas the division of the social policy functions was more even: the counties acquired responsibility for education and social services, while the districts were made responsible for housing.
Similar changes followed in Scotland soon afterwards.
Then, in 1986 the Thatcher government abolished the metropolitan counties.
Their functions were either devolved to the districts or given to ad hoc joint boards.
An accompanying central government preoccupation about local government in this period was the fact that it was becoming an increasing spender (not surprisingly, in the light of central government's expectations of it in areas like education, personal social services and housing).
In the period up to the middle 1970s central government steadily increased its contribution to local expenditure.
It also struggled, rather fruitlessly, to find ways wholly or partly to replace the system of local taxation, the rates assessed on property.
In the last year of the Callaghan government the central contribution to local expenditure began to be cut.
The Thatcher government continued this process, much more zealously, developing a formula which deliberately penalized those authorities it deemed to be over-spenders.
Then, in addition, it  decided it must limit local authorities' powers to go on increasing local rates.
It developed a power which enabled it to ‘rate cap’ a group of authorities whom it deemed to be high spenders.
Finally, at the time of writing, it is abolishing rates and replacing them by a poll tax known as the ‘community charge’.
Scottish legislation to do this is already on the statute book, and legislation for England and Wales is before Parliament.
This section has described policy developments in a period in which the Conservatives and Labour alternated in power.
Thirteen years of Conservative rule was followed by nearly seven years of Labour rule.
Then there was an episode of nearly four years of Conservative government.
After that Labour ‘enjoyed’ a period of four years in government in which continuance in office depended upon the support of the Liberals.
Then, in 1979 the Conservatives won a clear majority.
They won a second term of office in 1983, and a third term in 1987.
In the first edition of this book it was argued that levels of controversy over social policies since 1951 had not been particularly high.
Conservative ideologists had had much to say about the case for bringing market conditions more effectively to bear upon the distribution of social services, but only in the housing field had Conservative governments taken steps that represented major responses to this viewpoint.
Labour had disappointed many of its supporters, who closely identified the party with the advancement of the welfare state.
A succession of economic crises had limited the money available for new social policies.
Yet both parties had considerably advanced public expenditure, particularly on social policies, to the point where some economists had argued that this kind of expenditure had become an inflationary force, limiting the scope for new wealth-creating private investment.
This is a view both parties had taken very seriously.
The most staggering growth had been in public employment and in social security transfer payments, two forms of growth politicians find very hard to limit.
However, political dominance since 1979 by a Conservative government much more openly hostile to the welfare state has changed the political atmosphere.
Today the welfare state is to some extent ‘under siege’.
Hence the title of this chapter has been changed from the positive word ‘growth’ used in the two earlier editions of the book to the more neutral word ‘history’.
In fact, however, as is shown in some detail in chapter 11, while the Conservatives have been very committed to public ‘expenditure restraint and have stopped the growth of public employment, they too have found social policy expenditure hard to curb.
Public sector housing expenditure has experienced severe cuts.
Education expenditure has been cut a little.
Health and personal social  services expenditure trends are harder to interpret.
The figures suggest slight growth, but needs and costs have grown faster and some decline has been experienced.
Nevertheless social policy expenditure as a whole has grown, driven upwards by the considerable growth in its major component, the social security budget.
Undoubtedly the political and economic climate for social policy growth has chilled.
In the 1950s Keynesian economic management techniques were employed to try to retain full employment without inflation.
Critics of policies of that period like Samuel Brittan have suggested that chancellors found it difficult to time their uses of the economic ‘brake’ or ‘accelerator’properly, and that the ‘stop-go’pattern that emerged provided a poor economic environment for investment decisions, and thus inhibited British growth.
The particular motivation for some fairly panicky use of the ‘brake’ was a concern with Britain's tendency to run into balance of payments problems, importing more than it was exporting.
However, during this period a rate of growth was achieved that was good by the standards of the mid-1970s, full employment was maintained, and inflation, while ever present, was never so high as to cause alarm.
In the 1960s, despite an increasing commitment to economic planning, the cyclical pattern got worse.
Inflation increased, balance of payments crises forced the application of strong restraints to public expenditure and private incomes on a number of occasions, and, at the depressed point of the cycle, quite marked increases in unemployment occurred.
In the mid-1970s Britain faced a more severe crisis, in which very high inflation, a balance of payments problem and continuing high unemployment occurred all at the same time.
Measures to cope with the first two by traditional means worsened the third.
At a time when governments seemed to have learnt a great deal about economic management they found it increasingly difficult to practise it.
In fact, the rise in economic management problems can be correlated with the dramatic increase in the number of economists in the civil service!
Different schools of economists have preached different solutions to these problems.
On the Right the ‘monetarist’ school of thought has become increasingly influential, arguing that governments must control the money supply and let economic forces bring the system under control.
This viewpoint was put partly into practice in the 1970s, but politicians were reluctant to let bankruptcies and redundancies occur on a sufficient scale to really test the monetarist hypothesis.
More influential, and more in conformity with Keynesian orthodoxy, were those economists who argued that income restraint was necessary to bring unemployment and inflation into balance, and to prevent Britain's balance of payments getting out of hand as rising wages led us to import goods we could ill afford while making it more difficult to sell things.
As  far as they were concerned, what happened was that wage bargaining was no longer restrained by the social and political forces that hitherto limited rises to figures that would not disrupt the economy.
Incomes policies were seen as crucial to help solve our problems, yet over and over again governments found that political pressures made these very difficult to sustain for any length of time.
The whole picture was, however, complicated by changes in the pattern of trade in the world, and particularly by rises in prices of primary commodities.
After 1979 the ‘monetarist’ theory was more boldly put into practice.
The government treated the money supply and particularly the public sector borrowing rate as the key phenomena to keep under control.
It was prepared to let unemployment rise rapidly in the cause of the war against inflation.
It abandoned incomes policy in the private sector, seeking only to keep pay increases to public employees tightly under control.
Initially it found the removal of pay controls and its own taxation adjustments produced severely inflationary effects.
But then it was successful in bringing inflation under control, but achieved that at the expense of a rapid increase in unemployment.
Numbers registered as out of work rose from just over a million in 1979 to over 3 million in 1983.
They have remained close to the latter level ever since.
In chapter 9, one of the issues which will be examined will be whether social policy measures can help to cope with unemployment or whether it is primarily an economic problem.
While one school of economists, broadly on the Left, see a way forward toward economic stability and growth in employment through protection against imports, doubts are  increasingly raised about how such measures can counter a developing trend towards lower job opportunities.
There is evidence that the character of demand for labour is changing, and that new investment is essentially capital-intensive and therefore unable to absorb much labour.
Analysis of the issue is complicated by questions about the changing composition of the labour force, which large numbers of married women have joined since the war, and about the extent to which the unemployed lack the skills and capacity now required by industry.
Early in this chapter it was pointed out that at the beginning of the century British governments adopted an approach of relief of unemployment that largely ruled out the creation of specific employment opportunities.
In the early 1970S interest was awakened in Britain in the case for the development of ‘active labour market policies’ of the kind adopted in Sweden.
These involved such things as assisting labour mobility, expanding training when unemployment rises, and creating special work projects for the unemployed.
Their appeal was that they were conceived in Keynesian terms as helping to reduce the extent to which measures to alleviate unemployment, in a largely fully employed economy, created inflation.
Their adoption in Britain occurred at a time of high unemployment.
Accordingly instead of serving the economic function for which they were originally advocated they have been modified to serve the political function of reducing the number of unemployed whilst minimizing intervention in the economy as a whole.
There has been a particular concentration on measures for young people to the extent that many who leave school at sixteen can expect up to two years in government schemes which combine work experience with training.
These reflections upon some of the problematic relationships today between economic and social policies conclude this chapter on the development of social policy in Britain.
It has been hard to decide what should be given attention, and how much detail should be included.
It was important to sketch in some of the history of developments in social policy.
In our complex society so many of the peculiarities of our institutions and policies can be explained only by what has gone before.
It is also necessary not to view policies in a static way; they have been built up slowly over a long period and they are still changing.
The factors that helped to build them will be examined further in the next two chapters by looking at the forces that influence the making and implementation of social policy.
After that we will be ready to look at specific policies in more detail.
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
Such is the wealth of historical literature that it has been difficult to decide what to give in notes in this chapter.
References have been confined to some of the more significant primary sources and to secondary sources that readers may find particularly interesting or readable.
Some of the major historical works upon which the author has depended have not been cited.
Derek Fraser's The Evolution of the British Welfare State (see n. 9) is a good general historical textbook but is stronger on the nineteenth than the twentieth century.
Pat Thane's The Foundation of the Welfare State, deals with the period from 1870 onward.
The inter war period is well covered in Gilbert's book (see n. 15).
A number of recent books deal with the 1945–51 Labour government.
Amongst these K. O. Morgan's Labour in Power is recommended.
Historical accounts of the more recent period are, generally speaking, still to be written, as is an overall review of social policy development since the Second World War.
However, Nicolas Deakin's The Politics of Welfare provides the rudiments of such an account.
The Making of Social Policy
INTRODUCTION
This chapter deals with the social policy-making system, introducing the key institutions involved in the process in Britain.
The next chapter looks at the implementation of social policy.
The two chapters must be considered together; dividing the policy processes between ‘making’ and ‘implementation’is, in various respects, difficult.
It is hard to identify a dividing line at which making can be said to be completed and implementation to start.
There is also a considerable amount of feedback from implementation which influences further policy making, and many policies are so skeletal that their real impact depends upon the way they are interpreted at the implementation stage.
The starting-point in the chapter is the ideal to which the British system of government is presumed to correspond, in which policy making is seen as the responsibility of our representatives in Parliament, who answer to the people at the general election for their stewardship of the public interest.
The chapter will first look at the features of the system that correspond to this model, and at the institutions that are reputedly responsible for the policy-making process.
It will also look at the implications of the presence of lower-tier organs of government, at local levels, and at the way in which representative government seems to be expected to work within them.
After this, the discussion will turn to consider the various ways in which the model of representative government is modified, or perhaps even undermined, in practice.
It will consider how the people's will is translated into political action.
It will look at the part played by pressure groups in the system, and it will examine the case that has been made for regarding democracy as significantly undermined by ‘political elites’.
The relationship between government and Parliament will be scrutinized, together with its parallels in local government.
Attention will be given to the role played by the machinery of government, by the civil service and by local government officers in the policy-making process, and some general points will be made about what we mean by that ‘process’.
These later issues will lead naturally into the examination of the implementation process in the next chapter.
THE REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENT MODEL
When the systems of government in Britain, the United States, most of Western Europe and much of the Commonwealth are claimed to be democratic, that rests upon a view that a form of representation of the people prevails in their governmental systems.
Clearly, these systems do not involve direct democracy since in complex societies large numbers of decisions are taken by small numbers of representatives.
Some countries seek to involve the people more directly, from time to time, by the use of plebiscites.
There is a further sense in which representative government is indirect.
A distinction is often made between representatives and delegates.
Delegates are regarded as mandated by those who elect them to support specific policies and to return to explain their subsequent decisions.
British politicians have persistently rejected the view that they should be regarded as delegates, arguing instead that their duty is to make judgements for themselves in terms of their understanding of their constituents' best interests, while recognizing that they may, of course, be rejected at the next election if they become seriously out of touch with the people they represent.
In this sense they claim to be concerned with the interests of all their constituents, and not just those who voted for them.
This doctrine was first expounded by Edmund Burke in the late eighteenth century.
Today, of course, the importance of political parties makes it difficult for members of Parliament to claim to represent all their constituents; but equally makes it difficult for them to assume delegate roles.
The presence in Parliament, and in the local councils, of party groups exerts an influence in favour of party programmes and away from a direct relationship between member and constituency.
The modern modification of representative democracy is therefore to see the public as being allowed to choose from time to time between two or more broad political programmes, and being able to reject a party that has failed to carry out its promises.
If this model of democracy prevails, social policies may be expected to be determined by the commitments of the political parties, and proposals for policy changes will be set out in election manifestos.
The growth of the welfare state will be clearly relatable to the growth of democracy, with the people choosing to see their society change in this way.
The limitations of this view of the policy-making process will be explored, but first there is a need to identify more explicitly the institutions of government to which such an analysis must relate.
Those who have previously done courses on the British constitution may wish to skip the next two sections.
THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT SYSTEM
The curious feature of the British constitution is that Britain has democratized institutions that were created in an undemocratic age.
Most countries have systems of government that are relatively modern creations, either designed after cataclysmic political events which required the setting up of entirely new institutions, or set up to meet the needs of newly created or newly independent states.
The governments of France and Germany, for example, fall into the first of these categories, and those of the United States and the Commonwealth countries into the second.
The British pride themselves on having developed a system of government that has been a model for the rest of the world.
The truth is that, while certainly many constitutional ideas have been borrowed from Britain, the British system contains features that no one designing a system of government today would conceivably want to adopt.
The monarchy and the House of Lords are the two most significant British ‘anomalies’.
Formally, neither has much influence on the policy-making process.
Monarchs have relinquished their rights to interfere; the House of Lords has been largely stripped of its rights by successive parliamentary Acts since 1911.
This discussion need not go into the residual rights and responsibilities of these two.
The House of Commons is elected from over 600 constituencies (an exact number has not been quoted as regular constituency boundary changes alter it), each of which returns the person with a simple majority of votes at each election.
After a general election the monarch has the formal responsibility to ask the leader of the majority party to form a government.
On most occasions the Monarch's duty is clear, but situations in which there is no party with a clear majority may complicate the task.
Broadly, the expectation is that the Monarch will not have to take a decision that will then prove to be a violation of the democratic process, because it will be up to whoever agrees to form a government in these circumstances to prove that he or she has adequate parliamentary support.
In other words, the position of a minority government can be made untenable if all the other parties combine against it.
There are, however, ambiguities in such a situation, as the lives of minority governments may be perpetuated more by a reluctance  to force them to resign than by any positive commitment to their support.
The newly appointed prime minister will then form a government, giving a hundred or more governmental offices to his or her supporters.
Again, the normal assumption is that these will be members of his or her own party, but exceptionally a coalition may be formed in which government offices go to other parties.
All those given office will normally be, or will be expected to become, members of either the Commons or the Lords.
Most will be members of the Commons (known as ‘members of Parliament’).
The choice of members of the government rests significantly upon the preferences of the prime minister.
However he or she cannot disregard interests and factions within his or her own party, and will obviously give some attention to the competence of those appointed.
The most important prime ministerial appointments will be those of the members of Cabinet.
The normal practice is to appoint a Cabinet of fifteen to twenty-five members.
It will include the main departments of government together with some members who do not have departmental responsibilities who may be given political or co-ordinating roles.
The Cabinet, chaired by the prime minister, is the key decision making body within the government.
New policy departures of any significance and new legislation will need Cabinet approval, and conflicts of interests between departments will have to be fought out in the Cabinet or its committees.
Each Cabinet sets up a number of committees to do more detailed work.
Some of these will draw on the help of non-Cabinet ministers.
The government departments to which attention must be given in the discussion of social policy in England (the different situation in the other component countries of the United Kingdom is outlined later) are the Treasury, the Department of Health and Social Security, the Department of the Environment, the Department of Education and Science and the Department of Employment.
Two other departments, the Cabinet Office and the Home Office, also play a small part.
Readers must be warned that it has been the practice of governments in recent years to alter the departmental structure from time to time, ostensibly in an effort to find the best possible framework for policy co-ordination, but — it may be suggested — with less elevated political motives in mind too.
Accordingly, it may be the case that by the time this book is in your hands departments may have new names and policy responsibilities may have been moved from one department to another.
Had this book been written in 1964, for example, the responsibilities of the Department of Health and Social Security would have been described as coming under the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance, and the National Assistance Board.
The prime minister is technically the First Lord of the Treasury.
This archaic title serves to remind us that, while today we regard the chancellor of the Exchequer as the senior Treasury minister, the prime minister is, above all, bound to be involved in major decisions on expenditure, taxation and the management of the economy.
The importance of this aspect of policy is so great that there are often other Treasury ministers in the Cabinet, such as the chief secretary to the Treasury and the paymaster general.
These may be expected to play important roles in relation to decisions on public expenditure.
Each of the departments listed above has its senior minister, the secretary of state, in the Cabinet.
Again, the prime minister may choose to have other ministers from specific departments as Cabinet members.
Under the last Labour government, the minister of state in the Department of Health and Social Security who took particular responsibility for social security, Mr Stanley Orme, was a Cabinet minister.
Each department head has the support of several junior ministers, known as ministers of state or under-secretaries, who may take on particular responsibilities for specific policy areas.
The recent trend towards ‘super-ministries’ taking on several different but related areas of policy has made this political division of labour particularly important.
The role of the minister who is also a Cabinet member involves a quite considerable conflict between a position as a member of the central policy co-ordinating team within the government and responsibility for the protection and advancement of the interests of a department.
In his Diaries of a Cabinet Minister the late Richard Cross man gave considerable attention to this problem.
It is personally difficult for any individual to give wholehearted attention both to departmental issues and to the main political strategy problems arising outside his or her own responsibilities.
There is likewise a crucial problem for a rational approach to government in which strategic questions may not be best resolved by bargaining between a group of individuals all of whom have conflicting, ‘tunnel vision’ images dictated by departmental needs and priorities.
Clearly, the members of the Cabinet without departmental responsibilities are expected to help to resolve this problem, but they often suffer from a sense of being outsiders without the detailed departmental briefs possessed by their colleagues.
The creation of a group of special civil servants, including individuals recruited from outside the public service for their expertise or political connections, has been seen as a further desire to strengthen strategic thinking in government.
There would seem, however, to be a continuing and inevitable conflict here.
As far as his or her departmental duties are concerned a minister's work will fall into roughly four categories.
First, he or she may be  responsible for putting forward new legislation.
Clearly this is something the ambitious politician will want to do.
He or she will hope to secure a job that involves the initiation of policies from the party's programme.
Second, he or she will have a large amount of day-to-day administration to oversee.
Much of this will involve the formulation of new policies that do not require legislation, or the determination of responses to new crises within the department.
It is in this kind of work that the distinction between policy making and implementation becomes so unclear.
In many respects any issue that a department regards as requiring a ministerial decision is likely to be describable as a ‘policy issue’.
Third, he or she will have to deal with questions from members of Parliament about the policies and activities of the department.
While this may be seen primarily as a defensive kind of action, involving much routine work by civil servants who are required to produce the information needed for parliamentary answers, it may also provide opportunities for publicizing new policy initiatives.
Indeed, many questions are planted by friendly MPs, from the back benches on the minister's own side, to enable activities to be advertised.
Fourth, the minister has a wide public relations role beyond Parliament.
This will involve a programme of speeches, meetings and visits relating the department's activities to the world outside.
Several references have already been made to the support of ministers by civil servants.
It is self-evident that civil servants have an important role to play in implementing policy.
What also needs to be emphasized is that civil servants are also heavily involved in making policy.
Until recent changes in the structure of the civil service, designed to reduce barriers between the various grades and to stress the importance of many of the managerial roles played in connection with policy implementation, it was possible to draw a fairly clear distinction between the ‘administrative class’, containing the ‘higher’ civil servants responsible for policy, and the rest of the civil service.
Now, the policy-making group is a little more difficult to define.
Each major department has at its headquarters a group of 100 or so civil servants, from the grade of ‘principal’ up to‘permanent secretary’, who are concerned with decisions of a ‘policy’kind, many of which require ministerial approval.
The theory of representative government clearly requires that they be called the servants of the minister, providing information and evidence on policy alternatives but not taking policy  decisions .
The British system of government involves more than a network of departments headed by ministers.
Responsibility for various specific public services is hived off to a range of special agencies, though in each case ultimate responsibility for policy lies with one of the central departments.
Again, these subordinate bodies might be described as  being concerned with implementation and not with policy making.
But, while this is broadly true, many do this within only general guidelines and have therefore an important, if subordinate, policy-making role.
Students of social policy will come across a number of important examples of bodies of this kind with a nationwide remit.
In the field of manpower policy the Manpower Services Commission, containing representatives from both sides of industry, has been delegated extensive responsibilities by the Department of Employment.
This is an example of government efforts to foster new initiatives by creating an agency outside of direct central political control.
There are others at regional and local levels, particularly in the health service, which will be mentioned later.
The discussion in this section has moved from the consideration of the composition of Parliament, and the nature of the relationship of government to Parliament, to a more detailed account of the agencies concerned with policy making.
There is a need, however, to look a little more at the role of Parliament.
It has been shown that about 100 of the 600 members elected to Parliament become involved in specific government jobs.
What role do the rest play in policy making?
Primary policy making involves the promulgation of Acts of Parliament.
The overwhelming majority of these are promoted by government, and thus the initial ‘Bills’ are prepared by civil servants within the departments.
Bills then go through four stages in each House: a ‘first reading’, which simply involves the formal presentation of the Bill; a ‘second reading’, at which there is likely to be a large-scale debate on the basic principles of the Bill; a ‘committee stage’, when the legislation is examined in detail (normally by a small ‘standing committee’ and not by the whole House); and a ‘report stage’and ‘third reading’, at which the Bill that emerges from the committee is approved, but may be re-amended to undo some of the actions of the committee.
Clearly, members without ministerial office may participate in all of these stages, and Opposition members will take particular care to scrutinize and attack government action.
The leading Opposition party organizes a ‘shadow cabinet’ to provide for a considered and specialized response to the activities of the government.
Back-bench MPs may be able to promote new policies through ‘private members’ Bills': These cannot have direct financial implications for the government, and they have little chance of becoming law without government support.
Occasionally governments assist private members with their Bills, particularly by allowing extra parliamentary time.
Some significant social policy measures have become law in this way.
The Abortion Act of 1967, for example, was promoted by a Liberal MP, David Steel, and became law because many key ministers were sympathetic.
In this case the Bill concerned an issue of conscience on which  many felt it would be inappropriate for Parliament to divide on party lines.
The abolition of capital punishment and reform of the law on homosexuality came about in a similar way.
In the 1970s the Labour government supported a private member's Bill which took over an item which would have been included in its own programme if there had been sufficient parliamentary time.
This curious reversal of roles may have owed something to the agreement of the Liberals to support a government without a clear majority; the legislation was the Housing (Homeless Persons) Act of 1977 promoted by a Liberal, Stephen Ross.
In addition to Acts of Parliament both Houses have to deal with a great deal of what is known as ‘subordinate’ or ‘delegated’legislation.
Many Acts allow governments to promote subsequent changes and new regulations.
It is important to recognize that many policy changes pass through Parliament in this way.
It would be an extravagant use of parliamentary time to require new legislation for changes of this kind.
Controversy arises, however, over the extent of the use of delegated legislation, since some Acts convey very wide scope for this kind of ministerial action.
To promote subordinate legislation the government has to publish a ‘statutory instrument’ which is open to scrutiny by MPs.
Some of these require parliamentary approval; others may be annulled if a negative resolution is passed by either House within forty days of their initial publication.
Hence back-benchers may intervene to prevent subordinate legislation.
A joint committee of the Commons and the Lords has been set up to scrutinize statutory instruments, and therefore to facilitate parliamentary review of subordinate legislation.
They have, however, a mammoth task and only give detailed attention to a limited number of the statutory instruments that are put before Parliament.
Readers will find a good example of legislation for which statutory instruments are important in the 1986 Social Security Act.
They will look in vain for detailed information on, for example, the housing benefit scheme or the ‘social fund’ in the Act: this is contained in subsequent regulations.
In particular actual benefit rates are not included in such legislation but set out in regulations which are regularly updated and amended
Reference has already been made to parliamentary questions as providing an opportunity for back-bench scrutiny of government actions.
Members put down initial questions in advance.
Many questions are answered in writing, but those that receive oral answers may be followed up by supplementary questions.
In addition to the powers to ask questions, various parliamentary procedures provide scope for MPs to promote short debates on topics that concern them.
The main Opposition party is extended more specific facilities of this kind, so there are days allocated for debates on topics of its own choice.
One peculiar characteristic of the British Parliament that distinguishes it from many legislatures in other countries, and particularly from the United  States Congress, is the slight use made of specialized committees.
This is also a difference between the central government system and the local government system in Britain.
The committees that consider Bills are in no way specialized; they consider new legislation in rotation regardless of subject and do not do any separate investigatory work.
There is also, however, a system of select committees.
Perhaps the most important of these is the Public Accounts Committee, concerned to look at the way in which public money has been spent.
Then there are select committees on the work of the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration (the ‘Ombudsman’), on Statutory Instruments and on European Legislation.
In 1979 fourteen committees were set up to concern themselves with the work of specific (or in some cases two specific) government departments.
Ad hoc committees may also be set up to investigate specific subjects.
However, such is the power of the executive in our system that it is doubtful whether these new committees can do other than play a rather superior pressure-group role.
They investigate specific topics, with the aid of specialist advisers, and have issued some influential reports.
But, as stressed above, they have no role with regard to legislation.
This account of the institutions of British central government has shown that elected representatives have a wide range of parliamentary duties.
If they belong to the party that wins power they may well take on a government office of some kind.
If they do not achieve office they are still in a special relationship to government in which, while some advantages may accrue from being a member of the ruling party and having many colleagues and friends in office, there may also be disadvantages in that party allegiance implies a duty to support the  government .
Some of the scope for the criticism of policy that comes to Opposition members is denied to government supporters.
On the other hand opposition, in a Parliament organized strictly on party lines, implies a situation in which it is very hard to secure majority support for your own ideas.
REGIONAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
The term ‘regional government’ is used here to cover two phenomena: the government of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, and the organization of the government of specific services on a regional basis.
Northern Ireland had a devolved system of government between 1922 and 1972.
The Government of Ireland Act of 1920 conferred a considerable measure of self-government upon Northern Ireland.
All social policy legislation was the responsibility of the Northern Ireland  government, and revenue was raised partly by local taxes and partly by the United Kingdom taxation system.
In practice legislation at Stormont, the Northern Ireland Parliament, tended to follow legislation at Westminster quite closely but often a few years behind.
The people of the province were represented both at Stormont and at Westminster.
The British government possessed reserve powers, so that it could interfere in the government if it so wished.
Until the ‘troubles’ of the late 1960s it studiously refused to do so.
However, in 1972 the Northern Ireland (Temporary Provisions) Act suspended Stormont and imposed direct rule from Westminster.
In 1974 an attempt to begin to restore self-government through a new Northern Ireland Executive, elected by proportional representation to try to provide for the involvement of the Catholic minority in government, was brought to an end after a strike by Protestant workers.
In 1982 a further, very limited, form of political participation was started.
Government of Northern Ireland is through a secretary of state for Northern Ireland at Westminster who heads a Northern Ireland Office.
Within Northern Ireland itself the former separate departments operate but all are technically under the jurisdiction of the Northern Ireland Office.
The various junior ministers in the Northern Ireland Office share the ‘ministerial’ responsibilities for these departments.
Naturally, the Northern Ireland departments operate on the basis of legislation passed before the demise of Stormont.
This is supplemented by special legislation from Westminster where appropriate.
Scotland's affairs are conducted from Westminster by way of a secretary of state for Scotland and a separate Scottish Office, which is split into several departments.
Much Scottish legislation is already separate.
Those social services that come under local government housing, personal social services and education — have their control devolved to the Scottish Office and are regulated by separate legislation.
The health service in Scotland has a slightly different structure and its own separate laws, but here the centralizing tendency for control from London has been very strong.
The social security system is, on the other hand, that obtaining throughout Great Britain.
Within Parliament there is a convention that only Scottish MPs participate in debates on Scottish matters.
Since the 1987 general election the ranks of Conservative MPs have been reduced to a very small number.
This is likely to bring the arrangements for Scottish legislation under strain and increase the pressure for political devolution.
Devolution to Wales is not so extensive.
Whilst there is a separate Welsh Office, most legislation deals jointly with England and Wales.
After the 1987 election Mrs Thatcher appointed an Englishman, representing an English parliamentary seat, to head the Welsh Office and represent it in Cabinet.
In many respects the Welsh Office is little more  than an integrated ‘regional office’ bringing together, in a way not present in the English regions, concerns about health, personal social services, education and housing.
Acts were passed in 1978 allowing for devolution of most of these administrative powers to elected assemblies in Scotland and Wales.
These were subject to acceptance by the people of those countries, who were consulted by referenda early in 1979.
The people of Wales conclusively rejected the proposals.
In Scotland there was a majority in favour of devolution but it fell short of the 40 per cent of the electorate required by the statute.
The Channel Islands and the Isle of Man have substantially more independent systems of government, and do not send MPs to Westminster.
In view of their small size, however, it does not seem appropriate to say anything more about them.
In the context both of the discussion of devolution to Scotland and Wales and of the consideration of the reorganization of local government, some attention has been given to the case for regional government in England.
While it seems unlikely that any regional system will be developed, it is important to note that most government departments with responsibilities for local services have systems of regional offices.
These regional structures appear to have comparatively little significance for policy making, with perhaps one exception of some importance for social policy.
This is that the National Health Service is administered through regional health authorities, consisting of a small body of people appointed by the secretary of state.
This is an important tier within the complicated government structure set up for the health service, with responsibilities for the allocation of resources and for strategic planning.
Local government in England and Wales is organized into two distinctive systems.
In the metropolitan areas of London, West Midlands, South Yorkshire, Greater Manchester, Merseyside and Tyne and Wear there has been, since the abolition of the Metropolitan Counties (see p. 35) a one-tier system of metropolitan districts responsible for personal social services, education and housing.
There are ad hoc bodies dealing with some of the functions of the former counties, but these need not detain us as their tasks do not fall within the main concerns of this book.
In the inner area of London, however, one special ad hoc body remains, which was in fact created when the London reforms of 1963 were enacted: the Inner London Education Authority.
This Labour-controlled body is not popular with the Thatcher government.
New legislation may allow inner London boroughs to take over education, perhaps on a piecemeal basis.
In the rest of England and Wales there are county authorities which are responsible for education and personal social services, but also a  lower tier of districts which include housing amongst their responsibilities.
In autumn 1978 the Labour government announced a commitment to give social services responsibilities, and perhaps those of the education service, to the largest of the district councils.
The Conservative administration, whose party members do not often control these large urban authorities, has shown no interest in this matter.
Planning responsibilities are shared between the two tiers.
There is also a third tier of parish councils, with minimal powers.
Whilst many of these are old parishes, others are towns that previously had significant powers of their own, some retaining mayors and calling themselves town councils.
In Wales these third-tier authorities are known as community councils.
None of these third-tier authorities have significant social policy responsibilities, so they will not be examined further here.
In Scotland there is a two-tier system very similar to that operating in the non-metropolitan areas of England and Wales.
The top-tier authorities are there known as regions, a more appropriate title perhaps, as one of them, Strathclyde, contains half the population of Scotland.
There are great variations in population size between the regions, a probably inevitable consequence of the uneven way population is distributed in Scotland.
In those parts of Scotland that are most isolated (Orkney and Shetland and the Western Isles), there are single unitary authorities that deal with all local government functions.
Local government in Northern Ireland has been stripped of almost all its significant powers.
It had previously been notorious in some areas for the manipulation of electoral boundaries and for the practice of religious discrimination.
Health services and personal social services come under four appointed boards.
Education is the responsibility of three separate education and libraries boards.
Public housing is the concern of the Northern Ireland Housing Executive.
The health service, outside Northern Ireland, has its own separate system of regions and districts.
The local authorities are represented on the district authorities, and health districts have been partly designed to facilitate liaison with local authorities.
The field of social policy that does not have an even partly devolved structure below the national level is social security.
The Department of Health and Social Security is itself responsible for the delivery of social security benefits, and maintains its own regional structure and a system of local offices for this purpose.
There is, however, a separate system for Northern Ireland.
National legislation defines the powers of local authorities, and may set limits to those powers.
It also imposes upon local government a range of duties.
The relationship between central and local government in Britain is a complex one.
Local government is not autonomous, but neither is it merely local administration.
Some statutes impose fairly  clear tasks for local authorities.
But many give powers, and indicate ways in which those powers should be used, without undermining the scope for local initiative.
Other Acts of Parliament merely grant local authorities powers, which they may choose whether or not to use.
Exceptionally, a local authority may itself promote a ‘private’ Act to secure powers to undertake new ventures.
Local authorities are therefore able to make or elaborate policies and are not merely implementing agencies.
However, the relationship between central and local government involves both partnership and conflict.
Central government seeks to impose its will not merely through legislation but also through the communication of large amounts of guidance.
This may be embodied in circulars, regularly sent from central departments to local authorities, or through less formal communications from ministers, administrators and professional advisers.
Central intervention will be justified in terms of national political commitments, to ensure that central policies have an impact upon all localities.
There is an inherent conflict between the demands of local autonomy and the principle of ‘territorial justice’, requiring that citizens in different geographical areas secure comparable treatment.
Central government also justifies its interventions in local government in terms of its concern with national economic management.
It is its financial control over local government that tends to weaken its claim that the central local relationship is a partnership.
The problem is compounded by lack of a satisfactory way for local government to raise its own revenue.
Local authorities have three major sources of income: rates, payments for the provisions of services and government grants.
Rates are local taxes imposed upon property.
They are unpopular since they are regressive and are poorly related to income.
As local services grew, therefore, government grants have become an increasingly important source of income.
By 1977–8 about 61 per cent of all local authority income in England and Wales came from government grants.
Since that time central government has taken steps to reduce the proportion of local expenditure it funds.
By 1985–6 it had brought it back to just below 50 per cent.
While, theoretically, local authorities may spend their own incomes in ways they themselves choose, the government, in calculating local government grants, increasingly indicates how it expects the authorities to allocate funds between priorities.
In the determination of its grant to local authorities the government uses a complex formula which tries to take into account the extent of need for the various services.
In chapter 2 it was pointed out that the Thatcher  government had made strong efforts to curb overall local government expenditure.
It has attempted to be very explicit about what it considers to be unnecessary  local expenditure.
As far as the central grant is concerned, it has developed a technique that enables it to cut the money given to some authorities which it considers to be over-spenders by an amount equal to or more than any expenditure increase.
As far as rates are concerned, it has imposed ‘rate caps’ on a selection of local authorities, which prevent or put limits upon any rate increase.
It is important to note that most of the authorities which have experienced the more punitive forms of grant limitation and all but one of the authorities which have experienced rate capping have been Labour controlled.
Many of these have also been authorities with substantial areas of inner-urban deprivation within their boundaries.
Not surprisingly these measures have been controversial, and a central-local battle has developed with a strong party political character.
In early 1986 the government took its concern to influence the financing of local government a stage further.
In a Green Paper, Paying for Local Government, it proposed the abolition of domestic rates; the setting of non-domestic rates by central government and their distribution to authorities by way of a pooling system; and simplification of the grants system.
In 1987 it embraced these proposals in an Act to apply to Scotland, to come into force in the financial year 1989.
A Bill before Parliament at the time of writing will extend this measure to England and Wales in 1990.
The abolition of domestic rates involves their replacement by a flat rate ‘community charge’, widely called a ‘poll tax’, which every adult must pay.
Some low income people may have reductions, as they do now with rates, probably through housing benefit.
But the government intends everyone should pay some amount.
The community charge will have dramatic redistributive effects — to put it simply, away from small numbers of adults in high valued homes towards larger numbers in lower valued ones.
It is therefore likely to be more regressive than rates.
It will be administratively complex because it will bring many more people into the local taxation net.
It is seen by the government as a measure which makes more people pay directly for local services and which will increase local accountability.
The effects upon the services with which this book is concerned and upon the behaviour of local government are hard to predict at this stage.
This has been a rather large digression from the main concerns of this chapter, but it is important to bear in mind this important change, which appears likely to occur very soon.
Central government also maintains control over local authority borrowing.
The trend, in recent years, has been away from a system of strict, item by item controls to broad limitations upon total borrowing.
The system is currently a complex combination of these two approaches to control, which will not be examined in detail here.
Policy making in local government is the responsibility of elected members.
These represent districts, or wards, within each authority in  much the same way as MPs represent constituencies.
Today a great deal of local politics is arranged along party lines, and most councillors represent the political parties that are also found at Westminster.
Local authority members each belong to a number of committees.
Most business in transacted in these committees, so that the meetings of the full councils are largely rubber-stamping affairs, affording opportunities for the making of political points.
The committee structures are primarily related to the various functional responsibilities of the authority.
Many local authorities operate ‘policy committees’, which aim to co-ordinate the activities of the authority as a whole.
In most authorities the parties are represented on the committees in proportion to their distribution on the whole council.
Often the majority party will assume the chairmanship of each of the committees, and occasionally the policy committee is used as a one-party cabinet.
The increasing politicization of local government is intensifying the conflict between central and local government, and particularly between radical Labour authorities and the current Conservative administration.
THE VOICE OF THE PEOPLE?
It has already been noted that in the British system of government MPs and councillors are elected in individual constituencies on the basis of a procedure in which the candidate with a simple majority is the winner.
It is generally the case that the voter has to choose between two to four candidates, each of whom is the representative of a specific political party.
In this way electoral choice is peculiarly structured.
Voters have to make their decision on the basis of assessments of particular people, with their own special policy commitments, in relation to the more general political biases and policy commitments of their parties.
The parties' intentions are perhaps of more importance than individuals' commitments.
However, what the parties offer are broad packages of policies, within which voters may like some items while disliking others.
Hence the individual voter's starting-point in trying to influence policy through the electoral process is a situation of very limited choice in which it is general policy biases, or even more general considerations, often described as ‘party images’, that must govern his or her selection of an MP.
Moreover, his or her vote will be taken together with large numbers of other votes, perhaps motivated by very different policy preferences.
Hence, one person's voting choice may be influenced by a party's commitment to raise pensions, which leads him or her to support it despite its commitment to other policies — say increasing educational expenditure — with which he or she disagrees.
But others who vote for  the same party may be motivated by directly opposite considerations — a strong commitment to education, say, but no concern about pensions.
Furthermore the candidate for this party in one constituency may stress a commitment to education, while colleagues in other constituencies may make the pensions increase the central plank in their programme.
The above example was chosen to illustrate the basic underlying problem about the use of choices between representatives as a means of settling policy priorities.
The reality is that party platforms are considerably more complex, with choices between desirable ends deliberately obscured.
No party presents the electorate with explicit choices between widely desired ends; they generally seek to convince it that they can bring a little more of everything that is wanted.
Voters are forced to discriminate between the parties in terms of their general ideologies, value biases and images.
Furthermore, most voters do not really make electoral choices.
Many vote for the same party every time they vote, and probably give little attention to the personalities or policies of specific candidates.
Voters behave in ways that, as far as the collective pattern of choices is concerned, political scientists are largely able to predict from their occupations, social origins and personalities.
Only a minority of the electorate changes sides between elections.
Indeed, many of the changes that alter the balance in power in Parliament are no more than changes between voting and non-voting, or vice versa.
Research findings suggest, moreover, that the people most likely to change their votes — the floating voters — are generally the least informed within the electorate, and are thus not people who can be said to be making careful choices between policies.
It is suggested, instead, that political images are particularly significant — the personalities of the leaders, their projections of competence and of their capacities to deal with the nation's problems.
An important consideration at a general election is the success or failure of the government in power in coping with the economic situation.
In this sense a verdict may be given on its policies, but only in a very general way.
Clearly, therefore, electors are not normally provided with the opportunities to make clear choices about social policies, or between social policy options.
There are certainly general characteristics of the parties' approach to social policies that may help people to decide between them; and at particular elections (such as, for example , the general election of 1945) one's social policy commitments may be particularly clear.
But at other times it may be very difficult to single out policy issues that divide the parties.
In 1970 the Child Poverty Action Group attacked the Labour government's failure to deal effectively with family poverty and secured a pledge from the Conservatives that family allowances would be increased.
The Conservatives did not increase  these allowances, but it is doubtful whether many voters were influenced to change their allegiances on this issue.
Those who studied the parties' platforms carefully would have had to relate the Labour Party's generally stronger commitment to universal social security policies to the Conservatives' specific pledge.
It may be suggested that what the Child Poverty Action Group expected, and wanted, was a new Labour government returned to power, chastened by criticism of its family policies, and not a Conservative government.
Another characteristic of social policies is that, while some involve broad responses to popular needs and wishes, many are specific measures to assist quite small disadvantaged groups in the population.
Policies to assist disabled drivers, for example, may be viewed as generally desirable, and in that sense may have electoral appeal; but the people they benefit directly or indirectly is a very small minority in the population.
Disabled drivers may be a relatively ‘popular’ minority group; but what about policies to help the long-term unemployed, rehabilitate criminals or provide facilities for vagrant alcoholics, for example?
If there were a direct relationship between the pursuit of electoral popularity and the determination of social policies, surely minority causes would receive much less attention than they do now, and unpopular minority causes would receive no attention at all(or even more punitive responses).
Opinion polls suggest that a variety of social reforms carried out in Britain in the last few years — the abolition of capital punishment and the liberalization of the law relating to homosexuality, for example— were enacted in the face of popular opposition.
Other survey evidence suggests, moreover, that a majority of the population has little sympathy towards those most in need of help from the welfare state.
This suggests the presence of a political mood that is electorally exploitable.
The problem, however, in understanding the popular impact upon social policies is in explaining the fact that governments seem peculiarly restrained in translating such opinion into policies.
At a time when the British electorate has elected a Conservative government for the third time on the basis of a minority of the votes cast it is additionally important to add to this examination of the impact of ‘the voice of the people’ upon social policy determination the observation that our ‘first past the post’electoral system can convey a very ambiguous message.
After the 1987 election Mrs Thatcher can claim to have a very clear mandate.
But her opponents can point to the majority vote against her, split, largely speaking, between the Labour Party and the Liberal/SDP Alliance.
Similarly, as has already been suggested with reference to Scotland, in our very centralized political system it can be shown that government support is very low in some regions.
Yet, of course, the introduction of some kind of proportional representation  system would not necessarily solve this ‘political arithmetic’ problem, for policy priorities would then be influenced by the way negotiations between potential coalition parties developed.
PRESSURE GROUPS AND POLITICAL ELITES
Much of the detailed analysis of the role of pressure groups in the policy-making process has been carried out in the United States.
There the political system has several characteristics that particularly facilitate the mobilization of small groups of people to influence decisions.
First, power within the system is very fragmented — between President and the two Houses of Congress, between the federal government and the states, and between the state government and local government.
Second, in that vast and diverse country political choices are much more dictated by local interests than they are in Britain.
Hence the relationship between members of the Congress and their local electorate is much less affected by national party considerations.
Third, at federal level the parties are accordingly much less unified by political ideologies.
Political actors are therefore readily influenced by small groups which can effectively threaten to have an electoral impact.
In Britain pressure groups are probably just as much in evidence as they are in the United States.
A number of studies have dispelled the notion that they are of no importance in the British system.
But there is a need to beware of the assumption that they have as direct an impact upon the political system as they do in the United States.
Their importance in the politics of that country has led political scientists to propound a modification of the theory of representative government in which the weakness of the individual voter, discussed on pages 54–57, is seen as compensated by his or her membership of interest groups.
Democracy is thus seen as ‘pluralist’ in character with politicians engaged in continuing processes of compromise with multiple groups.
Such a theory is then seen as explaining the deference of politicians to the interests of minorities; and a new and perhaps superior version of democratic theory is presented which has as its hallmark the achievement of a political consensus in which minority interests are protected.
This theory has, however, come under fire in the United States.
It has been pointed out that there are biases in the system that make it much easier for some interests to be heard than others, and much easier for modifications to the status quo to be vetoed than to be supported.
These general points about the plurality of pressure groups are worthy of our attention since they suggest important questions about the way the British system operates.
The contrasts made above between the  political systems on the two sides of the Atlantic suggest that it may be much more difficult for British pressure groups to identify points at which the political system is particularly open to influence.
In individual constituencies grievances with the established political parties have to be very deeply felt, and very widely shared, to upset the normal national electoral swings.
Direct interventions in elections motivated by local issues are rare, except in the areas where nationalist parties can have an impact.
Outside Scotland and Wales politicians have often been able to be singularly insensitive to local issues.
And the current three or more party system further distorts the picture.
There are similar problems for a national pressure group in persuading political parties that disregard of its case carries electoral dangers.
Furthermore, any interest group able to threaten in this way probably has a special relationship with a major political party, and is acknowledged as important in that sense.
Many of the most powerful of the British pressure groups tend to have an established relationship with one or other political party.
The trade unions are, of course, the clearest example of this phenomenon.
They played a key role in the original establishment of the Labour Party, and provide a large proportion of the party's funds today.
Correspondingly the other side of industry is an important paymaster for the Conservative Party.
It is unlikely that the major elements in either of these groups will actually change sides, but it may be threatening to the parties if they are lukewarm in their support.
However, there are ambiguities even in these power relationships.
While it is arguable that the Labour Party dances to the trade unions' tune, it is also the case that the special relationship facilitates bargaining.
By contrast, the danger of union opposition to the Conservatives is that the strike weapon may be used to resist policies.
Similarly, the Labour Party has to face, when in power, a commercial and financial establishment that can de-stabilize the economy through speculation and the movement of currency.
These reflections lead us to an alternative view of pressure group power in Britain: that the strongest weapons are forms of direct action and not the manipulation of electoral choice.
If this is correct, it gives a very different emphasis to political pluralism, one that makes democracy through the ballot box of much less importance.
Attention must be given to ways in which pressure groups secure or resist policies through their power to take actions that directly affect either the success of policies or the stability of the political system.
This suggests the need to examine the power of groups whose co-operation is needed to implement new policies, and the influence of agencies that are expected to play a crucial part in the policy process.
What, for example, is the basis for the influential role doctors have been able to play in health service policies?
To what extent does the increasing militancy of other  civil servants influence policy making?
Why does government give attention to the views of the associations that represent the various groups of local authorities?
What is the significance of organized resistance to rent or rate increases?
The threat of direct action seems to put a very different complexion upon political bargaining processes, transforming the view of the significance of pressure groups.
Yet in the 1980s the capacity of a determined government to ‘sit out’ forms of direct action — most obviously in the case of the 1985 miners' strike — raises doubts even about this form of pressure-group action.
It is important to look more closely at the ways in which, regardless of the possession of a direct capacity to disrupt the political system, particular groups enjoy an institutionalized relationship to the political system.
In particular, it is necessary to go beyond the examples of close relationships to political parties to consider whether the positions some groups enjoy in relation to the political system owe nothing to particular party allegiances.
Indeed, there are groups whose very power in Britain might be jeopardized if they were seen as identified with specific political parties.
The power of some pressure groups can only be explained in terms of what may be called an ‘insider’ status within the policy-making system.
This implies a further deviation from democratic theory, a system within which some individuals and groups have special statuses.
A number of political scientists have suggested that societies possess a political ‘elite’, that decision makers are drawn from a narrow spectrum within a society.
Marxist analyses of the social structure suggest that the political system is dominated by representatives of the bourgeoisie, the capitalist class.
But other political theories, notably those of Pareto and Mosca, suggest that there is a ruling elite that is not necessarily characterized by the possession of economic resources.
Modern interpretation of elite theories seek to show either that key policy offices are held by people from a narrow spectrum of social origins, or that a limited number of people, characterized by close links with one another, dominate decision-making roles.
For Britain it has been shown that Cabinet ministers, senior civil servants, members of key advisory bodies and the heads of prestigious organizations tend to be drawn from a relatively narrow social class group, characterized by education at public schools and Oxbridge and by having had parents in a similarly narrow range of upper-middle-class occupations.
The picture is, however, not simple, and there is some evidence that the backgrounds of top decision makers have changed to embrace a slightly wider range of social origins in recent years.
While certainly it seems plausible to suggest that, if there are people from similar social or educational backgrounds in a number of key roles, the relationships between those people will facilitate the sharing of ideas and opinions, the processes involved cannot necessarily be explained as simply as this.
Beware of the argument by inference: since X went to the same school as Y, is it inevitable that he is able to influence his decisions?
What is more important to explain the place of some of the pressure groups in Britain in relation to the structure of power is to examine the sense in which the policy-making power is perceived as involving assumptions that some interests should be consulted.
Such assumptions rest upon several foundations.
One of them is that expertise conveys the ability to help with public decision making.
This is the technocratic view, that experts' opinions carry a greater weight than other people's.
It is the basis upon which academics sometimes secure a measure of influence in government.
Similarly, some pressure groups secure attention because of their expert knowledge.
In the educational and medical fields such ‘heavyweight’ pressure groups abound.
Another foundation upon which pressure groups may secure influence is their association with traditional elite groups.
Voluntary organizations benefit by royal sponsorship and by the acquisition of prestigious figures as vice-presidents and supporters.
Such sponsorship is not always easily earned.
It is clearly helpful to have a cause that readily attracts the sympathy of influential people.
It may also be important to behave in ways that are deemed respectable.
This is a curious feature of this kind of pressure group activity; to some extent the power of groups depends upon their ability to forswear the more direct weapons in the pressure group armoury, to avoid mounting vociferous opinion-forming campaigns or threatening forms of direct action.
The supposition, here, is based upon a belief that there is an underlying elitist approach to government in Britain.
A fairly narrow range of people are responsible for key decisions; some of these attain such positions through democratic representational procedures, but they co-opt others to their ranks.
These other people may be individuals of shared social backgrounds, but the process of co-optation may be more haphazard.
Individuals from pressure groups, or at least representing specific interests, secure entry into the ranks of those who exercise power by virtue not only of expertise but also of personal qualities, such as persistence and charm, which enable them to persuade that they have something to contribute to public decision making.
They also generally have to establish that they understand some of the unspoken rules relating to public participation: that they don't embarrass their sponsors by the use of direct tactics or indiscreet communications with the press or unseemly behaviour in committee situations.
In so doing they join that list of people who have been called upon over and over again to sit on public committees and advisory bodies.
This argument, then, is that political influence may be secured in Britain without the aid of independent power.
The system co-opts  others to join its ranks, and pays attention to some citizens very much more readily than others.
In this day and age people are rightly cynical about propositions concerning the power of ideas.
They look around for other explanations and ulterior motives.
But in the study of social policy, the importance of individuals should not be wholly underestimated.
There are examples of people who, through the strength of their commitments and the power of their attention to detail, have secured a place in the policy-making process.
In the first half of this century William Beveridge was such an individual.
More recently Richard Titmuss seems to have played an important role.
There are many lesser examples around, of people whose influence upon policy making owes nothing either to any notion of representative government or to the cruder theories about pressure-group activity
A great deal of pressure group activity is, of course, concerned with ‘good causes’.
Again, a theory of the policy-making process needs to find room for ‘good causes’ as well as for ‘good people’.
There are important questions that should not be brushed aside about the place of altruism in policy making.
It is not naive to argue that politicians, or if you prefer some politicians, have commitments to ideals.
It is certainly important to recognize that many politicians want to be seen as supporters of ‘good causes’.
Hence, pressure groups for the disabled, the old, neglected children and so on will exert influence out of proportion to their naked power.
For them the skilful use of mass media may be important, and key contacts in positions of power will be a great help.
No account of social policy making should disregard the potential influence of these ‘good causes’, however much there may be scope for controversy about their real power in situations where interests are-in conflict.
Indeed one of the frustrating phenomena many pressure groups of this kind experience is continuing assertions by politicians that they do matter, which is accompanied by minimal concrete action.
It is very hard to predict the political circumstances that will favour interests of this kind, but manifestly many have secured benefits without the use of any perceptible political ‘muscle’.
It is perhaps useful here to bear in mind the distinction often made in the study of pressure groups between ‘interest’ groups and ‘cause’groups, though in the tactical struggle for influence each may seek to co-opt the support of the other.
Interests seek to be recognized as ‘good causes’, and causes try to enlist the backing of more powerful ‘interests’.
It has been suggested in this section that pressure groups provide a crucial qualification to the notion of a simple relationship between electors and elected.
Some writers have suggested that they solve the problem of the powerlessness of the individual in relation to the political machine.
While there are many circumstances in which that is true, it  seems important to acknowledge that the political system contains biases that make it much easier for some groups to secure influence than others.
In addition, in Britain there is the peculiar phenomenon of the exercise of influence by groups that, according to the crude calculations of political arithmetic, do not seem to have a power base at all .
This must lead us to look at the shortcomings of the ‘how many divisions has the Pope's approach to the estimation of political influence.
It implies, however, a recognition that the minority who occupy powerful positions in British society are able to make choices, based neither upon notions of democracy nor upon calculations about who has power, about whom they will listen to or consult.
MINISTERIAL POWER.
THE ROLE OF OFFICIALS AND THE INFLUENCE OF OUTSIDE GROUPS
In The Sociology of Public Administration the author developed a typology of local government styles to try to elucidate different characteristics of politician/official relationships in different political situations.
The emphasis was upon local government because it was felt that it was easier to develop a comparative analysis drawing upon the considerable number of studies of local decision making in Britain and the United States.
However, the typology was intended to have a more general  relevance and provides a useful starting-point for this discussion.
Three types of political system were identified: ‘ideological politics’, ‘administrative politics’ and ‘bargaining politics’.
A system of ‘ideological politics’ relates most clearly to the model of ‘representative government’.
It is one in which the traditional distinction between politics and administration is most easily made.
Political parties compete to win elections by submitting distinct programmes from which the electorate can choose.
Politicians instruct administrators to frame policies compatible with their mandates and commitments.
The Thatcher governments have stood out as examples of this phenomenon.
‘Administrative politics’ describes a contrasting system in which full-time officials are much more clearly dominant.
The ‘politics’ are organizational rather than public, and many of the key conflicts are between departments.
Ministers in central government, while formally possessing the key decision-making powers, in fact find themselves involved primarily in expounding views and defending policies generated within their departments.
Politicians of the majority party without ministerial office find themselves frustratingly shut out from a decision making process into which they are given few insights.
In British local  government the committee system provides scope for the wider use of elected representatives in an administrator-dominated context, though here such involvement may further undermine representative government since it will depend primarily upon personal characteristics.
J. M. Lee has described such a situation admirably:
It is misleading to think of the County Council primarily as a body of elected representatives who make decisions of policy and then order officials to execute them.
Although such a view constitutes the theory, the reality is vastly different.
It is better to regard the system of county government as a body of professional people placed together in a large office at County Hall, who can call upon the representatives from all places throughout the area which they administer.
Some of these representatives by sheer ability and drive make themselves indispensable to the successful working of the machine; others merely represent points of view which come into conflict with it.
The concept of ‘bargaining politics’ was derived from examination of accounts of local politics in the United States.
In recent years, partly as a result of exposure to the American literature and partly because of a desire to adopt a tough-minded approach towards power, British social and political scientists have increasingly been on the look out for signs of a similar system in Britain.
In such a system political outcomes are seen to depend upon inputs of resources of power.
Those who hold elected positions are not ‘representatives’ so much as‘brokers’bringing together coalitions of interests.
Their desire for re-election forces them to adopt strategies in which they are highly sensitive to pressure groups.
Some reservations about this view have already been suggested, but it was acknowledged that elements of bargaining are by no means absent from the British scene.
Bargaining politics implies a clear role for politicians which may suggest that officials will occupy subordinate positions.
While this is true inasmuch as political futures are at stake, it has been suggested that in Britain deals with quite explicit electoral implications are rare.
Bargaining may therefore be more concerned with the maintenance of specific policies or particular organizational arrangements.
If this is the case, it may be that officials have more to lose, or have more explicit commitments, than the politicians.
Key conflicts concern relationships between departments and the outside world; ministers are expected to help defend departmental interests.
It is not suggested that the individual types fit any specific political system.
British central government must be noted as a context where conflicts often appear to be of an ideological nature and where the representative model is treated as of some importance.
Yet a key theme in discussions of relationships between ministers and their departments has been the extent to which politicians enter with apparent policy  commitments but become socialized into roles determined by the permanent administrator and particularly by the need for ‘policy maintenance’ within their department.
Furthermore, a related theme to the ministerial discovery that cherished policy innovations are not administratively feasible is the recognition that vested interests and pressure groups carry a political ‘clout’ that had not been realized when policies were planned outside government.
Policy-making outcomes may be determined by the interaction of three forces: political input (ideological politics), organizational considerations within departments (administrative politics) and external pressures (bargaining politics).
Some decision-making processes are influenced more by some factors than by others; thus it is probably appropriate to stress the importance of political input in British central government, of organizational considerations in British local government and of bargaining with external forces in American government.
Beyond these generalizations, the more detailed study of the factors influencing the way that policy is made needs to take various considerations into account.
First, what are the kinds of policies involved?
This raises the question so far evaded in this chapter: What is policy?
Writers on policy analysis are agreed that a policy is something more than a decision.
Friend and his colleagues suggest that ‘policy is essentially a stance which, once articulated, contributes to the context within which a succession of future decisions will be made’.
Jenkins similarly stresses the notion of interrelated decisions concerned with the selection of goals and the adoption of a course of action.
Smith suggests that ‘the concept of policy denotes…deliberate choice of action or inaction, rather than the effects of interrelating forces’: he emphasizes ‘inaction’ and reminds us that ‘attention should not focus exclusively on decisions which produce change, but must also be sensitive to those which resist change and are difficult to observe because they are not represented in the policy-making process by legislative enactment’.
Policies are thus not easy to define.
It is doubtful whether much can be gained by trying to achieve any greater precision than that suggested in the definitions above.
It is more fruitful to look in a concrete way at the relevance of policies for the activity of a minister and his department.
On appointment to office a new minister will take over responsibility for many departmental policies.
The overwhelming majority of these will be just existing ways of doing things.
A good many will be enshrined in Acts of Parliament.
But these will be accompanied by organizational arrangements, systems of administration and working conventions which will also help to define policy.
There is a distinction to be made between policy and arrangements made for its implementation.
This will be explored further in the next chapter; here it must be stressed that these arrangements will in many cases have a quite  fundamental impact upon the character of the policy and may thus be deemed to be part of the policy.
It is this existence of policies determining most everyday practice in a department that provides the most crucial group of constraints for a new minister.
Existing policies keep most people occupied most of the time.
Innovations depend upon finding opportunities for staff to work on developing new policies.
They may also depend upon getting people from within the department to work to change old policies which have hitherto been regarded as quite satisfactory.
Clearly an innovating minister has to find ways to get a vast operational organization to change its ways.
What is perhaps more significant is that a new minister will also find that his department is developing new policies.
These are not necessarily merely the left-over business from a previous administration.
Many of them will derive from weaknesses in existing policies that have been recognized within the department, and that administrators are striving to correct.
Some, moreover, will have their roots in changes in the world upon which existing policies operate, changes that are making those policies unsuccessful or irrelevant.
This group of policies or ‘would-be policies’ is important.
New ministers may find that their own, or the party's, policy aspirations mesh with the policy issues upon which the department is working.
In such circumstances they may find it comparatively easy to become, or to be seen as, innovators.
But they may have to face the fact that their own view of his department's policy needs are irrelevant to the main problem being tackled within it, or even that their own commitments lead in quite opposite directions to the ones being taken by those concerned with policy innovation in the department.
Popular discussions of the success or failure of ministers are often carried out in terms of their personalities and their experience.
Of course it is often possible to distinguish ‘strong’ and ‘weak’ministers; but it must not be forgotten that the comparatively temporary incumbent of the top position of a large organization may be just lucky or unlucky — in arriving when key advisers are likely to agree that exciting innovations are necessary, or conversely in finding that the consolidation of existing policies, or the confronting of unpleasant realities, is more important than the policy changes he or she cherishes.
There are various kinds of policy initiatives.
Some policies may be enacted by the passing of a law.
Reform of criminal law, for example, may have no administrative implications.
A second category of policies with only indirect consequences for the minister's own department are those whose enactment and implementation depend upon another agency.
Legislation giving powers, and even sometimes duties, to local government comes into this category.
The Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act of 1970 is a classic example in this category.
While it  seems to involve the development of a national policy for the disabled, in practice its dependence upon local government makes it a gesture in which central government involvement is comparatively slight.
This measure arose as the result of an initiative by a private member, Alf Morris.
A new piece of legislation on this issue, the Disabled Persons Act 1986, seems to have similar characteristics.
Individuals and voluntary organizations are likely to have to work hard to make local government implement it.
Clearly it is easier for a minister to accept this sort of legislation than to develop a policy that effectively changes the direction of a great deal of work going on within the department.
In the above case the policy making may be more ‘symbolic’ than real; ministers may hope to derive kudos without really enacting innovations.
Once a minister seeks to enact policies that require the expenditure of ‘new money’ he or she becomes engaged in what is inevitably a more difficult political exercise.
Formally the approval of the Treasury is required, probably together with the support of the Cabinet in one of its priority-setting exercises, where the minister is involved in competition with colleagues who have alternative expenditure aspirations.
What this implies for the minister's relationship with civil servants is altogether more complex.
The specific expenditure commitment will be by no means the only one the department might undertake.
Hence there will be an intra-organizational battle about the case for that particular innovation.
What the outside world sees as a minister promoting a particular project is probably the end of a long process in which different groups of civil servants within the department have argued about the case for that venture as opposed to other ventures.
A minister who says ‘I want to do X’ will have to face civil servants who argue ‘but we need money for Y, Z’and so on.
The political negotiations between a minister and the Treasury ministers will be matched by much more elaborate negotiations between civil servants.
A case that is comparatively weak when argued within the department will come up against further problems in this tough forum, and a minister who successfully overrides objections within his or her own department may well lose in this wider battle.
Students of government have, moreover, raised questions about the extent to which civil servants will fight effectively for their minister against the Treasury, in view of the prestige and power of the latter within the civil service as a whole.
In differentiating various kinds of policies, and in interpreting their implications for ministerial power, it must be recognized that some policies have implications for more than one department.
A new approach to assistance with housing costs, for example, may have to be considered both by DHSS, with concern for social security policy, and DOE, with its responsibility for housing policy.
In addition, local government is likely to be involved.
This adds a form of complexity that  greatly enhances the significance of negotiations between civil servants, and the related tendency for the maintenance of the status quo.
Such policies place strains upon the unity of the political group involved.
Two key aspects of government emphasized in the Crossman diaries are the difficulties facing a minister with departmental responsibilities who tries to take an overall view of government policies as a whole, and the related tendency for ministers to take narrowly departmental views which sabotage interdepartmental co-operation.
This discussion has distinguished between policies that ministers can enact with relatively slight implications for their own departments and those that require elaborate departmental involvement.
It has implied that where ideological commitments are involved a distinction may be made between relatively easy gestures and hard administrative battles.
Yet it may also be the case that some difficult aspects of ‘bargaining politics’ are involved where policy success depends upon the response of other organizations.
It is, of course, outside the field of social policy, in industrial relations, that the best examples are found of the undermining of policy innovations by groups outside government.
The 1964–70 Labour government found that its alliance with the trade unions limited scope for action in this field.
The Thatcher government has found some of its ideas for tax and social security reform affected by the reservations of small business about new tasks for government.
Within social policy, however, the power of the doctors provides related examples.
In this case the problem comes, if not exactly within the secretary of state's own department, at least from within a public agency.
More important, however, for the analysis of social policy is the interplay between central government and those other organs of government, particularly local government, which have a crucial role to play in the implementation of policy, but are also themselves in certain respects policy makers.
A new minister with an overall responsibility for the health and personal social services within the Department of Health and Social Security, or for education, or for housing policy (together with local government in general) within the Department of the Environment will find an ‘established’ relationship between the department and local government or the health service with certain key characteristics.
There will be a body of enacted legislation, a pattern of grants from central government, a range of procedures relating to the sanctioning of new initiatives including the taking up of loans for new capital expenditure, perhaps a pattern of inspection or policy review, and a variety of policy expectations enshrined in circulars and related messages from the centre.
In a few cases the obligations of the local authorities will be quite clear.
In a rather larger number of situations the authorities will have quite explicit duties but will not have been given detailed guidance on  how to carry them out.
In yet other important cases the local authorities will regard themselves as the key policy-makers; the central requirements will have been specified in such general terms that the decisions that really dictate the quality of the service given to the public are made locally.
Then there will be some situations in which central government has made it very clear that the policy initiative rests with the local agency, by permitting activities if they so wish.
Finally, there will be a few situations in which local authorities have been almost entirely the innovators, in which they have sought to promote local acts through Parliament or in which they have interpreted general powers given to them in quite novel ways.
The new minister who wants to introduce changes into this pattern has a variety of options open, but each may involve complications wherever there is resistance to new ideas.
New policies are expressed as much in ministerial statements, White Papers and circulars to the local authorities as in new statutes.
In each case the minister may be able to back up a recommendation with indirect weapons: by control over loans and other powers to permit or limit activities, by co-operation or its refusal in situations in which joint central local action is necessary.
In the National Health Service the control over funding also facilitates policy change from the centre.
The local authorities often fight hard to try to protect their independence.
They may be unresponsive to ministerial suggestions, and they may make this opposition very clear through the local authority associations.
The threat of non-co-operation from the local authorities may make the minister think again.
The most publicized cases of such non-co-operation have occurred where some authorities have stood out against the minister on a highly political issue.
It may be suspected that issues on which there would be widespread local resistance, but where a party political split is not clearly in evidence, rarely hit the news headlines because they are quietly negotiated in private discussions between the minister, or civil servants, and the local authority associations.
The public conflicts of recent years have involved confrontations between different  political ideologies: the resistance from the Clay Cross Urban District to the Conservative Housing Finance Act; the rejection by Merthyr County Borough of the Conservatives' withdrawal of free milk for schoolchildren; the resistance of a number of Conservative education authorities to the Labour commitment to the introduction of comprehensive secondary education; the resistance of Labour local authorities to the Conservative government's legislation on the sale of council houses; and the forms of creative accounting developed in the mid-1980s by some local authorities to evade expenditure restraints.
The evidence suggests that a determined central government, generally backed by the courts, has (at least since 1979) been able to impose its will in most central local battles.
Although the local authorities are themselves, as has been suggested, policy makers, the force of influence for policy change is not just one-way.
Just as the new ministers encounter groups of civil servants within their departments with policy concerns that conflict with their own, so too they encounter local authorities keen to take new initiatives.
These will be eager to protect their own autonomy, but may also seek to convince ministers that their local initiatives should be enshrined in national policy.
Hence, as a source of local initiatives local government may be as important as central government.
The example of comprehensive education is again interesting.
Before the 1964–70 Labour government made it Department of Education and Science policy, a number of local authorities had already set up comprehensive schools.
It is significant that, while in some areas, such as London, this development was motivated by a political commitment, in other places, for example rural Devon, it was educational administrators who had convinced councils, of a broadly Conservative persuasion, that the development of such schools was the most appropriate policy.
In this section the discussion has ranged over many of the influences upon policy.
Using the notion that is particularly associated with representative government, of a new minister with explicit policy commitments, attention has been given to the pressures that frustrate such commitments, or replace them by commitments derived from other sources.
It has been stressed that there are strong forces in favour of the maintenance of existing policy, and that many new initiatives are in fact derived from concerns not so much to innovate as to correct the imperfections of existing policies.
Policy analysis needs to be concerned with a flow of interrelated policies, with abrupt changes of direction a comparatively rare occurrence.
Hence, it is interesting that, while the historical account of social policy tended to stress a variety of significant contributions to policy, building constructively on the past — the 1911 National Insurance Act, the 1944 Education Act, the 1946 National Health Service Act — perhaps a key theme in modern writings on the policy process is the absence of rational forward planning but in its place a phenomenon that has been called ‘disjointed incrementalism’.
Is there a conflict of approaches here?
Braybrooke and Lindblom, the theorists who drew attention to the significance of ‘incrementalism’, were particularly concerned to attack that portrayal of the policy process which perceived it as, or able to become, a rational appraisal of all the alternative consequences of alternative policies followed by the choice of the best available.
If incrementalism is perceived in these terms there is little difficulty in understanding its applicability to social policy.
As the historical chapter  showed, the development of social policy has been very much a process of piling new initiatives on top of older policies, without ever clearing the ground to facilitate a fresh start.
Then, as this piling-up process has proceeded, it has created new interests which future developments have to take into account.
Since political values have often been at stake in conflicts over social policy, the very character of the ideological issue has precluded a cool appraisal of all the policy options.
If the choices are between understanding policy making as a pure exercise in rational decision making, as the putting into practice of ideologies, or as a quite incoherent process of bargaining and muddling through, it is sensible to reject each alternative.
It is a compromise between all three, with perhaps the first least apparent and the third most in evidence.
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
Like the previous chapter, this one has drawn upon a vast literature, this time largely from the discipline of political science.
Reference notes have largely been chosen to include some of the classic works that expounded particular theoretical viewpoints together with textbooks that most clearly interpret theories and issues for British audiences.
The following suggestions for further reading will be primarily in the latter category.
For those who require a basic textbook on British government Hanson and Walles's Governing Britain is recommended.
An alternative with a strong constitutional law bias is Hartley and Griffith's Government and Law.
Jowell and Oliver's The Changing Constitution reviews some emergent issues of importance.
An account of the local government system is provided by Tony Byrne.
Gyford's book provides a review of the evidence on the nature of British local politics, drawing on a large and growing literature.
Travers's The Politics of Local Government Finance (see n. 35 in chapter 2) and Loughlin's Local Government in the Modern State (see n. 4 in this chapter) explain the development of the central/local government conflict discussed in this chapter.
Valuable discussions of the policy-making process in social policy are found in Hall et al.'s Change, Choice and Conflict in Social Policy, in Banting's Poverty, Politics and Policy, and in Ham's article ‘Approaches to the Study of Social Policy Making’.
Chris Ham and the present author's The Policy Process in the Modern Capitalist State explores many of the theoretical issues about the study of policy making.
Implementation
INTRODUCTION
Why devote a chapter in a book on social policy to the study of policy implementation?
What is the significance of this issue for our subject?
There are several reasons why it is important.
First, the discussion of policy making in the later part of the last chapter suggested that many new initiatives stem from the recognition that older policies are failing to meet desired goals.
This may be because these goals have changed, but it may equally be because the social world for which the original policies were designed has changed.
This is an implementation problem.
It may also be because there were weaknesses in the older policies, many of which became apparent once policies were implemented.
In this sense it is important to scrutinize the implementation process with some care.
Second, this concern with the ineffectiveness of policies is now recognized as requiring the asking not only of questions about the character of policy but also about what is wrong with the implementation process and the organizations responsible for implementation.
It may be that the policies are at fault, or it may be that corrective action is most appropriately applied to the implementing agencies.
This is the central concern for what we may call the ‘top-down’ approach to the study of implementation: why don't those who are expected to carry out policies do what is required of them?
Third, and finally, while it is true that the impact of all policies must be subjected to careful scrutiny, it is clearly particularly important to give attention to what it feels like to be on the receiving end of social policy.
This may be described as a concern with ‘impact’ rather than with ‘implementation’.
However, it is this concern that has led students of social policy to give increasing attention in recent years to the activities of that group of public servants who may be called ‘street-level bureaucrats’, to ask questions about what actually happens in the exchanges between these people and the public.
Before, therefore, exploring any further the phenomenon of policy implementation, a brief account of the main groups of people responsible for social policy implementation in Britain is appropriate.
An examination of the wide range of people involved, of the many different roles they play and of their varying involvement in or distance from the policy-making process will help to stress the importance of giving attention to implementation and to introduce the more theoretical discussion that is to follow.
Social security benefits are calculated and paid to the public by a very large number of Department of Health and Social Security staff based in regional and local offices throughout the country.
Over 90 per cent of the staff of DHSS, the government department with the largest complement of non-industrial civil servants, is based in local offices.
Those responsible for contributory benefits are concerned with the paying out of amounts determined by a largely computerized central system.
Until the implementation of the 1986 Social Security Act the largest group of local office staff was concerned with the administration of the supplementary benefits system, interpreting a complex system of rules largely without the use of new technology.
The introduction of the new ‘income support’ and ‘family credit’schemes involves the adaptation of most of these people to a more routine computerized system.
However, a minority of them are concerned with the highly discretionary ‘social fund’.
There is only one other large group of people defined in Britain as civil servants that is concerned with the implementation of the social policies discussed in this book, and that is those involved in the employment services.
Otherwise field-level social policy implementation is the responsibility of National Health Service and local authority officials, who, since they are not employees of the central government departments, are not regarded as ‘civil servants’.
At the time of writing employment and training services are the responsibility of the Manpower Services Commission, a quasi autonomous public body which operates under the overall surveillance of the Department of Employment.
But the government has just announced that this staff concerned with employment advice will move back into the Department of Employment, to ensure that their work is more integrated with that of the staff paying benefits to the unemployed.
The exact details of these changes are not yet clear.
It is presumed that staff concerned with training and with the operation of special work creation schemes will remain with the Manpower Services Commission.
There is also a small band of people with employment responsibilities for young people, who work for local education authorities: the careers officers.
The implementation of health policy is devolved by DHSS to regional and district health authorities (DHAs).
The latter are concerned with field-level policy.
The important feature of this system for policy implementation is that the districts have both policy-making and implementation responsibilities.
While, since the changes recommended by Griffiths, there is a key managerial cadre in district health authorities, health remains an area of social policy in which professionals-particularly doctors and nurses — have extensive degrees of autonomy.
It is often difficult to make the policy implementation distinction with reference to a service operated by professionals.
Day-to-day service provision decisions may actually determine, or pre-empt, priorities.
In this sense they can be described as policy decisions.
This may seem to violate the definition of policy making as involving more than isolated decisions, yet individual professional judgements of this kind may cluster or have similarities that suggest implicit if not explicit policy decisions that are being made at the operational level.
In addition to the regional health authorities there are other regional organizations with relevance for several of the other services with which this book is concerned.
The social security network is organized into regions under the supervision of a regional office.
The Department of the Environment has a system of regional offices that handle many aspects of relationships with the local authorities.
The DHSS has regional social work inspectors who help the department to relate to the local social services departments.
In all these cases these regional organizations are likely to have an impact upon policy implementation.
But the peculiar feature of the health service organization is that the regional links in the chain, the regional health authorities, are semi-autonomous organizations, standing between DHSS and another rather similar set of organizations, the district health authorities.
Primary responsibility for the implementation of education policy lies with local authorities in England and Wales.
As suggested in the last chapter, there has been a considerable amount of conflict in recent years about the autonomy of these authorities as ‘policy makers’.
To some extent the implementation issues in this service concern the relationship between the authorities and the schools.
While the chain image is not entirely appropriate, since varying responsibilities and degrees of autonomy are involved, and individuals in the chain may be bypassed, it is important to acknowledge that implementation may depend upon the following series of links: education committee, chief education officer and his or her administrative staff, local authority inspectors, school governors and managers, head teachers, departmental heads within the schools, and class teachers.
The examination of policy implementation in the education service raises a number of interesting questions about  local authority autonomy, the role of school management and the place of professional discretion.
Higher education in Britain has required special forms of organization designed to take into account the fact that many colleges serve more that the local authority area in which they are based, and to acknowledge the special claims to autonomy of the universities.
For the university sector a special intermediary body exists, the University Grants Committees and, apart from local authority representation on university governing bodies, there is no link with local governments For the rest of higher education — the polytechnics and colleges of higher education — the involvements, in most areas, of more than one local authority has been acknowledged through special arrangements to share management and pool costs.
These may, from time to time, make policy formulation and  implementation a complicated business.
At the time of writing the education control system is undergoing changes.
The government proposes to set up a network of secondary schools under direct central control.
It is also tightening its mandatory requirements of the local education systems particularly in respect of the curriculums.
In higher education a new central body is proposed to take control over polytechnics out of the hands of local authorities.
The universities are also experiencing much more direct government intervention, now to be exerted through the Universities Funding Council.
It will be interesting to observe the extent to which this increased centralization runs into implementation control problems.
The personal social services are the responsibility, inasmuch as they are under public rather than voluntary controls, of social services departments within local authorities.
While professional discretion and autonomy is also to some extent an issue in this service, implementation is not complicated by either a multi-tiered structure like that of the health service, or by powerful institutions like the schools and colleges.
While many directors and senior staff in social services departments are professionally qualified social workers, a relatively small proportion of the staff is engaged in social works.
Other key workers include home helps, residential care staff and occupational therapists.
Policy implementation is often influenced by the character of co-operation between these different occupational groups.
It may also be heavily dependent upon voluntary efforts much of which is only loosely co-ordinated and is marginally subsidized by the public departments.
While for education there is a major department of state, the Department of Education and Sciences which is responsible for national policy and the relationship between the centre and the local authorities, the personal social services is only the smallest of the three policy concerns of the Department of Health and Social Security.
One implementation problem here is that the main central department  responsible for local government is the Department of the Environment.
This department, together with the Treasury, deals with the main financial and legal links with local governments but has no responsibility for education or social services.
This exacerbates a tension, at the local level, between the demands of an integrated and corporate approach to local government and the separable service interests of two larger heavy-spending departments, of education and social services.
For social services the link with DHSS encourages the giving of attention to relationships with the health service, and to a lesser extent with social security.
DHSS has been engaged on seeking to co-ordinate the planning of health and social services.
This is a development of some importance for the evolution of integrated caring services in the community.
A special device, developed recently, that cuts across the link between social services and the rest of local government but strengthens that with health, has been the ‘joint financing’ of social services ventures with health service money.
Local authority housing is the responsibility of the lower-tier local authorities.
In Northern Ireland protests about discrimination by local authorities led to the creation of a province wide Housing Executives and in Scotland there is an important nationwide public housing authority to supplement the work of the local authorities.
There is also in England and Wales a Housing Corporation, responsible for the provision of funds for housing associations.
In the New Towns special development corporations provide public housing.
A feature of recent government policy has been a quest for new ways of managing and financing housing.
This is increasing the importance of bodies like the housing associations, financed by public money or by a combination of public and private money.
The implementation of housing policy is fragmented not only because of the mixture of kinds of housing authorities; this is an area of social policy in which many significant decisions are made by private agencies.
Since there are four main types of housing tenure — renting from a local authority, owner-occupation, renting from a private landlord and renting from a housing association — and the government intervenes, or has intervened, to try to influence the quality and cost of each type, policy implementation is often a very complex matter.
In studying its attention has to be given not only to the relationship between government and the local authorities, but also to government attempts to influence the behaviour of building societies and landlords.
There are also some other public-private interactions of some significance for housing policy.
For example, there have been government efforts to influence the price of land and to curb land speculations government intervention in the money market, and government manipulation of the costs and benefits of various statuses in the housing market by means of taxation and social security policy.
Finally, it is misleading to suggest that these relationships between government and the various private sectors are of no concern to the local  housing authorities.
The latter increasingly seek to influence housing opportunities of all kinds in their areas, and to give advice to those they do not house themselves.
Moreover the housing authorities, of course, have a significant interest in land prices, and have planning responsibilities to relate housing activities to other kinds of development in their areas.
Housing policy implementation has many dimensions.
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN POLICY AND ITS IMPLEMENTATION
In the previous chapter it was suggested that policies are complex phenomena which are hard to define with any precision.
This obviously makes for difficulties in distinguishing policy making and implementation, and for identifying implementation issues and problems.
The distinction between policy making and implementation seems to need to rest upon the identification of decision points at which a policy is deemed to be made and ready for implementations like a commodity that is manufactured and ready for selling.
This is note thought to imply two separable processes.
The difficulty, however, with this analogy is that policy-making and implementation merge.
The policy-making process is like the design of a building for a specific occupant by an architects the implementation process affects policy design quite early on and will continue to influence some details of it even after implementation has begun, just as modifications are made to buildings after occupancy.
Policies have characteristics that must affect the nature of the implementation process.
Many policies will be complex, setting out to achieve objectives x, x 1 , x 2 …under conditions y, y 1 , y 2 …
These complexities may very well complicate the implementation process.
Others will involve vague and ambiguous specifications of objectives and conditions.
These will tend to become more specific during the implementation process.
Constraints are not merely contained within new policies themselves.
While it is possible, in the abstract, to treat policies in isolation from other policies, in practice any new policy will be adopted in a context in which there are already many other policies.
Some of these other policies will supply precedents for the new policy, others will supply conditions, and some may be in conflict with it.
The process of inaugurating new policies will continue after the adoption of the policy and will then further affect implementation.
Another general constraint that must not be overlooked is, of course, the fact that the scarcity and control of public finance frequently sets limits to policy developments In some cases these limits are quite  explicitly set by central government.
Perhaps they arise because the government does not recognize the true costs of its new policies, or perhaps because of a resistance to making a particular policy effective which comes from within the central government machine.
In other cases the split between central government as a policy initiator and local government in the role of implementer produces a situation in which central intentions appear to be thwarted by local scarcities.
Hence the Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act of 1970 expects local authorities to provide a range and scale of services that in practice they rarely can.
However, since central government in Britain is the dominant influence upon the availability of local finance, there is a certain political duplicity here in legislation which requires local agencies to provide benefits that the centre knows they are unlikely to be able to affords.
Policy goals are often specified, as has been pointed out, in general or unclear terms.
We may identify a number of different reasons for this lack of clarity.
Firstly, it may be simply that policy makers are far from clear what they really want.
The lack of clarity may be so total that it is comparatively meaningless to seek to identify a policy or to study its implementation.
Some of the ‘policies’ of this kind derive from political aspirations to demonstrate a popularly desirable commitment.
It was suggested in the last chapter that some so-called ‘policies’ may be merely symbolic.
Second, it is important to take account of the extent to which a lack of clarity about policy stems from a lack of potential consensus.
Policies emerge that are not merely compromises but also remain obscure on key points of implementation.
Where this occurs it is likely that there will be a lack of consensus among the implementers, too.
Hence wide variations in practice may emerge, together with a range of conflicts surrounding the implementation process.
The 1977 Housing (Homeless Persons) Act provides examples of implementation problems — concerning the definition of priority groups, the extent of the duty to provide help and advice, and the identification of the responsible authority — that would seem to have emerged from the conflict during the legislation process.
In the same ways the author has elsewhere suggested that some of the difficult ‘value’ problems faced by the former National Assistance Board (NAB) staff stemmed from the ambivalence of legislation.
The traditional attitude to the poor had been to regard them, in the absence of unambiguous evidence to the contrary, as undeserving individuals on whom public money should be spent most sparingly.
The National Assistance Act seemed to turn its back on this doctrines yet it failed to jettison the view entirely and it failed to provide financial resources sufficient to enable the Board to avoid having to distinguish between the claims made by applicants, particularly as regards their more unusual needs.
Consequently the onus of  distinguishing between the ‘deserving’ and the ‘undeserving’poor tended to fall upon the officer dealing with the applicant in the fields just as it had fallen upon the relieving officer in the past.
While the politicians and administrators who framed the Act would not have wished to have espoused the notion of the ‘undeserving poor’ they felt unwilling to risk the public criticism that would have resulted from an approach to poverty that involved ignoring the potential waste on the ‘work-shy’and the fraudulent application in order adequately to meet the needs of the majority of applicants.
This has continued to be true of many aspects of social security policy.
This source of implementation problems is closely related to another of some importance.
Sometimes the political ambivalence about a policy is reflected not so much in the policy itself as in the constraints that are set upon the implementation process.
The simplest form of constraint here is, of course, the failure to provide the means, in money and staff, to enable a policy to be implemented properly.
Another example of a quite deliberately imposed implementation problem is the adoption of administrative procedures that are explicitly designed to affect the impact of a policy.
Thus Deacon has shown how ‘the genuinely seeking work test’ was manipulated in the 1920s to make it difficult for unemployed people to establish their claim to benefit.
He describes it as imposed as a quite explicit deterrent without reference to the actual availability of work.
It is important, while acknowledging that many policies are made complex and ambiguous by the conflicts within the policy-making process, to recognize that it is intrinsically difficult to specify some policy goals in terms that will render the implementation process quite clear and unambiguous.
This is one important source of discretion for implementers.
Jowell has drawn attention to examples where the concern of policy is with ‘standards’ that are not susceptible to precise factual definition.
He argues that standards may be rendered more precise by ‘criteria’, facts that are to be taken into accounts but that ‘the feature of standards that distinguishes them from rules is their flexibility and susceptibility to change over time’.
Questions about adequate levels of safety on the roads or in factories, or about purity in foods are of this kind.
So are many of the issues about need in social policy.
Discretionary judgement is likely to be required by policy, alongside the more precise rules that it is possible to promulgate.
If a policy is a complex and ambiguous phenomenon, with aspects that go ‘too far’ for some people and ‘not far enough’for others, it is important to acknowledge that the dissensus that attends its ‘birth’will continue to affect its implementation.
It may therefore provide opportunities for some implementing agencies to develop new initiatives that were perhaps not originally envisaged.
However, policies also often contain ‘footholds’ for those who are opposed to their general thrusts or  who wish to divert them to serve their own ends.
Bardach has developed an extensive analysis of the various ‘implementation games’ that may be played by those who perceive ways in which policies may be delayed, altered, or deflected.
While some policies contain few features that their opponents can interfere with — laying down, for example, a clear duty to provide a particular service or benefit — others, such as the DHSS commitment to the development of community care for the mentally ill, depend heavily upon the commitments of implementers, and are relatively easily diverted in other directions or even rendered ineffective.
It is important to raise questions about the ways in which policies are expressed, and the evidence required to establish the extent of implementation Policies may be conveyed to local implementers in a range of ways from, at one extreme, the explicit imposition of duties and responsibilities to, at the other end of the continuum, the very loose granting of powers which may or may not be used.
We can contrast, for example, the comparatively strict ways in which regulations under the 1986 Social Security Act instruct local authorities in the administration of housing rebates, with powers given (originally in the 1963 Children and Young Persons Act, now in the 1980 Child Care Act) to local authorities to make money payments, in exceptional circumstances to prevent children being taken into care, where no attempt has been made to prescribe how this should be done.
In this discussion it has been hard to draw the line between issues that are essentially ‘characteristics of policy’ that affect implementation, and points that are really observations about the characteristics of either the relationships between central policy makers and local implementers, or of the organization of the implementing agencies.
While it is helpful to make a distinction between ‘policies’ on the one hand and the implementation process on the other, this must raise problems at the margin.
Policies are formulated with the implementation process in minds and often it is more realistic to see policies as products of implementation rather than as ‘top-down’ inputs into the process.
THE ‘CENTRE-PERIPHERY’ RELATIONSHIP
It is possible to some degree to distinguish between those implementation issues that arise essentially from the ‘distance’ between what we may describe as ‘centre’and ‘periphery’and those that are facets of other aspects of relationships within complex organizations.
The latter, which will be discussed in the section after this, are of course considerably complicated by the problem of ‘distance’, particularly when two or more separate organizations are involved.
In British public administration the ‘centre’ will generally have been involved in the policy-making process.
But where implementation is delegated to other organizations the ‘centre’ generally maintains an interest in the implementation process.
Equally, the ‘periphery’ has an interest in policy making and can be expected to contribute to a feedback process from implementation into policy elaboration.
However, there are several different kinds of centre-periphery relationships that significantly influence the implementation process.
The simplest model is clearly that in which the centre and the periphery belong to the same organization.
The most complex occurs where policy implementation depends upon co-operation between separate autonomous organizations, and particularly where responsibility at the periphery is (a) delegated to several organizations with separate territories and (b) dependent upon co-ordinated action between two or more local organizations.
Even the more straightforward implementation systems tend to involve a complex organizational structure.
The DHSS has, at headquarters, a Regional Directorate to channel policy directives on social security matters to the regions and local offices.
This was set up in 1972 to cope with the fact that, in the words of the director of the regional organization'
More and more instructions, more and more complex in their nature descended more and more frequently upon local offices, but without any adequately effective co-ordination at the Headquarters level to ensure that those in the outfield had a clear enough idea of what their order of priorities should be as they became less and less able to deal effectively with the totality of their responsibilities.
Previously when bottlenecks arose in the benefit delivery system regional or local decisions had to be made that might affect implementation, now there is a central ‘directorate’ which is likely to be involved in the examination of policy feasibility and which plays an important part in determining how policy is implemented.
Crucial as this innovation may have been for co-ordination, it has contributed to an increased sense of ‘distance’ between policy makers and implementers in a policy system that operates primarily in a unified, top-down, manner.
Recognition that there may be issues to consider about ‘levels’ even in the social security systems emphasizes the importance of this dimension for the study of implementation where separate organizations are involved.
It is clearly important to identify not merely the issue of the relationship between different levels of elected government but also the existence of a variety of organizations whose relationships to either central or local governments, or both, is often ambiguous: the health  authorities, the Manpower Services Commissions, the University Grants Committee and the universities, the New Town Corporations and so on.
It is important to bear in mind the wide range of inter-agency linkages that may be necessary without reference to the subject matter of those linkages.
Pressman and Wildavsky have made a tentative attempt to draw attention to what may loosely be described as the mathematics of implementations the way in which the mere quantity of agreements necessary may, even when all parties are committed to a policy, undermine or delay effective action.
Hence it is necessary to give attention to the following issues about centre-periphery relations:
1
the relationship will be likely to involve two or more organizations at either the ‘centre’ or the ‘periphery’or both.
Effective implementation may depend upon  co-operation not merely between the two ‘levels’ but also between different organizations at the same level;
2
the centre-periphery relationship may be mediated through one or more intermediary or regional body;
3
relationships between agencies will in practice involve a number of different issues, and the symmetry that it is possible to draw in an abstract model will not be the same for each issue.
In reality any organization will be involved in a web of relationships, which vary in character and intensity according to the issue.
Hence, local authorities have to deal with a number of different central government departments, but the extent to which this is the case varies from issue to issue.
Equally, some activities require considerable co-operation between ‘peripheral’ agencies while others require very little.
However, it may be misleading to lose sight of the overall pattern since the outcome of one relationship will affect responses to another.
Relationships are ongoing, each will have a history that conditions reactions to any new issues.
Equally, each organization will have developed its own sense of its tasks mission and role in relation to others.
These will affect its response to anything new.
One issue deserving of attention if only because of the importance it assumes in the United States implementation literatures is the ‘special’ agency set up to concern itself with policy making and implementation in a specifically limited policy field.
Schon has described government agencies as ‘memorials to old problem’.
It has long been recognized in the United States that there are difficulties in getting old agencies to implement new policies.
A crucial innovation strategy has therefore involved the creation of new agencies for this purpose.
However, students of this process have pointed out that these new organizations then face problems about there relationships to older agencies.
While new organizations may possess a strong commitment to a new policy, and may have powers that enable it to bring together the resources for its implementation that were not possessed by any single previous organization, it still has to relate to a world in which other agencies have a great deal of power to influence its success.
One of the crucial issues, to which the creation of ad hoc agencies in the United States is a response, is the problem, at all levels but particularly at local level, of ‘overlapping governments’.
There are so many ways in which different government agencies can veto or neutralize other agencies' initiatives that a new agency, with more precisely defined policies, is seen as offering, perhaps in desperation, a new way to ‘get something done’.
While it would be foolish to suggest that a comparable problem does not exist at all in Britain, it is important to recognize that ours is a more simple system in which individual agencies have more clearly defined powers and more definite boundaries to their responsibilities and sphere of influence.
Only rarely, therefore, can we identify examples of agencies set up explicitly to circumvent problems of this kind.
Moreover, when they do occur they are more often allowed to operate in territories (in both a spatial and a policy sense) in which others' intervention is limited.
The New Towns are examples of successful British innovations in this sense.
What is interesting about them is that while the development corporations acquired powers that gave them a great deal of autonomy within their own territories, there is today a variety of questions to be raised about the extent to which their ‘success’ was secured at the expense of other policies to which they ‘ought’to have related.
While the New Towns often built up relatively successful and prosperous new communities, they have done little to relieve the problems of the least  privileged in the old communities from which they drew, and hence, while by providing for ‘overspill’ they have helped to solve some inner-city problems, they have exacerbated others.
While the use of the New Town device is now being discontinued, British governments continue to experiment with approaches to urban renewal which bypass existing agencies.
The Urban Development Corporations are the latest such devices, spawned by a central government which sees the local authorities as likely obstacles to local economic development.
Three motives can perhaps be identified for the creation of special agencies in Britain, although there are of course dangers in taking ostensible motives as real ones, to create an effective separate and accountable ‘management system’ to reduce political ‘interference’and to provide for the direct representation of special interests.
The development of a separate manpower policy agency seems to have been carried out with all these motives in minds The University Grants Committee has been seen as serving the second and third purposes.
Doubts are being expressed about whether its successor, the Universities Funding Council, will do this.
Clearly, the special character of the National Health Service structure owes a great deal to the strength of special interests, though its reorganization in the 1970s owed much to ‘managerial’ thinking.
It is also interesting as perhaps the key example of a special system designed to minimize political influence at the local level, since local authority involvement is only indirect and slight.
Two of the three ‘motives’ outlined above are of special importance to the study of implementation, since the removal of some aspects of policy making from direct political influence and deference to special interests both introduce complications that make it particularly difficult to distinguish policy making from implementation.
These agencies may be seen alternatively as implementers that affect  the character of policy or as independent creators of policy forever in a relationship of tension with the ‘centre’.
It is this tension that can then sometimes be seen as leading to central efforts to curb the independence of agencies whose initial  freedom was provided by government.
All three of the agencies mentioned in the last paragraph have recently been the subject of central limitations to their activities or curbs upon their freedom!
THE ORGANIZATIONAL CHARACTERISTIC OF IMPLEMENTING AGENCIES
In the study of agencies concerned with policy implementation two significant bodies of literature can be drawn upon.
There are studies by organizational sociologists that suggest the limitations upon the formal control of subordinates by means of rules, and the behavioural studies of law enforcements which have emphasized the significance of bargaining and discretion in the activities of the police and other rule-enforcers.
Both suggest that there are finite limits upon the prescription of subordinate behaviour.
Very detailed rule-making is a difficult and time-consuming activity.
If it has to be backed up by close supervision and control a point may be reached where such activities are self-defeating.
If the subordinate has to be so elaborately controlled the supervisor might just as well undertake the task.
Conformity to rules relies primarily upon compliance, upon a willingness to work within a regulated framework which Etzioni has suggested rests either upon acceptance of a ‘utilitarian’ financial bargain or upon a ‘normative’commitment.
A key point about the former is that it also invokes in practice some measure of ‘tolerance’ on both sides, some concept of ‘trust’.
This applies limits to the things the supervisor can require the subordinate to do, and involves acceptance by the superior of limited deviations by the subordinate from the activities that are expected.
It is not necessary to elaborate this diversion into industrial sociology unduly.
The general point is that the mindless conformist implementation is rarer.
More common, even in a wide range of situations in which subordinate staff are primarily motivated by ‘utilitarian’ rather than‘normative’considerations, is some concern about the justification for the policy that is to be implemented.
Indeed, as the recent concerns of trade unions in, for example, the health services and in social security suggest, there seems to be a growing ‘rank and file’ interest in policy.
This extends beyond a tendency to influence policy delivery by the characteristic ‘insubordinate’ responses of evasion, delay, and so on, into a desire to feed back views into the policy-making process.
The studies of rule enforcement particularly indicate that in most tasks, and particularly in the more elaborate tasks, there will be a strong element of discretion.
In the last section three sources of discretion were identified, arising from (a) a deliberate recognition of local autonomy,(b)‘political’ difficulties in resolving key policy dilemmas, and (c)‘logical’problems in prescribing ‘standards’.
This discussion adds a fourth, the inherent limits to the regulation of tasks.
In practice, prescriptions for policy implementation convey discretionary powers to field-level staff for reasons that are combinations of these four ‘sources’ of discretion.
An alternative way of looking at this phenomenon is to see the field official as a ‘street-level bureaucrat’.
His or her job is characterized by inadequate resources for the tasks by variable and often low public support for the roles and by ambiguous and often unrealizable expectations of performance.
The official's concerns are with the actual impact of specific policies upon the relationships with specific individuals, these may lead to a disregard of or failure to understand the wider policy issues that concern those ‘higher up’ in the agency.
The ‘street-level’ role is necessarily uncertain.
A modicum of semi-professional training defines the role as putting into practice a set of ideals inculcated in that training.
Yet the ‘street-level’ bureaucrat is also the representative of a government agency, one that is itself subject to conflicting pressures.
In day-to-day contact with clients and with the community at larger he or she becomes to some degree locked into the support of individuals and groups that may be antipathetic to the employing agency.
In such a situation of role confusion and role strains a person at the end of the line is not disposed to react to new policy initiatives from above as if he or she were a mere functionary.
New policies are but factors in a whole web of demands that have to be managed.
It is interesting how many of the social workers who regard themselves as identified with their clients, sharing some sense of oppression by the ‘bureaucracy’ that weighs upon them both and working therefore to help the clients receive resources from the ‘system’, have a view of  social security field staff that is directly in contrast to their view of their own position.
They see social security staff as biased and prejudiced against the poor and only too ready to evade their responsibility to help.
They demand, therefore, that the social security bureaucracy should more effectively control and discipline its subordinates.
Without taking sides on these views it can be acknowledged that there are ‘two faces’ to street level bureaucracy.
It may be seen as the effective adaptation of policy to the needs of the public, or it may be seen as the manipulation of positions of power to distort policy towards stigmatization, discrimination and petty tyranny.
Which it does will vary according to the policy at stake, and the values and commitments of the field workers, but it will also depend upon the scope accorded by the organizational control system, for this phenomenon is not  necessarily independent of ‘biases’ built into the policy delivery system.
Social workers can manipulate their ‘system’ in favour of some clients because their agency grants them licence to deploy such commitments.
Social security officers can discriminate negatively because they are encouraged to be vigilant to prevent fraud and abuse.
Consideration of discretion and of the roles of ‘street-level bureaucrats’ must also involve looking at the implications of professionalism for implementation.
For Etzioni the compliance of professionals to their organizations rests upon ‘normative’ commitments.
But policy makers may be said to have to ‘pay for’ a lessening of day-to-day control problems with concessions in the implementation process, professionalism tends to involve participation in the determination of policy outcomes.
In the health service, for example, doctors have been able to secure a very full involvement in policy making within the service as one of the prices for participation.
Three interrelated points may be made about professionalism:
1
that it may entail a level of expertise that makes lay scrutiny difficult;
2
that professionals may be, for whatever reason, accorded a legitimate autonomy;
3
that professionals may acquire amounts of power and influence that enable them to determine their own activities.
These sources of professional freedom clearly have a differential impact depending upon (a) the professional involved,(b) the organizational setting in which professionals work, and (c) the policies that they are required to implement.
The importance of the level of expertise for professional power has led some writers to make a distinction between professions and semi-professions, with doctors and lawyers in the former category but social workers and teachers in the latter.
Point (b) has been the subject of controversy about the impact upon professional activities of organizational, and particularly public, employment, the conclusion to which would seem to be, in short, that ‘it depends on the profession and upon the organization’.
On point (c) once again, a good deal depends on the nature of the policy involved.
There are a large number of situations in which it is expected that professional judgement will have a considerable influence upon the implementation process.
Clearly explicit in many policies is an expectation of this.
This applies to many decisions made in face-to-face relationships between professionals and their clients.
Many of the issues involved are increasingly the subject of controversy, involving arguments about ‘rights’ versus ‘discretion’.
Within these arguments disputes occur about the significance of expertise and about the scope for effective limitation of discretionary power.
The effective resolution would also impose many difficult policy questions, about moral rights to choose, for example, with reference to abortions and the best way to allocate scarce resources, for example , with regard to kidney machines, which are at present partly masked by professional discretion.
There are also some important questions here, which are very hard to resolve, about the way to link together professional autonomy in dealing with an individual relationship with a clients and a policy-based concern (or ‘public concern’) about the way in which professionals allocate their services as a whole.
A further important complication for the study of implementation introduced by the involvement of professionals is that some activities depend upon the co-operation of two or more professional groups.
Studies of attempts to co-ordinate the efforts of various professions concerned to protect children from injury by their parents have suggested that particular professional practices, activities and terminology may intensify communication problems.
There are also, clearly, some key problems about the boundaries between the various professional ‘territories’.
It is important to recognize the extent to which professional involvement with policies implies not merely scope to influence implementation but also an impact upon policy itself.
Within the health service the very direct influence of the doctors has been subjected to considerable attention by policy analysts.
What has perhaps been accorded less attention has been the ways in which policy and implementation have involved a feedback from implementation as policies have been found inadequate to meet the demands of ‘good professional practice’.
Packman has examined the way in which social workers in children's departments gradually found that good child care practice required not merely the control and care powers possessed under the 1948 Children's Act but also preventive work to keep children out of‘care’.
They innovated as far as possible under the 1948 Act but eventually secured a further Act, in 1963, which legitimated ‘preventive’ work.
A similar  concern to extend social work practice, to enable integrated work with whole families, led, as Hall has shown, to further legislation in 1970 bringing all local authority social work within one department.
The discussion in this section has developed the key points about inter-organizational practice by means of consideration of the rules-discretion dichotomy.
But to end it three issues must be raised, which have been implicit rather than explicit within the argument so far: the relevance of the lack of clarity within much policy; the significance of value conflict; and the importance of rewards.
The first of these points does not require much further emphasis at this stage.
A lack of clarity in policy has already been identified as one explanation for discretion.
But equally when the relationship, within a system of rules, between means and ends is far from evident, then implementers may be more disposed to break rules, and their supervisors may be disinclined to enforce them.
A lack of clarity about policy goals and conflict about values, as already suggested, often go hand in hand.
Burton Clark has written of ‘precarious values’.
Policies may have among their goals objectives that lack support in the community.
Implementers will be aware of the controversial character of the policies and may not themselves subscribe to the goals entailed.
The social security official required to secure the delivery of benefits to one-parent families, but also expected to prevent abuse, may well take the latter consideration more seriously than the former, letting his or her conception of morality and stereotypes about the social behaviour of the claimants influence  behaviour .
But the implications of Clark's analysis go further than this, seeing the problem of precarious values as affecting not merely day-to-day behaviour but also the way in which a whole organization may conceive its tasks.
In particular, an organization that is given a task that is controversial and unpopular in many quarters, such as an organization charged to promote racial and sexual equality or one providing help to a stigmatized group such as vagrant  alcoholics , may find that it is given an unclear mandate and is placed in a position in which it finds it hard to acquire ‘legitimacy’ for its activities.
This may lead to the adoption of ‘safe’ and uncontroversial activities, organizational security being put before any movement towards potentially disruptive goals.
The problem of ‘precarious values’ may also be related to the problem of rewards.
We return here to Etzioni's analysis of the distinction between ‘utilitarian’ and ‘normative’rewards.
Clearly the official placed in a position of ‘role-strain' between the demands of superiors and the expectations of the public, or of ‘value conflict’ between his or her own ideals and those embodied in policy, will be influenced by rewards of both kinds.
Benefits now and hopes of advancement may curb an inclination to deviate from the requirements of superiors, a feeling that  some parts of the job are ‘worth doing’ may be even more influential.
But the substitution of ‘unofficial’ or ‘official’goals may be a product of recognition that more ‘worthwhile’activities may thereby be undertaken.
The motivation of field-level staff is an important issue even within the most integrated organization.
Where, however, ‘control’ is attenuated by a gap between those concerned with policy and the implementing agency, it may assume crucial significance.
THE SOCIAL, POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC ENVIRONMENT
Policies are evolved in a wider environment in which problems emerge that are deemed to require political solutions, and pressures occur for new political responses.
Implementing agencies continuously interact with their environments.
Much has already been said that has a bearing upon the underlying significance of the environment.
Whatever the relationship between state and society, policies may be interpreted as responses to perceived social needs.
Government is concerned with ‘doing things to’, ‘taking things from’, or ‘providing things for’ society, or for parts of it.
Putting policies into practice involve interaction between the agencies of government and their environment.
Those who do that are, of course, themselves a part of the social environment in which they operate.
However, in looking at social policy we must also question whether the distinction between the policy system and its environment can be easily made.
In chapter l it was established that it is misleading to see any single equation between the activities of the social policy system and the enhancement of social welfare.
But just as the policy determinants of welfare are multiple, and sometimes unexpected, so individuals' welfare is influenced by phenomena that have nothing to do with the activity of the state.
The determinants of an individuals' welfare can be broadly classified as depending upon their own capacity to care for themselves combined with (a) market activities and relationships;(b) the behaviour of ‘significant others’ as providers of ‘informal care’amongst whom family members are likely to be the most important; and (c) the role played by the state.
To study welfare requires attention to all ‘determinants’ and changes in the way in which welfare is provided are particularly likely to involve shifts in the roles played by these ‘determinants’and shifts in the relationships between them.
In other words, the process of interaction between policy system and environment is a very active one, and those interactions occur across an ambiguous and shifting boundary.
To give a concrete example, personal social services care is only one element in individual care systems in which family, neighbour and purchased care are likely also to play a part.
A shift in the availability of — or character of — any one of these care ingredients is likely to have an impact on the others.
Day to day policy implementation in the state-provided sector involves the management, or indeed mismanagement, of its relationships to the other elements.
Accordingly studies of social policy have conceived of the system as a ‘mixed economy of welfare’.
Furthermore, ‘social divisions of welfare’ have been identified recognizing not merely that there are different sources of welfare for individuals but also that individuals differ in the access they have to different welfare systems.
Titmuss, who originated the notion of ‘social divisions of welfare’ identified alongside mainstream ‘public welfare’‘fiscal welfare’, the system of relief from taxation (of which the relief for mortgage interest payments and pension contributions are among the most important examples) and ‘occupational welfare’(the range of fringe benefits available to some employees).
Titmuss, together with others who developed his work such as Sinfield and Townsend, argued that these other welfare systems may provide large benefits additional to, or quite separate from, the benefits provided by the more central institutions of the welfare state.
They may operate in a direction quite contrary to any egalitarian tendencies in the mainstream policies.
The ‘social divisions’ theme has been taken up in another way by some recent feminist writers who have been concerned to show not merely that many welfare provisions discriminate against women, but also that female services within the family and neighbourhood form crucial separate welfare systems, enhanced in importance when other systems fail or are withdrawn.
These points have been emphasised in this chapter because the implementation of many contemporary policy initiatives — privatization, the limitation of social expenditure, the extension of community care — involve changing the balance between the various ingredients in the ‘political economy of welfare’.
Where government withdraws or reduces its direct contribution to welfare it may still make an indirect contribution if the social security system subsidizes private provision, or it may have to acquire a new range of regulatory concerns about the quality of private services, or it may face increased problems in the other areas of concern because of the new pressures placed upon individuals and families.
Those who are directly affected by policies, the public, may be crudely divided into unorganized and isolated public — who pay taxes, receive benefits, seek planning permission, visit doctors and so on— and the organized public, the organizations upon whom policies have an impact.
These relationships may be studied with a view to ascertaining whether implementation proceeds in terms of the even-handed justice that Max Weber suggested is, or should be, characteristic of bureaucratic  administration.
Clearly, questions about bias in the behaviour of public officials, the mechanisms by which scarce benefits or services are rationed, the roles played by ‘gatekeepers’ and the problems of securing effective ‘take-up’of some benefits are issues of concern for the implementation of policies.
In study of these issues many of the issues about the motivation of implementers — about ‘role-strain’, ‘precarious values’ and the exercise of discretion — concern the interaction between the nature of policy, the implementation system and the characteristics of the public.
Policy delivery is not easily made an ‘even-handed’ process; class differences influence access to professional services, some social security applicants are less well informed and more easily deterred than others, and ‘street-level bureaucrats’who may be regarded as highly responsive to local needs in a white neighbourhood may be seen very differently in a black one.
Here the ‘environment’ affects the way the policy is received.
The relationships between implementers and organizations may well involve elements of bargaining.
Moreover it has been suggested earlier that one important issue for social policy that arises in relationship between public authorities and private agencies is that the latter may be the instruments by which government executes policy.
One of the clearest examples of this is provided by the building societies.
The government today sees them as  as important for housing policy as are the local authorities.
It has sought to get them to extend loans to borrowers, who hitherto, because of their low incomes or because of the areas in which they want to buy houses, have not been able to get help from the societies.
Government seeks to influence the prevailing borrowing and lending rates, and was even, in the 1970s, prepared to lend money to prevent the latter being raised.
Hence, the analysis of implementation is complicated by the extent to which many organizations participate in policy implementation.
The blurred boundaries between the public sector and the private sector complicate the study of implementation, particularly when the government engages in private and obscure bargaining processes with private organizations.
Other organizations with an impact upon policy implementation may include the public organizations.
There is a difficulty here about drawing the lines between the categories used in the analysis.
Reference has been made to the complexity of policy.
An extensive discussion has also been provided of the extent to which implementation requires interagency co-operation.
What has not been emphasized, however, is the extent to which, in addition to the clear and close relationships involved, in a system so cluttered both with policies and with agencies there is a very wide range of interaction involved.
Indeed, any new policy may be described as having a ripple effect.
Policies may be understood as being  interlocked with other policies.
Successful policy implementation depends upon resolving problems of incompatibility between policies over often quite a wide range.
Even policies with little direct impact on each other will be ‘rivals’ for scarce resources.
Such issues will not be merely inter-policy issues but also inter-agency ones.
The resolution of conflict between different policies depends upon mutual adjustment.
At most this may require re-definition of one or other policy; more often it probably requires the exercise of discretionary powers associated with one or other to enable special circumstances to be recognized.
The flexibility required of the policies implies a flexibility required of different agencies.
This means that policy implementation may require bargaining and dealing between agencies, and that therefore considerations may be brought into the inter-policy relationship that are very much wider than the ones that appear to be at stake.
Just as every new policy enters an arena already full of other policies, so every time interrelations imply agency interrelations there is a whole history of relationships that must be taken into account.
This chapter has portrayed the implementation process as a complex one, in many respects inextricably bound up with the policy-making process.
It has suggested that in the study of social policy it is important to give attention to implementation problems that arise directly from the characteristics of policy, but to recognize also that there is a complicated interrelationship between these and a range of inter- and intra-organizational factors.
Finally, all these complications interact with a complex environment.
An approach to the examination of social policy has been introduced here that has not been given much explicit attention in relation to the study of specific policies.
One justification for this lengthy examination of policy implementation is that, while we all experience the effects of the implementation process, and many of us participate in various ways in it, very few of us are involved in policy making.
Yet it is this policy making, often particularly that which occurs at the highest level, that receives very much more attention.
It is hoped that, in considering the detailed discussions of particular areas of policy contained in the next section of this book, readers will bear in mind the importance of the implementation process for the actual impact of social policies upon the public.
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
The author has contributed to further discussions of the issues raised in this chapter in chapters 8 and 9 of his book with Glen Bramley,Analysing Social Policy , and in chapters 6–9 of his book with Chris Ham (see n. 31 in ch. 3).
Susan Barrett and Colin Fudge's Policy and Action is also an important source.
Other key works on implementation are those by Pressman and Wildavsky (see n. 6) and Bardach (see n. 4) and an article by Van Meter and Van Horn.
The theme of discretion has been a particular concern of the author's work cited above.
Those who want to follow up this issue should also look at the writings of Jowell (see n. 3) and Davis, and a collection of papers edited by Adler and Asquith.