

NEWS
Penguin, Longman add shine to Pearson results
Pearson's book publishing companies shone out as the group's star performers last year.
On turnover up 7% to £718.7m (out of total group turnover of £1.6bn), operating profits from books soared by 35%, from £59.7m to £80.4m (out of total group operating profits of £155.6m).
This was by far the largest profit increase among the groups businesses, and meant that book publishing contributed 52% of group operating profits on 44% of total sales.
In terms of operating cash flow — a measure which Pearson holds well-nigh as dear as profits — the achievement was equally impressive, with book publishing responsible for a full 61% of the group's total.
Upbeat presentation
Speaking at a generally upbeat presentation of the results this week, Pearson chief operating officer Frank Barlow said that both Penguin and Longman had scored record sales, profits and cash management.
At Penguin, trading profits were £26.3m — and increase of 101% or, if the impact of the Smithmark and New York lease problems of the previous year is excluded, of 31.5% — while at Longman, operating profits were up by a hefty 38%, to £23.5m.
Addison-Wesley increased operating profits by 3% (rather more in dollar terms) to £28m, while Federal & Capital, the financial newsletter business, gained 13% to £2.6m.
Penguin's operating margin was just over 8%, compared with 6.7% in 1991.
This would suggest a turnover of around £330m, 12% up on the year before.
Although Pearson does not disclose a geographical sales breakdown for individual companies at this stage, it was evident from the presentation of the results that the increase in sales was achieved primarily in the US (which last year accounted for 55% of Penguin sales worldwide), rather than in the UK.
The US company had a record number of titles on the New York Times bestseller lists through the year, including two new Stephen King titles and Terry McMillan's Waiting to Exhale , and started off the year in a similarly cheerful position, with eight out of the 50 bestsellers on the lists.
Pearson finance director James Joll said that trade in the UK, although better than feared, had been tough throughout the year, until December brought some welcome relief.
Even then, however, the upturn had served more as a harbinger of better things to come than as the means of eclipsing the recessionary weakness of the previous 11 months.
In Australia, Mr Joll said, Penguin's performance was ‘sound’.
At Longman, the operating margin was 13%, which would mean sales of around £181 — up from £160m the previous year.
Paula Kahn, chairman and chief executive of Longman Group, commented that it had been a good year for Longman ‘despite the impact of the recession in some of our key markets around the world, particularly our ELT markets in Europe’.
Exciting changes
Longman Group UK's educational publishing had been particularly successful, she said: ‘Longman Education took advantage of the exciting changes taking place in its market place and considerably increased its sales and market share, while Longman Higher Education's refocus on its key academic markets paid off handsomely.’
Ladybird, under new management, increased its market share, grew its sales ‘significantly’ and achieved margins of 10%, Ms Kahn said, through capitalising on its national curriculum linked ranges such as the Test Your Child Practise series.
‘In addition, the performance of the Ladybird Disney range must rate as the single most dramatic development in children's book retailing over the past 12 months.’
Churchill Livingstone, the medical publishing business (described by Mr Barlow as ‘small but beautiful’), grew profits by 45%, while Pitman Publishing had an ‘outstanding year’, with the Financial Times /Pitman Publishing books for business series a special highlight.
Good year in Asia
Although Europe was tough, with a slowdown in profits despite something of an advance in sales, all Longman companies — but especially Churchill Livingstone Japan and Longman Group Far East — had a good year in Asia Pacific, Ms Kahn said.
Looking to the future, she warned that 1993 looked set to be a tougher year than last, ‘Education funding in the UK looks less secure than in 1992, and there are no major World Bank projects likely to come through in 1993.
Ladybird, Medical and Business and Professional should do well again.
1993 will be a tough year again for ELT, especially in southern Europe, but Asia Pacific should perform well across all activities.’
At Addison Wesley, higher education titles performed well and the company's natural sciences programme had its best ever year, Mr Joll said.
The US schools market was more competitive, he added, citing Harcourt Brace as a particularly energetic contender in the field; but marketing costs were down, so that operating margins were kept high — at 14% in dollar terms.
Commenting on the performance and prospects of Pearson as a whole, chairman and chief executive Lord Blakenham, in optimistic mood, said that the trading environment had improved considerably in the home market since the interim results were announced, with both interest charges and sterling down.
Profits and earnings per share were down (the former by 16% at pretax level, and the latter by 22%)— primarily because of restructuring costs at the oil services business, which just broke even, and because of falling profits from fine china and investment banking.
City relief
But, Lord Blakenham said, ‘cash generation, on which future increases in shareholder value depend, achieved an all time high’.
The point was not lost on the City, which, pleasantly relieved by the results and cheered by an increase in the final dividend, marked the shares up by 27p.
Asked about possible acquisitions, Lord Blakenham singled out educational, medical, professional and children's book publishing as areas in which Pearson was strong, and where the group believed it could achieve expansion through both organic growth and acquisitions.
Reed provokes wholesalers' wrath
Reed Consumer Books was this week locked in dispute with leading wholesalers after proposing to introduce a standardised discount structure and abolishing full credit on returns, in a move which if pursued by other publishers could seriously damage the long-term prospects of the wholesale sector.
That, at least, is the view of the five leading wholesalers.
Complex matrix
In a standard letter to trade wholesalers, group commercial director Peter Cheeseman wrote: ‘The current discount matrix is unduly complicated.
Instead we will be introducing three levels of discount across all Reed Consumer titles — for all hardbacks; for all paperbacks and road atlases; and for Bounty.’
Mr Cheeseman argued that ‘anomalies within the discount structure have grown up which need to be removed to put all our customers on a similar basis of trading.
Certain of the services implicit in a wholesaler function, and for which publishers have agreed to pay higher rate of discounts, have been eroded over the years, and we wish to see them reinstated.
‘This refers specifically to the assumed facility of a wholesaler to order in bulk, and to be able to recycle and place previously purchased stock so as to minimise returns.
The value of returns in any six months period will be limited to 12% of the gross invoiced sales achieved in the previous six months.
Once that ceiling is reached no further credits will be allowed until the start of the next six months period.’
At the end of the letter Mr Cheeseman suggested that an incentive scheme could be introduced in order‘to provide retrospective discounts for increases in business over the base period, which will be the 12 months to March 1993.’
The letter has united wholesalers — usually such fierce rivals — in their outrage.
Several senior wholesalers told The Bookseller that they were dismayed with the way in which Reed had chosen to make the announcement.
A recurring complaint was that the letter was from someone with whom wholesalers had had no previous contact.
Kip Bertram went so far as to describe the letter as ‘venomous’, and Norman Smith, managing director of Total Book Distribution, said it was ‘insulting and naive’.
Bertrams' buyer Mike Butler said the initiative had deeply shocked him, and posed a significant threat to the long-term health of the trade.
‘We were annoyed that there was no mention of negotiation or consultation of the original letter.
‘We have now asked Reed to suspend the proposed changes until we have had a meeting with them on 22nd April.
There is a real danger here that other publishers could jump on the Reed bandwagon, and force wholesalers to buy at less advantageous discount and credit terms.’
That assessment was shared by Barnicoats' managing director Jonathan Barnicoat.
‘Reed has handled the whole issue appallingly,’ he said.
‘The clear policy here is to affect trade business — significantly, merchandising wholesalers have not received the letter — by snubbing trade wholesalers, and, by implication, independent booksellers.’
Hotchpotch
Reed Consumer Books' chairman Richard Charkin said he was not surprised by the response from wholesalers.
‘Over the years variation in discounts and other terms have arisen with various wholesalers, and we have been left with a hotchpotch of trading terms.
What we want to do is to introduce a standard level of discount for everyone, a level playing field.’
Rubinstein leaves Pan
Felicity Rubinstein has resigned as managing director of Macmillan London, and will leave the company at Easter.
Ms Rubinstein, a former rights director of Heinemann, said she was unable to reach an agreement with Pan Macmillan's chairman Alan Gordon Walker about her future role in the company.
‘We have talking for a long time about how the company might change structurally, and many of Alan Gordon Walker's proposals would have left me with a job that I didn't want to do,’ she said.
Ms Rubinstein said she was disappointed, but not shocked, that her association with Pan Macmillan had ended suddenly.
‘The discussions have been taking place for such a long time that I rather got used to the idea that I should be leaving.
But the news has come as a total shock for many people.
I had four good, rewarding years with the company, and I am only sorry that we were unable to reach an agreement.’
Mr Gordon Walker told The Bookseller he regretted that it had not proved possible to agree on a ‘suitable continuing role for Felicity’.
He added, ‘I have had no disagreement with Felicity.
She made a major contribution to Macmillan London, which she leaves as a profitable and successful part of the group.’
Ms Rubinstein is the second senior figure to leave Pan Macmillan in recent months.
Last December UK sales director Billy Adair after five and a half years with the company.
Rubinstein: ‘no suitable role’
Michel to leave Orion for RH
In another round of musical chairs between Orion and Random House, Caroline Michel is to leave her job as marketing director at Orion to join RH at the beginning of May.
She has been at Orion since October, and has been responsible for, among other things, the marketing of Vikram Seth's A Suitable Boy .
This represents a return for Ms Michel to the company where she began her career: she joining Chatto, and worked for Hutchinson and Cape, before joining Bloomsbury in its launch in 1987 (after a brief dalliance at Weidenfeld — now part of Orion).
She is also a former m.d. of Granta.
Her style and title at Random House — associate publisher and marketing director for the group's literary imprints Cape, Chatto and Vintage — are intended to reflect a bridge between the publishing and marketing functions.
The term associate publisher was also, said RH chief executive Gail Rebuck, and appropriate one ‘for someone who has come to the top of the tree’.
Ms Michel was, she said, ‘a unique talent in publishing’.
Anthony Cheetham paid tribute to Ms Michel as having done ‘a fantastic job for us’.
BOOKSELLER NEXT WEEK
Take a look at the audio book
Or maybe lend an ear.
‘If the sound trade continuously bombards its clientele with music, why cannot book browsing be accompanied by the finest voices of the British stage measuring their tonsils against the masterpieces of English verse?’
With no Booker or Whitbread, argues Al Senter, marketing audio books has to be approached differently.
With selections of children's and adult audio books from Rachel Redford and Peter Mathews.
Author's choice
‘The Gaiety is a few hundred yards west and when I was 10 and I met Brendan Behan there, he suggested I become a writer.
A hundred yards east, in Jammet's famous restaurant, my father pointed out Flann O'Brien scribbling with a pencil on the marble counter.’
Peter Cunningham describes his favourite bookshop.
Publishing in Russia
‘Imagine a publishing environment where piracy is rampant, inflation is running at 1% a day, bank loans carry an interest rate of more than 200%, and printers must be bribed to print books.’
Philip G Altbach reports on a conference on Russian publishing held in Washington DC last month.
Young for his age
Peter Rabbit turns 100 this year, but certainly doesn't look his age, thanks to the commissioning of new animation.
Julia Eccleshare's monthly Children's Book News and preview of the best of forthcoming titles.
Coming soon
Bookshop systems
An investigation into how bookselling technology has closed the information loop and transformed the trade, plus a directory of systems suppliers — coming on 16th April.
BA Christmas catalogue spreads its pages
Christmas 1993 sees the Booksellers Association's 10th Christmas catalogue.
BA Marketing's first mailing goes out to publishers next week, and there will be a second letter towards the end of April inviting submissions.
The deadline for the adult section will be 8th June, and for the children's section 15th June; the final selection will be announced at the end of July.
The print run for the catalogue last year topped 5 million copies, and the BA is expecting to beat that this year.
There were some rumblings of dissatisfaction last Christmas about aspects of the catalogue; though a market leader among seasonal book catalogues, it has to compete keenly with catalogues from other sectors.
Books for Giving promises several new features for 1993.
An extra eight pages have been added, which will mean a new page design allowing for larger jacket reproduction and a 25% increase in space for each title.
There will be an increased focus on paperbacks and audio books, and for the first time author features and interviews.
And Books for Giving will be inserted in the November issue of a high circulation women's magazine.
In addition to the annual regional media tour — last year BA marketing executive Corinne Gotch gave a record breaking 50 radio interviews — there will be a prize draw channelled through participating bookshops, and window and instore display competitions for booksellers.
Harvill publisher Christopher MacLehose left , the Angelo Dundee of British publishing, is pictured with his author Pete Dexter at the launch last week by Harvill and Flamingo of the paperback edition of Dexter's novel Brotherly Love .
The party was held at the Thomas à Beckett Gym in the Old Kent Road
Hopes fade for print deal
The print industry is bracing itself for industrial action from next Monday,Printing World reports.
It says many printers remain reluctant to reach individual pay agreements with the GPMU print union, hoping that the British Printing Industries Federation and the union will return to the negotiating table for further talks.
The BPIF's director of employment affairs Andy Brown said: ‘We have had no indication that the GPMU is prepared to settle at anything close to our final offer.’
Printing World said a source close to the BPIF negotiating team saw the failure to reach agreement as the final blow to national negotiations.
The union has reiterated its wish for an agreement, but has continued to negotiate individually with companies that are willing to meets its claims, which include an extra day's holiday from next year.
General secretary Tony Dubbins said: ‘We are continuing to make progress at local level following the breakthrough with the Lawson Mardon Group.
‘We are conducting talks with an increasing number of major groups.
This is in addition to a growing number of small and medium size companies.’
Matrix-Churchill memoirs
Paul Henderson, the head of Matrix-Churchill whose trial for supplying arms to Iraq was abandoned amid controversy last autumn, is writing a memoir which Bloomsbury will publish in October.
The Reluctant Spy will tell the story of the trial, and will also recall the 20 years during which Mr Henderson worked for MI6.
Bloomsbury, which has world rights in the book, reports ‘intense interest’ from newspapers in securing serialisation.
‘This is a story of an individual versus the system to rival Spycatcher and Stalker ,’ commented Bloomsbury's managing director Nigel Newton.
Authors protest over Bookshelf
The chairman of the Society of Authors, Anthony Sampson, has written to the BBC to protest about the shelving of ‘Bookshelf’, broadcast for the past 15 years and the only programme on Radio 4 devoted specifically to books.
The programme, presented by Nigel Forde, is due to come off air in the summer.
Sports prize up
William Hill has increased the value of its Sports Book of the Year award from £3,500 to £5,000.
The judges, headed by John Gaustad of Sportspages, are Matthew Engel, Lord Howell, Hugh McIlvanney, Cliff Morgan and Ian Wooldridge.
The closing date for nominations is 20th September.
Further details may be had from John Gaustad .
COMPANY NEWS
CHEAPSIDE
Headline keeps up growth momentum
Headline announced another strong set of results last week.
Group sales in the year ending 31st December 1992 increased by 40% to £15.7 (excluding intragroup trading and with only a five-month contribution from Bookpoint).
Operating profit rose by 54% to £2.03m, and pretax profit by 58% to £2.05m.
Managing director Tim Hely Hutchinson said that the profitability of the publishing business, together with the contribution from Bookpoint, was now such that its organic growth plans could be funded without significant net cash usage.
The company achieved a net cash inflow of nearly £400,000 in the second half of the year, leaving it with £1m in cash and no borrowings.
Strong organic growth
Analysing the growth in sales in greater detail, Mr Hely Hutchinson said that book publishing sales of £14m had increased by 25%.
There was a £900,000 boost from the catalogue of 34 titles previously published under the Queen Anne Press imprint, acquired in April.
‘In addition, 16% organic growth, in a recessionary market that appeared to us to decline by about 5% in value during the year, represented a strong underlying performance,’ he said.
The non-fiction division yielded sales of £3.9m in only its second year of publishing, while the fiction division grew by 19% to produce £10.1m of sales.
Headline overcame the difficulties of its market — the weakness of the retail scene, and less than robust sales through wholesalers to supermarkets and other non-traditional outlets — not only by a strong new book publishing programme, with 385 new titles compared with 300 the previous year, but also by a cautious approach to overheads.
(The group now employs 56 people in publishing, appointing one new editor per quarter, and 120 in book distribution.)
This caution countered some weakness in gross margins (the result of increased book club and export sales, and of lower print runs), Mr Hely Hutchinson said; and net operating profit from publishing grew by 27% to £1.68m — an operating profit margin of 11.9%.
Interestingly, backlist sales grew more quickly than overall sales excluding QAP, increasing by 20% to £3.5m.
Export sales were up by 32% to £3.1m, with a strong performance in Europe and Australia and a recovery in South Africa.
At Bookpoint, operating profit for the five months from July, when it was acquired, amounted to £35,000 on sales revenue of £1.7m, excluding intragroup business.
‘The second half of the year is traditionally much the stronger for Bookpoint, but our expectations were still exceeded,’ he said.
Cautious assumptions
Looking ahead, Mr Hely Hutchinson said that company plans continued to make cautious assumptions about the general economic outlook, but that there appeared to be some positive indications.
Group sales in the first two months of 1993 were ahead of internal forecasts and substantially higher than in the same period of 1992.
‘The year has started a bit stronger, so we're hoping that with the end of the VAT threat for the meanwhile and after two lean years, this will continue.’
This year, Headline plans to expand its new title output from 385 to 480 titles.
Bookpoint is putting increased emphasis on marketing, and expects to increase its client base further from 80 publishers at the time of acquisition and over 100 at the year end.
In the longer term, development work is well under way to continue adding to organic sales and profit growth in 1994 and beyond.
Headline is now, for example, acquiring titles for a new paperback fiction imprint, Headline Review, to be launched in the second half of 1994.
Bookpoint, meanwhile, is investing in new computer hardware and software, for full deployment by the end of this year, and is planning to install new physical handling equipment over the next 12 months.
Mr Hely Hutchinson said that Headline was looking for UK-based acquisitions that offered quality and enhanced shareholder value.
‘But we would only consider them if they were logical,’ he said.
‘Nobody's interested in empire building now.’
Harcourt Brace to sell UK schools list
Harcourt Brace is divesting its UK schools list.
The list is focused on the primary school market, and has particular strengths in mathematics, English and special needs.
There is also significant work-in-progress.
The sale is being handled by the Pofcher Company ().
Dorling Kindersley interims in depth
Last week Cheapside reported the bare bones of Dorling Kindersley's first set of interim results as a quoted company: sales up 20.2% to £38.6m and pretax profit up 20.8% to £4.2m (after charging £208,000 of flotation costs).
This week it seems fitting to flesh out these results.
Sales of DK adult publishing, which increased by 31% to £23.9m, reflected in part the strong performance of DK's two Royal Horticultural Society gardening books.
The RHS Encyclopedia of Gardening , published last year, sold through even more copies in its first season than its companion volume, The RHS Gardener's Encyclopedia of Plants & Flowers , did when first published in 1989 — but the latter title actually generated over £1.1m turnover during the six-month period.
This is a prime example of DK's remarkable strength in backlist sales, which were another important factor in the increase in adult publishing sales, as was the success of two of DK's sex books (Anne Hooper's Ultimate Sex Guide and Miriam Stoppard's The Magic of Sex ) in the US.
A 10% drop (to £11.3m) in DK's children's books sales was a result of increased competition from what chairman and chief executive Peter Kindersley called a glut of ‘me too’ non-fiction in the US, inspired by DK's extraordinary success in this genre and all vying for a place on the 10% of shelf space allotted by bookshops to children's books (including fiction, he pointed out).
‘We're confident that the sheer quality of our children's books will win out in the medium term,’ he said.
He added that, in the meanwhile, DK had entered a number of new geographical markets, including Taiwan, Korea, Thailand, India, Argentina, Mexico and the Middle East; and that the decline in sales of children's books was offset by the very strong growth in adult titles.
‘Our businesses cover a number of fronts, and tend to be cyclical,’ he said.
Looking ahead, Mr Kindersley said that DK adult publishing was expected to continue its strong performance, and that DK Children's would probably be flat until 1994–95, when a number of major reference books were scheduled for publication.
DK Direct continuity series would probably experience good growth this year, followed by flatter turnover in 1993–94, before resuming its advance.
The group's five new businesses — DK Multimedia, DK Education, DK Cartography, DK Vision and DK Family Library — had not yet made a contribution to pretax profit but were now beginning to generate momentum.
The City marked DK shares down by 41p on the day the results were announced, in reaction (or overreaction) to the company's warnings about the overcrowded UK children's books market and to reports (or misreports) of DK's decision to delay selling certain titles to the US discount warehouses, which was misrepresented as a decision to stop selling to these altogether.
However, the drop in the share price could also be seen as a corrective to the excessive value placed on the shares in the company's first months on the stock market.
New Sunday trading bill
It is reported that a draft bill to reform the Sunday trading laws will be published in the next few months.
There appears to be no room for the bill in the present legislative session, but the government has been keen to maintain the momentum of its proposals for reform to the laws.
Longman moves to Cassell
Judith Longman joins Cassell as publisher of its Mowbray imprint on 5th April.
She was previously editorial director of SPCK, where she was responsible for commissioning a number of innovative and controversial books, including Daring to Speak Love's Name , which was dropped by SPCK and later published by Hamish Hamilton.
The appointment takes Ms Longman into a broader Anglican and non-denominational religious books area.
‘I was looking for new challenges, and Cassell as a large independent commercial publisher offers me the scope to publish a wide range of books in a commercial environment.’
Ruth McCurry, who has been responsible for Mowbray's development since its purchase by Cassell in 1988, continues as publisher with responsibility for Geoffrey Chapman.
Management change at Batsford
Staff at B T Batsford started the week with an unexpected change in management.
Managing director and major shareholder Peter Kemmis Betty has been appointed president — a non-executive position but one which will enable him to concentrate on editorial areas, chess and archaeology, in which he has a particular interest.
He was not available for comment, however, as he had just flown off to Australia.
The new chief executive of Batsford, which celebrates its 150th anniversary this year, is another shareholder, Bobby Cox, who has been running Seaby, a specialist coin company with historical associations with Batsford.
Mrs Cox joins the board of B T Batsford, as does Ian Moore, also a substantial shareholder, in the position of deputy chairman.
David Kidd, also from Seaby and previously with Hodder & Stoughton, Scholastic and Pan, rejoins Batsford as sales and marketing director.
Batsford's most recent financial results, for the year to end-December 1991, show turnover more or less static at £4.7m but a loss of £60,000, down significantly from £218.000 in 1990, a reduction due in part to lower costs and borrowings.
Expansion at Alan Sutton
Stroud-based publisher Alan Sutton, which specialises in history, local history, biography and militaria, is celebrating its 15th birthday this year in expansionist mood.
It has increased its sales and marketing departments, and will be looking to publish significantly more titles in 1993, some 280 against 180 in 1992.
In addition, it US company, based in New Hampshire, will begin later this year publishing titles local to the US in Alan Sutton's In Old Photographs series, and there are plans to experiment with this same series for the French market, starting with Brittany.
Alan Sutton's strategy, says sales and marketing director Nicholas Murphy, is to become ‘the national local publisher’.
The list is by no means confined to local publishing as the photograph on the right of Norma Major with author Susan Normington indicates, but part of the planned expansion in the UK will, as it were, be inwards, covering localities in greater detail than ever before.
‘And now we have got a full sales team we will be able to move further from home,’ says Mr Murphy.
The company has just appointed an agent for Australia and New Zealand — Peribo in New South Wales, run by Eddie Coffey.
Biographer Norma Major was one of the first to congratulate Susan Normington, an old friend of hers, on Napoleon's Children (£16.99), which Alan Sutton published on Thursday this week.
‘Now that I've seen the finished copy I'm delighted that I encouraged Susan to write it,’ said Mrs Major.
Alan Sutton has appointed new sales reps for every region: David Thompson () will cover the north of England; Paul Field () the Midlands; Nigel Britton () London; David Wightman () the south east; Terry Boyce () the south west and Wales; and Jim Millar () Scotland.
The sales office manager is Nigel Brown, assisted by sales office supervisor Nicola Perkins.
In the publicity department James Burkinshaw has joined from the Stockton Press in New York as publicity manager, Fi Henderson has been promoted publicity officer, and promotions and marketing officer Kerry Chambler has been brought in from within Alan Sutton.
Brassey sold
Brassey, Britain's oldest military publisher and formerly a (tiny) part of the Robert Maxwell empire, has been sold to Robert Stephens Holdings, an Anglo-American publishing venture whose chairman is Stephen Rubin.
The price of the deal was not disclosed.
Mr Rubin, who is also chairman of Pentland Industries (formerly the owner of Reebok shoes), said that he had brought Brassey ‘mainly because I love books, and because this is a lovely little company in a niche area of business, with very good people involved.
This is not a cold commercial situation where we expect to make a fortune, but one where people get job satisfaction — and so, hopefully, will I.
The board of directors, which includes Lord Rippon and Maj.-Gen.
Tony Trythall as chairman and deputy chairman, will remain in place; Maj.-Gen.
Trythall and Jenny Shaw will continue as joint m.d.s, and Ms Shaw continues as publishing director.
The staff will also remain in office and will be expanded.
The company plans to carry on with all its publishing operations and to open up new lines of activity.
‘Brassey's renaissance comes at a most opportune time,’ commented Maj.-Gen.
Trythall, ‘when the recession in the USA and UK is beginning to recede and when it is becoming only too clear that the end of the Cold War has not reduced the need for or interest in books and journals dealing with armed forces, war, conflict, terrorism, tension, crisis and all aspects of international relations.’
WHS gets new non-executive directors
Michael Orr, former head of investment banking at Merrill Lynch, Europe, and Martin Taylor, chief executive and chairman-designate of Courtaulds Textiles, have joined the board of W H Smith, bringing the number of non-executive directors to eight.
Mr Taylor, 40, a former journalist with the Financial Times , is regarded as one of the best of the younger generation of British managers.
Mr Orr, 55, previously finance director of Grand Metropolitan, holds a number of non-executive posts, as chairman of Molins and director of Granada, Marston, Thompson & Evershed and Sketchley.
Change for Children's Books of the Year
The 1993 edition of Children's Books of the Year will be launched at a party at Book House, Wandsworth, on Tuesday.
It will be the last in the current format.
The first issue, published in 1970, appeared as an annotated catalogue to the then National Book League's touring exhibition and as a guide to book buyers away from centres where books were displayed.
The selector in 1970, and until 1985, was Elaine Moss, who set the high standards which her successor, Julia Eccleshare, continued.
This will be the last selection by Ms Eccleshare (who is now The Bookseller 's children's book correspondent) and the last to be copublished by the Children's Book Foundation and Andersen Press.
The reason for the change is the huge increase in the output of children's books — in 1970 just over 2,000 titles were published, last year just over 7,000 — and the organisers have now decided that a new method of selection should be put in place.
Team approach
Suggested by Margaret Meek, a CBF governor, there will be a move towards a team approach, and a group of around 12 readers will look at 1993 books, their selections co-ordinated by Madeleine Lindley, children's book specialist based in Oldham.
The CBF says that it wants ‘a new look, and perhaps a new name, to go with a new approach’.
In her last introduction to the selection, Ms Eccleshare warns that ‘children's reading is under siege.
Not, as might be imagined, from the long-dreaded combined forces of Sega Megadrive, Nintendo Game Boy and the rest but from a far more insidious and therefore dangerous enemy — the government.
Golden age obliterated
‘As I finished selecting these 200-odd titles which reflect the continuing excellence of writing for children, a document was leaked which made it clear that the authorities which are controlling the education of the next generation had, at a stroke, obliterated the ‘golden age’ of children's literature — at least as far as reading in schools is concerned.
‘This they have done by drawing up a ‘list’ of recommended books for children of different ages which are, almost without exception, not one but two generations old.
In so doing they are making reading old-fashioned, illiberal and unappealing…
‘Are the lists inspired by literary considerations at all, or governed by something more sinister?
It is hard not to wonder when, in ignoring the best writing for children, they are denying the existence of the multicultural and non-sexist fiction which has reflected the changes in society over the last 20 years.’
An exhibition of Children's Books of the Year 1993 will be on display in the foyer of the Grand Hotel, Torquay, during the Booksellers Association Conference, from 26th to 28th April.
Jacket detail
Going, going to Torquay
It is not too late to register for the Booksellers Association 1993 Conference, Investing in the Future, in Torquay from 26th to 28th April.
The BA is mailing registered delegates with conference handbooks and information packs this week but is happy to take late registration.
Anyone interested in receiving details should get in touch with Meryl Halls or Susannah Dann at the BA on .
The latest speakers to be firmed up for the conference are David Pascall, chairman of the National Curriculum Council, who will speak at the general assembly session on The New Generation — A Strategy for Reading, and Simon Lang of the Henley Centre for Forecasting, who will be a speaker at the general assembly on The Future of the Book.
Multimedia peeks out of its niche
Mike Holderness writes
News of sales of more than one million copies of a publication on CD-ROM startled publishers at last week's conference on electronic books and multimedia.
What had been pigeonholed by many as a niche market, for niche products, seemed to have come of age when Alain Pierrot of Hachette disclosed to the conference the total sales of the Grolier Encyclopaedia on a silvery disk.
The conference, on 22nd and 23rd March at the London International Book Fair, organised by Meckler and sponsored by The Bookseller , attracted over 300 representatives from British and European publishers and agents.
Culture clash
They heard reports of the state of the art, mostly from the electronics side of the industry.
The clash of cultures was illustrated towards the end of the first day: ‘Just tell us what the standards are that we should be aiming for’, a publisher demanded, fed up with what he called ‘axe grinding’ by manufacturers.
But, by the end of the gathering, many were enthused by the prospect of selling subsidiary rights for many separate electronic formats.
Agents were pondering whether they shouldn't ‘hang on to thee rights, and wait for the time when they're equipped to sell them,’ as conference chairman Tony Feldman put it later.
Edinburgh based consultant Janet Mundy attended to further her MBA research on the new media.
She finds manufacturers evasive on the matter of setting standards: ‘Everyone says, ‘We've got the standard’…they're hoping to impose their design on the world.
And when I ask about their installed base they change the subject.’
Windows only
Dorling Kindersley chooses to produce its multimedia children's and home reference works exclusively for PCs running Microsoft Windows — not surprisingly, since Microsoft is a major shareholder.
They need the 650mb capacity of CD-ROMS to include sound and moving pictures.
Alan Buckingham, head of its multimedia division, says this choice was made ‘because of the huge installed base’— and because many of his projects are collaborations with Microsoft.
But it is also ‘keeping a weather eye’ on other formats.
More acronyms
There was more acronym-slinging.
‘PCMCIA’ is, apparently, a standard for plug connections and file formats which should soon permit cards bearing silicon Read-Only Memory to slot into desktop PCs and personal organisers.
The trouble, as with CD-ROM, is that even if the storage is compatible, software on it which is written for the Macintosh, or Windows, or the Acorn Archimedes, or Apple's forthcoming Newton, or Sony's Data Discman, will make no sense to the other machines.
Ferhan Cook of Apple Europe reported that Apple is collaborating with Microsoft to encourage productions of CDs which will be interchangeable between the Mac and Windows worlds.
An ‘authoring system’, called ‘Kaleida’ and expected to be released at the end of the year, will enable publishers or packagers to edit together text, sound, still and moving pictures.
Ride them all
Tony Feldman concludes that publishers ‘don't have to back one horse in the race — you can ride them all’.
As he sees it, the ‘modest incremental cost’ of producing versions for different platforms is the key to exploiting the variety of formats.
It is also the key to a Pandora's Box of problems over rights and copyright.
These will get worse towards the end of the century, when the focus moves from CD-ROM and the like to information retrieved on spec over high-capacity data links.
I, for example, use the Grolier Encyclopaedia — not on a CD-ROM, but on a computer in Columbus, Ohio.
There is a strong temptation to paste what I access into what I'm writing, or perhaps to forward a copy instantly to a colleague with a dozen taps on the keyboard.
Not everyone resists that temptation.
No one knows how the law of intellectual property will evolve in the face of such developments.
PLR debate — memories of filibustering
Funding of Public Lending Right was increased by Parliament last month, after a debate that echoed the filibustering that postponed the introduction of PLR through much of the 1970s.
PLR was finally enacted in 1979, after an arduous battle in which Conservative MPs Roger (now Sir Roger) Moate and Iain Sproat, together with Labour MP Michael English, managed to hold up its progress by filibustering.
The draft order for an increase in PLR funding, from £4.74m this year to £5m in 1993–94, was welcomed generally by the Commons and approved — but not before the two Tory MPs once again expressed their antagonism to the scheme.
The Under-Secretary of State for National Heritage, Robert Key, introducing the draft order, said the increase in funding was more than 5%, which recognised the costs of a new computer and sought to maintain the real level of the rate per loan to authors.
This year's rate was increased in December from 1.81p to 1.86p.
Free provision ‘crucial’
Mr Key said payments to authors this year accounted for 83% of PLR expenditure, as funds for information technology were needed.
‘These payments are not an end in their own right.
They are designed to ensure that authors receive recompense for the free provision of their books to the public by libraries.
That free public library provision is crucial in fostering a literate, informed public, and with this my department's overall aim of making more widely accessible the rich and varied cultural heritage of this nation can be achieved.’
Conservative MP Paul Channon, who as Minister of the Arts introduced the order that brought PLR into being in 1982, said the Conservative government of the day had managed to use what was ‘a very defective act’ to get PLR on the road.
But, he added, ‘I am delighted that it has stood the test of time and that its few critics have at least remained silent.
Whether they are still critics I am not sure.’
Mr Channon was soon given certainty.
Mr Sproat arose and declared: ‘I am sorry that I feel compelled to enter a gently discordant note into the debate.’
He recalled the ‘ferocious debates that we had in the House back in the 1970s when, if I recall correctly, the Public Lending Right Bill was almost the only government bill that was defeated by Opposition backbenchers.
‘I object to the principle of the PLR not because I wish to do hardworking authors out of money — I would be eligible for PLR but I have declined to register on principle.’
He objected to the ‘high percentage’ of the £5m fund that would go on administration.
In the seventh year, to February 1990, the administrative costs involved in giving moneys to authors stood at 14%.
The following year, 1991, it was 17% of the money disbursed, and last year it was 26%.
‘It seems to me that if one sets up a quango and it spends 26% of the money disbursed on its own administration, that is a pretty high percentage.’
Mr Sproat was not, he insisted, against the scheme from any reasons of philistinism, ‘but I do not think this is the best way to encourage authors.
If one decides to give away £5m to encourage the arts, I do not think that it is a very sensible way to give it to my noble friend Lord Archer, who is a very rich man already, and who gets £6,000 a year out of the pockets of taxpayers who are very much poorer than he is.’
Mr Sproat was followed by Sir Roger Moate, who took up the theme, objecting ‘to money being distributed under this scheme to those who do not need it and to giving tiny sums to the many who do need it.
Wrong principle
‘The whole principle behind this expenditure of public money is wrong…authors have benefited from the sale of their books to the public libraries.
Without their purchasing them, many of these books would never have been published.’
But coming boldly to the defence of PLR was Tory MP and author Gyles Brandreth.
‘I must at the outset declare and interest.
I am a recipient of Public Lending Right and I have come to the House tonight to say thank you to honourable members who were here in 1979, when the legislation was passed.’
Mr Brandreth had a particular salute for Mr Channon, ‘for the leadership that he showed then and has shown since.
I say thank you also to the Registrar and his team in Stockton-on-Tees.
Mr John Sumsion, the original Registrar, did a wonderful job.
He is the only man I know who led a quango in a successful way, the head of a lean, mean team which delivered the goods.’
Wholly good
Mr Brandreth concluded with a rousing rationale for PLR: ‘…the English literary heritage is the glory of our civilisation.
It is quite right that we should recognise the contribution that authors make to our cultural and literary life.
We are right to reward the living ones with public lending rights.
They play a very important part in our civilised life.
Let us acknowledge with gratitude something wholly good that is emanating from the House tonight.’
Rounding off the debate, Mr Key explained that the installation of the computer had been the reason for the reduction in the funding available.
However, 90% of funding to be distributed to authors was not fanciful, and indeed the new Registrar, Dr James Parker, was keen to establish a figure of 11% on which he would work for administrative expenses.
It was, he said, important to recompense authors through PLR.
‘The sale of one book to a public library ensures that many readers will take advantage of that authorship.
I appreciate that those readers might have purchased copies of the book if the public library service had not provided it.’
Modest mark
The expectations of the public had, he said, increased in respect of the library service.
‘Through our recognition of the Public Lending Right, we have seen that libraries are not just the repositories of our uniquely rich heritage but resource centres for our communities, important to the quality of our lives.
It is a modest mark of our gratitude to those with gifts and skills of writing that we make this increase to the Public Lending Right…’
INTERNATIONAL NEWS
W H Smith celebrates 90 years in the Rue de Rivoli
W H Smith celebrated the 90th anniversary of its bookshop in Paris with a cocktail party on 22nd March, attended by Sir Christopher Mallaby, the British Ambassador to France.
Peter Troughton, retail managing director of W H Smith plc, Bing Taylor, general manager of W H Smith books and Europe, and John Cormode, concessions manager, represented the company's UK management at the occasion.
UK and French publishers and representatives of the British Council were among the 120 guests.
The English Bookshop in the Rue de Rivoli has the distinction of being the W H Smith branch which has remained longest on its original site.
It carries one of the largest selections of English language titles in France, and last year extended the first floor with a showroom for ELT materials.
The manager in Paris is Stuart Walker, who has been with the company since 1970.
The shop was started by the Neal brothers back in the 1870s.
W H Smith acquired it in 1903 and carried out a major expansion and refit in 1907.
In the First World War the shop remained open throughout, but the stock and premises were confiscated during the German occupation of Paris in 1940.
W H Smith reclaimed the shop after the end of the war, and has traded there without interruption since.
W H Smith has been trading from these premises behind the elegant arcades of the Rue de Rivoli in Paris since 1903
Newman to be A&L president.
Eric Newman has been appointed president of the US medical and scientific publisher Appleton & Lange.
He succeeds Christine Young, who is leaving the company to pursue other interests.
Appleton & Lange is part of the business, technical and professional group of Paramount Publishing, more familiar as Simon & Schuster until a few weeks ago, when Paramount Communications announced that it was changing the name of publishing group (International News, 5th February).
Mr Newman was formerly with Reed International, most recently as chief executive of Butterworth-Heinemann and as publisher at Cahners Healthcare.
During nearly 20 years with Reed, he held a number of executive posts in Australia, Asia, Europe and the US.
He led the merger of the Butterworth and Heinemann STM operations in the UK.
UN admonishes Iran over Rushdie
Two clauses relating to the Iranian fatwa against Salman Rushdie were included in a resolution on human rights in Iran adopted by the United Nations Commission on Human Rights at its 49th session, which closed last month.
In addition to expressing disquiet over reports of continuing violations of rights in Iran, the resolution included a reaffirmation ‘that governments are accountable for assassinations and attacks by their agents against persons on the territory of another state, as well as for the incitement, approval or wilful condoning of such acts’.
The resolution made clear that the Commission ‘also expresses its grave concern that there are continuing threats to the life of a citizen of another state which appear to have the support of the government of the Islamic Republic of Iran and whose care is mention in the report of the special representative’.
•As The Bookseller went to press, it was reported that Mr Rushdie had had a meeting on Tuesday with John Smith, the Leader of the Opposition — the first at this level in the Labour Party since the fatwa was issued.
New CCC payment schedule
Effective immediately, the Copyright Clearance Center in the US will make payments from its Annual Authorisation Service (AAS) and Transactional Reporting Service (TRS) semiannually instead of annually, says BP Report .
The payments will be made in June and December.
The CCC said that in order to make the transition from the current annual payment schedule, which is ordinarily in March, it intended to make three distributions during calendar year 1993.
The combined payments for March 1993 and June 1993 are expected to be about £9m, a more than 50% increase over the payment in March 1992.
CCC president Joseph Alen said the decision was ‘fundamentally always the ideal’, and with 300 major licensees, the clearance centre was ready to move to the new schedule.
He added that at CCCs fourth quarter closing, it was signing up new licensees at a 30% higher rate than anticipated.
L of C fears for copies
Bills introduced in the US by the chairman of the House of Representatives Intellectual Property Subcommittee and his Senate counterpart proposing changes to the 1976 Copyright Act are being strongly opposed by the Librarian of Congress, James Billington, and by the Register of Copyrights, Ralph Oman, reports Publishers Weekly .
Under these proposals, authors or publishers would no longer have formally to register works with the Copyright Office to be in a position to bring legal action for copyright infringement.
According to Mr Billington, the proposed changes in the law would ‘effectively eviscerate’ the US copyright registration system and remove the statutory incentives which mean that the Library of Congress receives the free deposit copies to which it is entitled.
‘The vast majority of materials received now by the Library through copyright are not obtained by mandatory deposit, but through voluntary registration stimulated by the incentives of recovering statutory damages and attorneys’ fees in infringement cases,’Mr Billington said.
New president, new direction for AIE
The Italian publishers' association, the Associazione Italiana Editori, this week elected a new president, Tiziano Barbieri, chairman of Sperling & Kupfer and of Edizioni Frassinelli.
He succeeds Gianni Merlini of UTET.
After a meeting of the AIE's board on Tuesday, Mr Barbieri spoke of the need to press forward with changes to the association's constitution, and with a fresh look at the ways in which books are sold and promoted in Italy.
‘In order to change and adapt to shifts in the Italian business and political scene, a radical rethink of what the AIE has stood for until now is going to be necessary,’ he said.
BBN — under threat, again?
The British Council's monthly magazine promoting British books worldwide,British Book News , looks to be under threat, again.
At the end of last year, and with the help of its publishers' advisory committee, the Council's Libraries, Books and Information Division drew up a book promotion policy.
As a result, the division's Manchester-based director Helen Meixner told The Bookseller , ‘We are reviewing all the book promotion operations against this policy.’
Bibliographic provision is an element of this review, and as an important contributor of this,BBN will come under the microscope.
BBN last escaped the axe in 1986 and was subsequently revamped under its current editor Jennifer Creswick, but it has never been far from the blade as the Council has been forced to cut back over the years.
Whether BBN will survive will become clearer after a further Council meeting in May.
ICYB — help for booksellers
Bertrams Books, Usborne and Yale University Press have donated £380 to enable a British bookseller to visit the International Congress of Young Booksellers, which is holding its annual conference in Rust, Austria, from 23rd to 29th May.
Young booksellers who would like to attend the conference but have been prevented from doing so by shortage of funds should contact the ICYB vice-president Debby Sutherland at Waterstones, Bath ().
Cambridge correction
The caption to the Oxford Cambridge football match photograph in the issue of 19th March said that the match was part of OUP's history promotion.
The promotion was in fact a joint one involving 100 titles from both presses.
According to CUP, the trade in the UK and Ireland has been ‘magnificently supportive’, with almost 200 window displays of the Oxford Cambridge Book Race design, and entries have flooded in for the competition to win a holiday in Pompeii.
OBITUARIES
Andrew Hollingsworth
John Hitchin writes
Andrew Hollingsworth, manager of the Puffin Children's Bookshop in Covent Garden, who died on 24th March, had already become, at the age of 31, one of the country's leading children's booksellers.
He joined the Puffin Bookshop in the summer of 1985 and quickly established himself as someone with a deep interest in books for children, especially for the very young, and won the hearts of customers, fellow members of staff and publishers visiting the shop, not to mention the many authors and illustrators who gave their time freely for the events and signings at the bookshop.
Although he trained as a chemist, with a degree from the University of Bristol, it was clear that he was a ‘natural’ children's bookseller.
He served on the BA's Children's bookselling committee, took part in the meetings of the book trade's children's books committee, and last year served as a judge for the children's book section of the Whitbread Prize.
Andrew fought a brave battle against lymphoma, succumbing only after all treatment had failed.
His family are anxious that he should be remembered by contributions to the Combined Oncology Fund (contributions should be sent to Frankie Brown,).
Andrew will be much missed by all the many who had the good fortune to count him as a colleague and a friend.
Sonia Benster writes
Andrew Hollingsworth, manager of the Puffin Bookshop in Covent Garden, who died on 24th March, was one of nature's gentlemen, quiet, courteous and generous, as well as brave in the face of illness.
His expertise as a children's bookseller was highly valued by his colleagues, and he made a great contribution over a number of years to the work of the BA's Children's Executive, as a member and, more recently, as a vice-chairman.
His loss will be keenly felt.
We hope to arrange a tangible recognition of his services to children's bookselling, but meanwhile, we share with his family sadness at the death of a young man of great ability who achieved much in the time available to him.
Beth Brown
Eric Lycett writes
Beth Brown, wife and partner to Bob Brown, of Wayfarer Books in Tewkesbury, died on 14th March.
Shortly after opening their shop in 1986, Beth was told that she had cancer.
Refusing to submit, determined to rewrite the record books, she fought with courage, dignity, and above all, humour.
Beth enriched the lives of everyone that she met, always showing concern for others, never complaining, always smiling, living life to the full.
She remains an inspiring example to be remembered and talked of with fondness and good humour.
H Stanley Foster
Stanley Foster of Hodder & Stoughton Educational and of its precursor the University of London Press, and chairman in the 1960s of the Publishers Association's educational publishers' group, precursor of the Educational Publishers Council, died last Friday at his home near Bexhill-on-Sea.
An obituary will appear shortly.
Jean Dwyer
Jean Dwyer, widely known in publishing as the long standing London syndication manager of News Ltd of Australia, died in Oxford on 9th March, aged 59, after a long illness.
Edwin Ketley
Peter Clark writes
His many friends and colleagues will be sad to hear of the death of Edwin (Eddie) Ketley at his home in New Zealand on 6th March.
He had retired to NZ after a long career in education and publishing with Schofield & Sims, Collins Educational and Holmes McDougall, where latterly he had been publishing director.
He was an active member of the Educational Publishers Council.
C Northcote Parkinson
Cyril Northcote Parkinson, prolific author and inventor of Parkinson's Law — which holds that all work expands to fill the time available for its completion — has died, aged 83.
TRADE NOTES
Moves
Helicon Publishing has promoted Anne-Lucie Norton to acquisition director.
She also joins the Helicon board.
Pan Macmillan has appointed Ellen Grout contracts manager to set up a new department responsible for negotiating Pan Macmillan's head contracts.
She reports to Sarah Lutyens , rights director.
Clare Miller is appointed assistant contracts manager.
Stuart Attwood has joined Mensa Publications as marketing manager.
Robert Allen continues to head the company and has also been made director of the newly formed Mensa Psychometrics.
Verity Kalcev , formerly at Book Data, had joined International Book Development as international training administrator, reporting to Euan Henderson.
Vesna Nall succeeds Ms Kalcev at Book Data as customer services manager.
Following the restructuring of the Chambers Harrap sales force,Elaine Walker has been promoted to key accounts manager.
Martin Redfern , formerly at Chancery Law Publishing, has become a marketing consultant, principally for Pitman Publishing.
He can be contacted at .
Architect and author Michael Spens has joined Academy Editions as commissioning editor.
Caroline Mallinder , formerly at Butterworth Architecture, has joined E&FN Spon, an imprint of Chapman & Hall, as commissioning editor for architecture.
Robert Breese has joined the Dawson subscriptions sales team, and Ian Bangham has been appointed the Dawson agent in Ireland.
Beverley Bicknall has left Simon & Schuster and from 5th April can be contacted on .
Tristan Ashman , previously at Arnoldo Mondadori's London office, now works from ,.
Serial rights of BBC Books are handled by Penny Pumphrey on a freelance basis.
She can be reached on  or, via BBC Books' publicity office on 
Emma Rintoul , previously of James Clarke & Co, has been appointed promotions assistant at Chadwyck-Healey.
Beverley Cousins has joined Kyle Cathie Ltd as junior editor.
She was formerly with Macmillan.
Representation
Balnain Books is now represented in England, Wales and Ireland by Troika,,.
Distribution
The Geological Society Publishing House, Unit 7 Brassmill Enterprise Centre,, is the European distributor for the American Association of Petroleum Geologists and the following series published by the Geological Society of America : Decade of North American Geology Suite; Memoirs; Reviews in Engineering Geology; Special Papers; Treatise on Invertebrate Paleontology.
RICS Books has become the agent in Europe for the American Congress on Surveying and Mapping and the American Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing .
Orders should go to RICS Books,.
Book Data ‘s mail was stolen on 24th March.
Customers who recently sent anything by post to Book Data are asked to contact Vesna Nall on .
Ellenbank Press is no longer distributed by Bookspeed.
Booksellers in the north and Midlands can order from local wholesalers or Glyn Summers Ltd, Stanley Mills,,.
Booksellers in the south can order from Turnaround Distribution,.
Editorial enquiries .
New Era Publications has moved to Saint Hill Manor;,.
Orders should go to this address.
The Trade Counter remains New Era's distributor and returns should be sent to the Mendlesham address.
Peninsula Press , now incorporating John Starkey Publications, is represented and distributed by Barnicoats, Parkengue, Penryn, Cornwall .
Knockabout carries the complete back stock of Tundra Publishing .
Details from Joe Toussaint or Chris Andrew on .
Knockabout is at .
Addresses
Edinburgh University Press and Polygon (Sunday Times Small Publisher of the Year 1993) have a new fax number for orders and trade enquiries only,.
This number is also a 24 hour answerphone.
Mensa Publications is now at  .
Pavilion Books is now at  .
Western Publishing has moved to new offices at  .
Catalogues wanted
The British Council asks publishers of British books to send one copy of their current catalogue(s) to Bibliographic Services Section (Catalogues), British Council,.
The John XXIII Centre for Social Research and Action in Rio de Janeiro has received a donation for buying books in the areas of faith and culture, anthropology, philosophy, ethics and theology.
Interested publishers are invited to send catalogues to: Dra M C Lucheti Bingemer, CIAS,.
Review copies wanted
The Corfiot , Corfu's English language monthly magazine, and the Corfu Messenger , a weekly newspaper, request review copies for their book pages.
Publishers should send books to Hilary Whitton Paipety, The Hermes Press,.
Water Bulletin , the weekly news magazine for the British water industry, is introducing book reviews.
Publishers are requested to send review copies of books which deal with the water industry to Paul Garrett,Water Bulletin .
Transport
The Bookseller is publishing a special feature on new and forthcoming books about transport (railways, motoring, aviation, naval and maritime) in its issue of 4th June.
Publishers should send reading copies or proofs of books published in or after June to David Russell at The Bookseller , to arrive no later than Friday 30th April.
Library Resources Exhibition
A preview of the Library Resources Exhibition being held at the NEC, Birmingham, from 15th to 17th June will be carried in The Bookseller 's special feature on 21st May.
Exhibitors are invited to send details of their special promotions or launches to David Russell at The Bookseller .
by Friday 23rd April at the latest.
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR
The future of trade publishing
From Mr Conrad Goulden
Sir, Trade publishing, both in this country and the US, has undergone a sea change in the last two years which I believe has gone unremarked.
The largest companies have drawn up a criteria which demand inter alia that new book purchases must be based on a stock turn of one year (in other words, the whole print run has to sell out within one year of US publication) and that the projected gross margin must not be less than 50%.
From the point of view of the banker or shareholder these may seem to be not unreasonable or even undesirable limitations.
However, for those who still care about the continuance of vigorous and diverse English language publishing, this is pretty poor news.
If fully implemented, these policies would lead to the large houses, who dominate output and distribution, publishing virtually nothing that is not anodyne and ephemeral.
In the harsh climate in which we live it is perhaps too much to hope that editors, no doubt feeling themselves lucky to employed at all, will rise up against their own management to resist this dictate.
However, unless some such backlash does occur, I fear that the decline of the book and thus reading, will have been implemented not by television, video or the computer, but in the last analysis by the publishing industry itself.
Yours faithfully ,Conrad Goulden The Gee Company,.
Sanctions against Serbia
From Mr William Porter
Sir, I have just returned from a full week in Belgrade and would like to seek comment and clarification on the information and knowledge sanctions which are now being imposed on Serbia.
They have effects which would seem to be self-defeating and counter-effective, and are probably in contradiction with the United Nations’ own principles concerning the freedoms of information and knowledge.
1.
It is impossible to obtain any foreign newspaper or magazine whatsoever in Belgrade.
They are not available on news stands or in the hotels.
In 30 years of visiting the city this is the first time that I have experienced this state of affairs.
Apparently, the reason lies outside the country, as these newspapers would be welcomed within it.
What is the logic of making our own reporting and interpretation of events in Bosnia unavailable to Serbian readers?
2.
All flow of learned information in terms of scientific, technical and medical journals has ended.
Even where subscriptions have been paid, the journals are not arriving.
Scientists who have been preparing commissioned material for publication in Western journals and books are having their manuscripts frozen, often without notification and, at best, with a curt note from the publishers.
In a few cases private individuals have been receiving journals by post, if they weigh less than 300 grams.
But that, for example, eliminates the Economist .
Library and institutional subscriptions have been totally cut.
3.
The ex-Yugoslav Publishers Association has had its membership of the International Publishers Association suspended.
One consequence of this was that only two Western publishers exhibited at the 1992 Belgrade Book Fair, where 90 had shown their books in 1990.
The public are, therefore, getting no new exposure to Western/world literature.
The sum total of all this is that there is a black-out, a closed interface, for all Western printed news, scientific, technical and medical journals and books.
Is this really the intention of the UN sanctions and, if so, what is the reasoning of it?
If it is to put pressure on broadminded intellectuals to persuade their leaders to change their policies, it is having the opposite effect, and is causing them to support the nationalist government.
Perhaps, somewhere along the line, I have misunderstood this situation and I would like to be enlightened.
If not, I would suggest that the UN and many governments are in the process of taking actions without thinking through the consequences in terms of common sense, human nature and higher values.
I have friends and relatives by marriage on all sides of this hateful and destructive conflict and I believe that, in the end, its solution will be found through reconciliation, firstly of individuals and then of communities.
Only they and not outsiders will be able to rebuild their shattered land.
Yours faithfully ,William Porter Chairman, Advisory Council International Communications Forum,.
Sales appointments
From Mr Dallas Manderson
Sir, Your report on 26th March about the appointment of new sales directors at Random House and Orion stated that Random House had announced ‘the appointment of Mike Broderick to the new position of group UK sales director…(and) By a happy symmetry, Orion has now been joined by Dallas Manderson, who has left his post as group trade sales director at Random House’.
The implication is that I have had to leave as there was no job for me after this restructure.
I have no desire to detract from Mike Broderick's promotion, but as The Bookseller is a journal of record I would like to make it clear that it was only following my resignation that the position of group home sales director was created at Random House.
Anthony Cheetham offered me complete control of the whole sales operation at the Orion Publishing Group Ltd, encompassing home and export sales for both hardbacks and mass market paperbacks, and while I have been very happy at Random House in its many incarnations, I felt it was too good an offer to miss.
I therefore offered Gail Rebuck my resignation on 17th March, and she finally accepted it on 19th March, asking that it should be kept confidential until 24th March, after the London Book Fair was over.
Yours faithfully ,Dallas Manderson Group Trade Sales Director Random House,.
Edinburgh bookshops
From Mr Gary Pulsifer
Sir, I was surprised to see that Ian Norrie, in his fairly exhaustive trawl through the bookshops of Edinburgh (26th March), had omitted Britain's second only gay bookshop, West & Wilde.
The shop, at 25A Dundas Street, has been trading for 11 years now — in an earlier incarnation it was called Lavender Menace — and is a valued addition to Edinburgh's gay and lesbian community.
Yours faithfully ,Gary Pulsifer Peter Owen Ltd,.
Editing matters
From Ms Liz Daiches Kettle
Sir: While fulling endorsing the sentiments expressed by Anne Waddington (12th March), I am concerned that she appears not to know that the word ‘hopefully’ means ‘filled with hope’, not ‘it is to be hoped’.
It is to be hoped that most members of the Society of Freelance Editors and Proofreaders are aware of this fact.
Yours hopefully ,Liz Daiches Kettle Senior Editor Longman York Publishing Services .
LONDON INTERNATIONAL BOOK FAIR
LIBF 1993 — graduating from exhibition to event
‘For the past five years we have been working hard to turn the London International Book Fair into a major event in the publishing calendar, rather than just another exhibition, and I think this year we managed to achieve that aim,’ reflected LIBF director Brian Bradford at the end of the 22nd fair.
‘From now on we want publishers and booksellers to take this event very seriously indeed.’
That the LIBF is growing in importance is not longer in doubt.
This was reflected in the decision of HarperCollins, Hodder, Penguin, Pan Macmillan and Random House to rejoin the fair after staying away last year, and the fact that GALC, the umbrella organisation of the European booksellers' associations, held its annual spring meeting during the event.
The fair, which attracted a record-breaking 10,678 visitors and 4,085 publishing personnel from 867 companies, is set for further growth.
Next year the event will be held in the Grand Hall of Olympia 1, which will provide 50% more floor space to be taken up over the next five years.
The plans of the Grand Hall were on display throughout the fair, and they were warmly received; Olympia 2, though an improvement on the Barbican, has never been very popular with exhibitors or visitors.
This year several publishers on the upper levels complained about the heat, and about the confusing layout of the stands.
‘It really was too hot,’ commented Hodder's chairman Philip Attenborough.
‘There is something about the entire layout of Olympia 2 that reminds me of Milton Keynes: all these signposts leading nowhere.’
Transworld's international sales director John Blake said the heat of Olympia 2 did not create a good atmosphere in which to do business.
‘Olympia 1 will be so much better.
Exposure to natural daylight will benefit everyone, and most people I have spoken with welcome the fact that the fair will be situated on a single ground floor.
European feel
The 1993 LIBF had a distinctly European feel: the number of overseas visitors compared with last year rose from 1,868 to 2,462, an increase of 32%.
All that was needed to make the fair a truly international gathering of the publishing community was a large contingent of American publishers.
John Blake attributed the surge in European visitors to the return to the LIBF of the major houses.
‘Undoubtedly their presence benefited everyone else.
In previous years many overseas publishers were probably put off from coming to London by the fact that not all the major players in British publishing were represented at the fair.
But that was not the case this year.’
There still remains some way to go in convincing the returnees that a good turnout of big houses is ultimately better for all concerned.
Penguin's chairman Trevor Glover, while unconcerned about the poor American turnout, said he doubted that much real business was done at the fair.
‘I accept that it is absolutely essential for smaller publishing companies to be represented here.
But I am less sure whether the bigger houses, with their established markets, benefit other than in terms of public relations.
We have no plans to pull out again, but I have experienced no ‘Road to Damascus’ conversion.’
Pan Macmillan's chairman Alan Gordon Walker expressed a similar view.
‘I believe we were right to rejoin the fair, but I am still not sure how much hard business actually takes place here.
But it is a growing event and we shall continue to support it.’
Among the seminars to attract significant interest was a discussion of the 1993 Best of Young British Novelists promotion, chaired by Martyn Goff.
The panel — Maggie McKernan, publishing director of Phoenix House; David Blow, manager of Waterstones in Camden; Catherine Eccles, m.d. of Granta; critic D J Taylor; and BOYB novelists Adam Lively and Will Self — discussed the merits of the promotion, and the reaction which greeted the announcement of the selected 20 authors in the Sunday Times in January.
D J Taylor — who had a heated exchange with Lawrence Norfolk, a BOYB author who was in the audience — captured the mood of the debate: ‘I think the real importance of the promotion lies in the fact that it draws people's attention to British fiction, and provides the backdrop for a much wider discussion about the relative decline of the English novel since the Second World War.’
Above left John Harvey-Jones leading a seminar on managing for the ‘90s; and the Grand Hall of Olympia 1, where next year's book fair will be held
Other seminar highlights included Managing  for the Nineties, led by Sir John Harvey-Jones.
In typically robust style Sir John outlined his vision of the future.
He predicted that it would be those publishers who were prepared to embrace change and take risks that would gain a competitive edge and succeed in the tough marketplace of the '90s.
Sir John condemned large advances for authors as ‘sheer folly’(although he admitted that while they were still common practice he was more than happy to receive one), and wondered whether as more publishers ‘linked into bookshops’ EPOS systems via EDI there would still be a long-term need for wholesalers’.
Identify your market
‘The real test of recession management comes when economic recovery begins to take place,’ he concluded.
‘That is when you will discover if all those decisions you took during the last three years were the right ones.
Remember, more companies go bust at the beginning of a recovery than at any other time.’
Identify and focus on your market was the advice of both speakers at the Sunday GALC/BA seminar on Increasing Book Sales.
As Bing Taylor, W H Smith's general manager books, put it succinctly: ‘It is essential that the owners or managers of a bookshop or chain have a crystal clear vision of their own philosophy, that which differentiates their business from all other booksellers…
John Sandoe with his tiny treasure trove of a bookstore off the King's Road, understood this instinctively and must surely have the highest measure of customer loyalty in London.
Tim Waterstone understood this through instinct borne of experience.
Stephan Brüback of the German shop design specialist Hans Brüback Landenbau & Verkaufstechnik took a visual approach to the theme of customer recognition, suggesting that social differences be accepted and even adopted in the definition of a shop's corporate identity.
British bookshops, he felt, were rather conservative in appearance.
‘If you want to identify your target groups, the easiest way would be to look at people's living rooms.’
And he proceeded, with the aid of slides, to match life styles with shop ambiences.
The Monday afternoon seminar Forward into Europe: Business and Tax Developments, smoothly presented by senior members from accountant Ernst & Young, drew substantial attendance which included literary agents as well as financial managers from publishing houses.
Top and Elton John lookalike pulls the crowds on the Omnibus stand;centre Polygon's editorial director Marion Sinclair left and publicist Kathryn Maclean were delighted to hear that Polygon had been named the 1993 Sunday Times Small Publisher of the Year.
Below John Hitchin left , president of the BA, took visitors to the LIBF on a literary pub crawl.
With him at the Punch and Judy Tavern in Covent Garden (setting the opening scene in ‘Pygmalion’) were visitors from Denmark Kaare Lund, Hanne Madsen and Anker Hedegaard.
Gamekeepers turned poachers
Ernst & Young fielded a former Inland Revenue Inspector of Taxes and a former VAT inspector — gamekeepers turned poacher as it were— to talk about the changes brought about by the Single Market to the regulations governing direct taxation and VAT.
Looking beyond the confines of the EC, Jon Lester, a member of the company's eastern Europe group who has been on secondment in Berlin, Bratislava and Budapest, gave an informed overview of publishing in the region, touching on areas of opportunity, support for foreign trade, and possibilities for foreign investment.
Bookshop promotions — do they work?
The speakers at the Publishers Publicity Circle seminar, Bookshop Promotions — Do They Work?, were well briefed and forthright.
It was refreshing to hear publishers and booksellers risking offending each other.
Ten years ago, such a debate would largely have concerned the policies of publishers.
But the rise of chains has resulted in booksellers playing a much more active part in the promotion of books, inviting publishers to contribute to the costs of catalogues, books of the month and generic campaigns, and taking a lead, too, in organising author events.
The effectiveness or otherwise of the various elements of these promotions provoked most of the discussion at the seminar.
the increasing role of booksellers in promotions is apparent in their displays, which they like to design to reflect their images of their stores.
‘We're working with publishers on customising, or perhaps I should say ‘Dillonising’, point of sale material,’ said David Mutton of Dillons.
Larry Finlay of Transworld was sceptical about this approach.
‘I really believe that the design of p.o.s. has got much more professional in the past few years,’ he said.
‘I don't see titles standing out in generic displays.’
But Mr Mutton found support from David Godwin of Cape, who argued that ‘a bookshop is not a stage for publishers to display their wares in’, and considered that a good deal of p.o.s. came across as ‘a ghastly, ill designed mess’.
Mr Mutton and Mr Godwin disagreed, however, about catalogues.
These gave ‘very little message to the reader’, said Mr Godwin; he would like to see the £1m or so he estimated was spent on catalogues being put into a generic campaign for books.
Dillons, meanwhile, thought catalogues were ‘extremely important’, and was inserting its spring and summer selections in the Times .
Larry Finlay said that he had changed his mind recently on the subject: ‘the more I speak to booksellers, the more I hear that catalogues are used’.
Unequal sharing of costs
Mr Finlay's main concern about bookshop events was what he considered to be the unequal sharing of costs.
Transworld would have been involved in 300 bookshop events in the year to the end of June.
After paying for travel, accommodation, meals and for p.o.s., the company was picking up 80 to 90% of the bill each time.
And booksellers were also demanding contributions towards displays.
‘Why should we spend money to get a book in a window that should be there anyway?’
John Mitchinson of Waterstones had some impressive figures to demonstrate the effectiveness of his company's promotions: its backing of The Fields of Glory , for example, generated 50% of that title's UK sales; 45% of the UK sales of the paperback edition of The Beauty Myth went through the chain.
More and more of his time and budget, Mr Mitchinson said, was spent on research, because ‘one of the things we don't talk about enough is who is buying books, what it is they want, and what makes them buy’.
According to his findings, 53% of buyers made their purchases as a result of instore promotions.
Booksellers were the right people to instigate such promotions: ‘what a bookshop has, more than any publisher, is authority’.
Finally, an author's viewpoint.
Terence Blacker had made a small bet with himself that he would be the first speaker to mention children's books: he won.
But the children's events in which he had taken part had been particularly rewarding.
They helped to overcome the notion that many children had that bookshops were daunting places.
‘I'm always amazed how interested people are in writers and writing,’ Mr Blacker said.
But he thought that this interest was underexploited, even though not all authors were interested in, or had a talent for, publicity.
There were purists, like Graham Greene and J D Salinger; and there were enthusiastic self-promoters like Gyles Brandreth and Jeffrey Archer.
‘I'm afraid I have to grit my teeth and say I'm closer to Gyles and Jeffrey.’
Above left BOYB authors Adam Lively left and Will self took part in a discussion about the 1993 Best of Young British Novelists promotion.
Left Pan Macmillan presented author Peter Mayle with a Gold Pan to mark the sale of 1 million copies of the paperback of A Year in Provence .
Mayle was joined by Julia Fosker left , manager of the book department of J H Clarke and Company, and Michelle Parkhurst who bought it.
Merehurst Fairfax launched its new children's imprint Swallow.
From left are editorial director Shirley Patton, m.d.
Nicholas Wright, sales director Debbie Kent, and marketing director Kirsten Schlesinger.
All the freebies of the fair
Ross Bradshaw of the Mushroom Bookshop, Nottingham, on a day out at the fair
The last time I came up to town for the LIBF, the colleague who came with me showed a great talent for tracking down free wine.
This involved, among other ploys, gatecrashing and invitation-only reception for people involved with the Canadian book trade.
‘I read Margaret Atwood,’ she said, before engaging the Canadian ambassador in animated discussion.
This year I felt it best to avoid wine and all things Canadian lest anyone had a good memory.
Back at the firm, did my colleagues ask if I had made any good deals, ordered too much or made new contacts?
Well, not quite.
‘Did you get many freebies?’ was more like it.
In fact the range of freebies was slightly disappointing.
Fezzes for all
TBD gave me enough pens to make a significant impact on this year's office stationery allocation; they also gave me a useful laundry bag, as did Bertrams.
Bertrams had free Quality Street, which should do their sales no harm at all.
Elsie B graced me with a long chat which made me feel as if I'd been in the presence of royalty, though I suspect not too many members of the Royal Family are at their desk as early as Elsie.
Trade & Travel kindly gave me a fez ‘for my daughter’, which resulted in a complaint from one colleague that if I was going to invent one offspring why not a few more so that all the staff could have fezzes.
Biblios were handing out travel survival packs which looked as though they would contain condoms, but didn't — come on Biblios, this is the 1990s!
The pack, however, had Elastoplast, which came in very useful when I caught my finger and started dripping blood over the Troika stand.
And that was all, except of course for 3 cwt of catalogues from companies we never deal with and which we get sent through the post anyway.
Free food
For future reference, publishers who are looking for big orders at the fair might try serving free food.
Olympia food prices, I remembered, were too much for underpaid booksellers, so I huddled in a corner with my bagels and hard-boiled eggs from home.
A nice lunch would have sold me anything.
Did I make any deals, brush up any publishing contacts?
To a certain extent yes, though as one of the few remaining radical bookshops there were few radical publishers to talk to.
Turnaround Distribution was not at the fair; neither was the Women's Press, nor GMP.
Pluto and Lawrence & Wishart were there, all 18 square inches of them.
At least Pathfinder is still going strong and Writers & Readers was making a comeback.
These days I seek out radical publishers only for nostalgic reasons.
Our current top 10 bestsellers include seven self-help books, so Airlift is more our style.
Mushroom Bookshop and Airlift go back a long way, to the days when both of us attracted unwelcome police attention for some of our more esoteric wares.
These days Airlift is quite a big and respectable business, and, judging by the tans of the proprietors, a healthy one.
Mushroom is respectable too, I should add — but we don't go in for tans, we're too worried about skin cancer.
Everyone else I met at the LIBF was welcoming, even when I was humming and hawing over buying singles or two copies of a small number of titles.
Coffee and croissants
And then back to Nottingham on The Bookseller coach.
Coffee, croissants and the morning papers had seemed very attractive on setting out, but I hadn't bargained on being stuck for ages in Kilburn on the way home.
Nevertheless,The Bookseller made some people very happy.
In Leicester a group of men got up like train spotters were very excited to see our coach.
They were bus spotters, complete with bus badges.
Our coach gave them a real buzz.
Above left a relaxed Andrew Motion visited Dillons bookstore at the fair to sign copies of his forthcoming biography of Philip Larkin.
Right Colin Francome enlivened the Millbank stand by donning a pair of stilts and doing a spot of juggling to promote his book Juggling for All 
Observations of a (jaded) antipodean
From our New Zealand Correspondent
The lasting impression of last week's London International Book Fair, to an antipodean publisher and book marketer who was not emotionally or financially involved in proceedings, was the niggling worry that so much time, money and energy is poured into books that the world doesn't need or — if the buzzing basement gathering of remainder specialists is a useful gauge — actually want either.
While it is doubtless heretical to question the divine rightness of ‘market forces’, the endless and accelerating stream of virtually identical glib and glossy gardening, health, food and animal books puzzle those of us who still see books as rather more than just one more colour co-ordinated component in the interior decorator's armoury.
Does the keen gardener really need or want (and will she or he actually buy)The Complete All-Colour, Organic, No-Weed Patio Wildflower Guide ?
And into how many positions can couples contort themselves on the covers of sex guides?
Politics, sociology and biography seem to be constantly trivialised.
Despite the scientific evidence to prove the point, it does seem that the ratio of ‘real’ books to non-books, masquerading behind soft or hard covers, is tipping alarmingly towards the latter.
Forbidding, frustrating
Undoubtedly, the LIBF works well as an international meeting place for publishers and suppliers who arrive each year with appointment books already filled and order books at the ready for filling.
But for many booksellers and librarians the barricades of desks and tables of busily negotiating suits that fill most stands must be both forbidding and frustrating.
And the abiding memories of London ‘93?
Complete mayhem during registration on Sunday morning prompts the question: are chaotic queues essential to the beginning of the British day?
A number of non-British visitors were heard to mutter that it would not have happened at Frankfurt.
Then, in an industry that considers two-colour calling cards flashy, it was hard not to notice the earnest young men and women with the L Ron Hubbard given mission to evangelise about Dianetics , or stunt rider Eddie Kidd, who is carrying self-confidence to the point of leap-frogging his motor cycle clear across the Great Wall of China.
There was also the young lady wearing the ‘World City Map of Hong Kong’ sandwich board who was heard to sigh, as she sallied forth from the loo, that she hadn't thought of that problem when she took the job.
But most poignant of all was the deserted Ministry of Culture, Slovak Republic stand staffed by a collective of solemnly seated, moustached, chain-smoking, dark suited gentlemen who clearly wanted to be somewhere else.
Academic booksellers and publishers are facing a time of profound change.
Yet most delegates to the 1993 College and University Booksellers group conference appeared to relish rather than dread the challenges
Revolution under the spires
THE KEYNOTE ADDRESS at last year's College and University Booksellers group annual conference given by Peter Scott, then editor of the Times Higher Education Supplement , looked ahead at Higher Education in the Year 2000.
By this year's conference, held last month at the Abbey Hotel in Great Malvern, the ‘exceptionally rapid and radical change’ Mr Scott had predicted appeared to be all too close and getting closer.
‘Turmoil is the word that comes to mind when one looks at the evolving British education system,’ wrote John Davies, director of the Educational Publishers Council of the Publishers Association, in The Bookseller in January.
‘Publishers and booksellers will have to pick their way though a landscape made strange and problematic by change.’
These words, capturing as they do the landscape in which most academic booksellers and publishers operate, were to resonate throughout the conference, for which change became a buzzword, a defining theme and animating principle.
Change can of course be regarded as a source of threat.
But in the event, most of the speakers and delegates appeared to relish the challenges that lay ahead.
Combative keynote
In the opening session Richard Charkin, chief executive of Reed Consumer Books, quickly established the mood of the conference with a characteristically combative keynote speech.
On a bright, late winter afternoon, a jacketless Mr Charkin, fresh from three months at Harvard University on an Advanced Management Program, offered publishers and booksellers a way forward.
He analysed a ‘typical value chain’ for books’— breaking the costs of the chain down into separate areas, such as authors/agents, editorial, distribution, retailers and paper/print — and explained how the implementation of new technology and streamlined working practices should lead to significant savings in each of these areas.
His vision of the future also included a reduction in university support services for authors; fewer editors working on more books; cheaper typesetting and data processing costs; significantly reduced print runs (‘I expect 50 copies will be considered a large run for some titles’); electronic customer catalogues; improved customer service; a merging of the jobs of copy editor, designer and production controller; and dramatically improved distribution (‘the 10 minute book run off locally in the shop could soon be a reality’).
Overall, Mr Charkin presented a picture of a man enthralled by present opportunities and future potentialities, rather than yearning for the comfortable certainties of the recent past.
‘Change is not a word that one would readily associate with academic bookselling, but it is being visited upon us and we must respond.’
With this remark Waterstones' operations manager Will Havercroft began the challenging session, Changes in Higher Educations: What They Mean For Us.
Campus bookselling had existed in splendid isolation and been largely unmoved by the 1980s high street revolution, he argued.
But the revolution had now spread to campuses, and it was no good booksellers putting up the barricades.
The session — which featured detailed contributions from Blackwell Retail's academic development manager Roger Bowen, and Pitman Publishing's sales and marketing director Rod Bristow — examined the recent changes in the British education system and suggested ways in which they could be exploited to generate more sales.
Mr Bowen outlined the management structure of the new universities (polyversities), the ‘massification’ of education, modularisation, and the likely effects significantly increased student numbers would have on traditional teaching methods.
He predicted a steady rise in the proportion of mature and part-time students returning to education, warning that booksellers would have to change their working patterns to accommodate these new students.
‘In an unpredictable and increasingly competitive environment, flexibility will hold the key to success,’ Mr Bowen said.
Student growth
Rod Bristow saw universities changing more over the next five years than they had in the previous half century.
This presented publishers with a tremendous opportunity to exploit the growth in student numbers, and the diversification of new markets.
‘I am sure that as classes get bigger and lectures replace the old tutorial and seminar systems, books will take on a higher perceived value as they become more central to the course.’
But Mr Bristow warned that the traditional relationship between bookseller and publisher would be further tested by computer-based interactive home teaching kits, and the rising popularity of distance learning information packs.
‘A state without means of some change is without the means of its conservation,’ wrote Edmund Burke in Reflections on the Revolution in France .
And, after digesting the central message of the session on Changes in Higher Education, delegates could do worse than remember Burke's warning.
For as each of the speakers agreed, it will be those booksellers and publishers who are prepared to respond to new and changing circumstances, while preserving the best of the old order, who will ultimately reap the benefit.
Above The Abbey Hotel in Great Malvern, venue of the 1993 CUBs conference
But it was not just the new that offered  business potential.
An existing area of higher education remains ‘an opportunity’ and ‘a challenge’(for which read ‘under-served’and ‘difficult’)— that of further education.
Paul Whitnall of Sceptre Books in Walthamstow, east London, described the FE market as ‘a land of confusing initials’.
But, while the initials which represent the myriad courses and qualifications available to students were indeed confusing, other factors seemed to be at the root of the market's apparent inaccessibility to publisher as well as bookseller.
Expanding market
The FE market was large and growing, and the recent Budget had allowed still further provision to expand it in line with government policy to increase student numbers by 25% over the next three academic years, Mr Whitnall said.
It contained the majority of students in post-compulsory education.
There were, he reported, 4.2 million students in FE, many more than in the universities and ‘polyversities’ combined.
Their commitment to study ranged from evenings only to part or full time.
They studied a wide variety of subjects: general, education, creative arts, languages, business, building, technical, computer, agriculture, hairdressing and so on.
And they were awarded a host of qualifications, from GCSE and ‘A’ level to RSA, C&G, College Dip and BTEC, although non-examined courses absorbed the majority.
These qualifications would all change, said Mr Whitnall, as each syllabus was realigned with the introduction of GNVQ.
However, despite all this potential, the relationship between FE and the book trade remained patchy.
With a few exceptions, links were weak.
‘FE is a chaotic market,’ he declared.
‘Constant changes in teaching patterns and assignment based learning means standard texts are inadequate, and it is hard to find authors who can produce appropriate material.
The target market for any particular text is also often very small.’
All of this added up to an ‘inaccessible market’.
Past meets present: a gathering/reunion of CUBs' chairmen.
From left ,standing , Julian Hardinge, Chris Sugden (the 1994 chairman), Richard Barker (the 1993 chairman) and Phillip Grey;seated : Bob Marshall, Graham Cousins, John Bloggs and Rick Tiller
Unpredictable demand
Poor communication and a lack of understanding of their respective needs were core to the failure of the book trade and FE to get the most out of each other.
Mr Whitnall reported teaching staff ‘dismayed’ by the service from the trade, with titles hard to identify and evaluate and frequently no obvious source of supply for students if texts were recommended.
In their turn publishers and booksellers found that FE students — and sometimes lecturers too — were frequently not committed purchasers, resulting in an unpredictable level of demand.
This was exacerbated, he added, by many students having no experience of book buying and coming from a ‘culture’ in which books were not valued and often from backgrounds unsympathetic to academic development.
Add to this courses where books were not obviously appropriate, and the market began to fragment before the bookseller's eyes.
Even where books were appropriate and the student keen, a lack of funds could often limit purchase.
FE students were more often than not financially squeezed, and books were not the priority.
Overall, Mr Whitnall concluded, it was ‘an opportunity which would be difficult to convert’.
His parting advice to those interested in taking the challenge was ‘keep an ear to the ground, your back to the wheel and get your foot in the door’.
A determined spirit and entrepreneurial approach were also advocated by a subsequent speaker, as he declared ‘Selling Mars Bars enables us to maintain a good bookshop.’
These words might have had Philip Grey of Warwick University Bookshop strung up for high treason a decade or so ago, but such are the realities of recession that far from stringing him up, CUBs gave him a whole session in which to address the question of Who Needs Books?
Developing Sales by the Creative Marketing of Non-Book Merchandise.
It was not that Mr Grey's enthusiasm for selling books had waned, rather that he was convinced of the advantages of diversification.
‘The potential in non-book product is enormous and challenges book sales for a share of student spending.
This should be attractive to booksellers. you can still sell books, but augment those sales with others.’
After all, Mr Grey observed, ‘after the first 10 days or so of the academic year we regard it as all over.
It is absurd not to spread our earnings through the year.’
At present two fifths of the Warwick University Bookshop group's turnover was in books, the rest in products that persuade the students to spend their money.
We regard the Warwick campus as a high street.
Universities are ready to go for the big time and exploit their earning capacity in a way they haven't in the past.
Bookseller cum hairdresser
Mr Grey's business is not only as a bookseller but also as ‘the newsagent, the supermarket, the hairdresser and the gift shop in the arts centre’.
A consultant had advised them that they could earn £10.5m more from their current activities, and that there was a potential additional revenue of £25m to be made from the campus by expanding into calendars, hot dogs and more.
Mr Grey's enthusiasm and energy for the entrepreneurial challenge was contagious, but one could nevertheless feel a good few heels digging in among the bookselling purists at the idea of running a hairdresser.
But Mr Grey was swift to reassure them: ‘Selling other things does not take away from books; as our sales from the supermarket and  news have grown, so have books.
It should be encouraging and a challenge.’
Wading into yet deeper waters, he finally posed the question, ‘Who needs new books?’
‘We don't sell secondhand books, but I think we should.
We could operate a large secondhand bookshop on campus.
Look at the huge turnover of a business like Follets in Chicago [a substantial ‘wholesaler’ of secondhand university textbooks].
We could set up a Follets here.
We should see the secondhand market as an opportunity, not a threat, or it will become a threat.’
Quick off the mark: first place in the 1993 Golden Parcel academic hotline awards went to Butterworth Law, with an average delivery time of 1.63 days.
From left were Peter Marshall of Pitman Publishing (third, 1.71 days); Wendy Edge of International Thomson (who came a close second with 1.68 days, and appeared to be very much the people's choice); Colin Marshall of Leicester University Bookshop (who was responsible for collating the results and who collected the award on behalf of the absent Butterworth Law); and Derek Hall of Addison-Wesley (fourth, 1.72 days).
Thomas Nelson, which was not represented, came 5th with 1.73 days.
Pricing up
Spotting the publisher delegates blanching at the very idea, he added, reassuringly: ‘In the US the publishers price to cope with the secondhand market, and with discounting too.
UK publishers could also price up accordingly.’
A rather less contentious session was on EDI: Editions, Edicts and Edifications.
This set out to show how the application of electronic data interchange (the transmission of data between computer systems) to book trade services should hold the key to a cost-efficient future of paperless communication.
Julian Hardinge of John Smith & Sons, who chaired the session, and fellow speaker Peter Ferris, IT and production director of John Wiley, both urged delegates to invest time and funds in EDI technology.
‘The technology exists, the standards are in place, the benefits are easy to demonstrate,’ said Mr Hardinge.
‘What is needed now is determination, vision and the will to make EDI work for the collective benefit of the trade.’
The importance of the session could easily have been obscured by the excessive use of jargon.
But by speaking plainly — and wittily — both speakers succeeded in retaining the attention of their audience for a full hour, despite a collective hangover from the conference dinner the night before.
At the 1992 CUBs conference Richard Barker of Waterstones presented a case study of a typical campus bookshop, based loosely on a Waterstones operation.
He had hoped then also to find a publisher who was prepared to offer a comparable insight into the operation of an academic publishing house, but no publisher had accepted the brief, possibly for fear of revealing intimate company details.
This year, however, a volunteer did come  forward : Routledge UK sales manager Alan Leitch.
Mr Leitch gave a valuable insight into the process of publishing academic books, and the figures — including gross margin, gross trading profit and operating income/net profit — made fascinating, and provocative, reading.
(Several delegates were heard to mutter, ‘Surely that write-off/obsolescence figure was too low’, as they made their way out of the main meeting room.)
Inexact science
Last year the workshop session that followed Mr Barker's presentation revealed that most publishers appeared to know very little about the financial realities of retailing.
The workshop session following Mr Leitch's presentation showed just what an inexact science publishing is, as groups of publishers and booksellers produced substantially different results after being asked to prepare a sales and profitability forecast of a new Routledge business book.
Despite the contrasting results, however, most delegates agreed that the workshop exercise had been worthwhile, and that Mr Leitch should be congratulated for setting an example for his more coy competitors and for helping perpetuate the open and instructive atmosphere that distinguishes CUBs conferences.
SPECIAL FEATURE
SCIENCE FICTION, HORROR AND FANTASY
Despite these recessionary days the science fiction and fantasy market is thriving.
The collectable aspect of the genre means keen fans will want to buy the lot, hardback, paperback, graphic novel and T-shirt as well.
Mike Sullivan, department manager of Books Etc, Charing Cross lists new and old authors that will sell in 1993
Beating the recession with dragons and sorcerers
Escapism in these dark days of recession is an attractive option.
Perhaps this is why sales of science fiction, fantasy and horror books — the last given a recent boost by a bout of vampire fever — remain healthy.
Most encouraging for the bookseller is the  buoyant hardback market for genre titles: in part this is a result of the continuing proliferation of series which leave the poor punter desperate for the next instalment and willing to fork out the extra few bob for the hardcover.
However, the collectable aspect of the genre is also a factor: fans not only want their favourite author's books in hardback, they want the paperback, the graphic novel and the T-shirt as well.
Such devotion used to be the preserve of Tolkien addicts, but now authors such as Eddings, Donaldson, Pratchett, Tad Williams and Robert Jordan have their own ardent fan followings.
This year's sf, fantasy and horror goodies are generously spaced with notable peaks coming in May and August, although all months contain strong titles.
HarperCollins stands out in terms of both quality and volume of titles published, with Little, Brown's Orbit imprint and Random House's Legend list also showing strongly.
An increasingly important aspect of some genre authors and titles is their ability to cross over into a mainstream readership.
Stephen King, James Herbert, Douglas Adams and Terry Pratchett (‘the best English humorist since Wodehouse’ in the opinion of one of my customers) have already done so, and more are likely to follow.
On the other side of the coin this year we have mainstream authors plying their trade in classic sf territory — Robert Harris and P D James to name two.
Above jacket illustration for Tom Holt's Here Comes the Sun , published by Orbit
What follows is in month-by-month format.
In most instances, though not all, I have listed the bigger titles first.
A lot of first    publication trade paperbacks appear simultaneously in hardback, in which case I give the details for the trade paperback while mentioning the availability of the hardback.
For most months I have included titles that I think are worth ‘having a go’ with, although they may not figure in the first rank.
May
In a bumper month Stephen King's Gerald's Game (NEL, £5.99) just about gets the nod, but he's hard pressed by Terry Pratchett's latest Discworld paperback,Small Gods (Corgi, £4.99).
One book is not enough for the inexhaustible Terry, so we also have a new juvenile title from him,Johnny and the Dead (£9.99).
This month sees the Orbit promotion headed by a new Iain M Banks novel,Against a Dark Background (£15.99), and while this is not set in the world of the Culture, the novella which gives its name to Banks' collection of stories The States of the Art (£5.99) is.
Both books boast excellent wraparound cover art.
While Pratchett sits atop the humorous fantasy pile, two more pretenders to his throne get an outing this month.
Legend has paperback original,The Sorcerer's Appendix (£3.99), from a new author it likes a lot, Andrew Harman.
However, as the author most likely to come near Pratchett, my money is on Tom Holt.
He has a new hardback,Here Comes the Sun (£14,99), and a new paperback.
Overtime (£4.99), which will be included in the Orbit promotion.
HarperCollins weighs in with the A format of Raymond Feist and Janny Wurts' Mistress of Empire (£4.99), while The Curse of the Mistwraith (£8.99) sees Wurts on her own with the first a new series.
Her association with Feist has moved sales of her own books up several notches, and this will one to watch.
Colin Greenland's Harm's Way (£8.99) is a Victorian space opera — his first novel Take Back Plenty was an award winner and strong seller.
Finally, a word about Millennium's project to release uniform editions of Michael Moorcock's Eternal Champion series.
This month it publishes Elric of Melniboné (£10.99), which has excellent cover art; the ensuring months will see further volumes.
It is good to see Moorcock's work finally being given the attention which is so often lavished on lesser writers.
Jacket illustration for Michael Moorcock's Elric of Melniboné,published by Millennium
June
Pride of place goes to the grand old man of sf, Arthur C Clarke.
His new novel,The Hammer of God (Gollancz, £15.99), is essentially an expanded short story, and although I suspect it will not perform as well as the Rama series, it will still be much in demand.
HarperCollins shows well again with the trade paperback of Raymond Feist's The King's Buccaneer (£8.99) and two Katherine Kerr titles,A Time of War (£8.99 and hb) the A format of the first in the series,A Time of Omens (£4.99).
Those of you with long memories will remember Robert Rankin's previous incarnation with Pan.
Well, whatever Pan didn't do Transworld is doing (perhaps sending unsolicited vegetables through the post is a master marketing ploy).
Rankin has Armageddon 3: The Remake (£4.99) and a new hardcover,The Book of Ultimate Truths (£14.99).
He's certainly as funny as Pratchett, and a good deal madder.
July
Despite my files tellin me this month has the longest list of genre titles, it is the one with least to offer.
James Herbert's Portent (NEL, £5.99) will do well, but the hardback struggled.
Who'd be a hero, eh?
Sparhawk, just back from questing in the Elenium, ready to claim the kingdom and woo the girl, discovers that his creator David Eddings doesn't give him much time to breathe, and he's off again: the A format of Domes of Fire (Grafton, £4.99) is out this month — stay tuned for further instalments.
Orbit has Crisis on Doona (£4.99), which sees the indefatigable Anne McCaffrey in partnership with Jody Lynn Nye, and a welcome reprint of the classic post-holocaust novel A Canticle for Leibowitz (£4.99).
One to watch will be The Stress of Her Regard (HarperCollins, £4.99), a ‘dark fantasy’ from Tim Powers, an excellent and much neglected author.
August
Jammed full of great stuff.
HarperCollins launches its sf and fantasy imprint this month with Kim Stanley Robinson's Red Mars (£4.99) as the flagship titled with Green Mars (£14.99) coming at the same time.
Red Mars is one of those ‘crossover’ titles, with a great cover and a story that will appeal to the Tom Clancy/techno-thriller market.
The second book of the Tamuli,The Shining Ones (Harper-Collins, £14.99), will keep the David Eddings fans happy, while Robert Holdstock's The Hollowing (HarperCollins, X and hb), a story in the Mythago Wood series, is for those who like a more polished fantasy.
Julian May's Jack the Bodiless (Pan, £4.99) was promised for so long that when it finally came out it took everyone by surprise, including the hardback publisher HarperCollins, and it went o.p. within days of publication.
Robert Jordan's Wheel of Time series keeps on turning, getting bigger and bigger with each title; the A format of The Shadow Rising (Orbit, £5.99), comes the month, number four, and a big seller in hardcover.
Timothy Zahn's The Last Command (Bantam Press, £9.99) concludes the highly successful Star Wars trilogy — expect more.
Legend publishers two C J Cherryh titles:The Goblin Mirror (£4.99)Faery in the Shadow (£8.99); it will be interesting to see if Legend can revive this established author, whose sales have recently flagged.
September
No problems here.
Douglas Adams' Mostly Harmless (Pan, £4.99) stands head and shoulders above the rest of the pack.
Viking makes a rare outing into the world of science fiction, though William Gibson is a writer with a strong mainstream following:Virtual Light (£14.99) is set in a none-too-distant future where, according to Gibson, we can look forward to a new form of virtual reality, the virtual light of the title, and a religion based on Cable TV — shades of Philip K Dick here.
McCaffrey is back again with Damia's Children (Bantam Press, £8.99) in C format, and a new hardback,Powers That Be (£14.99) with co-writer Elizabeth Scarborough.
Some important horror titles this month: Shaun Hutson's Heathen (Warner, £4.99); and Mr Murder (Headline, £15.99) from Dean Koontz.
Hutson really hasn't reached the heights that he promised, but should still sell very well.
Laymon's star, on the other hand, is rising, and he seems to perform better with each title; Koontz continues to challenge Stephen King at the top of the pile.
Virgin launches its series of Judge Dredd novels, with two this month:Deathmasques and The Savage Amusement each (£3.99).
A new title follows every month.
It strikes me as a great idea, and  it's hard to see how they can lose when you consider that 2000AD magazine sells 300,000 copies a week.
October
Although the vampire craze will probably have subsided by now, this won't affect sales of Anne Rice's Tales of the Body Thief (Penguin, £4.99), the biggest title this month.
Also watch out for Kim Newman's Anno Dracula (Pocket, £4.99), an alternative history where vampires rule OK in Victorian England.
The Legend imprint is relaunched this month; its most consistent author David Gemmell, leads the way with Waylander II (£4.99) and Druss the Legend (£14.99).
HarperCollins leads with Song for Arbonne (£4.99) by Guy Gavriel Kay, high fantasy from a writer who is a cut above the pack.
November
A very strong month, with new paperback megasellers from Stephen King,Dolores Claiborne (NEL £4.99), and Terry Pratchett,Lords and Ladies (Corgi, £4.99).
Transworld also has yet another Anne McCaffrey,Crystal Line (£4.99), in A format.
Stephen Donaldson adds to his Gap series with number four,Chaos and Order (HarperCollins, £14.99), in hardcover and the third,A Dark and Hungry God Arises (£5.99), in paperback.
This series started slowly, but it is now doing very well; it would be a mistake to underestimate the potential of either of these titles.
Stephen Baxter is an emerging British author of good hard sf, and Timelike Infinity (HarperCollins, £4.99) should help confirm his status.
This is another addition to Mars literature from Greg Bear with Moving Mars (Legend, £8.99, and hb).
Bear is one of the most accomplished writers of sf around and an author who commands a wide audience, beyond the bounds of the genre.
Bear's The Venging (£4.99) is out at the same time in A format.
Orbit publishes Alan Dean Foster's Son of Spellsinger (£4.99), and although the previous book in this series came out some time ago fans have long memories and this will sell well.
December
As usual, this is a quiet month.
But there are two big titles, Arthur C Clarke's Garden of Rama (Orbit, £5.99) and Dean Koontz's Dragon Tears (Headline, £5.99).
Legend finishes the year laughing, it hopes, with a second Andrew Harman,The Frogs of War (£4.99)— it obviously means business with this guy.
A lot of titles for this year you may think, but I've only scratched the surface.
As always there is much more going on than its seems, and some bright new star of the genre is likely to emerge out of nowhere.
Harbourside cafes, palm trees, arrival by Simplon Orient Express, ‘30s evenings with casinos and Palm Court Orchestras, and mouth watering seafood — travel writer Carol Wright describes some of the more delicious options open to delegates to the Booksellers Association Annual Conference in Torquay
Palmy days on the Riviera
TORQUAY, PAIGNTON AND Brixham together promote themselves as the ‘English Riviera’: they offer 22 miles of coastline with 18 beaches.
Harbourside cafes and palm trees add to a hot house image.
You can even buy a souvenir local palm tree from the Torbay Palm Farm at  in Torquay.
The palmy days of the 1930s are treasured, with centrally set statue and a memorial room in Torre Abbey to Torquay's most famous daughter, Agatha Christie.
One can arrive in Torquay on chartered Venice Simplon Orient Express and have theme 1930s evenings with casinos and Palm Court Orchestras all arrangeable through the English Riviera Convention Bureau, The Tourist Centre, Vaughan Parade, Torquay (), which provides mini-guides and other information.
Though one can hide from less than Rivieraesque weather in the 1989 Fleet Walk Centre, which offers ‘leisure shopping’, more characteristic is Torre, the old quarter with its antique shops.
At the corner of Fore Street and St Marychurch is a Bygones replica of a Victorian street, ‘now with authentic smells’, in a former cinema, open every day and complete with militaria and railway collections, coffee and souvenir shops.
Grandest among the hotels is the Imperial, Parkhill Road (), a stately secluded clifftop spot, like a moored cruise ship embalmed in an atmosphere recalling days when Edward VII came ashore from the Royal Yacht.
The restaurant has been renovated and renamed the Regatta.
Its most expensive à la carte items are Beluga caviar with a glass of Russian vodka at £75 and Torbay lobster at £45.
But there are reasonable table d'hote menus for lunch and dinner at £16 and £27 respectively, with the accent on British dishes and lush desserts, like brandied bread and butter pudding with vanilla sauce.
Things to look for are fish and seafood fresh from the Brixham fleet, traditional Devon farmhouse style dishes, and value for money wine bars and bistros.
At the Osborne Hotel, Meadfoot Beach (), Raffles is a bar-brasserie with an eclectic menu embracing oriental — particularly the imaginative bar bites — with filled baked potatoes, steaks, curry and desserts under the title Maugham's Memories of Old England and including treacle sponge and bread and butter pudding.
Raffles is open for coffee, tea and pastries; meat-free dishes are available.
Also at the Osborne is the Langtry, more formal for dinner with monthly set price à la carte menu that could start with deep fried Brixham crab pancake flavoured with Bramley apples and lemon, or for main course one of Chef Colin Liddy's noted dishes — Cornish hake poached with deep fried leeks and saffron and vermouth sauce.
Along with the Riviera '30s, nostalgia goes steam train travel.
The Dart Valley Railway and Buckfastleigh Steam Centre attract sightseeing transport buffs, but dining on the move is available for groups on the steam drawn Riviera Belle, which runs from Paignton to Dartmouth.
The Pullman style restored carriages include the ‘Duchess of York’, built in 1931 and christened by the Queen Mother.
Menus are sturdily British, and cost around £25 to £30 for a three course dinner.
Details from Paignton and Dartmouth Steam Railway ().
A converted Dutch barge, the Nova Inn is a fittingly maritime place to stay in one of its 12 cabins, or to eat out at ().
It is moored on the River Dart, and bookings can be made through the office at  ().
English food is served for up to 40 people; a three course dinner costs about £15.
The Inn on the Green, The Seafront, Paignton () is open till midnight every night; everything is freshly cooked, and there's a choice of seating areas with or without live music.
A three course dinner is £8 to £12.
The Mulberry Room,() is open from 10.30 a.m. till 5 p.m. and from 7.30 p.m. till 9.30 p.m., with 25 to 30 places and serving an English/Continental   menu in an informal Victorian setting.
Lunch is around £9, dinner £16.50.
The fish for which Brixham is famed is served at The Lobster Pot, a 300 year old building at 13A The Quay (), open till midnight.
Lobster, fish and charcoal grilled steaks are the specialities, with live entertainment on offer most evenings.
Burridges, at  (), overlooking the harbour, is open only till 9.30p.m.
The accent is again on fish, including seafood platters of king prawns, crab and whitebait.
The ghosts of retired colonels haunt some of Torquay's menus.
Memories,(), has 30 covers for dinner and Sunday lunch.
The menu mixes hearty steaks with chef's sauces, fish, a few Continental classics like boeuf bourguignon and chicken kiev, with a page of curries including vegetarian ones made with Quorn.
Curry prices average £4.30, plus rice at £1.30.
Draught lager and bitter are available accompaniments.
Hot food fans can try Jingle's, at 34 Torwood Street (), an informal restaurant with music of the '60s and '70s backing the Tex Mex spicy dishes.
A three course dinner is £12 to £15.
Riviera fare
Remy's, at 3 Croft Road (), offers a French Riviera menu.
A small, 36-cover restaurant featured in the food guides, it charges £14.85 for a three course dinner cooked by chef/proprietor Remy Bopp.
Moules, snails, or rillettes may be starters, tarte au citron and Grand Marnier crepes are available after fresh fish, meat dishes and vegetarian dish of the day.
The Vaults, at  (), in the vaults of an old chapel, has a 60-plus strong wine list.
A three course dinner costs £16 to £20.
Flynn's Bistro, Parkhill Road (, evenings only, not Mondays, booking recommended), is also French, and features local seafood on a simple, straightforward menu.
Grilled sardines, garlic mushrooms and snails can start the meal, followed by a choice of half a dozen entrées plus blackboard ideas and choices of grilled steaks.
The Village Brasserie,() has ample free parking and a frequently changing French provincial/English menu selection.
A three course dinner is from £10, with a varied choice from chargrilled sausages with cider, apple and grape sauce to stir-fried chicken, and a blackboard selection of the day's fresh fish.
Italian restaurants
There are plenty of Italian restaurants, Quo Vadis,() is a small, 25-cover restaurant in a ‘Roman stucco’ house.
Parking is easy but booking essential.
The owner and his wife are chef/hostess, and menus from £12.50 for three courses include funghi Quo Vadis, diced garlic salami and mushrooms in a cream sauce, a selection of veal, beef, chicken and fish dishes, and lobster thermidor is available with advance notice.
Restaurant Costa Fiorita,(, closed Mondays), has a daily seafood special, with pasta and rice dishes available as starters or main courses.
Zorba's,(), is of course Greek, indeed very much so with live  Greek music, dancing, plate smashing —‘audience participation a must’.
Seating is split level, and the menu features mezes fro two at £19.50 and fish from red mullet and swordfish to fresh squid and whitebait.
Zorba's also offers a vegetarian selection.
Portuguese cooking, a rarity, is found at the Backstage Bistro,(), where wall are decorated with memorabilia from early cinema days.
The chef/proprietor is Portuguese, and special Portuguese evenings are held with five course meals and live music all costing around £13.
The menu includes traditional dishes of grilled sardines, Portuguese cod, grilled swordfish, seafood with piri piri sauce and a wide selection of plain grilled meats, burgers, mixed grills, and a vegetarian selection.
While there are a lot of Chinese restaurants, the Michelin guide's choice is Yum Sing,(), serving Cantonese, Pekinese and vegetarian recipes.
There is a private car park, a two section restaurant with alcove seating and private party room, and plentiful choices of set dinners from around £23, though a three course à la carte choice will be around £15.
Vegetarian pancakes
The vegetarian venue is the creperie Cripes,(, open till 11.30 p.m.), serving dinner at around £10 a head.
Galettes , Brittany's savoury buckwheat pancakes, are served with different fillings, salad and relishes with dessert crepes, followed by organic ice creams and all washed down with ciders, soft drinks or wines.
For those with time to drive outside Torquay, there is the gourmet mecca of Shaun Hill's Michelin starred food at Gidleigh Park, Chagford (), on the edge of Dartmoor.
It has a 400-plus wine list and 250 bin-ends, and an extensive list of ports and malt whiskies.
The Carved Angel,, Dartmouth (), has views and excellent food by Joyce Molyneux.
It was the winner of the Sunday Telegraph Sunday Lunch of the Year competition in December, and the £30 a head charge includes mineral water, olives, pastry nibbles, bread, coffee, petit fours, and service.
Further afield
Towards Plymouth, down deep hedge-lined lanes, is a soothing prelude to lunch at Thurlestone Hotel, Thurlestone near Kingsbridge (), where in the verandah style Margaret Amelia restaurant overlooking the cliff-top golf course liberal use is made of Devon's produce, from creams to meats and salmon from the Avon, oysters from along the coast and crab from Salcombe.
A five course dinner menu as £23 and includes vegetarian choices.
The village pub attached to the hotel has bar lunches of salmon  pâté on wholemeal toast.
A cliff path walk affords views of Burgh Island, to which Agatha Christie escaped to write in a cliff top gazebo —Evil Under the Sun was set on this 26 acre private island.
The Burgh Island Hotel () is an art deco shrine with a dozen suites.
As well as good local fare from the restaurant after cocktails in the 1930s Palm Court glass domed lounge, there is the 14th century Pilchard Inn pub serving light lunches.
BOOK NEWS
In Buffy's espadrilles
It is hard to imagine the glamorous Deborah Moggach impersonating a decrepit roué, but that is what she says she did while writing The Ex-Wives (£14.99), coming from Heinemann on 29th April.
‘I became Russell [her hero]in a way.
I felt like a portly 60 year old man with a beard, and that I was shuffling down to the shops in my espadrilles like he does, with his horrible, ratty little dog.’
Russell Buffery (‘Buffy’) is an invalided veteran of three marriages and numerous dalliances, and an absent father.
An actor whose best roles are behind him, he scrapes a living from voice-overs, sometimes for advertisements and sometimes, more desperately, for tapes for dodgy language schools.
In his considerable spare time, he visits the pub, makes fruitless trips to the bookmaker, and shops for medications for his real and imagined ailments.
One day at the chemist, Russell meets the naive and gauche Celeste; with a shock like a recognition, he falls in love with her.
She appears to reciprocate.
But, unknown to him, she is assiduously exploring his past life, tracking down his ex-wives, children and step-children.
Her motive becomes apparent only at the end of the novel, when all the characters are brought together for Christmas in a snowbound Kentish cottage.
NW1 entanglements
‘What I was trying to do was reflect our extraordinary lives now, when so many people have several marriages.
I've lived in streets — needless to say, in NW1 — where I and my husband were the only people who were married with children from the same person — and then we got divorced.
It gets so terribly complicated: I thought that it would make a very good board game.
‘I read a very good piece by Candida Crewe, in which she said that she felt her life had been made richer by having had step-parents.
I wanted to put that in, rather than going on about the deprivation and the tragedy of divorce and broken families.’
Moggach's last three books have been the social dramas Stolen and To Have and To Hold (adapted from her own television scripts), and the thriller The Stand-In .
The Ex-Wives returns to the comic vein of some of her earlier writing: ‘I wanted to entertain myself, I lay on the floor on my stomach, scribbling away and laughing — well, if I can't laugh at my own jokes, who else can?’
Her enjoyment is apparent in the incidentals to the novel as well as in the main narrative.
The book is brimming with little aperçus: why, if dogs eat only meat, do their breaths smell of fish?; why, when the credits roll at the end of a film, are more songs listed than one can remember having heard?
Moggach's conversation is similarly fertile, illustrating her points often with several metaphors.
‘When I'm writing, everything that's happening in my normal life becomes useful for the book.
I'm like a great vacuum cleaner hoovering up everything as I go along, or like a catfish sucking up all the rubbish in an aquarium.
‘I don't keep a notebook, but I write things on the back of my chequebook or on my wrist — like ‘fishy breath’.’
A lot of these quirky observations are made by Buffy, whose ex-wives often find themselves imagining what he would say about events.
But Buffy is more entertaining to think about from a distance, or to read about, than to marry.
‘He's impossible to live with but delightful to know,’ Moggach says.
‘But I think practically everybody's impossible to live with: I certainly couldn't live with anybody any more.’
Buffy, rather than the issue of ex-wives and the children of broken marriages, was the starting point for the book.
‘V S Pritchett wrote a wonderful thing which I've got pinned up above my desk: that you don't invent a plot, you invent a character, and then the character leads you off and that becomes the plot.
I invented him, Buffy, and when I'd got him, the book started working.
It all starts cooking, the motor starts up; and that's a wonderful moment, when you turn the ignition and it bursts into life.
‘He was an amalgam at the beginning, but then he became himself and I forgot who he was an amalgam of.
I pinpointed where he lived: this dusty old mansion block of flats on the Edgware Road, where a lot of ex-husbands fetch up, where the lifts don't work, and where there are Anita Brookner women behind lace curtains.
Making them real
‘I used to go there, and sit in the coffee shop opposite, or in the pub; and I used to picture him coming in.
It's as if he still lives there, so when I go past I look up at the window I'd put him in.
‘It's happened with one or two other books of mine.
It happened with Porky , which was a novel about incest, in which the girl lived in a  subsiding smallholding near Heathrow Airport — which is actually where Penguin Books is.
When I go past, I wonder what has been happening to her in the intervening years, and that's very odd.’
By contrast, when she wrote the novel versions of Stolen and To Have and To Hold (‘ghastly title — it was a television title’), her characters had already been embodied, by other people.
‘The characters when I'd started out were in my head, but by then they'd become real actors.
So Brian Protheroe or Amanda Redman or Art Malik became my ghost writers.’
Adaptations
She has also worked the other way round, turning The Stand-In into a screenplay; a film directed by Mike Nichols and starring Anjelica Huston has been talked about — though talk, in Hollywood is not a very reliable omen.
And she has adapted other people's work: her dramatisation of Anne Fine's Goggle-Eyes is currently showing on BBC2.
(The Ex-Wives will be serialised on ‘Woman's Hour’ at publication).
And she is a journalist, as is Buffy's third wife Penny.
‘She's not really like me, because I'm not a power shouldery person,’ Moggach makes plain.
‘But she's very like a lot of women I know, who have scarves knotted on their shoulders, and who know the difference between collagen and silicone, and who kiss Jasper Conran at parties.’
Scriptwriting and journalism, though, are not as absorbing for her as her novels.
‘I get very abstracted when a novel is on the go.
I'm very bright and breezy, but sort of glassy looking.
People can tell: I'm really longing for them to leave so I can get on with it.’
She says she gets ‘horrible’ if she does not work every day.
Perhaps this addiction comes from having writing in her blood: her father is the author and historian Richard Hough, and her mother is children's author and illustrator Charlotte Hough.
‘Because I come from a booky family, in some ways I've taken writing for granted — it's like coming from a family of butchers and going into the meat trade.
I can't imagine life outside it.
What I do worry about is that one day, somebody's going to find me out.
Because, if it's going well, it's a wonderful way to live.
PEN awards
PEN has announced its 1993 literary prizes.
The J R Ackerley Prize for autobiography, worth £2,000, has been won by Barry Humphries for his memoirs More, Please (Viking, £16.99).
George Steiner received £500 and a silver pen as the winner of The Macmillan Silver Pen Award for Fiction for Proofs and Three Parables (Faber, £5.99).
Former Beirut hostage Brian Keenan was awarded the Time-Life Silver Pen Award for Non-Fiction (£1,000 and a silver pen) for An Evil Cradling (Hutchinson/Vintage, April £6.99).
And Sir Victor (VS) Pritchett, who will celebrate his 93rd birthday this year, was presented with the ST Dupont Golden Pen Award for Long Service to Literature.
FIRST REPORT
Rotten memories
Debbie Beckerman at Transworld has bought from agent Jane Judd the memoirs of jockey Lester Piggott , to be written with his daughter, journalist and television presenter Tracy Piggott, as the third title of a three-book deal for Partridge Press.
The other two acquisitions, for autumn 1994 and autumn 1995, will be Classic Lester 1 and Classic Lester 2 by Michael Tregaron, and will cover Piggott's record-breaking wins in England and abroad.
The memoirs will be out in 1966.
Caroline Upcher at Sinclair-Stevenson has sold paperback rights in Penny Perrick ‘s first novel Malina to Bantam for £161,000; the underbidder was S-S’ sister imprint Mandarin.
The Irish saga will be out in hardback in May.
Perrick's agent is Caradoc King at A P Watt.
Humphrey Price at Hodder has bought, from St Martin's Press in the US, UK and Commonwealth rights in the autobiography of former Sex Pistol John Lydon (Rotten, as was).
Hodder secured the floor a year ago, but the auction was not held until the manuscript arrived.
Rotten: No Irish.
No Blacks.
No Dogs covers the early history of the Sex Pistols, and their abortive US tour, as well as Lydon's childhood in the North London Irish community, where he encountered the kind of prejudice expressed in his title.
Hodder paid a high five-figure sum; publication will be at the end of the year.
Transworld has bought the autobiography of Status Quo , written with Roger Kasper, for publication by Bantam Press in November.
Just For the Record will tie in with a nationwide tour of the same name, and will be promoted (including signing sessions) by band members Francis Rossi and Rick Parfitt.
The title has an added significance: Status Quo is in The Guinness Book of Records for having the greatest number of hit singles — 45 in band's long career.
The book was bought through Handle Group of Companies, the group's manager.
On successive days, Tom Rosenthal at Deutsch signed up a father son, commissioning farceur Brian Rix (Lord Rix) to write a history of his trade, currently entitled Life in the Farce Lane , and buying Jonathan Rix ‘s first novel Some Hope , to be published in the autumn.
Some Hope will be Deutsch's first ever original paperback novel, because, says Rosenthal, ‘this is a book for, by and about the young in a wonderfully iconoclastic and contemporary style’.
Deutsch has also made arrangements with King's College Cambridge and the Society of Authors, acting on behalf of the estate of E M Forster , to renew and continue publication of the Abinger Edition of E M Forster, which will include not only some of the earlier works, but also the first publication of material contained in the King's College Forster archives.
Reed has signed up for a further period of seven years to publish the back list of John Steinbeck , after submitting a lavish brochure of marketing plans to the estate.
Reed has published Steinbeck for the past three years, having taken over his novels and short stories from Pan.
Tom Sebastian , formerly with Transworld, has moved to Orion in a two-book deal which includes the political thriller (‘also a compelling love story’)Special Relations , which will be a lead next January.
Bill Massey, editorial director of Orion Paperbacks, says, ‘It shows Tim Sebastian significantly extending his range beyond the espionage genre.’
(Agent Anne McDermid at Curtis Brown.)
Chatto and Vintage have bought a new book by Naomi Wolf , author of The Beauty Myth .
Jonathan Burnham describes Power Feminism as ‘a manifesto for a new generation of women, offering a feminism based on powerful roles for women rather than seeing them as victims’.
It will be published by Random House in the US, and will be out here in September.
Buying world rights with Knopf in the US, Burnham has also commissioned a biography of Albert Camus by Booker Prize judge Olivier Todd , who has the collaboration of the family and access to the archives of Camus' publisher, Gallimard.
Publication will be in 1995.
After negotiations between Pavilion's editorial director Trevor Dolby and Stewart Steven, editor of the Evening Standard , Pavilion has bought the Evening Standard Guide to London Restaurants 1994 , by Fay Maschler , for ‘a substantial five-figure sum’.
In it, Maschler reviews and grades over 300 restaurants; the publisher expects it to be ‘trusted as a bench mark of culinary excellence’.
Sara Fisher at A M Heath has done two deals with HarperCollins.
To Jonathan Warner she has sold UK and Commonwealth rights in a first novel,Spidertown , by Puerto Rican Abraham Rodriguez , for spring 1994, and to Michael Fishwick she has sold Bart Kosko ‘s Fuzzy Thinking , the textbook for the new concept of fuzzy logic — that sees the world not as black and white, or, in computer terms, 0 and 1, but having grey areas about which ‘intelligent products’(including camcorders and washing machines) have to make ‘judgements’.
The concept is, it proponents believe, crucial to the development of artificial intelligence.
The shoutline for the book, due in spring 1994, is ‘The Future Is Fuzzy’(which prompts Sara Fisher to comment ‘so are my past and my present’).
Nicolette Jones 
In brief Paper Tiger is spending some £10,000 on a promotion for its graphic and fantasy art list in April.
Display material, featuring the dragon from Ciruelo's The Book of the Dragon , includes a 3D showcard, posters, wobblers, bookmarks, badges and stickers, and the first of a series of advertisements will appear in Interzone magazine.
While some publishers have attempted to counter the decline in print runs for first time publications by pushing titles into paperback others have been looking for ways to revitalise their hardback sales.
Reducing prices to under £10 has been one method.
Now Heinemann is promoting with format as well as price with its new series of Crown Octavo hardbacks.
Larger formats have become fashionable in recent years; Heinemann's attractively produced titles, like Bloomsbury's Classics, demonstrate that smaller hardbacks can be made to look very appealing.
The series (each title is £9.99) begins on 29th April with Susan Minot's Whartonesque Folly , to promote which the author, highly praised on US publication, is visiting the UK.
On 27th May there is A River Sutra , the new novel by Gita Mehta, who will also visit for publication; as will Amanda Filipacchi, whose first novel Nude Men is described as ‘an erotic tour de force’.
Then there is the great R K Narayan's The Grandmother's Tale , a collection of three novellas.
The 1993 Geoffrey Faber Memorial Prize has been won by Will Self for his collection of short stories The Quantity Theory of Insanity (Bloomsbury, £5.99).
The £1,000 prize is awarded annually and is given in alternate years for a volume of verse and for a volume of prose fiction.
The £1,000 Arthur C Clarke Award for a work of science fiction published in the UK has been won by Body of Glass (Michael Joseph, £14.99, Penguin, 6th May, £5.99) by Marge Piercy.
The £1,000 Guardian Children's Fiction Award has been won by William Mayne for Low Tide (Cape, £8.99, Red Fox, 20th May, £2.99).
Children's author Margaret Mahy has been awarded the Order of New Zealand, an honour limited to 20 living New Zealanders at any time.
Simon Armitage is the 1993 Sunday Times Young Writer of the Year , for which he receives £5,000.
He is the author of two collections of poetry,Xanadu (Bloodaxe, £5.95) and Kid (Faber, £4.99).
He was given the award on Monday at the Sunday Times Literary Banquet.
One of the winners at the BAFTA awards last week was Neil Buchanan's series ‘Art Attack’, which begins a new run in May.
A tie-in book, by Neil Buchanan and Tim Edmunds, is published by Hodder (£3.99); their Another Art Attack will come in September.
PICK OF THE PROMOTIONS
Pick of June promotions
Boxtree
Don Shay and Jody Duncan The Making of Jurassic Park June, £9.99 Promotional spend:£10,000 First printing:65,000 P.o.s. 24-copy dumpbin; colour poster PR:competitions in film magazines and national press; limited number of preview tickets available to trade.
Chatto & Windus
John Fuller The Worm and the Star 3rd June, £9.99 pb original P.o.s.:showcards Author tour:readings and signings
Adam Lively Sign the Body Electric 10th June, £15,99 P.o.s.:showcards Author tour:readings and signings; a Best of Young British author
Edmund White Genet 10th June P.o.s.:Poster and show cards
Glyn Maxwell Gnyss the Magnificent: Three Verse Plays 3rd June, £8.99 P.o.s.:showcards 
Above from left Penguin saves the penguin: Barbara Taylor Bradford from HarperCollins; Mars-Jones from Faber; Adam Lively from Chatto.
Faber
Adam Mars-Jones The Waters of Thirst 28th June, £14.99 P.o.s.:full-colour posters, showcards available Author tour:major cities Bookshop rating:interview in Waterstones' Summer Catalogue 
Kinky Friedman More Kinky Friedman 14th June, £14,99 The Kinky Friedman Crime Club 14th June, £5.99 P.o.s.:dumpbin, full colour jacket posters Author tour:touring UK in a Cadillac, singing pastiche Country & Western songs, and signings; CD and tape giveaways of new album, ‘Old Testaments and New Revelations’
HarperCollins
Barbara Taylor Bradford Angel 1st June, £14.99 P.o.s.:illuminated display bins, posters, box books, author poster; complete repackage of backlist paperbacks; summer reading catalogues Author tour:bookshop signings Advertising:national press and women's magazines Media coverage:features in press, TV and radio; local media to tie in with author tour
The Kenneth Williams Diaries ed Russell Davies 24th June, £20.00 P.o.s.:posters Author tour:literary festivals, interviews, features — press, TV and radio
Dr Steve Jones The Language of the Genes 7th June, £16.99 P.o.s.:poster, summer catalogues P.R:national press, radio and TV interviews, bookshop talks, lecture at Natural History Museum
Patrick O'Brian The Wine-Dark Sea 24th June, £14.99 P.o.s.:mixed dumpbin with paperback Clarissa Oakes , poster, O'Brian newsletter Advertising:full-page ad in Times magazine Media coverage:feature profiles in Times ,Independent 
Isabel Allende The Infinite Plan 24th June, £14.99 P.O.s.:full-colour poster, bin headers, postcards Author tour:Birmingham, Manchester, Leeds Media coverage:national newspapers including Daily Mail ; interviews Radio 4's Woman's Hour and Desert Island Discs, BBC World Service, Classic FM, local media in London
Peter Straub The Throat 24th June, £15.99 P.o.s.:full colour poster, repackaged backlist
Eric Lustbader The Kaisho 7th June, £14.99 P.o.s.:dumpbins, full colour poster Advertising:national and men's magazine advertising
HarperCollins Children's
Lynne Reid Banks The Mystery of the Cupboard 11th June, hb £8.99, pb £3.50 The Adventures of King Midas 11th June, hb £7.99, pb 2.99 The Magic Hare 11th June, £2.99 P.o.s.:colour 39-copy dumpbin containing a mix of new and back list titles; Indian style banner; golden key brooch and tie pin for booksellers; author poster Author tour:author appearance at the School Library Association a.g.m., Bristol, in May; speaker at Georges Bookshop, Bristol; literary lunch in Chichester; events in Worcester, London, Manchester, Bath, Chorley, Cambridge and Edinburgh Book Festival; guest speaker at the Royal Over-Seas League's Literary Lecture, London, in November PR:local media throughout author tour; feature by author in Books for Keeps ,The Mystery of the Cupboard reviewed on Radio 4's Treasure Islands in June
Headline
Richard Laymon Alarums 3rd June, £15.99 hb, £8.99 pb  P.o.s.:customised display boards, dumpbin available, poster, airport window displays Advertising:nationwide radio
Hodder & Stoughton
James R Mellow Hemingway: A Life Without Consequences 17th June, £25 First printing:3,000 P.o.s.:showcards
Wu Ningkun A Single Tear 3rd June, £18.99 First printing:6,000 Bookshop rating:summer catalogues Author tour:bookshop talks and evening events
Rebecca Ridgway Something Amazing 17th June, £16.99 First printing:7,000 P.o.s.:showcards Author tour:interviews and talks in Manchester, Birmingham and London
Lois Battle Storyville 3rd June, £15.99 P.o.s.:showcards; extract on audio tape Advertising:national including Daily Mail and Sunday Times Books supplement
Terence Strong Stalking Horse 17th June, £15.99 Advertising:national including Daily Telegraph and Daily Express Author tour:media interviews throughout UK Media coverage:Soldier ,Pegasus ,Globe & Laurel magazines
Belva Plain Whispers 17th June, £15.99 P.o.s.:showcards Advertising:national including Woman's Journal ,Daily Mail Femail section Media coverage:in women's magazines
Little, Brown
Yachting journalists Barry Pickthall and Bob Fisher Ocean Conquest 24th June, £20 First printing:12,000 PR:official tie-in for the Whitbread Around the World Race, promoted jointly by Little, Brown and Whitbread; launch at Southampton Yacht Club with TV coverage; competitions in yachting and boating press for copies of the book and a Whitbread product Serialisation:national press
The London Dungeon Book of Crime and Punishment 10th June, £10.99 First printing:10,000 Promotion:end page voucher entitling two people to enter London Dungeon for the price of one; radio competition with prizes of 1,000 London Dungeon tickets
Macmillan
Barbara Castle Fighting All the Way 11th June, £20.00 Media coverage:Sunday Times magazine,You magazine,Independent on Sunday Author tour:literary events and signings Harrogate, Chichester, London, Blackburn, Manchester, Edinburgh, Cambridge, Oxford
OUP
James Joyce Ulysses 17th June, £9.99 Promotional spend:£10,000 P.o.s.:dumpbins and poster Author tour:editor Jeri Johnson to visit Ireland for interviews
Penguin
‘Save the Penguin’ stock promotion June P.o.s.:Dumpbins, giant Penguin showcards; Penguin bookmarks free to bookshop customers Advertising:Independent ,Sunday Times ,Guardian Week End,Time Out ; taxi cabs PR:booksellers' free draw, consumer competitions to win holidays in Sea World, US; plus cuddly toys, T-shirts, mugs
Secker
Roddy Doyle Paddy Clare Ha Ha Ha 24th June, £12.99 P.o.s.:18-copy dumpbin with header, A2 poster, T-shirts Advertising:London Underground escalator panels; regional radio advertising on Clyde, Metro, Piccadilly, Midland West; national press
Simon & Schuster Children's Books
Check-o-Matic children's quiz 8th June Starter Pack (Check-o-Matic box and book), £9.99 Mathematics (8–10 year olds), £2.99 English (8–10), £2.99 Science (8–10), £2.99 Trivia (8–10), £2.99 Mathematics (10–12), £2.99 English (10–12), £2.99 Science (10–12), £2.99 Trivia (10–12), £2.99 P.o.s.:counterpack holding 80 books and 16 starter packs with free stickers; children's lapel stickers; leaflet and instore dispenser Media coverage:media campaign including Young Telegraph ,Early Times ,Junior Education ,Take a Break ,Woman's Realm ,Bella ,My Weekly , GMTV, Channel 4's Early Bird, The Children's Channel, local media in London, Bristol, Wilts, Oxford, Wales, Scotland, Ulster, Leics, Herefordshire, Somerset
Smith Gryphon
Lady Colin Campbell The Royal Marriages: Private Lives of The Queen and Her Children 21st June, £15.99 P.o.s.:poster and showcards PR:TV, radio and press interviews around country Serialisation:national newspaper 
Below from left Hemingway from Hodder; Whitbread tie-in from Little, Brown; Belva Plain from Hodder; Allende from Harper-Collins
CRITICS CROWNER
Life in the old dog yet
It is one of the paradoxes of life that the genres that are the most condemned are the ones that get the most review space.
At the moment people are being indignant about literary biographies and the nasty things they are saying about their subjects.
There was D J Taylor fulminating away in the Sunday Times : If there is any consolation to be derived from this tide of literary lives written with questionable aims and based on questionable motives, it is that even the very best biography has no longevity.
Who is there now who reads Morley's life of Gladstone or A C Benson's life of his father, the archbishop?’
What about Boswell then?
Neurosis of an age
Mr Taylor added: ‘Each age necessarily reinterprets the figures of the past according to their own preoccupations or neuroses — hence Glendinning's interesting speculations about Trollope's sex life — and superannuation is inevitable.
Meanwhile we should stop pretending that we live in a golden age of literary biography, an art form that all too frequently seems to be founded not so much on spite, as on a fundamental lack of interest in its subject.’
I am not sure that the problem lies in ‘lack of interest’.
I would have thought that there was too much interest: an interest in making money; an interest in making a sensation; and, very often, a deep interest in the subject and his or her work.
What about Leon Edel and James Joyce?
What about Leslie Marchant and Byron?
What about Hilary Spurling and I Compton-Burnett?
Surely Mr Taylor is talking through his hat by implying that the part that matters in Victoria Glendinning's life of Trollope is her speculation about Trollope's sex life — however interesting.
A few rotten apples, like Michael Coren's biography of H G Wells and Hugh David's speculations about Stephen Spender, should not, surely, discourage the writing, and reading, of literary biographies.
OK, there may be too many biographies being written, but that is a matter for author and publisher.
Sorry, this is a very long way of getting around to the first crop of reviews of Philip Larkin: A Writer's Life by Andrew Motion (Faber).
Strangely, this is not one of the books mentioned by Mr Taylor, perhaps because the Sunday Times will be giving a page or so to it next week.
We shall see.
My complaint about reviews so far is that everyone is reviewing the man Larkin and not the biography of him.
Mr Motion should be pleased enough by the compliments paid to his work, but most of these appear in the last paragraph or so as a sort of afterthought when the reviewer has finished giving his own version of the poet.
Anthony Burgess, writing about the biography in the Literary Review , was at his most Burgessish, beginning: ‘That title is misleading, as is the identical declaration on the poet's tombstone.
Larkin wrote, and wrote well, but he did not write for a living.
Those of his generation (to my shock I wake to the realisation of senior membership) who call themselves writers practise all the genres and will write anything for money — even, like Auden, for a brace of cheap cigars.’
Mr Burgess added a little later: ‘Larkin lived on a librarian's salary; poems, including poetry prizes, raised him above the level of bare subsistence.
There is the popular image of his date-stamping tripe, bicycle clips still on while dreaming of poetry.
This will not quite do.’
Well, no it won't, but one wonders where, outside of Mr Burgess' imagination, such an image exists.
An awful lot of writers  have had other means of earning a living, but still, surely, have the right to have ‘writer’ carved on their tombstones.
It was a long time before Mr Burgess got around to the book.
Even then, such assessment as there was was lost in Burgessian rhetoric: ‘Mr Motion does all he can to chronicle those years and years of world without event, in which the interesting things happened in trousers, in pubs, and on paper…
We are getting to know Larkin: we have more poems than we thought possible, all those letters, now this.
We primarily have the poems, and primarily among those The Whitsun Weddings , whose very title (volume and chief poem therein) evokes life and beatitude.
This drunken abusive wanker was the real thing, and this is a real biography.’
Quietly provocative
Peter Conrad, writing in the Observer , started with the same query as Mr Burgess about the subtitle, but took a very different view: ‘Andrew Motion's superb biography of Philip Larkin has a quietly provocative subtitle —‘A Writer's Life’.
Socially reclusive, emotionally recessive — it might be asked whether Larkin had any life at all; the student radicals at Hull who daubed denunciations of him in the university lavatories presumably thought that he should get one.’
Then somehow, Mr Motion got lost until the very end: ‘Motion — affectionate but undeceived about the man's frailties, a diligent researcher and a deft reader of poetry — has written an equally exemplary life of him.’
Weren't all those dashes odd?
John Mortimer (Mail on Sunday ) certainly took his time getting to the book, and when he got there he was cliché-ridden enough and bland enough even to stand out from that bland and cliché-ridden paper: ‘This is an important book which makes us face the fact that genius doesn't go with happiness, or blandly acceptable opinions.
It may, as with Larkin and Evelyn Waugh, go with views that started as a joke which the author ends by taking seriously.
Good poetry has nothing to do with political correctness.
‘If a book like this has to be written, and in the end I think that it does, it couldn't be better done.
Does it add to our enjoyment of the poetry?
Perhaps not, but it adds a little to our knowledge of the contradictions and complexities of an artist's life.’
Rumblings and trumpetings
David Sexton (Sunday Telegraph ) was on good form.
‘Has ever a literary life been preceded by such rumblings and trumpetings?’ he asked.
Later, he complained: ‘The whole row is based on a false assumption: that as readers we need to be protected from the disappointing facts about the lives of writers, if we are to continue to admire their work.
We should be more robust.
So the man is not so great as his art?
What did you expect?’
But Mr Sexton took a different view of Mr Motion's intentions from the others: ‘His biography is clear, detailed and illuminating.
It should be said straight away that he has done the job thoroughly.
It certainly won't need to be done again.
Yet although Motion may have started to do honour to Larkin's achievement, what his book predominantly conveys is distaste for the man.
‘His best attempt at negotiating the distance between admiration of the poetry and dislike for the individual who created it is this metaphor, in his introduction: ‘When he found his authentic voice in the late 1940s, the beautiful flowers of his poetry were already growing on long stalks out of pretty dismal ground’— a botanical conceit designed to leave Larkin soiled, but the poetry ready for picking.
The author is dirt — thanks.’
How about this?
David Profumo wrote in the Daily Telegraph : ‘Heresy as it is in literary circles, I have to say I have never been taken with the work of the late Angela Carter.
American Ghosts and Old World Wonders [Chatto]is a collection of pieces she was writing when she died last year, but, with the exception of the opening story, I doubt this volume will secure her many new converts.’
Elspeth Barker (Independent on Sunday ) did not agree: ‘Those who know Angela Carter's work will need no encouragement to read these stories (she is the only late 20th-century writer I know who can use an exclamation mark and get away with it); for others they offer a joyous introduction.’
Well, well!
And I mean that exclamation mark.
So there.
Quentin Oates 
UNAUTHORISED RETURNS
With intent to titillate
You can always rely on the Modern Review to ask the really Big Questions, such as Who Killed British Fiction?
You look in vain for answers, mind you, unless you've ever wondered what Will Self would say to you if he were a taxi-driver.
I'd promised myself not even to think about Julie Burchill again, let alone mention her (yeah, right on, Camille, we're rootin' for ya), but I must say that I agree with her that the Best of Young British list would have improved by the addition of an American and someone who'd written a non-fiction book about football.
Anyway, to judge by the magazine's groovy post-modern orange cover, they think it was Penguin who killed British fiction, which seems a little harsh.
I put this point to my old friend and Penguin spokesman Dick Flightless-Boyd.
‘How can anyone say we killed British fiction when we're publishing the complete works of Anthony Trollope in chronological order?’ he complained.
Quite.
And talking of the death of the novel, here is my all-purpose article on the subject, available for a modest fee to any hack who wants to put it out under his own byline:
‘Is the novel dead blah blah blah Anthony Burgess blah blah twenties and thirties blah Greene Waugh Powell blah Booker blah blah Vikram Seth blah 1,400 pages blah blah War and Peace blah blah blah Julie Burchill blah blah Salman Rushdie blah Auberon Waugh son of blah blah cuts in library services blah blah on the other hand blah blah of Malcolm Bradbury blah blah University of East Blah blah Ian McEwan Kazuo Ishiguro Angela Carter blah blah Michael Ignatieff blah Late Show blah John Carey blah Modern Review blah blah paperback originals blah blah Philip Larkin bum…’
Sorry, that last bit has strayed out of my other all-purpose article, the one about whether biographers should expose their subjects' dirty little habits.
It's one thing for the Independent to accuse Chatto of changing Martin and John to Fucking Martin merely to titillate, which of course no publisher would ever dream of doing, quite another for John Glusman of Farrar, Straus to accuse Jonathan Burnham of mistaking the title of the penultimate chapter for the title of the book as a whole.
(I suppose it's lucky that it wasn't called Chapter 9.)
On balance, though, if I were Burnham, I think I'd rather stand accused of Intent to Titillate than Gross Inattention.
Somebody called Paul Hamlyn has started contributing curious caricatures of authoresses to the Sunday Times Books section.
I wonder if he is in any way related to the Paul Hamlyn?
Come to that, I wonder if Ruth Rendell and Jackie Collins are in any way related?
I only ask because Mr Hamlyn has made them look remarkably similar — the main difference is that Ms Rendell has a splendid pair of naked buttocks perched on her head where her hair should be.
So now we know.
I'm grateful to Bel Mooney lookalike Gail Rebuck for exploding that ole working-late-at-the-office routine that publishers are so solemn about.
According to the Observer , she always goes home at 6 p.m.
‘People don't get premiums for staying late into the night, because often they're not doing very much,’ she says ominously.
Acting on a hunch, I stationed myself at 5.59 p.m. the following Monday, and sure enough I was nearly killed by middle managers trying to get out of the office before the 6 p.m. deadline.
‘I'm building my working life around my family,’ I could imagine them explaining to puzzled spouses.
Or perhaps they just went to the pub instead.
I'm going out and I may be some time…
According to PN , one Paul Barnett has left Titan Books ‘to find spiritual happiness in Lapland’.
Think what a different world it would be if Anthony Cheetham had done that instead of starting Century.
‘All boats go up on a rising tide,’ observes Frank Delaney philosophically at the end of one of those come-on-Fred-we-give-you-all-this-advertising-how-about-an-in-depth-profile pieces, in this case on Harper-Collins, that PN does so well.
What he means is that the success of what are elegantly called ‘front-end’ authors like Archer and Clancy pulls the other, presumably ‘rear-end’, authors in its wake.
Of course the trouble with boats on a rising tide is that when the tide goes out a lot of those boats are left high and dry.
William Boot 
BENT'S NOTES
Having fun with lipograms
I am indebted to Mary Harpley at Reed for sending me a complete set of its Sunday Times Wordpower series.
Crisp, Clear Writing in One Hour is of little use to me I fear, but Guide to Wordplay and Word Games I have kept, as it contains a number of gems.
For example, the little known lipogram: ‘A lipogram is a literary composition which omits a certain letter of the alphabet.
As the letter e is the most commonly used letter, its omission in a verse or a novel is considered to be the ultimate linguistic challenge.
‘A fifth-century Greek poet named Tryphiodorus composed an epic poem on the voyages of Ulysses which ran to 24 books.
Each of these books omitted, in turn, all the letters of the alphabet: in the first there were no alphas, in the second no betas, and so on.
‘Lipograms have survived to recent times.
In 1939 Ernest Vincent Wright, a Californian musician, wrote a 50,000-word novel entitled Gadsby , without using the letter e.’
And The Name Book has provided a happy half hour of browsing through first names.
In no particular order: Eddie, deriving from Old English Eadweard meaning ‘rich or happy guardian’; Richard, Anglo-Saxon for ‘hard ruler’; Trevor from Welsh meaning ‘large place’.
And, what's this?
Giles —‘goat’.
I have passed The Secrets of Speed Reading to my colleague and Booker judge Nicholas Clee, who by test 10 should have reached 1,050 words per minute.
He'll need to have.
I'm indebted to Peterborough in the TELEGRAPH for pointing out an interesting fact that appears to illustrate how we differ from the Americans.
In the US, Dorling Kindersley's most successful books in the last financial year were THE ULTIMATE SEX GUIDE and THE MAGIC OF SEX.
The bestseller in the UK was THE RHS GARDENER'S ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PLANTS AND FLOWERS.
And here's an interesting thing I learned from the Independent on Sunday last weekend: as its correspondent David Lister put it, ‘An international competition to find the best of the worst new verse has been wound up because poets on both sides of the Atlantic can no longer distinguish between ‘good bad’ poetry and ‘bad good’poetry.’
Mr Lister reported that the International Society for Humour Studies had decided to put an end to the annual Julia Moor Good Bad Poetry Competition.
This was named after a 19th century frontier poet who, according to the organiser of the competition, Don Nilsen, was a ‘cross between Alfred, Lord Tennyson and Chief Sitting Bull’, and was ‘so outstandingly bad that somehow she was good’.
If published an example of her oeuvre :
And now kind friends, What I have wrote,
I hope you will pass o'er
And not criticise as some have done
Hitherto herebefore.
The male bookseller who scored 25 points (‘unreconstructed slob’) in Michael Joseph's Sex War survey omitted, perhaps wisely, to give his name.
Apart from him, male booksellers, and men married to women booksellers, seem to be newish men — if MJ's survey, conducted in advance of publication of Maeve Haran's Scenes from the Sex War — is an accurate guide.
It's interesting to note, though, that while a good number of men have ticked ‘I must try to be more helpful at home’, not so many women have imagined their partners making such a resolution.
And a question about the BA Conference seems to reveal people at their least supportive.
The women respondents were asked: ‘The company, amazingly, have offered to pay for your partner to go with you to the BA Conference.
He quips: a) It would be nice to meet the people you talk about; b) I hate Cardiff; c) Is there a swimming pool?
‘I hate Cardiff’ was the most popular response.
‘Is there a swimming pool?’ came next.
One woman suggested another comment, d): ‘Can we sneak off to do something interesting?’
I hear that Nicolas Thompson has been doing the rounds of literary agents in an attempt to improve the image of Reed Consumer Books among the agenting community.
Poor Nicholas: can't be a very pleasant job.
Being an unabashed admirer of the Guardian 's Notes & Queries column, I have decided to flatter it in the sincerest way possible.
Readers are invited to let me have queries about the book business, at home or abroad, and to offer answers to queries already put.
Particularly interesting queries or answers will win for those responsible the usual bottle of very passable claret (or some other tipple if you don't like claret).
To start the ball rolling:
Why can publishers sell many more copies of some hardback novels in Australia, with a population of 17 million, than in the UK, with more than three times the population?
Is it really true that Watership Down was rejected by over a dozen publishers before it was taken on and became a bestseller?
By how many publishers was it rejected exactly, and can you name some of them?
What is the origin of the word clawback?
What does it really mean?
Is it true that Philip Attenborough plans his overseas trips to coincide with cricket tours?
There are many more bookshops — especially branches of chain bookshops — than there were 10 years ago, and yet publishers complain that they are not selling any more books — fewer in many cases.
Can someone explain this apparent paradox please?
Was Catch 22 really called Catch some other number before it was published?
What was the number, and why was it changed?
From My Man on the Road
The appointment of Sally Coleman to the job of manager of Waterstones at Harrods from her current post running the Covent Garden outpost of the empire has come out of the blue.
It was all very sudden.
Harrods has the final say in whom its concessions may hire, even down to the lowliest positions, and Sally may have seemed the obvious choice to impress them.
I wish her luck.
Her new job was not advertised around the branches.
The Covent Garden job, though, will be open to applicants, and I guess there will be some competition for it.
The shop has had a chequered history: it opened as a Sherratt & Hughes, and was an early incursion by a chain retailer into an area dominated by, and largely reserved for, independents.
It is in a complicated building, and WHS had to close the shop soon after opening because of a planning dispute which included fears of excess noise from the airconditioning system.
Eventually they reopened it, changed its image to Waterstones, opened a children's books annexe, then closed that.
Now, while it is not a plum branch, it may be a useful stage in an ambitious manager's career.
Meanwhile the Harrods personnel department has apparently been giving Geoffrey Bailey a small problem.
Despite his 23 years' service at Hatchards, he was asked to supply three references.
I'm pleased to say that one of them came from Tommy Joy.
Horace Bent 
PUBLICATIONS OF THE WEEK
Publications of the Week is a service offered by The Bookseller to alert booksellers and librarians to newly published English language titles.
The list, which appears below, is prepared by Whitaker's Bibliographic Services, and consists of new titles and new editions, presented in 135 categories alphabetically under author.
The books have mostly been notified for publication this week.
Titles that Whitaker learns about after publication to into the list as soon as possible.
Only titles published in the current year are included here.
The date of publication is show as (1.93) for January 1993.
Prices are net unless marked with an asterisk*.
Publication of the Weeks forms the basis of other sources of bibliographical information from Whitaker.
The company's leading monthly updated services are Whitaker's Books in Print — on microfiche and Whitaker's CD-ROM service, BOOKBANK.
Both contain details of over 550,000 in print titles, over 40,000 forthcoming titles annually and the names and addresses of over 20,000 publishers active in the UK and Continental Europe.
BOOKBANK also contains details of up to 150,000 out of print titles.
Whitaker lists around 70,000 newly published titles each year.
Whitaker also publishes the most comprehensive listing of yet to be published books in its weekly microfiche service,New and Forthcoming Books .
Please send details of omissions or corrections to the list as soon as possible to Whitaker's Bibliographic Services so that they may be added to subsequent listings.
Further information may be obtained from Whitaker's Bibliographic Services at  