

NEWS
Publishers in merchandising deal with Dillons
Merchandising, previously associated in the main with mass market paperbacks, non-specialist retail outlets — and Foyles, is being introduced into the heart of book retailing.
A number of publishers have established, or are in the process of discussing, a form of merchandising agreement with the Dillons group.
Green shoots or otherwise, the effects of recession continue to bite and booksellers and publishers are looking for innovative and more profitable ways of doing business.
Some have opted for firm sale agreements to cut out the costly returns process, most notably with the Waterstones group and Reed with Dillons.
Merchandising is being tried as a different route to a similar destination.
By taking responsibility themselves for stock checking their titles with Dillons stores and reordering accordingly, publishers hope to boost their presence across the group.
While there are those who may see this as a canny means of winning market share and believe that the participating publishers must be giving an arm and a leg in discount to obtain such control, the publishers concerned view it in less Machiavellian terms.
Penguin has been operating a form of merchandising with Dillons since February and, says paperback sales manager Kevin Bristow, ‘no extra discount has been given’.
Penguin's motivation is to ensure that a core stock of its titles is always available in the stores.
‘The aim is simply to achieve maximum availability and therefore maximise sales.
‘The way retailers are running their businesses at the moment means that they are never overstaffed.
This puts enormous pressures on staff, who don't always have enough time to do the stock checking.
And at the end of the day publishers prefer their books to be on the booksellers' shelves than in the warehouse.’
HarperCollins is in the early stages of a similar agreement to maintain a core of its bestselling titles in all Dillons stores.
‘We did not believe that we were getting the best range of stock into Dillons,’ says Adrian Bourne, group managing director for sales.
‘By this method we believe that we will get a more appropriate range into the stores, and that those titles with be maintained in stock at all times.
This is something we did not enjoy before the agreement.
Looked at objectively, this has got to be the way to go.’
Adrian Bourne: ‘We were not getting the best range of stock into Dillons’
Joanna Mackle of Faber echoes this.
Faber's agreement came into effect on 1st May; it has appointed two part time merchandisers to support its reps in monitoring an agreed list of 400 Faber titles.
‘We were approached by Dillons and very much welcomed the move,’ says Ms Mackle.
‘We chose the core stock together, graded according to branch.
It is a wonderful way of assuring the presence of core stock and building up stock in Dillons stores.
We certainly expect a big uplift in sales through the group as a result.’
Transworld, which is still at the discussion stage with Dillons, hopes the system will overcome what it has found to be ‘erratic supply in Dillons’, says marketing director Larry Finlay.
‘While some of the Dillons stores are absolutely superb, with brilliant staff, stock management and buying, others are less so.
We want to take some control and show Dillons what can be done and that too cautious buying doesn't necessarily pay.’
Larry Finlay: ‘Some Dillons stores are absolutely superb, others less so’
The Penguin deal has been in place the longest.
It concentrates on a core of 2,500 titles, which are selected jointly by the publisher and Dillons head office, and reviewed regularly.
The stores are then allocated a minimum number of each title, according to their size and market, with the larger stores taking an amount over and above that, to be decided by the Penguin representatives and the stores' buyers.
When stock checking, the reps have the authority to reorder any titles which fall below the agreed number.
But, Mr Bristow stresses, ‘the key on the publisher's part is being responsible and not overloading the store’.
In order that too great a burden does not shift from bookseller to rep, Penguin, like Faber, has recruited merchandisers to do much of the checking.
‘It is a fairly straightforward job,’ says Mr Bristow, ‘and once the check is done and the order compiled, the shop manager will sign it off.’
The investment in Penguin's 12 merchandisers is not high, he says, and is paying off in increased business.
‘We are delighted.
We have seen a definite increase in sales.’
The system for returns remains the same, with requests to return authorised by the various publishers' reps.
But with the new system Mr Bristow believes that, for Penguin's part, ‘the shops shouldn't be overstocked.
They are getting smaller deliveries on the basis of regular stock checks.’
Penguin titles outside the core list continue to be dealt with in the usual manner.
‘Other titles are bought and ordered in the normal way, but the 2,500 titles represent 80% of Penguin's sales.’
While it is clear what the publishers stand to gain by investing both money and effort in ensuring that their key titles are on the shelves at all times, there might be more reluctance on the part of the booksellers to accept this encroachment onto their territory.
‘There was some resistance in the early days,’ says Mr Bristow, ‘with booksellers believing that their jobs would be eroded.
But stock checking is a boring job, and the booksellers can see the benefits of someone else doing it.
And they do still have involvement.’
Penguin is ‘happy to talk to anyone’ along similar lines, although it sees Dillons as ‘having the right profile and style of management to do this’.
A group like Waterstones would be less likely to welcome this approach: ‘It wouldn't do at Waterstones because their buyers like to do their own checking.
Also, the stock profile of the Waterstones in Exeter will be very different to that in Aberdeen.
Dillons has more continuity.’
While these merchandising agreements would appear to be universally welcomed by the publishers that have been approached at Dillons, another scheme which is currently under discussion may be greeted with more caution.
This is DOPRA, or Dillons Open Purchasing Returns Authorisation.
Publishers have been reluctant to comment on this proposed scheme at present, but it is believed to be an agreement whereby a publisher's rep would be given authority to put into the store any title in any quantity, for example 500 copies of a new title, and after 60 days would take back any copies the manager no longer wanted.
One publisher commented, ‘We are talking to Dillons about DOPRA, but we are not in yet.
Publishers want safeguards at a practical level to ensure that it does not open the floodgates to returns of all kinds.’
Dillons has invited comment on these new initiatives, but chief executive Frank Brazier declined to discuss them.
National Book Sale cancelled
The future of the National Book Sales was this week thrown into doubt after Book Marketing Ltd announced that the summer sale, due to run from 3rd July to 7th August, had been cancelled because of a lack of support.
The sale, which began in 1955, has been in decline: last winter fewer than 290 booksellers and 12 publishers took part, significantly down on previous years.
The decision to cancel the summer sale is a major disappointment for BML: after the failure of the trade to support the 1992 winter sale, it reduced the bookseller licence fee from £40 to £10 in an attempt to encourage greater participation.
Karen McDonald, BML's NBS co-ordinator, said a NBS committee meeting would be held on 24th May to discuss what could be done to revitalise the sale.
‘I don't think this is the end of the line: there is still going to be a winter sale.
But we are just not getting the support from the trade.’
Peter Chambers of the Hessle Bookshop, Humberside, and a member of the NBS committee, conceded that if the sale was to survive it had to be completely overhauled.
‘We have to find out why the trade is not supporting it.
I suspect one of the main reasons is that the selection of submitted titles is poor.
The sale needs to be revamped, even relaunched with a new name, and aggressively marketed.
We have to let customers know that a sale is taking place.
We manage to do this with a catalogue; why not a book sale?’
Booksellers who have registered for the sale will receive a full refund from BML.
Carnegie/Greenaway shortlist
Eight authors and seven illustrators have been placed on unusually long shortlists for the Carnegie and Greenaway Awards.
‘It was tough,’ said an exhausted Sue Greenfield, chair of the Youth Libraries Group, which judges the awards.
‘We know how much the awards mean to authors and illustrators; and we know that teachers and parents all over the country use these shortlists as the definitive guide to the year's outstanding children's books.
So we felt a great weight of responsibility.
We're not a glitzy judging panel, but this lot were an opinionated bunch, who debated things in intense depth and were ruthlessly democratic.
They work with children all the time, so they really know what they're talking about.’
The Carnegie medal is awarded for a book written in English.
The shortlist is:
Melvin Burgess,An Angel for May , Andersen Press
Gillian Cross,The Great Elephant Chase , OUP
Peter Dickinson,A Bone from a Dry Sea , Gollancz
Anne Fine,Flour Babies , Hamish Hamilton
Anne Fine,The Angel of Nitshill Road , Methuen
Judith O'Neill,So Far from Skye , Hamish Hamilton
Robert Westall,Gulf , Methuen
Jacqueline Wilson,The Suitcase Kid , Doubleday
The Kate Greenaway Medal is awarded for the most distinguished illustration in a book for children.
The shortlist is:
Jill Barton,The Pig in the Pond , Walker
Stephen Beisty,Stephen Beisty's Incredible Cross Sections , Dorling Kindersley
Caroline Binch,Hue Boy , Gollancz
Anthony Browne,Zoo , Julia MacRae
Robert Ingpen,Treasure Island , Dragon's World
Francesca Martin,The Dragon Hunters , Walker
Korky Paul,The Dog That Dog , Bodley Head
The winner of the medals will be announced by Michael Palin at the South Bank Centre in London on Wednesday 30th June.
Each will receive a golden medal, plus £1,000 worth of books to donate to any organisation they choose, provided by Peter's Library Service, which has sponsored the awards for the past three years.
£1m sponsorship boost for BL
National Heritage Secretary Peter Brooke has announced that the British Library has secured its biggest ever private sponsorship — £1m worth of computer systems for the St Pancras building.
Under the agreement, the Digital Equipment Company will provide Digital systems to support the Online Public Access Catalogue and the Automated Book Retrieval System.
This will enable items from the 12 million volume London holdings to be retrieved within 30 minutes.
‘I see this sponsorship,’ said Mr Brooke, ‘as an affirmation of a fruitful relationship between two organisations whose eminence is recognised worldwide: Digital in the field of networked computer products and services and the British Library as an international centre of excellence and worldwide resources for scholarship, research and innovation.’
The £450m headquarters of the British Library in St Pancras, which was due to have opened in March, is expected finally to open in 1996.
Last November Mr Brooke announced that the government would provide the necessary funds for the completion of the new building.
Publicity redundancy at Hodder
Beth Macdougall (below) has left Hodder, where she has been publicity director for the fiction and paperback lists.
For the last two years Hodder has run publicity for fiction and paperbacks and for non-fiction out of two units and under two managers, Beth MacDougall and Sally Randall.
The functions are now being put together under Sally Randall as trade publicity manager reporting to Eric Major.
Ms Macdougall, who has been with Hodder for three and a half years, was previously with Barrie & Jenkins and for 17 years at Secker, and has also run her own business.
She can be contacted at  ().
Tory MP unsettles trade over VAT demand
Conservative MP Quentin Davies sent a shiver of anxiety through the trade last week when, speaking during a Commons debate on the Finance (No 2) Bill, he urged the government to extend VAT to books and other zero-rated goods.
This was the first time that a Conservative MP had publicly urged the government to abolish the zero rate of BAT since the before the last General Election when, in a letter to the Publishers Association, the Conservative Party said that it would not impose VAT on books or periodicals.
Mr Davies told the Commons that Norman Lamont's Budget though courageous, had not gone far enough.
‘He [Mr Lamont]decided that it was necessary to increase taxes and I am sure that he was right.
He was also right to widen the tax base rather than to increase the (direct) rates.
I hope that he will be emboldened to go further and spread the VAT net even wider in the next Budget.
Perhaps he might like to start by extending it to books, magazines and newspapers.’
Mr Davies' remarks can be interpreted in two ways: the public expression of a maverick opinion, in the manner of Bill Cash or Ivan Lawrence; or he could be acting with covert government backing as a kind of stalking horse to gauge the reaction from MPs, and the public, to his suggestion.
In short, to determine whether a tax on books is a runner.
Should the latter be the case, the concern expressed last week at the Bookseller Association Conference by BA president John Hitchin, that the threat of a tax on books was still a live issue, was not ill-founded.
Bookrest collection
The annual collection at the BA Conference dinner for the Book Trade Benevolent Society raised £1,030.54 in Torquay last week.
The ‘Guess the Weight of the Parcel’ competition was won by Terry Shaughnessy of Pavilion Books (the correct weight of the parcel was 29lbs).
Vintage publisher
Contrary to the impression given in last week's report on the restructuring at Random House, Frances Coady remains Vintage's publisher in addition to her new job as publisher of the group of companies that includes Cape, Chatto, Vintage and Pimlico.
Will Sulkin continues as publishing director of Pimlico, and not of Vintage and Pimlico as stated.
Freelance editors launch training appeal
The Society of Freelance Editors and Proofreaders has launched an appeal to raise £25,000 initially to set up and run foundation courses and to train and assess tutors and mentors.
The society believes that good freelance editors and proofreaders are becoming increasingly hard to find because the pool from which they are drawn — editors leaving full-time employment — is drying up as a result of a lack of inhouse training and the general reduction in numbers.
A recent survey of editorial freelancers, carried out by Book House Training Centre, highlighted the lack of training and standards among freelancers.
More details of the SFEP appeal and of how contributions can be made to it are available from Michèle Clarke,.
Hatchards in Piccadilly was crammed to bursting with authors last Wednesday for its Authors of the Year reception, the annual event the bookshop stages to enable authors to get together with each other, and not a publisher in sight.
From left Pentos chairman Terry Maher, fresh from the Rockies, with Frank and Polly Muir
COMPANY NEWS
CHEAPSIDE
Longman aims to extend influence in Far East
Longman is to expand and invest in one of its key areas of strength and current activity, Asia Pacific.
The Pearson owned group has companies in Hong Kong, Singapore Malaysia, Taiwan and Japan, publishing across the range of Longman's subject areas — ELT, education, business and professional and medical.
‘Asia Pacific,’ said chairman and chief executive Paula Kahn, ‘is the fastest growing economy in the world.
We have a very experienced and professional management team in the region and we want to build on that strength.’
To this end Longman Group Far East will be restructured and renamed Longman Asia.
It will be headed as president by Willie Shen, who has been m.d. of Longman Group Far East for the past 18 years, and will initially be made up of two divisions: Longman Hong Kong and Longman Asia ELT.
Longman Hong Kong, which is already a major player in education publishing for schools and higher education, will also publish for business, professional and medical markets, and for children.
Stephen Troth, currently publishing and marketing director of Longman Group Far East, has been appointed managing director.
Longman Asia ELT will be headed up by Dugie Cameron, who moves from Tokyo to Hong Kong to become its director.
The division will be responsible for Longman ELT UK's sales and marketing in the region, and will also publish a regional programme for the large American English markets of Japan, Korea, Taiwan and Thailand, and the emerging China market.
With this development the group expects to become a market leader throughout the region, ‘an important step in Longman's objective to be the world's leading ELT publisher,’ said Ms Kahn.
Finally, Longman Asia is to have a business development director, a new post which will be filled by Mark Anderson, currently heading up Longman UK's training division.
He will relocate to Hong Kong in July.
Carlton prints its millionth book
Jonathan Goodman believes that publishing should be a ‘dynamic entrepreneurial business’, and last year set up Carlton Books to prove it.
One year on, the company, which published its first book only in November, has taken £6m worth of orders, and has 1m (presold) copies in print.
Carlton's second arm, set up only in September to create a promotional books business for Hodder and Pan Macmillan, has taken £1.5m of orders to date.
The company will also be cash-positive ahead of schedule.
So far, at least, one could say that Mr Goodman had proved his point.
Carlton Books' achievement, he says, has been based on an ‘unashamedly commercial’ approach, combined with a willingness to look beyond traditional publishing methods, to the music or magazine or advertising industries, for inspiration.
So, for example, it has imitated a record business practice by awarding silver, gold and platinum covers as 100,000, 200,000 and 300,000 copies of a title are sold; and if Carlton titles continue to sell as they have done, there should be a fair number of these metallic covers around.
Carlton books are patently and blatantly mass market, covering such subjects as computer games, dinosaurs and rock ‘n’ roll.
They are also very reasonably priced.
Prime customers in the UK are W H Smith and Book Club Associates.
Catering for the mass market, however, does not mean inferior quality in terms of content and illustrations (Mr Goodman and his 15 colleagues are breezily unsnobbish devotees of popular culture themselves).
Thus, the Carlton book of puzzles will come by courtesy of and collaboration with Mensa, while its book on dinosaurs comes with the authority of the Natural History Museum.
The heavy investment necessary for each title (say £100,000) means that every book must satisfy the ‘very strict criterion’ of selling at least 100,000 copies; ‘If not, why are we bothering?’
This, in turn, means that all titles must sell internationally: ‘To date haven't had one book that hasn't gone into foreign editions.’
If this sounds reminiscent of Dorling Kindersley's strategy, this is not surprising.
‘If there is one company we would hope to emulate, it is DK.’
Carlton will publish 25 titles this year, and 40 next, adopting a ‘strict pattern of release’, so as not to crowd the market.
Mr Goodman adds that the company was fortunate to have started up in the recession, because services could be had more cheaply than in easier times.
Kirkpatrick heads up Berlitz
Roger Kirkpatrick joined Berlitz Publishing this week as managing director.
The position had remained vacant since Charles Halpin left last autumn.
In the interim Jacki Heppard, international sales and marketing director, and Michael Cairns, director of planning and analysis, have been acting managing directors.
‘They have been doing a fantastic job putting the Berlitz name in a leading position since the move from Lausanne and through the process of merger with Fukutake,’ said Mr Kirkpatrick.
‘My job is to build on what they have done.’
Mr Kirkpatrick has most recently been with Mercury Books as marketing director, from where, it is thought, he was headhunted for the Berlitz job.
Before that he was with Roger Lascelles, where he had experience of working with travel publisher Lonely Planet.
Prior to that he had many years' experience in the trade, as group sales director of Associated Book Publishers and as group marketing director until 1989 of Random House UK.
Quarto scoops up de Bellaigue
Investment analyst Eric de Bellaigue (above), who was with Grenfell & Colegrave and latterly with stockbrokers Panmure Gordon until his retirement in January, has been appointed a non-executive director of the Quarto Group.
Mr de Bellaigue has 30 years' experience as an investment analyst, much of it spent following the publishing and printing sectors, on which he was a regular contributor to The Bookseller .
‘Eric's extensive knowledge of the publishing industry will prove invaluable,’ commented Quarto chairman Laurence Orbach.
‘Furthermore’ his understanding of City relations will be extremely useful, particularly as the group hopes to see a period of development and growth in the medium term.’
BPCC heading for Stock Exchange
BPCC is heading for a flotation on the Stock Exchange, either late this year or early next, according to the Financial Times .
It quoted chief executive John Holloran as saying that the process of seeking a listing had begun.
BPCC, Britain's largest commercial printer, whose customers include nine of the country's 10 bestselling magazines, left the Maxwell empire in June 1989 in a £235m management buyout.
Publishing employee statistics
The Central Statistical Office has confirmed that census of production data collected under the 1992 Standard Industrial Classification survey will show separate employee statistics for the book publishing sector.
In the past it has been difficult to obtain statistical information relating to publishing because the final analysis of the census of production data always produced figures that bracketed publishing with printing.
Only companies employing over 20 people are required to submit a return to the Standard Industrial Classification survey, which gather statistics on, among other things, a company's turnover, number of employees and productivity.
Business rate boost
The government has announced that businesses will receive a £350m boost in the current financial year as a consequence of uniform business rate increases being limited to 3.6% — the rate of inflation in September 1992.
Junior Environment Minister Robin Squire told the Commons that around 40,000 small business premises and 400,000 larger ones would benefit from the changes.
In April the Environmental Secretary Michael Howard announced that businesses facing higher rate bills as a result of the introduction of the UBR in 1990 would have their rate increases frozen in real terms for the second successive year.
Penguin errors on Whitaker
An error on the monthly computer tape supplied by Penguin to Whitaker Bibliographic Services has led to over 2,000 Penguin titles being wrongly designated as out of print.
Whitaker's Book-Bank , magnetic tape and online customers will still be able to find the relevant titles but they will be flagged o.p.
The relevant titles will be missing completely from Whitaker's microfiche services.
TeleOrdering users will also find titles wrongly designated in their next morning answerbacks, although orders will still be routed to Penguin.
Whitaker is consulting with Penguin to ensure that the situation is rectified in time for next month's publications.
Book printing performs well at St Ives
St Ives last week reported pretax profits of £10.5m for the half year ended 29th January 1993, an increase of 4.1% over the same period last year.
Turnover was 1.1% down at £108m.
Chairman Bob Gavron said that the group had not yet seen an upturn in its markets, and that the modest increase in pretax profits was achieved by an increase in market share in some businesses, an improved product mix, greater efficiency and cost containment.
The group's book printing business had performed well, he said, increasing market share in hardbacks, which had compensated for a fall in demand for mass market paperbacks during the six months.
‘The paperback market had now improved somewhat, and we believe that book production capacity and demand are more in balance than for some time’, he added.
BRL back in the black
Blackwell Retail Ltd edged back into the black — if only just — in the year to end-August 1992, after two years of losses.
The company made a pretax profit of £309,000 (compared with a loss of £380,000 in 1991) on sales up 6% to £30.5m.
These figures exclude the Broad Street shops in Oxford, which had sales approaching £14m (1991: £13m).
Gross margins improved by half a point to 30.3%.
Chairman Peter Bagnall declared himself ‘quite pleased’ with these results, given the year's trading conditions.
He was particularly pleased with the strengthening.
He added that the ‘cleaning up’ of the company was now virtually complete.
The clean up to which Mr Bagnall referred has been physical (refurbishment, rebadging and refitting), operational, and strategic.
At the operational level, stock turn improved again last year, from 3 to 3.25 times, and the staff/sales ratio (payroll as a percentage of sales) was reduced from 14.6% to 13.4%.
On the strategic side, the company has now focused squarely on its specialism as academic bookseller.
The closure of the antiquarian business in Bristol was part of this realignment, and was reflected in the 1992 accounts.
Mr Bagnall described business this year as ‘hesitant but improving’, with the improvement particularly noticeable in some of the southern shops.
Pearson goes TV shopping again?
Confidence appears to be growing in the City that Pearson is at last developing a coherent focus — on its media and entertainment interest.
Speculation in the weekend press suggests that, hard on its move into television production with its £99m purchase of Thames Television, Pearson is looking at a £100m deal which would buy a substantial minority stake in the Asian satellite station Star TV.
Star TV, owned jointly by Hutchison Whampoa and Hong Kong property and communications tycoon Li Ka-shing, broadcasts to 38 Asian countries from Hong Kong.
(Pearson's television interests include 17.5% of BSkyB and 14% of Yorkshire-Tyne Tees.)
Pearson shares rose 8p on Friday to 437p, and by close on Tuesday stood at 447p.
Raymond Snoddy, in the Pearson owned Financial Times , last Friday also reported on the possibility of Pearson taking UK Gold, the entertainment channel set up by Thames and the BBC, to Asia, and of Longman becoming involved in the educational channel for broadcasting to Asia.
Although Pearson managing director Frank Barlow would not comment on either of these projects, Asia is certainly an area of expanding interest for Longman (see facing page).
Meanwhile there was comment in the Sunday Times about Pearson's standing to benefit from a large pension fund surplus at Thames TV, such surpluses being a controversial issue in company accounting and takeovers.
‘Pearson,’ the Sunday Times reported, ‘is thought to have given an assurance that it will not plunder the surplus.
However, it would be able to make use of an extended pension fund holiday that should boost its profits.’
INTERNATIONAL NEWS
OCLC extends library school programme to eastern Europe
The OCLC (Online Computer Library Centre) library school programme is to be offered to schools of library and information science in Europe, a service which the centre hopes will be of special benefit in central and eastern European countries.
OCLC, a non-profit computer library service and research organisation, is based in Dublin, Ohio, and has the world's largest bibliographic information database and network linked to more than 16,000 libraries in 47 countries and territories.
The OCLC library school programme, available since 1984 to American Library Association accredited schools in North America, was established to provide faculty and students with access to OCLC cataloguing, reference and resource services which could be integrated into teaching programmes.
OCLC waives its charges for the use of most services, thus contributing to the teaching resources of participating schools.
‘The richness of this programme is now available to the kindred library communities of Europe,’ says Phyllis Bova Spies, OCLC's vice-president, marketing.
‘It will be of particular interest to the library schools in central and eastern Europe, since it will open a window to the faculties, services and library culture of North America and western Europe, and will be available without taxing the limited foreign exchange resources which they may have.’
Sargent to head DK Publishing Inc
Dorling Kindersley has recruited John Sargent (right), currently president and publisher of Simon & Schuster Children's Book Division, to become c.e.o.
of its US operation, Dorling Kindersley Publishing Inc in New York.
He will be responsible for both the adult and children's lists, and will report directly to the DK board in London.
Mr Sargent has previously held management positions at Macmillan and Doubleday.
Dorling Kindersley began publishing under its own imprint in the US in autumn 1991 and will be publishing 77 titles this autumn, including the American Horticultural Society Encyclopedia of Gardening (the US version of the RHS Encyclopedia of Gardening ) and Stephen Biesty's sequel to Incredible Cross Sections ,Man-of-War .
Fnac flights Belgian r.p.m.
On the eve of last month's Brussels Book Fair, the Fnac-Belgium, which has stores selling books in Brussels, Liège, Antwerp and Ghent, launched a press and consumer campaign against a bill under discussion in the Belgian parliament aimed at reintroducing resale price maintenance for books in Belgium.
Fnac is asking its customers to sign a petition opposing the proposals to reintroduce r.p.m. on books.
Echoing arguments used in the Fnac's campaigns in France, the Fnac-Belgium has declared the parliamentary bill ‘tailor-made for bookshops, but disadvantageous for books and the reading public’.
The bill introduced last year by the Flemish senator Herman Suykerbuyk, and based on the French ‘loi Lang’, proposes that discounts should be limited to 5% during a two-year period following the publication of a book.
A meeting of publishers and booksellers was held during the Brussels book fair.
The discussions were chaired by Luisa Bastos de Almeida, from the cabinet of the European Commissioner for Cultural Affairs Joao de Deus Pinheiro, and the Dutch MEP Jessica Larive.
Redundancy fears at Laffont
Two months after the Groupe de la Cité and Fixot agreed to merge Laffont with Editions Fixot, rumour is rife in Paris that a fresh round of redundancies is imminent.
A number of jobs were lost at Laffont at the end of 1991.
Staff fear that as many as 30 jobs are about to go.
INTERNATIONAL NEWS — US FOCUS
Bookstores and multimedia
The distribution model for multimedia titles is likely to be a hybrid of traditional bookstores, software outlets, entertainment stores, direct sales and electronic distribution outlets, Dan McCarthy, editorial director SIMBA/Communications Trends, told delegates to the Publisher Opportunities in Multimedia conference, held last month in New York City.
SIMBA is the publisher of BP Report .
Compared to books, distribution of multimedia software titles would remain more fragmented because the market was growing rapidly and potential customers could be reached through many outlets, Mr McCarthy said.
Although there were 14 distinct distribution channels for computer products, none accounted for more than 27% of the market.
Multimedia title distribution would rely heavily, at least at the outset, on the existing computer products distribution infrastructure — computer stores, software-only stores and direct mail.
Consumers were likely to turn to their conventional sources of software for multimedia titles.
The multimedia distribution mix would, however, change in the next two years, Mr McCarthy predicted.
The importance of computer outlets would diminish.
Emerging would be computer superstores and a mix of alternative channels such as book-stores, large format entertainment stores, rental outlets, direct marketing and electronic distribution.
Bookstores would be players in the distribution of multimedia, but needed to view the product in a new way.
‘Publishers need to work with booksellers to understand now the bookstores can become part of the distribution mix.
If booksellers view multimedia simply as an extension of computer software, rather than an extension of books, then they will greatly resist stocking titles,’ he said.
Miller Freeman sells M&T Books to Henry Holt
Only four months after buying computer book publisher M&T Publishing from its German parent Markt & Technik, Miller Freeman sold the unit to Henry Holt & Co last month.
Miller Freeman (San Francisco) is a magazine publishing subsidiary of the UK company United Newspapers.
M&T Books will be joined with Holt's computer book publishing unit, MIS:Press.
Steve Berkowitz, publisher of MIS:Press, becomes publisher of M&T Books as well.
The addition of M&T's advanced-level titles will give MIS:Press, which publishes tutorial books based on popular software applications, a better rounded mix of titles.
‘There's not much overlap in the title bases’ of MIS:Press and M&T Books, Mr Berkowitz said.
According to Miller Freeman's vice-president Don Pazour, the sale of M&T Books so soon after its acquisition by Miller Freeman was due to the resignation of Linda Hanger, who had been ‘the driving force behind the books’ division under M&T Publishing.
According to Mr Pazour, Ms Hanger resigned the day after Miller Freeman acquired M&T.
‘Suddenly we had a business we had no experience in.’
BOOKSHOP NEWS
Blackwell Retail wins lease at Sheffield Hallam University
Blackwell Retail has announced that it will open a new 3,200 sq ft academic bookshop in September at the Sheffield Hallam University, the old Sheffield Polytechnic.
The shop will be on a single floor in the central atrium of the new £27m Hallam University city centre complex — Campus 21, designed to take the university into the 21st century.
BRL, which will invest £250,000 in the project, won the tenancy of the shop in April, against competition which is believed to have included Dillons, Waterstones and Student Bookshops.
Last January BRL opened a 5,400 sq ft academic bookshop in Mappin Street at the University of Sheffield.
The group now has four bookshops in the city — the two university shops, and the W Hartley Seed branches at West Street and Broomhill — and 60 nationwide.
Sales and operational manager David Taylor said the popularity of the Mappin Street shop had helped the group to secure the tenancy of the new shop.
‘We were able to draw on our experience in academic bookselling, and demonstrate to the Hallam that we were already running a successful academic bookshop in Sheffield.
This is good news for the group: our strategy is definitely to concentrate on the academic market.’
The new shop, which will specialise in academic library supply, will carry around 20,000 titles, and support more than 20,000 students and 2,500 academic staff.
The shop will also operate a full EPOS system, and carry a range of general titles, stationery, compact discs and other non-book merchandise.
BRL is planning to recruit an experienced academic bookseller to run the shop; he or she will report directly to David Taylor.
Ottakars opens children's shop in Banbury
Ottakars, the eight strong chain of bookshops in the south of England, has opened its first stand-alone children's bookshop in a property next door to its branch at Banbury, Oxfordshire.
The 700 sq ft shop, called Ottakars Children's, has a range of around 4,000 titles, and has been fitted out with children's play and adult seating areas.
Ottakars' growth has been exceptional Managing director James Heneage said that, following a 17% rise in sales on a like-for-like basis last year, the group was poised for expansion.
Last December the group raised £1m of new equity finance from the venture capital company Foreign & Colonial Ventures Ltd.
‘The expansion of our Banbury shop is part of a programme to improve our existing shop base as well as open new shops,’ said Mr Heneage.
‘We shall be completely refitting the Newbury and Gloucester branches over the coming months, and enlarging the shop at Salisbury.’
Another closure
Waterstones has announced that Sherratt & Hughes at , will close on 15th May.
Operations director Richard Barker said the shop was simply too small to keep open.
‘Leicester is a city in which we should expect to have a good general bookshop, and we shall be looking for a bigger and better site in the city.’
Mr Barker has asked publishers and suppliers to cancel all outstanding orders, and remove the shop from their mailing lists.
Black Swan winners
The winner of the Black Swan 10th Anniversary Quiz is Sue Kimber of Books Etc, Victoria, who wins a stay in Stratford-upon-Avon for two, plus tickets to a Shakespeare play and a meal afterwards.
Three runners-up each receive £25 worth of Black Swan books: Amanda Robinson, Dillons, Nottingham; John McLay, Waterstones, Maidstone; and Janet Hayward, The Harbour Bookshop, Dartmouth.
W H Smith is celebrating four ‘best ever’ signing sessions held in shops in Europe and the UK, all courtesy of survivors of the Beirut hostage crisis Brian Keenan, John McCarthy and Jill Morrell.
McCarthy and Morrell were the guests at ‘phenomenal sessions’ at WHS branches in Brent Cross and Doncaster (Jill Morrell's home town).
Both events attracted large crowds who queued right around the shop and out of the door; at both events the couple were cheered and clapped as they arrived and presented with ‘bouquets of flowers and soft toys wearing yellow ribbons’.
They were ‘very nice and sincere and had a lot of time for everyone’, overstaying their allotted time by 30 minutes on both occasions.
Brent Cross sold 600 copies of Some Other Rainbow (Bantam Press, £14.99), while Doncaster boasted sales of 800.
Georges Bookshop in Bristol sold 762 copies during the signing and 70 copies the following day.
On the Continent, meanwhile, Brian Keenan above left made guest appearances at W H Smith in Amsterdam and Brussels.
Both shops organised evening readings with Mr Keenan talking about his experiences and reading passages from his account of captivity,An Evil Cradling (Hutchinson, £16.99).
The audiences were reported to be ‘impressed by the author's warmth and zest for life’.
Over 100 copies of the books were sold on each occasion.
TRADE NOTES
Moves
Trevor Dolby , formerly with the Reed Group, has joined Pavilion as editorial director.
Nicky Granville has been promoted to contracts director;Steve West has joined as production manager, and Hannah Griffiths as publicity and promotions assistant.
Carlton Books has appointed Ian McLellan to handle its worldwide sales activities in conjunction with Jonathan Goodman , managing director.
Sarah Schuman has joined as senior production controller.
OUP has appointed Frank Slater , currently at Macmillan Press, UK trade sales manager to succeed Mike Ward , who has moved to OUP's educational division.
Mr Slater will join on 1st June.
Julian Thomas , currently at Pitman, has been appointed publisher of the business studies list in the educational division of Hodder & Stoughton.
He takes up his new post on Monday 24th May.
Michael Jull , previously at Ashford, Buchan & Enright, has been appointed UK and export sales manager for Fountain Press.
As a result of the continuing growth of the club, The Softback Preview has appointed Jeremy Trevathan , formerly at Viking/Penguin, to the new post of senior editor.
Representation
John Brown Publishing is represented to the book trade by Fourth Estate.
Distribution remains with Bookpoint.
Fountain Press is now represented throughout Ireland by Repforce Ireland,().
Distribution
Sandpiper has exclusive UK and Eire distribution rights for Bookking International ‘s paperback series Classiques Français (the French equivalent of Wordsworth classics).
A list of titles and further information may be had from David Lines at Sandpiper Books,().
From June,Dragon's World and Paper Tiger Books will be distributed by Exel Logistics Media Services,().
Invoicing through Grantham Book Services ceases on 27th May.
Jamsa Press is distributed exclusively in the UK by Computer Bookshops.
Terms
Littlehampton Book Services no longer accepts returns for credit for Gollancz publications.
These should now go to Cassell, Stanley House,.
Addresses
Te Neues Publishing has moved to Cranbrook House,,().
Books Wanted
Lifestyle South , a general interest magazine aimed at households in Hants and Dorset, is planning to include a book review section.
Publishers are asked to send titles for review to Michelle Fulford at Lifestyle South ,().
Diary
ASLIB half-day seminar .
‘The Knowledge to Succeed in Europe’: 11th May, Business Design Centre, London.
Details from Kaye Poole, ASLIB  ().
National Acquisitions Group and UK Serials Group conference and exhibition , ‘Taming the Electronic Jungle’: 17th to 18th May, Market Bosworth. £188 members, £211.50 non-members including meals and accommodation.
Details from Jill Tolson, UK Serials Group,().
Scottish Publishers Association training course , ‘Copyright and contracts’: 17th May, T C Farries Room, Scottish Book Centre,: speaker Charles Clark.
£60 members, £80 non-members.
Details from SPA on .
British Library National Bibliographic Service contact day:20th May, 1.30 to 5 p.m., British Library, Boston Spa.
Free event but pre-booking essential.
Details from Barrington Stewart, The British Library NBS,().
Oxford Women in Publishing training course , ‘Moving into Commissioning’, 22nd May, 9.30 a.m. to 5 p.m., Wolfson College, Oxford.
£35 members, £40 non-members.
Details from Sue Bennett,().
Women in Publishing meeting , ‘Special Agents’: 19th May, 6.30 for 7 p.m., Publishers Association,.
Members free, non-members £1.50.
Yorkshire branch of the Booksellers Association annual dinner:14th May, Brasserie,.
Tickets from Sheila Chambers, Our Lady's Bookshop,.
Birmingham City Council Library Services one day conference , ‘Books for People’ on literature, publishing: 22nd May, 9.45 a.m. to 4.15 p.m., Birmingham Library Theatre.
£10 (£5 concessions).
Details from Pam Gaffney on .
Language learning
There will be a special feature looking at new and forthcoming foreign language learning materials in The Bookseller of 25th June.
Publishers should send new book, tape and CD packages to David Russell at The Bookseller (), to arrive no later than Friday 21st May.
Children's home reference
The Bookseller will publish a special feature on children's reference titles suitable for the family library in its issue of 9th July.
Publishers are invited to send reading copies and proofs of books published in or after July to Helen Paddock at The Bookseller ,(), to arrive by Friday 4th June.
Travel packages for Frankfurt
A variety of travel packages are available for the 1993 Frankfurt Book Fair, which runs from 6th to 11th October.
Most travel agents are prepared to tailor arrangements to meet individual requirements.
The prices quoted below are, unless otherwise stated, the cheapest on the agents' lists for shared twin-bedded rooms.
They are subject to alteration through increases in air fares and currency fluctuations.
Because of strong demand, all companies are urging delegates to book as soon as possible to avoid disappointment.
Ian Allan Travel offers a selection of six-night, three-night and two-night inclusive packages; accommodation-only packages are also available.
In order to accommodation those people who wish to visit the fair for just one day, Ian Allan has arranged scheduled flights on British Midland at a cost of £189.
The flights will arrive in Frankfurt at 9.35 a.m., and leave at 6.20 p.m.
All flights depart from Heathrow.
Fair entry tickets are also available from Ian Allan.
Details from Ines Ohlson ().
Chartwell Travel is offering discounted air fares to the Frankfurt Book Fair from £108 return.
Flights will be operating from Heathrow, Stansted, Birmingham, Bristol, Southampton, Cardiff, Manchester, Leeds, Bradford, Newcastle, Teesside , Humberside, Norwich, Glasgow, Edinburgh, Aberdeen and Belfast.
Chartwell also offers packages from £254 per person.
These include flights, hotel with private facilities, breakfast, taxes and entrance to the fair.
Details from Zena Cousin ().
Expo Travel offers inclusive flight and accommodation packages for the fair starting at £374 (£423 single) for two nights.
Packages for three, four and six nights at a variety of hotels, including Arabella Congress, Holiday Inn and Hamburger Hof, are also available.
Prices include scheduled flights from Heathrow.
Details from Gay Mattock ().
German Travel offers daily economy flights to Germany starting from £78.
Details are available from Mohammed Bhimani ().
International Chapters offers flexible accommodation arrangements and will be happy to advise on alternative travel plans.
Hotel prices start from £65 for one night (sole use/twin room £130).
Special rates are available for car ferries/Hoverspeed.
Return flights (Apex) start from: London £131, Birmingham £156 and Manchester £172.
Details from Edward Marquis ().
Janet Hinde Travel offers a wide selection of packages.
Arrangements can be tailored to meet individual requirements, with prices starting at £342 for two-night weekend packages in a single room (£278 per person, sharing a twin).
Prices, based on accommodation located centrally or in Frankfurt suburbs, include a fair entrance ticket and travel by scheduled airline from UK airports, including Heathrow, Gatwick and Stansted.
Accommodation-only packages, with or without sea-crossing, are also available.
Details from Pat Morrell ().
Above hopeful symbol of industry at the entrance to the fairgrounds
Josy Davis Travel is offering two-night weekend packages starting at £279 per person (£357 single); £363 (£482 single) for three nights; £653 single for five nights; and £576 (£796 single) for six nights.
Prices include scheduled flights from Heathrow or Gatwick, an entrance ticket to the fair, and the service  of a Josy Davis Travel representative.
Details from Josy Davis or Giulia Davis ().
Kuoni Travel offers a range of economy and medium-priced hotels in and around the city centre.
Prices, including breakfast, start at £68 per person per night.
These hotels are a new addition to Kuoni's hotel programme, which previously concentrated on deluxe and out-of-town accommodation.
Direct flights are operating to Frankfurt from London, East Midlands, Birmingham, Manchester and Glasgow.
Fares start at £133.
Also available are ‘special’ fares with Lufthansa and British Airways at £219 return.
For those driving to the fair, ferry/Hovercraft/Seacat crossings are available on request.
Details can be had from the trade fair department ().
Pressplan Travel has arranged a special inclusive tour to cover the first three days of the fair.
The two-night tour will depart from Stansted Airport on Wednesday 6th October.
Tour prices start from £367 and include: return scheduled flights; accommodation with breakfast at the Scandic Crown hotel, which operated morning and evening transfers between the hotel and fair; and all applicable airport taxes and hotel service charges.
Pressplan Travel has also arranged a one-day visit to the fair departing from Stansted on Wednesday 6th October.
This arrangement will ensure that visitors spend a full day at the fair.
The package is inclusive of return flight, in-flight catering and transfers between the airport and the book fair on arrival and departure.
Details are also available from Pressplan Travel ().
VIP Travel offers a wide selection of packages using scheduled flights from all major UK airports.
Accommodation ranges from tourist class to deluxe hotels in and around Frankfurt.
Arrangements can be tailored to meet individual requirements.
Details from Lorraine Wilder ().
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR
How publishers distort the playing fields
From Mr Julian Rivers
Sir, The current debate on fair competition between booksellers and book clubs has exposed a whole area of concerns for booksellers.
Although I am sure that the Publishers Association is sincere in wishing to manage the book club rules as tightly as it manages the Net Book Agreement, we are all aware of the increasing confidence of the book clubs, who are bound to accelerate their invasion into the territory that booksellers have regarded as theirs.
A bizarre scenario is unfolding.
A large number of trade publishers are indicating that their non-book sales are an increasing component of their total sales.
Their sales to supermarkets, direct to institutions and individuals, and to book clubs and other establishments have increased substantially, particularly over the last two years.
They say that they are following this course because bookshops are essentially  ineffective in expanding their market and that it is unreasonable for them to be restricted to selling their product to us alone.
I agree.
However, booksellers are not able to do more because publishers are preventing us from doing so.
I have always believed that discounting is only one item in the armoury of promotional activity.
Publishers' restrictions do not, for example, allow us to issue a Dillons customer loyalty card.
We are not allowed to give air miles in our stores, we are not allowed to give student discount vouchers, or stimulate imprint loyalty by offering basic ‘two for the price of one’ promotions, etc.
This at a time when the book clubs are coming to trade in the high street.
Against the backdrop of all this we have Sir Roger Elliot stating in his BA Conference address that ‘in the last resort a trade association has limited sanctions that it can apply, and if necessary it is for booksellers themselves to take appropriate action’.
The publishers, therefore, are in practice holding back booksellers by their adherence to a restrictive price agreement, but are laying off their bets by going around the traditional book trade and growing their market elsewhere, with patchy controls.
Dillons is expanding its market and is opening new bookshops every year.
However, it is clearly impossible for us all to stand back and watch the booksellers' position, in total terms, being undermined by some publishers' double standards.
I think we all know that the book clubs are not naive.
Nor are the individual publishers who are structuring their business specifically to develop direct supply.
Surely this is the time to reform publishers' restrictions on booksellers?
Yours faithfully
Julian Rivers
Pentos Retailing Ltd
.
Congenial undertakers?
From Mr Roy Bloom
Sir, As one of the leading remainder dealers, we find all the negative press about us quite amusing.
It seems that buying and selling remainders is the lowest form of bookselling, and is often treated as such.
What is it that we do that is so ‘damaging’ to the book trade?
Is it that we help publishers to clear their excess stock to give them more space and money to print something else?
Could it be that we encourage more of the public to buy books?
(Who knows, they may even enjoy a book so much that the next time the author is published they may even buy it at full price!)
For far too long remainder dealers have been regarded as ‘congenial undertakers’.
We would like to believe that we are a useful, important and respectable part of the book trade.
We have a lot of friends in the publishing industry.
Indeed, we have been a vital source of money in these recessionary times.
Perhaps one day we might even enjoy some positive press.
Yours faithfully ,
Roy Bloom
Roy Bloom Ltd,
.
London Book Fair
From Mr Peter Phelan
Sir, All long-time supporters of the London International Book Fair will rejoice with the organisers that they have reached the point of expansion to Olympia 1.
To have a ground floor exhibition hall will also have one great practical advantage.
It will frustrate the cussedness of the officials who, this year, closed down the passenger lifts on the stroke of 4 o'clock — exactly the moment at which many people on Levels 1 and 2 would have wished to use them as they carried packages down to the exit.
Yours faithfully ,
Peter Phelan
Publishers Licensing Society Ltd
.
Cash with order
From Mr Derek Bacon
Sir, We have just encountered a problem with obtaining a book on a cash with order basis.
The problem arises from use of the recommended ‘account payee’ crossing on a cheque, which prevents it being paid to a third party.
In the particular instance we ordered a Grub Street title using the information given in the 1993 Directory of Book Publishers , which directed us to ‘Chris Lloyd Sales and Marketing’.
This quotes order/office: Chris Lloyd, to whom we made out the cheque accompanying our order.
After some 10 days we received our order back from Bailey Distribution Ltd with a memo asking for a new cheque made out to them, since they could not transfer the original cheque due because it was crossed.
It is annoying to have to spend extra money on postage for a small order, but even more annoying to experience considerable delay in obtaining the book for our customer.
There are many possible solutions to this problem, and we hope that publishers using distributors will clarify their requirements to avoid unnecessary delays and frustration.
Yours faithfully ,
Derek Bacon
Bacon's Bookshop
.
Herbert in hardback
From Mr Charles Nettleton
Sir, I would like to correct an impression that may have been given in the Science Fiction, Horror and Fantasy round-up (2nd April) regarding sales of James Herbert's Portent in hardback.
While the book may have been disappointing for Books Etc in Charing Cross Road, the overall UK sales were spectacularly good at over 40,000 copies in the trade — a record sale for a Herbert hardback.
Indeed, the book is even now still in W H Smith's Top 20 hardcover fiction bestseller list.
Your sincerely
Charles Nettleton
UK Sales Director
Hodder & Stoughton,
.
Travel guides
From Mr Tony Wheeler
Sir, I was disappointed that no Lonely Planet guidebooks featured in your Travel Guides Bookseller list (26th March).
Disappointed but scarcely surprised, since Bookwatch wasn't tracking any of our titles (or those of a good many travel publishers) at the time when the list was compiled.
This seems to me like trying to bake a cake with half the ingredients missing — and then not warning the consumer why it might taste funny.
Yours sincerely
Tony Wheeler
Lonely Planet Publications Pty Ltd,
.
Not in Lapland
From Mr Paul Barnett
Sir, Just in case confusion is caused by William Boot's news in Unauthorised Returns (2nd April) that Paul Barnett has left Titan Books for the wilds of Lapland, I wonder if you would be good enough to let your readers know that the other Paul Barnett is still alive and well and working from Exeter.
Yours faithfully ,
Paul Barnett
Paul Barnett (Editorial),
.
Since the first publication in 1977 of his book on collecting modern first editions, Joseph Connolly has detected collectors becoming more enthusiastic in their pursuit of contemporary writers — to such an extent that a fine first of The Rachel Papers can now fetch £500
The draw of the moderns
PUBLISHERS AND BOOKSELLERS, for generally apparent reasons, are very fond indeed of the dedicated book buyer, while at the same time having no regard whatever for the collector of books.
This weirdo is perceived as poking around dusty old bookshops instead of the gleaming God-have-you-any- conception -what-this-refit-has-just-cost-us sort of outlet and, worse, buys secondhand books, books that have already been sold and therefore attract no income or royalties whatever;and who might even be willing to pay up to 10 times the original cover price if the damn thing is a first edition, whereas everyone knows that first editions are merely what are given away free, for heaven's sake, to hacks who seldom review them and — even more galling — to the bloody authors who wrote them in the first place.
Well, in this view — quite possibly for the very first time in the history of their occupations — publishers and booksellers are wrong.
Collectors of modern first editions (who, despite the recession, are a growing band)do buy new books — indeed, they form a dependable, if minor, corner of the market.
Assiduous sifter
You can spot the modern first edition collector: it is he who sifts assiduously through a pile of the new Martin Amis searching for the copy whose corner is not bumped, only to reject it because the alignment of the dust-wrapper (not jacket) on the spine is very slightly askew — but he doesn't want that copy either because of the biro indentation on the lamination, and the nineteenth copy would have been OK had the rear cover not been soiled.
It is he also who, just when the publisher is cock-a-hoop at having reprinted a hot new novel within a week of publication, will telephone the sales department earnestly requested a single copy of the first impression.
A right pain in the neck, in short, but in the end he will buy a copy — full retail price, no questions asked — and (because collectors are generally tidy chaps) will stack up neatly the rejects so that they may be snapped up by the mere purchaser or — even more gratifyingly undiscerning — the impulse buyer.
Since 1977, when I first published what is still the only British book on the subject (Modern First Editions: Their Value to Collectors ), collectors have become more and more attracted to contemporary writers; in this latest edition I list 281 twentieth century authors in whom there is currently the most interest, 115 of whom are alive and well and regularly producing new offerings which the hopelessly dedicated completists are obliged to add to their earlier  rarities .
How soon after publication these purchases are made depends on how rapidly the favourites reprint.
With the likes of Martin Amis (still the leader of the pack — a fine first of The Rachel Papers could now fetch £500), Julian Barnes, Dick Francis, Wendy Cope, John Mortimer, Kazuo Ishiguro, Tom Stoppard and quite a few more, one has to be fairly quick off the mark; with others, a more leisurely approach is adopted, either because the first edition tends to hang about, or — in such cases as le Carré and Forsyth — when the initial print runs are so huge as to discourage panic buying.
The mention of these two blockbuster names ought not to imply, however, that the collecting of contemporary fiction is necessarily allied to the bestseller lists: booksellers may rest assured that not one of the mega-thousands of Jilly Coopers, Jeffrey Archers, Wilbur Smiths or Catherine Cooksons will go to a collector, while a surprising number of Dennis Potters, Alan Bennetts, Kingsley Amises, William Boyds, Seamus Heaneys and Alan Ayckbourns will.
And if you hold a signing session — provided it isn't for a politician, a game-show host or some other nonentity — then the collectors will be out in force, perfectly happy to buy a new copy of Julian  Barnes' The Porcupine , though eager too to slip in their mint first of Metroland (worth up to £80) or Flaubert's Parrot (£40).
A few of the best
Among the others there is always growing interest in (alphabetically) Paul Auster, Nicholson Baker, John Banville, Peter Carey, Robertson Davies, Dom deLillo, Elaine Feinstein, Alasdair Gray, James Kelman, Jay McInerney and — of all strangenesses — Ellis Peters (a pseudonym for Edith Pargeter — 80 years old and still going strong).
Of the 20 Best of Young British Novelists, however, I confess to having listed only Iain Banks, Kazuo Ishiguro (both of whom appeared in the third edition) and Jeanette Winterson, although I think there is scope too for Will Self, Nicholas Shakespeare and maybe Ben Okri.
So, let's get this straight: first edition collectors do buy new books, preferably hardback and preferably mint, and all things being well, here is one of the many titles for which these loyal and driven souls will this season be queuing twelve-deep:
Modern First Editions: Their Value to Collectors , 10th June, Little, Brown, £25 
‘We need a significant raising of the barriers to entry — brave publishing (or even better, brave exploitation of the backlist) across a very narrow range of titles, powerfully marketed (and by that I mean television advertising) to create real volume.’
Alan Giles on the future of the children's book business in the UK
Upping the ante for children's books
AS I HAVE not attended a Booksellers Association conference since Eastbourne 1987, I was surprised by the fact that the 1993 conference was somewhat inward-looking and said so little about the consumer.
It is only right that we should analyse and debate the internal workings of the trade and its infrastructure, but let us not forget who pays our wages — the consumer.
I was also surprised to discover how few booksellers there were in Torquay, or if they were here their voices seemed strangely muted.
Maybe this is a consequence of the recession, maybe the growing influence of the chains, but I should encourage all booksellers actively to use this conference to help shape the agenda for the industry on which we all depend.
There has, quite rightly, been a great deal of discussion at this conference about the opportunities and threats presented by the new media.
But as someone who has been away from the industry for five years, I see a surprisingly rosy future for the book itself.
I want to take you through the thinking that led me to that conclusion, and then to concentrate on one of the keys to securing that future — the whole question of advancing the cause of children's books.
Why am I optimistic?
The ability of the book to adapt and indeed thrive following challenges from new media is legendary.
The cinema, television and computers all prompted the prophets of doom to forecast the demise of the book.
Yet these innovations simply served to create the complementary streams to cement further the role of the book in our lives.
Secondly, publishing has very low barriers to entry.
I accept that there has been a steady concentration of power in the hands of large, sophisticated and diversified publishing companies, yet it is still possible for you or me to set up on our own, and publish highly professional and innovative books from our own back bedroom at very little cost.
Changing print technology will  simply serve to reduce further these barriers to entry, making even lower print runs economically viable.
Books are the ultimate targeted product.
Of course the country may be riveted by the latest video release or the latest Nintendo game.
But the likelihood is that everyone else is consuming the same product; with the inexorable rise in the number of books in  print, there are now approaching 600,000 different titles to choose from, allowing each of us to tailor our reading precisely to our own individual needs and preferences.
Books are also convenient to use, with advantages of portability, accessibility and privacy in virtually any situation.
Thanks to the skills of publishers and printers, many books are also desirable possessions as physical products over and beyond the value of the information they contain.
With the possible exception of the now defunct art form of 12-inch album sleeve covers, what other entertainment or information product creates that same desire for possession?
Another indicator for the future of the book is a growing commitment across all age groups to lifelong self-improvement and a recognition in influential groups such as government and the media that the role of the book is not purely commercial, and that it conveys other advantages to society and must be regarded accordingly.
When we look at the demographics of book buyers and project forward the changes in these constituent groups, there is further good news.
I would particularly draw you attention to the 8% rise in the number of 45–59 olds projected between now and 1998, a group with growing disposable income and increasing leisure time.
We must also seize the opportunity presented by the considerable increase in numbers of children, particularly those of school age.
Even in these recession-ridden times, it is true that in most households, expenditure on the needs of children is protected to a greater degree than those of adults, and, in most cases, right across the social spectrum, books command a positive attitude from parents, where they; are seen as linking directly with a future passport for career success.
Adequate incentives
So I feel optimistic about the future of the book.
But to secure this future we are dependent on nationwide availability of properly capitalised bookshops which are committed to carrying a wide range of stock.
I share the scepticism of many other booksellers when I hear publishers' justification for differential treatment of book clubs, supermarkets, etc.
Publishers should make sure that there really are adequate incentives for booksellers to showcase their ranges, in prime locations, which are attractively fitted-out.
And booksellers should open across trading hours which match when customers want to shop — including Sundays.
We must also make sure that future generations not only read, but also have a real enthusiasm for visiting bookshops and libraries.
So what do I see as the problems in how the industry appeals to the children of today?
To me, the biggest problem must be overpublishing.
How can we possibly justify creating 7,000 additional children's books each year?
What booksellers can hope adequately to display more than a mere handful of these — and often then at the expense of much more saleable backlist titles with greater literary and commercial credentials?
Let's not forget that even if no more children's books were published at all, each year would still see the arrival of a new cohort of children and their parents and grandparents, who for the first time start to contemplate buying books which are relevant for a child of that age.
To them, books first published years ago are just as fresh, attractive and exciting as they were when first published — even if booksellers and publishers tired of them long ago.
As the father of young children myself, I often wonder at the adult-oriented visual images, themes and preoccupations which seem to dominate so much of our children's publishing, and the failure to recognise that today's generations of youngsters have grown up conditioned by the immediate access and instant gratification provided by the likes of television and computer games.
There is an urgent need for publishing to reflect that change of perspective.
Booksellers not blameless
And let me not suggest that booksellers are blameless either.
Many of us — and I most certainly include Waterstones — are guilty of creating an atmosphere which, while relaxing and relevant to book purchasing by adults, proves to be boring and even intimidating for children.
We also frequently overlook the fact that many of the most knowledgeable and committed adult book buyers have a very low level of confidence and experience in buying children's books.
Returning to the consequences of overpublishing, I see the whole industry as being guilty of dissipating its precious financial resources with too much well-intentioned but misguided advertising and promotional activity spread across a plethora of titles.
In my view, very little of this activity manages to scrape its way above the threshold of consumer awareness.
Furthermore, in so many British bookshops, there is a scarcity of the specialist knowledge that can advise and guide purchasers.
It seems to me that many of the people involved in our industry have a fundamental lack of understanding of the needs and preoccupations of the modern child, and there are far too many groups, circles, committees and working parties which we seem to form in endless pursuit of the Holy Grail of better children's bookselling.
I also become exasperated when I see some of the deals appearing in supermarkets and tacky remainder shops, with low levels of staff and service and complete inability or disinclination ever to pay their bills.
The problem with this type of promotion is that it undermines any sensible perception which purchasers of children's books might have of what constitutes value for money.
So what are the solutions?
I don't think we will get anywhere by regarding children's books as some kind of charitable cause with a long term and uncertain pay-off when the children eventually grows up to be an obedient adult book buyer.
The cause of children's bookselling can only be advanced by everyone involved making worthwhile sums of money which justify the resources allocated.
That means very significantly raising the barriers to entry — brave publishing (or even better, brave exploitation of the backlist) across a very narrow range of titles, powerfully marketed (and by that I mean television advertising) to create real volume.
It goes without saying that we should forget hardback novels — except perhaps for libraries — and concentrate on the paperbacks which children and their parents prefer.
We need the publishing skills which really can penetrate through the powerful myths and barriers which surround the role of books in children's minds, and give them real playground credibility.
We can't we devise publishing concepts which capture children's imaginations in such a way that they are confident to spend as much time talking about what they have been reading as they are about last night's episode of ‘Neighbours’?
Let's also not forget the number of gifts bought each year for children.
My two daughters are lucky enough to go frequently to their friends' parties, invariably attended by a dozen or so children clutching a present which has cost their parents between £3 and £5.
Rarely do I see a parent who has decided to buy a book as a present.
Why?
Let's remove the mystique that says ‘children's books are different’.
We must underpin the knowledge and confidence of customers by training, improved classification, display and merchandising aids, and recognise who really drives the purchasing decision.
New opportunities
Let us also celebrate and exploit the opportunities that have been created by new media, and ensure that bookshops are seen as the distribution channel of choice, and that we do all we can to make the book the natural bedfellow of these emerging products.
I fear that there will be a natural tendency for suppliers such as Sony to turn to consumer electronics and recorded music outlets with whom they already have business relationships, and who are able to live off low discounts.
But even so, I find it hard to imagine a better environment in which to sell their extensive software than a stockholding bookseller with knowledgeable staff.
The above is an edited version of a paper given by Alan Giles to the Booksellers Association Conference in Torquay.
Mr Giles is the managing director of Waterstones .
BA CONFERENCE 1993
Coming to terms with the new media, growing conflicts in the schools market, the joys of electronic data interchange and the whys and hows of financial management and market research — the Booksellers Association's Torquay Conference in depth
The future of the book — the light years ahead
The first assembly of the 1993 Conference, ‘The future of the book’, will probably be most remembered for Peter Kindersley's quietly passionate vision in practice, the marriage of words, pictures and sounds, in Dorling Kindersley's multimedia CD-ROM Musical Instruments , which, when demonstrated by the m.d. of DK Multimedia Alan Buckingham, drew spontaneous applause.
With Peter Kindersley on a panel chaired by Bing Taylor of W H Smith were Simon Lang of the Henley Centre for Forecasting and Beverly Anderson, the new head of Book Trust.
Modest growth
Simon Lang examined books in the context of the leisure market, and the news from the Henley Centre was encouraging if not entirely good.
Leisure spending was projected to grow modestly to 1997 (1.1% in 1993, 2.8% in 1994, 2.4% in 1995 and 3% in 1996 and 1997) as people sought to pay off their debts and continued to fear for their jobs.
‘According to statistics, 7 out of 10 of you are concerned about losing your jobs,’ Mr Lang told his audience.
But the spend on luxuries such as books was projected to slightly higher.
On the debit side, the Henley Centre is forecasting a rise in book prices of 33%, on a par with music products but greater than that for home computer products (-3.5%) and video software (+10%).
‘The repercussion are likely to be felt in the children's market,’ observed Mr Lang, ‘where ‘visual literacy’alternatives to books are more attractive among the 10 to 12 year olds — your book buyers of the future.’
Going into more detail on the book buyer profile, he reported buoyancy in the 24+ age group market, but a decline in the amount of time 16 to 19 year olds spend reading each week.
The ‘phenomenally good news’ was that between 1987 and 1992 the growth in the number of book buyers had outstripped the growth in the population, and reading continued to be a weekly activity for 71% of it.
Mr Lang attributed great significance to the potential for the future of book sales offered by ‘light’ book buyers (three or less books in 12 months).
Not only was this group on the increase but it embraced a complete cross section of society.
This growth he put down to the general improvement in bookshop presentation and the wider availability of books in non-traditional outlets.
These light buyers, he suggested, were a market to concentrate on and convert to medium (four to 9 books) and heavy (10 plus) book buyers.
In seeking to expand the market, publishers and booksellers would have to take into account a number of factors, such as:
•a general perception among the population of shrinking leisure time, and the growing number of competing activities
•the perception of books and reading as minority interests
•the attractiveness of and familiarity with electronic media among younger people
•the increase in out of town shopping and the negative impact of this on spontaneous purchasing
•the need to ensure books were exciting in a stressful decade.
‘My passion,’ said Peter Kindersley, ‘is to get the book to work harder.
There are so many distracting media around.
But one of the great problems with the new media is that, because the brain finds it difficult to do anything but process imagery and sound, it isn't left in a reflective state.
A book can be a learning experience.’
The combination was the complete marriage: ‘Through the picture I see reality; through the word I understand it.’
This was certainly  brought home in the demonstration of Musical Instruments .
Pan Macmillan's traditional BA dinner was held at the Egon Ronay Restaurant of the Year, the Carved Angel in Dartmouth, with guest of honour Barbara Castle (Fighting All the Way ), 11th June, £20), who enchanted guests with her passion and her charisma.
She gave her first election address, she said, at the age of 6.
It went: ‘Dear citizens, vote for me and I'll give you houses.
That was in 1916 — it should still make a jolly good election address.’
Baroness Castle is pictured here with conference first-timer Suzanne Watson of Heathcote.
Electronic books
And there was practical advice for booksellers which did not require the impossible.
‘We are still at the beginning of this new media,’ suggested Mr Kindersley.
‘Carve out a little part of your shop as an information corner, perhaps that part where you put travel guides or computer books.
Put your talking tapes there and a few CD-ROM products, and computer software.
This will begin to give your staff experience.
You won't be competing with video and music stores, but you will be a part of the information base of the high street.
You might consider changing the name of the bookshop a little to get in ‘electronic book’ somewhere.’
Beverly Anderson took up the theme of  new media.
Creative people in all walks of artistic life were responding to and ‘fooling around with’ the new media.
‘Can the book compete?’ she asked.
‘The book has unique strengths.
Print is very efficient for the communication and imbibing of information.
Print on a page is more seductive than print on a screen.
Print offers us privacy.
‘We need to play to the strengths of book.
We cannot have the voluptuous strengths of new technology, but books have the attraction of maturity.
We must be confident.
What we are offering is valuable.
Books have a particular value for a culture which is badly under-educated and where there is enforced leisure.
Books provide mental muscle building, in the privacy of and at your own pace in your place.’
The trade should provide a good variety of output for all tastes, from cheap classics to ‘trash’, and in variety of outlets —‘B&Q should be seen as a place to buy books.
We have to meet the people where they are.’
It should also, she urged, be an advocate for the book as well as conducting campaigns such as the fight against VAT: ‘Celebrating what is good is as important as campaigning’.
The new generation — a strategy for reading
Julia Eccleshare reports
The second general assembly found the stage set for a show discussion, a darkened hall with the five speakers and their chairman in a blaze of lights.
The two lead parts were quickly established: David Pascall, on the right physically and philosophically, and Mike Rosen on the left.
David Pascall, as the recent ex-chair of the National Curriculum Council, put the case for the ‘lists’ as the basis of a strategy for reading.
Mike Rosen, poet and broadcaster, was the champion of a strategy for reading dependent on enthusing readers by offering them books which they could enjoy, books which had been chosen by them or for them by people who knew about children's books.
Encouraging children
Author Michael Morpurgo, Angela Beeching, the executive producer of BBC TV children's programmes, and Keith Nettle, vice-chair of the International Publishers Association Reading Committee, were the supporting cast.
They offered no alternative strategies, but all believed that encouraging children to enjoy good books freely was the soundest way of holding on to readers and of creating a new generation of them.
The crux of the discussion was who should choose books for children, and how.
Mr Pascall's emphasis came back time and time again to the idea of a ‘framework’: ‘The purpose of the national curriculum,’ he said, ‘is to ensure that there is a framework so that we can be confident that every child has the opportunity to read widely, to develop the habit of reading and to develop the love and understanding of literature.
Obviously this is the experience of some children but we must make sure it is the experience and entitlement of every child in this country.’
The lists, he argued, would ensure that all children had a chance to read widely from some of the great literature of ‘our literary heritage and those of other cultures’.
Mr Rosen's attack on the lists was not with the particular choice of titles — indeed the list was so extensive that no one could possibly be against them all .
His argument rested on the fact that in ‘the real world’ people had conversations about books.
When a title of a book was given there was discussion about it; book lists had a paragraph about each book saying who thought what about it.
The National Curriculum Council's lists, he argued, ‘come from another tradition and one that is completely against the spirit of literature.
They are a diktat, apparently government-backed.
This government, so interested in privatisation, has actually nationalised reading.’
Thus the two positions were stated and there was little movement around those points.
Mr Pascall was determined to reassure the audience by reiterating his view that the framework was the answer.
He fervently believed that if there was enough consultation the lists would solve the problems of children's reading at a stroke.
While grudgingly accepting Mr Rosen's line that there were some good teachers who did teach properly, he was quick to counter with the challenge that ‘we couldn't be sure that it was happening elsewhere’.
Mike Rosen's footwork was much quicker.
He moved on from attacking the general principle of lists which had no apparent critical authority to citing individual examples of how books sometimes needed a mediator, most often a teacher, for their message to make sense.
He argued that the money spent on the national curriculum would have been far better spent on circulating information about books and encouraging teachers to use them.
Patronising lists
Michael Morpurgo, speaking as an ex-teacher as well as an author, supported Mr Rosen with a series of vehement statements which reflected a passionate commitment to the independence of teachers to choose books that were right for them and for their pupils.
His primary objection to the lists was that they were patronising to teachers.
That said, he barely engaged with the details of the argument, dismissing the very notion of the lists as if this were beneath consideration.
He shrewdly observed that the most important thing for a teacher was never to use a book that failed.
To do so could put a child off reading for life.
As an author, he exploded at Mr Pascall for suggesting that the lists would make sure that children read ‘suitable’ books: ‘What is suitable?
We should give children books which stimulate them, which open their eyes, not confine them with safe lists.’
Keith Nettle talked a great deal about the underfunding of the teaching of literature.
The inventors of the national curriculum seemed not to have thought about how it would be funded, he claimed.
No one took issue with this, but there was no one present to say what might be done about it.
Angela Beeching spoke about the role of TV in getting books to children through dramas and readings.
Clear evidence shows that many children buy books that have been adapted for television (though there is less evidence about the number who read them).
No bright future
Stephanie Nettell controlled her over-large panel well, asking probing questions to lead them on their way.
Nevertheless, there was little in the debate which looked forward to a bright new future.
Sadly, the current infighting about children's reading will do little to encourage publishers or booksellers to engage seriously in children's literature.
One must ask when those working in children's books will seize their opportunities and discuss the excellence of writing for children, the excitement that children show when they meet books, and the absolute commitment of all professionals, especially teachers and librarians, to getting the right book to the right child at the right time.
Selling into schools — the stakes, and the controversy, grow
Expanding your market by selling to schools promised to be a controversial session, and did not disappoint.
The schools market is an area where booksellers and publishers increasingly seem to be on opposing teams, playing on that all too familiar unlevel playing field.
And the game is growing steadily more acrimonious as the stakes rise.
Roy Davey, managing director of both HarperCollins Educational and Children's divisions, ventured that ‘I am not sure whether you see me cast in the role of partner or competitor’, a question clearly lingering in minds on both sides.
He further pondered two opposing maxims, Benjamin Franklin's ‘We must all hang together or assuredly we shall all hang separately’, and Karl  Liebknecht's ‘The basic law of capitalism is you or I, not both you and I’.
The session illustrated that the latter more accurately reflected reality in the schools market.
That the spotlight should be falling so directly on the schools market now was due, said Mr Davey, to the raised profile of education, the introduction of changes tot he national curriculum, but mainly to local management of schools.
With LMS ‘the fences came down’ and ‘schools were freed to make up their own minds whom to get their books from’.
This resulted in not only booksellers being free to pitch for the school business, but publishers too.
And, Mr Davey reminded his audience, it was a substantial and ‘certain’ market, worth around £200m a year.
Of that, around £60m of school purchasing was on ‘trade’ as opposed to text books, or ‘what in other terms is thought of as children's and teenage publishing’.
With children's books representing £290m or 12% of the book market, something like 20% of children's trade publishing ended up in schools.
Publishers' attitudes
Having established the size and therefore the importance of the schools market, Mr Davey moved on ‘to the really contentious bit — publishers’ attitudes, and actions, in this market’.
He was looking at ‘the possibility of reconciling’ the two views of ‘co-operation and competition’.
But, as BA president John Hitchin at the a.g.m. the following morning declared himself ‘gobsmacked by Roy Davey's appalling statement of policy at HarperCollins’, it would appear that he did not succeed.
Mr Davey acknowledged that ‘we each have our own commercial imperatives to follow’, and urged all groups ‘to be realistic; understand the imperatives of the other parties, and look for a deal or modus operandi that is stable and so gives both parties an acceptable result’.
But as subsequent speakers proved, one man's ‘acceptable result’ was another's unlevel playing field.
Mr Davey's imperative as a publisher that so upset Mr Hitchin and his fellow booksellers was that ‘my prime concern is that the school buys my books, and the only person the publisher can rely upon to actively sell his books to the school is himself’.
With this in mind, Mr Davey believed that ‘schools are too important to publishers to leave to the uncertain energies and stock ranges of the local bookshop’.
Mohammed to the mountain
And from a school's point of view, he felt that ‘if someone will come to your doorstep to demonstrate, why should you ignore this service and travel to their doorstep?
Especially if you are never willing to make a decision without first seeing and perhaps  trialling the product.’
Also, he believed, ‘in respect of much general book/library purchasing, the decision is not ‘what is the best book’ in absolute terms, it is much more ‘is this suitable/attractive and justifies my use of whatever funds I was intending to spend’.
They demand what they know exists and buy from what they see and know.’
Specialist children's bookseller Angela McPherson agreed that teachers wanted convenience in their book purchasing, but also emphasised that they wanted choice, advice on what was available and back-up services such as jacketing.
These were things booksellers could provide.
She also underlined the importance of parents becoming ‘better informed on what is available so that they can pass that enthusiasm and appreciation on to the children’.
Children themselves needed more visual encouragement to react to enable the book to compete with the attractions of video and television.
Ms McPherson called on publishers called on publishers for their support, a level playing field and, on a particular issue, more careful consideration of which titles they published non-net.
When being sold through a bookshop in single copies, they would, she said, be more profitably sold net.
Next up was David Stewart of Charles Wilson Booksellers, a veteran of the school market, who warned that Roy Davey's suggestion that ‘it was down to every publisher to be in schools selling their own books’ would in his view lead to chaos.
‘There is already resistance from teachers to the number of calls being made on them, and the bombardment of paper.’
Mr Stewart was convinced that, provided booksellers had the required enthusiasm and vision to tackle the schools market, they were  uniquely placed to act as agent to all publishers and to provide a one-stop shopping facility for teachers.
‘Most teachers would prefer to deal with bookshops, which offer a full service.’
But, he warned, ‘if you aren't enthusiastic about selling to schools, don't touch it because your enthusiasm has got to carry you through a lot of economic restrictions,’ including, he remarked, the ‘silly discounts’being offered by School Book Fairs that were ‘far more dangerous than publishers selling direct’.
Giving voice to the demands, and warning about the constraints on teachers buying books, Pat Clark, a teacher and member of the Federation of Children's Book Groups, reminded booksellers and publishers alike that ‘books are only one of the resources needed by teachers’.
With this in mind, it was important when moving into the schools market to consider who did the book buying in a school, and where they got their ideas from.
Once booksellers had found out who was behind the book order and what they wanted, it was vital to deliver the right book at the right time.
Direct selling
Ms Clark conceded that there was ‘little you can do to compete with the discount offered by School Book Fairs’, but urged booksellers to ‘show the teachers your advantages’.
As to direct selling, she believed that seeing off the threat of publishers was even easier: ‘No publisher can supply all the books a school needs.’
Ms Clark's optimism was encouraging, but question time reminded booksellers once again how relentless was the onslaught on the schools market from all sides when a questioner raised the issue of Dorling Kindersley ‘agents’ selling in to schools.
David Holmes of Dorling Kindersley fielded the accusation of ‘unfair play’: ‘The DK Family Library is a business set up as a networking operation, along the lines of Tupperware,’ he said.
‘It is operated by self employed agents.
We are not giving them special instructions to sell into schools, and in the main it is run on a party plan approach.’
10% minimum discount
However, while the company did not encourage them to approach schools, it was ‘not something we can stop altogether’.
He gave the impression that the agents were to a large extent out of DK's strict control and that the agents were policed largely on the basis of responding to complaints and taking remedial action where appropriate or possible.
He did, however, stress that ‘our representatives cannot give more than 10% discount’.
This seemed less than convincing when Angela McPherson replied that a Dorling Kindersley representative had been reported ‘selling at 50% discount to my local school and I lost the order’.
Whatever publishers' position on the question of ‘partner or competitor’, Richard Heath, of Heath Educational Book Supplies, stressed that ‘booksellers are not asking for favouritism, we simple need a level playing field’, and, he warned, ‘Publishers like Heinemann Educational, who attempt to gain market share for key national curriculum titles by offering schools 20, 25, 33 or even 50% discount for buying direct, cannot then expect the same support from booksellers as we will give to publishers who show commitment to booksellers.’
Virago's first event to celebrate the company's 20th birthday was for booksellers at a breakfast during the Booksellers Association Conference in Torquay last week.
A fitting start to the celebrations, said managing director Harriet Spicer, because of the support the trade had given Virago over the years.
From left the Virago team, Lennie Goodings, 20th year ‘mascot’ Ethel Merman (‘Broadway has been very good to me — but then I've been very good to Broadway’), Harriet Spicer and Fiona McIntosh.
The role of research in targeting the book market
In a workshop session which the BA might consider restaging as a full day seminar, Peter Mouncey of the AA, Leslie Henry of Book Marketing Ltd and Sue Morris of W H Smith tackled ‘Targeting the book market — the role of research’ from three different though complementary angles.
The provision of concentrated data about data tended to information overload, but there were valuable tips to be picked up.
The common theme was identifying and understanding the consumer.
Leslie Henry concentrated on secondary sources that would give a bookseller the insight he or she might need on current and potential buyers.
Firstly, the shop's own data: what sells, when and to what patterns; buying habits across subject categories; the effectiveness of instore promotions; and customer records.
Customer profiles
External information was available from a wide variety of sources.
Profiles of local customers could be built up from information from Training Enterprise Councils (TECs), local press and radio, Chambers of Commerce, libraries, colleges, local advertising, and research agencies.
Meanwhile, book buying habits and patterns were to be had from sources such as BML and the British Market Research Bureau, TGI, Euromonitor, Mintel, and trade journals.
Thirdly, observation could provide data on competition in the marketplace, how well other bookshops were doing, and what kind of customers they were attracting and why.
Sue Morris of W H Smith homed in on the primary source of the information — the consumer.
How could booksellers tap this source of data?
Ms Morris ran through the procedures of quantitative research, the collection of data and facts (as opposed to qualitative research, the gathering of judgements and perceptions).
Booksellers could approach quantitative research in three ways: do it themselves; do it mostly themselves and get the tabular data collected professionally: or use a market research agency for the whole project.
Whichever method one used, the first and most important step was to formulate objectives, the ‘what do I want to know, why, and what can I do with the result?’ guiding principles for research.
Should booksellers decide to carry out the market research themselves, they should not forget, Ms Morris warned, that their own time was money and that there would also be postal and printing costs.
They should identify the target and a sample; decide on the method (fact to face interviews, postal or telephone survey).
If the questionnaire method was chosen this should be ‘short, unambiguous, logical and not ask leading questions’; it should also seek to identify the sex, age, social class, lifestyle, buying frequency, address and, importantly, postal code of the respondent.
Judge the timing of the research carefully, advised Ms Morris; a key sales period, Christmas for example, would not be typical, neither were school holidays, which might throw up a biased sample.
Local higher education departments could often be interested in carrying out interviews — a bookseller's own staff would not be trained in the techniques and would inevitably be biased.
Finally, one would need to analyse the results, and bear in mind, for example, that a tabulating agency would create tables but not analyse them.
Mr Morris helpfully gave a couple of scenarios as benchmarks for the kind of agency fees a bookshop might be looking at.
Faced with a new branch of nationwide chain opening up in the next street leading to falling sales at one's own bookshop, a bookseller might go for interviews with customers leaving the new store.
Interviews with 200 such customers would cost around £2,500 through a market research agency.
A small local chain of bookshops seeking to identify its strengths and build a strategy in the face of a large chain moving into two of its five towns would probably find that research cost it about £4,500.
Geodemographics
Geodemographics, explained Peter Mouncey of the AA, was a system of producing data drawn from the national census, developed during the '80s.
There were four such systems: Acorn, Pin, Mosaic and Superprofiles, all of which took a number of census variables and turned them into groups.
Acorn for example, produced data broken down by ‘agricultural areas’, ‘older housing’, ‘council estates’, ‘metropolitan areas’.
Mosaic identified ‘prosperous pensioners’, ‘leafy suburbs’, ‘singles and flat dwellers’.
The whole electoral roll could be broken down into sub groups and the linking feature was the post code — all speakers stressed the importance of capturing this particular piece of information from customers and respondents to questionnaires.
Geodemographics, he added, could be used for targeting direct mail, analysing retail catchment areas, market research sampling, databases, by local authorities for utilities planning — and by the book trade.
BMRB collected post codes and was an Acorn user.
By collating the data one could, for example, identify and target the strongest, or weakest, buyers of romantic fiction in the last 12 months by social group.
Another development in market research was the ‘lifestyle questionnaire’, but Mr Mouncey warned that a lot more work needed to be done in this area as the response rate was generally low and not statistically significant.
He finished by demonstrating the AA's own geodemographic maps, which could show, by buying weight (heavy, medium, light) represented in coloured dots, the buying and reading profiles of London and Torquay.
Creating the plan and getting the credit
The ‘Financial Management for Booksellers’ workshop took a practical approach, covering the creation of a business plan, cash management and working capital, management accounts and information, bookselling and banking.
Waterstones' financial director Ian Newman kicked off by outlining the importance of having a business plan: ‘If you have got a plan, then you are controlling your business against something clearly set out and written down.’
Creating a plan entailed identifying the business' objectives, projecting profit and cash flow, and predicting market share.
It should be used as a working tool, for example, to help improve profitability, increase sales, improve buying margin, reduce operating costs, and reduce the amount of working capital tied up.
Cash management was vital, Mr Newman warned.
‘A lack of cash planning is usually what takes a business down.’
Close monitoring and forecasting could give important early indications of cash flow problems, with time to take corrective action.
Mr Newman added that ‘you don't need an accountant to prepare your cash flow statements every month; indeed I would suggest that it is dangerous to do so as it is your business, your livelihood.’
A key point to consider with management accounts and information was ‘who are the users of the information and what is useful and important to them’.
These considerations should be used to judge the right level of detail and regularity of their preparation.
Presenting the friendly face of banking, Paul Smith of the Royal Bank of Scotland gave booksellers an insight into a bank's approach to the prospective business customer.
In simple terms the first questions a bank would ask were: has the business got a long term future?
Do we have a workable relationship?
Do/can we earn an adequate return for the risk involved? and is there a clearly identified ability to repay?
Mr Smith encouraged forming an open and honest relationship with the bank, presenting this as in the interests of both parties.
‘It is important that your bank knows everything about your business so that if you have to go to them for help they are in the best position to five assistance.
And,’ he warned, ‘if you hide things and they are subsequently discovered, you lose credibility.’
He also reiterated Mr Newman's advice on having good management information.
‘If you are going through a difficult time, we do need to know why, hence the benefit of having good information and figures to hand.’
EDI — no pens, no paper, no fuss
Everything that happens, said Friedrich Nietzsche, eternally happens again and again.
Curiously, listening to Peter Ferris, IT and production director John Wiley, speak at the workshop session ‘As Easy as EDI’, chaired by Heffers' managing director Mark Wait, made one thing of the great German philosopher's gloomy doctrine of eternal recurrence.
Mr Ferris — witty, committed and impressively relaxed — with the aid of enhanced computer graphics began by demonstrating how EDI messages, such as orders, acknowledgements, invoices, delivery notes and statements, can be electronically transferred between computer systems.
He explained how this process, standard practice for most major retailers, could streamline booksellers' and publishers' working practices, and, by doing so, improve efficiency and profitability.
Nietzschean warning
But, although he did not mention the philosopher, he concluded with a Nietzschean warning: ‘The technology exists, the standards are in place and the benefits are clear.
But if you don't embrace EDI, relentlessly, every year, conference after conference, you will be faced with the prospect of people like me endlessly expounding the virtues of EDI.
What better incentive could there be for prompting booksellers to escape this predicament and embrace change?’
That assessment was echoed by the other speakers in the session — Kevin Allard of Bertram Books, David Edyvean of the Gosport Bookshop and Nick Polkinhorne of the Sevenoaks Bookshop —each of whom explained how the application of new technology had enabled them successfully to transform the environment in which they worked.
Nick Polkinhorne (using less sophisticated software than Mr Ferris: an overhead projector) offered a demonstration of how to use TeleOrdering; Kevin Allard did the same with First Edition, the EDI service for the book trade set up last year by Book Data and Vista.
David Edyvean, who has had installed in his shop the Bestseller EPOS system, which has an interface to Buyline and links to TeleOrdering,BookBank and other CD-ROM databases — explained that despite a personal lack of technical expertise, careful investment in new technology had enabled his shop to establish a competitive edge.
Then displaying all the fiery conviction of the convert, Mr Edyvean ended his presentation by ripping up an old-fashioned order form, snapping a pencil in half and proclaiming, ‘EDI is all about computers talking to computers, which means no paper, no pens and no fuss.’
During the open forum, which followed the session, a passionately lively, occasionally fierce, debate took place between representatives from TeleOrdering and First Edition.
TeleOrdering's sales and services director Ian Hall, supported by Whitaker's marketing director Martin Whitaker, said that TeleOrdering was upgrading its basic service and increasing its range of EDI facilities.
The improvements would enabled users of the system to place orders whenever they wished rather than be bound by the 24-hour batched system currently in operation.
In response, First Edition project director Mark Hodder-Williams said that First Edition had been in operation for nine months, and had successfully provided users with an efficient, fast computer-to-computer service for exchanging a wide range of commercial documents.
‘There is room for both systems,’ he said.
Strenuous exercises
The debate was concluded by a watchful Mark Wait.
‘There seems to be some confusion about which system does what,’ he said, ‘I think there needs to be a strenuous marketing exercise from both companies to explain the advantages of their systems to the trade.’
Giving voice to their frustrations and determinations in the battle for the schools market:from top Angela McPherson, Roy Davey, Pat Clark and David Stewart.
(See page 22.)
BOOK NEWS
Maeve Binchy's gift for drawing readers into the lives of people from small communities, and for describing the evolution of friendships, have won her millions of readers.
Her latest book tells the story of a village from the points of view of eight of its inhabitants
Maeve in heaven
Maeve Binchy's conversation is an ebullient, entertaining torrent of words.
But she is also a keen listener.
‘You wouldn't think I'd listen at all, because I'm so chatty,’ she says.
‘But I overhear people's conversations, and sometimes I'll get off a bus and follow them if I'm interested; or I'll stand beside people pretending to be looking at something or reading, but actually listening to them.
And I always listen when I get crossed lines.
I've never got a plot out of a conversation, but I get the way people talk.’
She has observed that not everyone's conversation follows her own style.
‘I talk a lot, and my friends and relations do as well.
We're always interrupting each other.
But a long time ago I was writing a television play about Irish men coming over to England to collect their brother's body, and I couldn't imagine how they'd talk.
So I went into Irish pubs.
I was amazed that people could sit with each other and say so little.’
Such research is evidence of the attention and care that she devotes to her writing.
Her latest work of fiction,The Copper Beech (1st July, £4.99), which is the Superlead announcing the new Orion Paperbacks list, is a superficially simple book that is in fact one of her most meticulously planned.
Set, like many of her titles, in a fictional Irish village, it tells the stories of eight children who have been educated at the village school and who have carved their names on the beech tree standing by the school house.
All the main characters appear, or are at least referred to, in all the stories — the village is small.
We witness a number of events from several points of view.
Keeping tabs
‘It was a difficult book to structure — more difficult really than writing a novel.’
Binchy says.
‘I wanted each chapter to be separate, but I didn't want it to be a set of separate short stories; so I had to keep an enormous notebook of who they all were and what they were doing at any given time.
‘When I was writing Firefly Summer , I didn't keep a notebook from the beginning, and I found myself having someone expelled from school who, when I checked, turned out to be 28.
‘I don't think I've made any mistakes this time.
I haven't heard about any — and you usually do hear.
I made one stupid mistake in one of my books, about a car, and I got about 25 letters.
I was so annoyed.’
She also takes great care to establish a sense of place.
‘Before I start a book, I always draw a map of the setting, and I put in people's houses.
It's very useful, because then it's very easy when you write, ‘He went up past the cinema and on to the church, and then he met so-and-so coming out of her house.’
‘It's very flattering for me that in America people go to the Irish Tourist Board and say they'd like to go to Mountfern or some of the other villages I've written about.
The Tourist Board people say, ‘I'm afraid it's imaginary’, and they say, ‘Oh no it's not: it's got a pub on this street and the bus comes up from Dublin.’
The Tourist Board asked me, ‘Could you not write about real places so we can send people there?’
I said, ‘I can certainly not write about a real place: I'd be arrested’’
Binchy's father, a lawyer, had warned her never to put anyone real into her fiction, and she has stuck to his advice with only minor deviations: Benny in Circle of Friends was in part a self-portrait — a safe enough liberty; and a mean friend of her mother found her way, disguised, into The Lilac Bus .
Nonetheless, her gift is to write about her characters as if they are known to her: her stories unfold through their eyes, with no apparent authorial manipulation.
Yet her simple, economical prose can carry irony as well as depth of feeling.
The complete absence from her novels of condescension is the secret of her popularity.
She was brought up in County Dublin and educated at a convent school and at Dublin's University College.
After a spell in teaching, she joined the Irish Times ; five years later, in 1973, she was offered a job in the paper's office in London, where she met her husband, writer Gordon Snell.
He encouraged her to write fiction.
Two collections of short stories,Victoria Line and Central Line , appeared in the 1970s.
Then, in 1982, the then fledgling Century published her first novel,Light a Penny Candle ; she has been a bestseller every since.
Advice for Bishop Casey
Binchy has fewer journalistic commitments now, but she continues to be a columnist for the Irish Times : she currently has a column of her own invention called ‘Unasked-for Advice’.
‘I gave Bishop Casey a great bit of advice, which he didn't take: I said he should come home now, and he should write a book about his side of the affair and give all the proceeds to charity.’
She would not like to abandon journalism altogether.
‘I'm nervous about hanging a metaphorical sign on my door saying, ‘Maeve Binchy: Author’.
In my passport I have ‘Journalist’.
It's my proudest achievement to have got into the Irish Times .
It's a very good paper, and I approve of its line, which is important: so many of my friends work for papers they can't stand.’
In September, she and Gordon will go to their home in Dublin and she will start work on her next novel.
A pattern has evolved in her writing schedule: when she has reached about the half way stage of the book, she will get together with her editor Rosie Cheetham and her agent Christine Green to discuss progress.
‘We've been a team for ever, and they'll say things like, ‘If we're no going to learn a lot more about this character, why do we have so much about him in the beginning?’
I'm always terribly pleased by that.’
Cutting
‘Then at the end, it's always too long, so we have this business about cutting.
I really prefer it if someone else does the cutting, because even though I've worked in newspapers for so long, it's terribly hard to know how to cut your own stuff.
Then it goes to the copy editor, who says marvellous things like, ‘The door was on this side of the room on page 24, and on the other side on page 124.’
I don't know how they do it.’
The wait until September before she starts another novel is mostly owing to her publicity commitments.
She has always given her time to support publication of her books, though she sometimes has doubts about how publicisable a novelist can be.
‘You can't go on to a talk show and talk about the plots of the books.
And there's nothing interesting about my life to tell.
It's been a nice, happy life — uneventful by most people's standards.
There's no point in dwelling on the sad things that happened.
Not much sad did happen.
It has not been one of those lives where people are rejected and say, ‘I'll show them.’
When I was young, my mother and father thought we were all marvellous.’
Hence, no doubt, the plots of her novels, which all revolve around the warm relationships of groups of characters.
‘My own life has been very much marked by families and good relationships.’
Media
Paul Bailey Sugar Cane (Bloomsbury, £14.99): interviews/features Radio 4's Start the Week (10th May),Elle (June),Guardian ,Independent on Sunday ,Daily Telegraph ,Scotland on Sunday ; readings in London, Leeds, Edinburgh, Manchester, York, Bath.
Deborah Jackson Do Not Disturb: The Benefits of Relaxed Parenting for You and Your Child (Bloomsbury, £10.99): interviews BBC's Good Morning with Anne and Nick, ITV's Top of the Morning, Radio 4's Woman's Hour (12th May), Radio 5, Radio 5, Radio Ulster,Independent ,Daily Telegraph ,Guardian ,Daily Mail ,She ,Practical Parenting ,Irish Times ,Bath Evening Chronicle ,Newcastle Journal ,Newcastle Chronicle ,Dundee Courier ,Wolverhampton Express & Star .
Errol Friedberg Cancer Answers (W H Freeman, 14th May, £10.95): extracts Daily Express ; features and reviews Sunday Telegraph ,Daily Mail ,Times ,Guardian ,Daily Telegraph ,Irish Times ,Living ,Woman's Journal ,Good Housekeeping ,Health Matters ,British Journal of Clinical Practice ,Hospital Update ,Scottish Medical Journal , BBC World Service's Health Matters.
Patrick Macgill Children of the Dead End Classic Serial, Radio 4: available in paperback from Caliban Books (£9.95).
In brief E. Annie Proulx has won the US Pen/Faulkner Award for Fiction for Postcards , published in the UK by Fourth Estate (£14.99).
Laughing Stock says that its Red Dwarf: Infinity Welcomes Careful Drivers has achieved the highest sell-in for an audio book since the BBC's Blackadder .
Recording will begin shortly for a second title,Better Than Life , which is due in the autumn.
PICK OF THE PROMOTIONS
Pick of July promotions
Boxtree
Piers Morgan Take That: Our Story 22nd July, £5.99 First printing:20,000 P.o.s. 48-copy dumpbin Author tour:minimum of 5 signings/appearances; TV and radio appearances Serialisation:the Sun Media coverage:national press and magazine coverage
Chatto & Windus
Rick Russo Nobody's Fool 12th July, £ 15.99 P.o.s.:showcards available on request Author tour:UK, bookshop events Media coverage:extensive interview and review coverage
Kenneth Branagh Much Ado About Nothing 29th July, £9.99 P.o.s.:showcards Media coverage:tie-in coverage assured with film, author interviews and events
Faber
Nigel Williams East of Wimbledon 12th July, £14.99, Coincides with paperback of They Came from SW19 (12th July, £5.99)P.o.s.:36-copy mixed dumpbins; 12-copy dumpbin; full colour jacket-posters; T-shirts Media coverage:press, TV and radio interviews Advertising:London Underground's District line Author tour:major cities
HarperCollins
Jeffrey Archer Honour Among Thieves 4th July, £14.99 Spend:£150,000 P.o.s.:‘Flaming’ floor displays; giant banner backdrops; double-sided posters; inflatable floaters; box books Author tour:signings and talks in London, Maidstone, Birmingham, Manchester, Liverpool, Southport, Chester, Glasgow, Edinburgh, Cheltenham, Dublin, Bath Media advertising:national TV; national press including Sunday Times ,Daily Telegraph ,Daily Express ,Times ,Financial Times ,Independent on Sunday ,Evening Standard ,Irish Times ,Scotland on Sunday 
Mark Goodier Unbelievable!12th July, £4.99 P.o.s.:20-copy counterpack with special header Media coverage:author will launch the ‘Unbelievable!’ radio feature, to be broadcast four nights a week, on Radio 1's Breakfast Show; national review coverage; author signings and interviews
Lynne Pemberton Platinum Coast 26th July, £4.99 P.o.s.:38 copy floor displays, full-colour posters, 12-copy counterpacks Media coverage:features in national newspapers and women's magazines; radio and television interviews; regional press coverage
Philippa Gregory Fallen Skies 26th July, £14.99 P.o.s.:Display bins and posters Author tour:south of England and appearances at the Edinburgh and Dartington Festivals Media coverage:national media interviews including radio and television
HarperCollins Children's
Nightmares Horror series 15th July, £1.99 each Horrorscope ,Nicholas Adams ,I.O.U.,
Nicholas Adams The Teacher ,Joseph Locke ,Class Trip ,Bebe Faas Rice ,Nightmare Inn ,T S Rue ,Deadly Stranger ,M C Sumner ,P.o.s.:54-copy dumpbin with price featured on header, 24-copy counterpack Media coverage:features in the teenage press.
Robin Kingsland Shirley Holmes series, £2.99 each The Case of the Missing Case ,The Case of the Hollywood Soap Star ,The Case of the Sheik's Missing Shake-Maker ,The Case of the Illegal Sherbet Shake-Down ,P.o.s.:26-copy counterpack; giveaway notepads; Shirley Holmes Activity Packs for bookshops and libraries Media coverage:competition in main provincial newspapers
Heinemann
Leslie Kenton Ludwig 26th July, £14.99 P.o.s.:12-copy counterpack, bookshop poster Media coverage:local and national TV, radio and press interviews
Hodder & Stoughton
John le Carré The Night Manager 1st July, £15.99 P.o.s.:18-copy dumpbin with special 3-D header, double-sided posters; box books Bookshop rating:inclusion in BA and other catalogues Advertising:national press campaign between July and December to reach over 20,000,000 ABC1 readers Competition:‘holiday for two in the Caribbean’ feature in W H Smith's Bookcase magazine
Geoffrey Moorhouse OM: An Indian Pilgrimage 1st July, £16.99 P.o.s.:pillar posters Bookshop rating:Waterstones summer catalogue, including author interview Media coverage:author interviews with local radio and regional press Advertising:Independent on Sunday 
Mark Girouard Windsor: The Most Romantic Castle 15th July, £20 P.o.s.:A1 posters Media coverage:the Architectural Foundation is organising at exhibition of 12 modernist architect's  ideas for refurbishing St George's Hall, Windsor, to generate controversy over English Heritage's plans (likely to be traditional refurbishment), to be featured in the Independent magazine and Vogue (August).
Country Life plans to run a conflicting competition with traditional designs for refurbishing the castle; possible TV programme about exhibition; author interviews Bookshop rating:Dillons/Hatchards Royalty catalogue
Little, Brown
Patricia Cornwell Cruel and Unusual 1st July, £14.99 First printing:20,000 P.o.s.:12-copy dumpbin with customer header, large full colour poster Advertising:jointly for All That Remains nationwide 30-second radio advertising campaign Author tour:UK author tour and signing sessions
Macmillan
Anita Burgh Overtures 23rd July, £14.99 P.o.s.:colour poster; musical mug Media coverage:reviews in Prima ,Essentials ,Woman & Home ; reviews and features in Daily Telegraph ,Daily Express ,Mail on Sunday ; regional radio interviews in Wales, Bristol, Cambridge, Cornwall, Manchester, Solent, Nottingham, West Midlands, Devon, Bedfordshire, Northern Ireland, Surrey, Sussex, Isle of Man and British Forces Radio.
Omnibus Press
Johnny Rogan Morrissey and Marr: The Severed Alliance 5th July, £9.95 P.o.s.:colour life-size Morrissey posters; 24-copy dumpbin with header; showcards Media coverage:articles and reviews in national press and music magazines; national radio interviews Advertising:Vox Author tour:readings, talks and signings in both book and record shops in the UK and the Irish Republic including Virgin Megastore, London; Dillons, Leicester; Waterstones, St Anne's Square, Manchester; Waterstones, Deansgate, Manchester; Books Etc, Charing Cross Road, London; Athena, Trocadero, London; Waterstones, Bath; Dillons, Bristol
Music Book Fortnight
Top 25 Omnibus Press music books, 19th — 30th July P.o.s.:three different banner posters featuring six musical artists; matching Omnibus Press bookmarks free to bookshop customers Competition:bookshop window display competition, and extra discount on orders exceeding 50 books
Oxford University Press
Oxford Minidictionaries 15th July Abbreviations , £3.50 Spanish , £2.99 Science , £2.99 German Grammar , £2.99 German Verbs , £2.99 Promotion spend:over £30,000 Competition:to win an Oxford Mini car, customers must decide how many copies of the Oxford English Minidictionary will fit into the car P.o.s.:giant window showcards, competition form dispensers, counterpacks, posters, new spinners Tour:the Oxford Mini will tour major towns in Britain, beginning in Manchester in July 
The Oxford sales team demonstrating that only four OUP reps will fit inside a mini
Penguin
Cosmo Penguin 16pp supplement in Cosmopolitan magazine (July)— including extracts from The Secret History by Donna Tartt (£5.99);The Happy Isles of Oceania by Paul Theroux (£5.99);Cosmopolitan 's top 50 Penguin summer reads P.o.s.:dumpbin; posters; showcards; run-ons of supplement for bookshop use Competition:to win two Air New Zealand flights plus accommodation for island-hopping holiday Bookshops:Cosmo Penguin events 
BENT'S NOTES
Extremely unique talents
The Booksellers Association staff on duty at the Torquay conference had a distraught call from the switchboard at BA headquarters in Vauxhall Bridge Road on Monday.
‘We've had the Somerset police on the line.
What have you guys been getting up to there?’
Somerset police had indeed called, and the BA had indeed been up to no good.
Well, not that bad really, but they'd laden a van in London bound for Torquay, and managed to overfill it somewhat, so that when membership services executive Kevin Ramage (driver) and conference executive Meryl Halls (navigator) were stopped on the road to Torquay and instructed by the police to proceed to the nearest weighbridge, they were found to be in contravention of the law.
Kevin stands to have his licence endorsed, and the BA itself to be fined.
The worst indignity, however, was reserved for Meryl.
The van having arrived at the weighbridge, she got out, but was instructed to get back in as she was ‘part of the load’.
How many of the trade worthies gathered at Torquay realised that one of England's best loved pop songs — the hymn ‘Abide with Me’— originated in nearby Torbay?
The words were written by the tubercular vicar of All Saints, Lower Brixham, the Rev H F Lyte (1793–1847), during his last months of illness.
Lyte was enormously popular during his 25 years of ministry there and built up a Sunday School of over 700 children.
He finally succumbed to his malady while convalescing in France, where he is buried in the English churchyard at Nice.
Lyte — whose bicentenary it is on 1st June, this year — was also a fanatical bookman.
The library of 4,500 antiquarian religious books assembled by him and his son took 16 days to auction in London in 1849 after his death.
The sale catalogue, marked with prices obtained for each book — a total of some £3,000 — is still to be seen in the British Library today.
One of the unexpected highlights of the BA Conference was the David & Charles disco, held at the obstinately unenchanting Toorak Hotel.
Among the many booksellers and publishers whom I spotted letting their hair down on the dance floor was independent publisher Christopher Hurst.
The music was predominately '60s and '70s pop, but that didn't seem to bother the inimitable Mr Hurst: he was last seen, tie and jacket discarded, dancing to the old Rolling Stones track, ‘(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction’.
And a very passable imitation of Mick Jagger it was too.
On the day that the Home Office figures showed that the number of reported crimes had reached unprecedented levels, Book Trust's chief executive Beverly Anderson had to cadge a lift with Penguin UK's m.d.
Trevor Glover back to London after her car was stolen from a quiet Torquay street.
Ms Anderson, who has spent many years living and working in London and Washington, was visiting Torquay for the BA Conference.
‘I have never had a car stolen before,’ she told me.
‘I was very upset when I discovered that it had gone: it was a terrible shock.
Police told me that it was probably taken by joyriders, and will end up miles away in somewhere like Bristol.
Torquay was the last place I expected something like this to happen.’
Or then again, perhaps it wasn't: the Home Office figures also showed that crime was rising more quickly in the shire counties and rural areas than in the major cities.
Groan making jokes from the presidents of the BA and PA at the BA dinner and dance are obligatory these days, and the Torquay Conference was no exception.
But among recollections of getting stuck on chamber pots and jokes about wives running off with police patrol men was an insight from Sir Roger Elliott of the BA director's office arrangement — wonderful were it true: Tim Godfray has two in-trays in his office, one labelled ‘In’ and the other ‘Deep In’.
One of the refreshing aspects of Torquay was bumping into first timers, for whom everything was interesting and for whom rubbing shoulders with the likes of Alan Giles, Bing Taylor, Trevor Glover, Paula Kahn, Peter Winslow, Richard Charkin, Kip Bertram, Frank Brazier et al was a bit of a thrill.
This should be what it's all about, after all.
But there were far too few new faces, and far too many head office honchos.
Which leads a jaded old hack like me to ponder on the disparity in attendees that has crept up on Conference over the years.
On the publishing side, which as usual outnumbered the booksellers by a good measure, there was a rash of thrusting marketing types along with the usual grey suits and sales people, so one could say that the publishers had got it more or less right.
But who were there to be marketed to?
Few of the bookselling groups encourage their branch managers to attend, Waterstones being the exception.
A sign of the recession or fear that these impressionable young booksellers might be contaminated by their publishing counterparts in some way?
Whatever, these are the people the publishers really want to nobble, and they don't come to conference.
So attention shifts in a rather desultory way to the ever diminishing group of small independent booksellers, and everyone ends up felling dissatisfied.
Perhaps, just as the BA holds a senior and junior College and University Booksellers Group conference, it could put on two mainline conferences: one for the under 45s, for the men and women who actually do the biz; and one for the older members of the trade.
This latter would be handed a bus pass and a deck chair, and could pass the time wondering to their hearts' content why the hell they were there.
It is not often that the Organ publishes press releases, but an exception might usefully be made in the case of the handouts by Random House about the personnel changes there.
To wit:
Carmen Callil is to take up the new role of Publisher at Large of the Random House Group, continuing to work in particular with Chatto & Windus in London and Random House Australia, and she will assume the additional role of Editor at Large for the Knopf Publishing Group in the US (Vintage, Pantheon and Alfred A Knopf).
Gail Rebuck, Chief Executive of Random House UK, said: ‘Carmen is a formidable talent in international publishing…
I am pleased that I will be working even more closely with Carmen, whose expertise and uncompromising literary tastes I so greatly admire.’
Says Sonny Mehta, Publisher of the Knopf Publishing Group: ‘Carmen's appointment is wonderful news for us on both sides of the Atlantic.
I have known her since my earliest days in publishing, when she played an important role in the launching of Paladin Books, and I have admired and learned from her every since…’
Frances Coady with immediate effect is appointed Publisher of the new literary group and will thus have overall publishing responsibility for Jonathan Cape, Chatto & Windus, Vintage and Pimlico.
Gail Rebuck commented: ‘In the past two years I have witnessed Frances’ excellent editorial judgement coupled with marketing flair and her consensus seeking management style that has helped secure so many important books…’
Carmen Callil said: ‘I've been working with Frances Coady since 1986, when she joined Jonathan Cape, and one of the greatest pleasures of my working life has been to observe the publishing genius she has brought to beat on the creation of Vintage.
Her literary standards, marketing genius, originality and dedication are unique…’
Tom Maschler said: ‘When Liz Calder left Jonathan Cape in 1986 to found Bloomsbury we were in search of a new Literary Director.
Liz's was no easy act to follow.
Indeed in the whole of British publishing there seemed to be no obvious person.
Frances had left Faber to work for Alan Yentob at the BBC.
Not without some difficulty I persuaded her to join us…
I will not list Frances’ numerous qualities but content myself with saying that I know of no one who could fill her position as well as she…’
Jonathan Burnham is promoted to Publishing Director of Chatto & Windus.
Carmen Callil welcomes his promotion: ‘He has formidable intelligence, stimulating intellectual and contemporary interests and brilliant editorial skills…’
Kate Parking, currently Publishing Director of Century, is appointed to the new position of Publisher for Century and Arrow.
Simon Master, Chairman of the General Books Division, commented: ‘Combined with the other great strengths of these new publishing structures, I am particularly pleased to welcome Kate Parkin's new role.
She has a superb track record, exceptional experience, and in a short space of time has made an enormous contribution to both reestablishing Century's image and restoring its profitability in conjunction with Arrow.’
And so on.
What a wonderful bunch of people they have in Random House.
And what is even more wonderful, they all think the world of each other.
It's not just the likes of The Satanic Verses that get rough treatment in some quarters of the literary establishment.
Geoffrey Smith of Windrush tells me that copies of the Windrush Island Guide to Northern Cyprus , until a couple of months ago the only in-depth guide to that part of the island, have been defaced in a number of London bookshops.
There must surely be more acceptable ways to protest at the Turkish occupation of that part of the island.
Horace Bent 
UNAUTHORISED RETURNS
A big cheer for Big Cheese
So, the end of yet another era, as the Lycra Sisters, Coady and Michel, take all the posh bits of Random House in their firm if elegant grip.
It's all very mysterious — why, for instance, does Cape still need a managing director but not Chatto?
I feel rather like the judge in the Lady Chatterley trial; what is a Publisher-at-Large?
Is it a Large Publisher who doesn't go to the office much? or something more sinister?
‘PUBLISHER AT LARGE: police are warning the public not to approach the woman, known to her associates as Cruella Callil — she can be extremely dangerous.’
Actually her global role as described in the handout makes her sound like a sort of spy satellite, beeping her way round the globe peering over the shoulders of Random House New York, Random House Australia, and for all I know Random House Namibia.
They'll all start keeping strange hours so the satellite's always somewhere else when they're working.
Beep beep!
Talking of Random House — and who isn't — more disturbing news reaches me.
It seems, unaccountably, that Mrs Alberto Vitale's risotto cookbook is having trouble finding a publisher in that quaint little corner of her husband's empire.
I do so sympathise with her.
My own latest effort,What Side Is Your Bread Buttered On? and Other Culinary Conundra , has also been getting the runaround in Vauxhall Bridge Road.
They just don't deserver either of us.
Self-publishing seems to be the only answer — if Mrs V will get in touch, we can form our own celebrity cookbooks imprint.
I think we'll call it Big Cheese.
‘Reading-wise he's currently in the middle of The Lost Continent …’ concluded Roger Tagholm in his PN interview with freelance rep Bill Gills.
Reading-wise ?
I feel a Penny Phillips moment coming on.
Presumably Mr Newman's mind was on his upcoming Bologna trip, maybe even on Risotto alla Vitale , or he would have swatted this vulgar solecism right out of the ground.
Still, ‘Reading-wise it's got to be Bookwise’ might make a useful slogan.
I've decided to found a new literary prize, the William Boot Award for Fuzzy Copywriting.
The first winners are none other than Penguin, for this gem: ‘A dynamic campaign has been fully loaded to detonate the summer's most electrifying thriller.
And the fuse has already been lit.’
That sets a standard for others to aspire to, eh?
Splendid piece of humbug from the Sunday Times in the copy accompanying their class photo of the Best of Young British: ‘Ten years ago…the chosen ones were greeted with a loud hooray.
IN stark contrast…the second list was…met with boos and hisses.
What has changed in a decade?’
The short answer to that earnest question could be the Sunday Times itself, which — lest we forget — was in the vanguard when it came to boos and hisses.
‘What was more surprising was the hostility of the press,’ the article went on.
Couldn't agree more.
Enthusiastic as I am about Beverly Anderson, I can't help feeling that Book Trust's new slogan —‘Get Reading’— is a bit inflammatory.
After all, when John Betjeman wrote ‘Come, friendly bombs and fall on Slough’ there was a tremendous stink, and I don't suppose the burghers of Reading will be any happier.
I have warned before of the dangers of the celebrity publisher interview, and I'm glad to seen that someone else was listening.
It's too late for David Godwin and Robert McCrum of course, but Jacqueline Onassis seems to have made all the right moves before her Publishers Weekly interview.
No tape recorder, no camera, questions strictly limited to her professional life, the right not to answer, the chance to okay quotes, no absurd leather trousers, accompanied at the interview by a trusted associate — if only her predecessors, who are equally distinguished publishers after all, had taken the same precautions.
Though I suppose the trusted associate bit might have been a problem.
I've been in two minds about whether to bother with the ABA this year, but the news that Baroness Thatcher and Margaret Atwood are to share a platform at a Book and Author Breakfast has made my mind up for me.
With the possible exception of Jeanette Winterson and Jackie Collins, I can think of no two women less likely to benefit from each other 's company than these two, and I  foresee fireworks.
If I were William Styron, the third speaker, I'd keep my head down.
William Boot 