

Editorials
Managing chronic hepatitis C virus infection
Interferon alfa is beneficial if corticosteroids fail
The discovery of the major parenteral non-A, non-B hepatitis agent in 1989 has led to an explosion of research on this virus, the hepatitis C virus.
With an extensive list of papers now published on hepatitis C what have we learnt about managing patients with chronic hepatitis C virus infection?
Over half the patients who acquire acute hepatitis C virus infection develop chronic hepatitis.
Although most chronically infected patients appear to have clinically apparent hepatitis, a subclinical chronic carrier state also exists.
Among healthy blood donors with antibody to hepatitis C virus (anti-HCV) many have histological evidence of chronic hepatitis.
Even though chronic hepatitis C appears to be an indolent disease in most patients, the observation that at least a fifth develop cirrhosis and as many as a quarter progress to liver failure indicates that chronic hepatitis C is not a benign disease.
Indeed, chronic hepatitis C accounts for many adults referred for liver transplantation.
The association between chronic hepatitis C virus infection and hepatocellular carcinoma has been described, although the exact oncogenic mechanism is unknown.
Enzyme immunoassays are commercially available for detecting antibody to hepatitis C virus.
The specificity of enzyme immunoassay can now be confirmed with recombinant immunoblot assay.
Hepatitis C virus nucleic acids (RNA) can also be detected in serum by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (detection range: 1000–4000 hepatitis C virus equivalent/ml in most laboratories) and, more recently, by the quantitative branched chain DNA signal amplification assay (detection limit: 48000 hepatitis C virus equivalent/ml).
The second generation enzyme immunoassay, which includes two additional antigens, c200 and c22–3, has replaced the less sensitive one antigen capture assay.
These immunoassays have shown increased sensitivity to anti-HCV in chronic hepatitis C and have shortened the period between infection and the detection of anti-HCV by four to five weeks when compared with the first generation assays.
In the right patients — that is, those with an identifiable risk factor and clinical evidence of liver disease — a positive result on a second generation enzyme immunoassay is enough to implicate hepatitis C virus as the cause of the liver disease.
However, in patients with hyperglobulinaemia and low optical readings (signal:control cut off ratio <2) a positive result should be confirmed by a second generation recombinant immunoblot assay, which uses four antigens (5–1–1, c-100–3, c33c, and c22–3).
The sample to cut off ratio is very useful in distinguishing true and false antibody reactivity.
In blood donors ratios of <2, 2–5, <5 on second generation enzyme immunoassays are confirmed by recombinant immunoblot assay in 22%, 41%, and 65% of cases respectively.
In patients with raised serum aminotransferase concentrations, 91–100% of cases detected as positive on second generation immunoassays are confirmed by recombinant immunoblot assay irrespective of the ratio.
The presence of antibody to the human derived epitope GOR has been reported to be associated with chronic hepatitis C virus infection.
However, a recent study has failed to identify any clinical importance of this marker, either in relation to disease activity or response to interferon alfa therapy.
Despite the fact that the reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction has been widely used in research laboratories, its clinical utility in chronic hepatitis C is not established.
There is rarely a need to employ this method to establish the diagnosis in immunocompetent patients with chronic hepatitis who are seropositive for antibody to hepatitis C virus.
Immunosuppressed patients are, however, often seronegative for anti-hepatitis C virus in the presence of active infection, and nucleic acid assays may have a role here.
Quantitative hepatitis C virus RNA assay, however, may have a role in selecting and monitoring patients for antiviral therapy; the recently developed quantitative bDNA by Chiron Corporation is a good candidate.
Recombinant interferon alfa has been shown to be effective in some patients with chronic hepatitis C. There are now 13 published randomised controlled trials of interferon alfa (dose: 1–10 MU) in chronic non-A, non-B hepatitis.
Despite differences in dosage and length of treatment, the results are remarkably consistent.
Interferon alfa returns serum aminotransferase concentrations to normal in 27%, 33%, and 41.5% of patients receiving 1, 2, and 3 MU thrice weekly for six months compared with 2.6% in untreated groups (results of studies pooled).
Unfortunately, relapse occurred in at least half of the responders after treatment was discontinued.
Reinstitution of interferon alfa appears to be almost universally effective in reinducing remission of disease.
Whether patients who relapse should be treated long term with a fixed or titrable dose or six month courses for each episode of relapse remains to be elucidated in future studies.
Multivariate analysis has shown that only a mild histological picture (chronic persistent hepatitis) is an independent pretreatment variable that predicts response to treatment.
Patients with  chronic persistent hepatitis may, however, survive for years without histological progression.
Initiation of treatment in these patients is controversial.
The use of interferon alfa in patients with decompensated cirrhosis, organ transplant recipients, children, and patients with extrahepatic manifestations of infection has not been properly assessed.
Recent reports suggest that interferon alfa can be used safely and effectively in patients with HIV infection and in patients with essential mixed cryoglobulinaemia.
Ribavirin, a nucleotide analogue, has been shown in pilot studies to reduce concentrations of serum alanine aminotransferase and hepatitis C virus RNA.
This drug is currently being evaluated in large multicentre randomised controlled trials.
Preliminary data suggest that it is effective but decreases serum hepatitis C virus RNA at a slower rate than interferon alfa.
Nevertheless, as an oral drug with few side effects, it may find a role in maintenance suppression in patients with chronic hepatitis C virus infection.
Patients with both autoimmune markers and hepatitis C virus present a diagnostic and management challenge.
There is at present no reliable marker to determine whether autoimmunity or hepatitis C virus infection is the major disease process.
These patients should receive corticosteroids first and only if they fail interferon alfa, since interferon alfa may aggravate immune mediated hepatocyte injury in patients with autoimmune chronic active hepatitis.
Patient education is an important part of management.
General knowledge about hepatitis C virus among the public is slight.
Patients with chronic hepatitis C should be counselled in the light of our current understanding.
The route of transmission in sporadic cases of hepatitis C is still unknown.
The risk of sexual transmission seems to be low when compared with hepatitis B virus, HIV, and other sexually transmitted diseases.
But the risk is five times higher in partners of patients coinfected with HIV.
Barrier contraception has been shown to reduce the risk of transmission.
Drug smuggler's delirium
Suspect cocaine intoxication in travellers with fever and a bizarre mental state
Drug smuggling by swallowing packages of drugs or by concealing them in the rectum or vagina has recently received much publicity after several couriers have died following rupture of these parcels.
The drugs are usually swallowed as small packets weighing 1–12 g, wrapped in several layers of condoms, toy balloons, plastic bags, or aluminium foil.
In spite of these coverings, the drug may leach out.
When this occurs the couriers often take benzodiazepines to stop themselves from getting too ‘high’ or agitated, but the outcome is nevertheless often fatal.
Radiological investigation of suspected individuals has increased the number of smugglers apprehended, but some still evade detection.
If the drugs do not appear in the stool as planned, or if symptoms of intoxication develop, the smuggler may present to a casualty department, fearing a package has burst, fabricating a story to try to avoid criminal proceedings.
The symptoms and signs of heroin intoxication are familiar to most clinicians, but cocaine poisoning may be harder to recognise.
Euphoria, disorientation, behavioural change, mydriasis, acute toxic psychosis, and coma may be misconstrued as a primary psychiatric illness.
Fever is common in cocaine poisoning — caused by a combination of reduced peripheral heat loss due to vasoconstriction, increased heat production with agitation and muscle rigidity, and resetting of hypothalamic heat regulating centres — and need not imply an infectious cause.
Cardiovascular manifestations include tachycardia, hypertension, peripheral vasoconstriction, and occasionally asystole and ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation.
Combined with a history of recent international travel, especially in West Africa or South America, these signs should raise the suspicion of ‘body-packing.’
Cocaine metabolites may be detected in the serum or urine.
Tests to determine drug concentrations are expensive and take time, but cheap, rapid screening tests are now available that provide a qualitative answer within one hour — for example, by fluorescence immunoassay on a urine sample.
Suspected smugglers should be admitted for observation and, ideally, be managed in an intensive care unit.
A search for secreted packages may take time, and there is a great danger of massive overdose if the packages decompose in the intestinal tract.
Plain abdominal films have limited success in identifying drug packages, with false negative rates of 1.2% to 33%.
The packaging may not produce an outline visible on a radiograph, and shadows due to constipation may obscure their silhouette.
Ultrasonography is commonly disappointing and contrast study of the bowel or computed tomography of the abdomen may be the only way to detect the packages.
If there are no signs of intoxication and the packages are visible radiologically the patient may be managed with gentle aperients, so as not to  precipitate rupture.
Regular radiological confirmation of successful transit through the bowel is essential.
Endoscopic removal should not be attempted as the risk of inadvertently puncturing a package is high.
If there are signs of developing toxicity or the packets fail to progress through the gut satisfactorily then they must be removed surgically.
Acute cocaine overdose may occur at any stage if a package bursts.
Standard resuscitation procedures should be applied.
Intravenous lignocaine (50–100 mg as a bolus) may be used for ventricular arrhythmias.
Refractory arrhythmias or seizures contraindicate further lignocaine, and propranolol (0.5–1 mg intravenously, to a maximum of 5 mg) can be used.
This may, however, worsen hypertension by increasing the peripheral vascular resistance.
Labetalol is theoretically better, but experience with this drug in this condition is limited.
Hypertension may be controlled by a nitroprusside infusion, which has the additional advantage of aiding heat loss by peripheral vasodilatation.
Seizures may be treated with intravenous benzodiazepines — for example, diazepam 2.5–5 mg — or short acting barbiturates — for example , sodium pentothal 25–50 mg — and very large amounts of anticonvulsants may be required.
Standard evaporative cooling methods are often insufficient to control hyperthermia, and cooling blankets, cooled intravenous fluids, and ice water gastric lavage have been used.
In our experience dantrolene sodium (1 mg/kg intravenously over 10–15 minutes, repeated every 15 minutes, up to a maximum of 10 mg/kg/24 hours) is successful in lowering the temperature, though others report less success.
Fever, muscle rigidity, and seizures may produce rhabdomyolysis and subsequent renal failure.
Intravenous ‘renal dose’ dopamine and mannitol should be given to patients with proved myoglobinuria: cocaine is best excreted in acid urine, so alkalinisation of the urine to reduce precipitation of myoglobin is not desirable.
Sedation, paralysis, and ventilation may be the only way to control fever and muscle rigidity and achieve haemodynamic stability until the acute crisis is over.
Closing mental hospitals
Simple information about hospital closures is not available
Less than six weeks before the start of sweeping reforms to community care in Britain the government's policy on mental health care is getting an increasingly bad press.
Public outcry followed the revelation that Ben Silcock, who was mauled after climbing into the lions' compound at London Zoo, was severely mentally ill and was not getting adequate treatment.
In response the health secretary, Virginia Bottomley, promised that she would consider new legislation on compulsory supervision and treatment of mentally ill people in the community.
Earlier this month the campaigning charity Sane (Schizophrenia — A National Emergency) reported the story of a mentally ill woman known to be at risk of suicide who attempted suicide while living rough.
Saneline, the charity's telephone helpline set up in 1992 to offer support and advice to people with mental illness and their carers, received 50 000 calls in its first year.
More than half of the callers, says Sane, were seriously mentally ill and desperate for help.
Now another mental health charity, the National Schizophrenia Fellowship, has collected data that further call into doubt current mental health policy.
On p 475 the results of the fellowship's survey of mental hospital closures in England show that 45 hospitals are due to close by the year 2000.
Yet last July the Department of Health was aware of only 29 such closures, and last month the parliamentary secretary for health, Tim Yeo, could not say how many were planning to close because no data are held centrally.
How can the government monitor the programme, and even speed it up, if it does not know the simple facts about the number of hospitals affected?
Devolution of responsibility from central government to regional and district health authorities may be a good thing, but when this includes the collection and use of important NHS data it hampers monitoring of national programmes like that for modernising mental health care.
And data on mental hospital closures are important.
We need to know what is happening to mental hospitals because they still contain most of the country's long stay (continuing care) beds.
Most commentators on mental health care agree that some people with severe mental illnesses (mostly those with chronic schizophrenia) need the safe, full time specialist care that is offered in the long stay wards of the old asylums.
Asylum, of course, means a place of sanctuary.
Even the most ardent critics of the closure programme agree that modern, small, and homely residential ‘sanctuary’ units are preferable to drafty wards in crumbling old hospitals where staff morale is often low.
But they argue that until enough new units have been funded, provided, and shown to be working the traditional hospitals are better than nothing.
And the old hospital sites might be the best places to build the new units because the local population is usually tolerant, and  both managerial and clinical staff have long experience of providing services for chronically mentally ill people.
Some critics also argue that there is a direct link between hospital closures and widespread homelessness and vagrancy, but this argument is not borne out by research.
The Team for the Assessment of Psychiatric Services has shown, for example, that long stay and ‘new long stay’ patients (those who have been in hospital between one and five years) generally do well when they are discharged into the community.
But there is a world of difference between these patients, discharged carefully to a community hostel, and those sent out at short notice after a few months in an acute psychiatric ward.
This second group never gets the chance of continuing care because there are too many admissions and too few long stay beds or suitable community residential places.
Their plight is an indirect result of the closure programme.
Since 1991 health authorities are meant to have ensured that mentally ill people who need continuing care are monitored on formal care programmes.
This approach includes ensuring that patients are not discharged from hospital until adequate community care is available.
But use of care programmes is patchy, not least because acute wards are under too much pressure to allow bed blocking.
With so many problems impinging on the plans to close Britain's mental hospitals and, whether justified or not, a public perception that closures cause tragic failures of care, it seems extraordinary that the Department of Health cannot say how many mental hospitals are due to close.
Such ignorance hardly inspires confidence.
Nor is it in keeping with the call in the Health of the Nation for better information and understanding about the burden of mental illness.
The aims of the new mental health task force, set up in January to monitor the mental health service modernisation programme (p 000), seem sensible, but if central data on the programme had been collected all along the team would not now have to go to the districts for information.
At the very least, Mrs Bottomley should ensure that such data are collected regularly until there is clear evidence from research that the alternative to mental hospital care is working.
Complaints by patients
A wide gap separates patients' and doctors' proposals for change
How complaints are dealt with strongly influences our assessment of a product or a service.
A well handled complaint can enhance the supplier's reputation.
The converse is equally true.
Companies anxious to promote the quality of their products have found that advertising for complaints improves confidence.
Doctors have been slow to appreciate that in a similar way their standing in the community could be raised if they encouraged complaints, investigated them rigorously, and made restitution when appropriate.
Medical complaints are increasing, but the response to them is still slow and convoluted — especially complaints against general practitioners.
Complainants often end up disillusioned with the system of redress and angry with the whole medical profession; and the doctor against whom the complaint was made is often also traumatised by the experience.
Patients who complain want information and explanation, and some also want compensation.
A good system must be accessible, impartial, speedy, open, and effective.
Growing interest in the rights of consumers has spread to health care, and the dictates of the patient's charter have generated renewed interest in complaints systems in the NHS.
Five papers are now in circulation, two from consumer groups, one from managers, and two from medical organisations.
All accept that the public is dissatisfied with the existing system, and all propose reforms.
Some key elements are evident at this early stage.
The first perceived fault in the existing systems is the lack of common procedures for complaints against hospital staff and general practitioners, and for clinical and non-clinical problems.
Three of the five papers recommend that all complaints should be dealt with in ways as similar as possible.
Secondly, they recommend ‘inquisitorial’ procedures, in which the complaint is investigated by designated people and the outcome is based on those facts which are established by the investigation.
The ombudsman's office already conducts its inquiries in this way.
By contrast, most health service complaints at present are investigated by the ‘adversarial’ system, which takes evidence from the two parties and comes to a decision — guilty or innocent.
The paper from the Association of Community Health Councils and from Action for the Victims of Medical Accidents sees the investigation of complaints as just one important segment in the overall maintenance of standards.
It recommends a complaints commission under the jurisdiction of an independent statutory health standards inspectorate.
Such a body would have substantial lay membership.
The medical profession's proposals are much more cautious.
The General Medical Council recognises the importance complainants place on rectification and that complaints systems should be able to rectify the circumstances that gave rise to the problem.
Rectification is often more important than restitution.
It recognises the need to take remedial action when poor general performance is alleged — but its inability to do so has, I believe, brought its regulatory function into disrepute.
The General Medical Services Committee and the General Medical Council seem unaware of the philosophical gulf that exists between the medical profession and user representatives.
The papers from these two bodies are still talking about ‘self regulation.’
Non-medical advocates of reform have long since lost faith in that concept.
They want an ‘independent’ review by a body including a substantial proportion of non-medically qualified people.
The General Medical Council has tried to soothe doctors' fears of even limited lay participation by asserting that it would be restricted in clinical matters.
Nevertheless, its paper agrees that ‘lay members are as able as doctors to recognise and respect the professional principles observed in safeguarding  the confidentiality of patients.’
Most lay people see the profession's scepticism as an insult to their integrity.
The General Medical Services Committee's working party seems to have been unconcerned about how the public and politicians might view its proposals — otherwise it would not have proposed to increase professional control over a system already under challenge for partiality, lack of openness, and professional control.
The public is unlikely to find its ideas acceptable.
To suggest that most complaints are problems of communication, amenable to resolution by doctors themselves, will not be seen as an improvement.
The extension of the informal conciliatory system will not satisfy the demand for an investigative system.
It is in nobody's interest to increase the adversarial nature of the procedures, yet this is what the General Medical Services Committee acknowledges would result from its proposals.
Complaints should be seen as part of the system that assures quality and maintains standards.
That requires an open, problem solving approach — and one that uses complaints to trigger reviews of standards.
Agreement on philosophy would make agreement on procedures possible.
These papers suggest that the profession has some distance to travel before recognising that an enlightened self interest would have it advertising for complaints and making sure that they were investigated independently.
The public's expectations, raised by the citizen's charter, are unlikely to be satisfied with anything less.
Paradoxical pain
When the metabolites of morphine are in the wrong ratio
The recent case of a consultant convicted of attempted murder for administering a lethal injection of potassium chloride to a patient in intractable pain has highlighted the issue of pain that, contrary to expectation, does not respond to opiates.
What is this so called‘paradoxical pain?’
There are essentially two pathophysiological varieties of pain.
The commoner is that in which non-neural tissues are damaged and specific nerve endings (nociceptors) within them stimulated; it is therefore usually called nociceptive pain.
Impulses generated in nociceptors follow classic ‘pain pathways’ to consciousness.
Many of the synapses in these pathways, as well as some peripheral nociceptor terminals, are sensitive to opioid drugs.
The other category is neurogenic pain, exemplified by post–herpetic neuralgia, trigeminal neuralgia, painful diabetic neuropathy, reflex sympathetic dystrophy, and central (thalamic) pain, in which there is no nociceptor stimulation.
Impulses are generated as a result of neural dysfunction and do not follow classic pain pathways.
Not surprisingly, such pains are not very susceptible to the action of conventional analgesics, including opiates.
Most nociceptive (tissue damage) pains should be susceptible to opiates, in proportion to the drug's ability to bind to opiate receptors in central pain pathways.
However, an increasing number of cases are being reported in which patients' pain does not respond as expected to the most powerful opiates.
Most such cases are in patients with malignant disease, but some occur in such non-malignant conditions as rheumatic disease (as in the patient of the convicted consultant).
It is these cases of nociceptive pain not receptive to opioids which have become known as ‘paradoxical pain’ or ‘overwhelming pain syndrome.’
Morphine is metabolised in the liver to its 3- and 6-glucuronides, both of which bind to opiate receptors.
While the 6-glucuronide is a much more potent analgesic than morphine itself, the 3-glucuronide antagonises the analgesic activity of 6-glucuronide in experimental animals.
Thus patients' analgesic response to morphine appears to depend on their 3-glucuronide:6-glucuronide ratio, the 6-glucuronide being responsible for the analgesic effect.
This ratio has been reported in several series of patients with malignant disease taking continuing oral doses of slow release morphine and having satisfactory levels of analgesia: in one series of 40 patients the mean plasma ratio was 5:1 and in another of 151 patients it was 4.5:1; in another 40 patients the ratio in the cerebrospinal fluid was 6:1.
Children appear to produce greater quantities of 6-glucuronide, so their ratios are lower.
In some cases of paradoxical pain — that is, patients with chronic nociceptive pain which does not respond to morphine — the ratio has been found to be much higher, meaning that lesser quantities of active 6-glucuronide are produced in proportion to the inactive, or even antagonistic, 3-glucuronide.
There thus seems to be quantitative differences in the metabolic processes concerned.
We do not yet know whether such differences are inherent or are induced by disease or even by the drugs themselves, or what part is played by age.
Nor do we yet know what the normal range of ratios is when morphine is given to naive subjects.
Methadone does not follow the same metabolic pathways as morphine, so it has been suggested that it may be useful in morphine resistant nociceptive (paradoxical) pain.
Our recent clinical experience has found that it is effective in such cases.
A distinction must be made between nociceptive pain not responding to morphine (paradoxical pain) and over-morphinisation.
The latter, although a mainly psychic state (albeit drug induced), can be mistaken for non-responsiveness because of the patient's agitation and apparent suffering; it responds rapidly to reduction in opioid dosage.
Workfare and health
There might just be benefits
John Major, the British prime minister, created a political storm recently when he seemed in a speech to be supporting the idea of workfare — requiring the unemployed to work in exchange for benefits.
The political right is attracted by workfare because it resents the idea that people might be paid by the state to do nothing.
The left, in its turn, is appalled that people who are thrown out of work through no fault of their own should then be required to undertake slave labour to qualify for the benefits that are due to them.
This polarisation causes the debate to stall, but in a world where unemployment is unlikely to fall fast or far and where so much work needs doing the idea may be worth exploring further.
One way to examine the issue is to consider the possible effect on the health of unemployed people.
The harmful effects of unemployment on mental and physical health are well established, although much less work has been done on the effectiveness of various interventions.
Re-employment has been shown to produce measurable improvements in health, but I know of no study of the effects of joining a workfare scheme.
Yet we do know — particularly from the work of Jahoda and Warr — the factors associated with unemployment that seem to damage health.
By examining the relation between these factors and workfare we may gain some insight into the likely effects on health of joining a workfare scheme.
This is a poor substitute for a randomised controlled trial, but when the problem is so huge and immediate we need to gain insights where we can.
The main factor that links unemployment and poor health is poverty, and workfare will do nothing here unless people are paid more than they would receive on benefit.
Other factors identified by Jahoda and Warr as important for health may, however, be provided by workfare: these include a time structure to the day, social contacts outside the family, a sense of doing things with others, regularity, and ‘traction’(the quality that leads to the maxim ‘If you want something done quickly ask a busy person’).
Whether workfare would provide other factors they identified is less certain.
Thus the best employment provides purpose, social status, and a chance to develop new skills.
If well organised, workfare might provide these needs, although the social status of being on workfare would probably be as bad as, if not worse than, that of being unemployed.
Similarly, workfare might expose people to the stigma and frequent humiliations that are damaging to health.
Thus workfare might present some potential benefits to health, and it might also reduce the chances of an unemployed person becoming unemployable because of prolonged unemployment.
But perhaps the greatest fear about workfare is that it might reduce the political spur to create jobs and lead to an army of people working in poorly paid conditions.
Yet even this issue is complicated because the long term answer to the health problems associated with unemployment is probably to remove the distinction between paid employment and work.
At the moment paid employment (even if it's making rubber ducks for export) brings status and income, whereas work, which we all do to keep going and may well do voluntarily in our communities, carries neither income nor status.
As the total amount of paid employment relative to the working population diminishes then we must either break down the barrier between employment and work or be condemned to live in a society permanently divided between the employed and growing numbers of the unemployed.
PAPERS
Incidence of severe acute renal failure in adults: results of a community based study
Abstract
Objective —
To determine the age related incidence of severe acute renal failure in adults in two health districts in England.
Design —
Prospective study of patients identified as having severe acute renal failure within a two year period; subsequent monitoring of outcome for a further two years.
Setting —
Two health districts in Devon.
Subjects —
Those adults in a population of 444971 who developed severe acute renal failure (serum creatinine concentration >500µmol/l) for the first time during a two year period, with subsequent fall of the serum creatinine concentration below the index value.
Main outcome measures and results —
125 adults (140 per million total population yearly, 172 per million adults) developed severe acute renal failure, of whom 90 (72%) were over 70.
Age related incidence rose from 17 per million yearly in adults under 50 to 949 per million yearly in the 80–89 age  groups .
In 31 patients (25%) the cause was prostatic disease, which was related to a good prognosis (84% (26) alive at three months).
Overall survival was 54% (67) at three months and 34% (42) at two years and was not significantly age related.
18 per million total population yearly (22 per million adult population) received acute dialysis.
Referral rate for specialised opinion was 51 per million total population yearly with an estimated appropriate referral rate of 70 per million per year.
Conclusions —
The incidence of severe acute renal failure in the community is at least twice as high as the incidence reported from renal unit based studies.
Prostatic disease, a preventable and treatable problem, is the most common cause.
Survival figures indicate that age alone should not be a bar to specialist referral or treatment.
Introduction
There seems to have been little improvement in survival in patients with acute renal failure in the past 20 years.
This has often been attributed to changes in the characteristics of the population studied.
Comparison among studies is hampered by use of different definition criteria, selection criteria, or population base.
Data collected from a renal unit do not give a true reflection of need as general practitioner and consultant referral rates may be influenced by their perceptions of the services available.
This study looks at true population incidence rates, referral rates, and survival in adults, particularly with respect to age and underlying diagnosis.
An estimate of workload implications is made.
Patients and methods
The study covered two health districts with a combined population of 444971 each with a stable population and negligible cross boundary flow.
Each district had only one biochemical pathology laboratory, which always measured serum creatinine concentration whenever electrolyte or other biochemical investigations were requested.
The laboratories carried out all work for general practitioners, National Health Service, and private hospitals in the area.
Over two years starting 1 January 1986 all serum creatinine concentration measurements were scrutinised and any patient with a concentration greater than 500 µmol/l identified.
The notes were studied subsequently, or in cases of blood tests initiated by general practitioners these doctors were contacted for further information.
Patients not living in the two health districts were excluded.
The last follow up was made on 1 March 1990.
Patients living within the defined geographical area were considered to have severe acute renal failure if the serum creatinine concentration rose above 500 µmol/l for the first time and then returned to below that level and remained there or if the patient died during the acute illness and the history or necropsy confirmed acute renal failure.
Patients whose serum creatinine concentration did not subsequently fall below 500 µmol/l were defined as having chronic renal failure; those in whom acute renal failure was part of any underlying terminal disease (usually malignant) were also excluded.
There was no cardiac surgery unit in the two districts studied.
This definition would not identify severe renal failure in children.
Throughout the paper the term adult means over the age of 15.
Haemoglobin, serum potassium, and serum bicarbonate concentrations and the presence or absence of oliguria (less than 400 ml urine in 24 hours) were ascertained retrospectively.
Confidence intervals for incidence rates were assessed by reference to the Poisson distribution.
Comparison between outcomes was performed by χ 2 test with Yates's correction.
The population estimates and distribution by age were taken from the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys report for 1988.
Results
Altogether 125 patients were identified during the two years, giving an overall incidence of severe acute renal failure of 140.5 (95% confidence interval 117.0 to 172.0 cases) per million total population yearly and an annual incidence of 172.5 (144.1 to 205.5) cases per million adult population.
age and sex incidence
Ninety (72%) patients were over 70, although only 14% of the population studied were above this age.
The incidence of severe acute renal failure increased with age from 17.1 cases per million population per year in adults under 50 to 949 cases per million per year in the 80 to 89 age group (table I).
A significant rise with age remained even when prostatic disease (which is largely associated with age) was excluded from the analysis.
There was a significant difference in incidence between the sexes, 90 men and 35 women being identified (χ 2 =29.16; df=1).
The annual incidence of severe acute renal failure was 259.4 (208.6 to 318.9) cases per million adult males and 92.6 (64.5 to 128.8) cases per million adult females (p<0.001).
The difference remained significant (59 men, 35 women; χ 2 =8.39, df=1, p<0.01) when cases of prostatic disease were excluded.
Survival at either three months or two years was not significantly related to age (χ 2 for trend=0.000, p=0.984; and 0.03, p=0.863 respectively).
The apparent higher percentage survival rate at two years in the under 50 group (table II) and in those over 80, even after exclusion of patients with prostatic disease, was not significant (χ 2 for trend=0.132 and 0.49 respectively).
diagnosis
The largest single category of patients was those with prostatic disease (n=31), which included both benign and malignant prostatic obstruction.
More than one in three men over 70 with acute renal failure had prostatic disease as a cause (27 out of 72).
Medical diagnoses covered a range of conditions, including dehydration (11 patients), sepsis (13), intrinsic renal disease (seven), and haematological disease (eight), or a combination of these in a few cases.
Cardiovascular disease was defined as such when the renal failure was secondary to an acute event in the cardiovascular system, usually myocardial infarction.
Obstruction covered all mechanical obstruction to the urinary tract, excluding prostatic disease.
Most patients in this category had renal stones.
Surgical causes were mostly postoperative but some were in the category of acute surgical admissions.
Results are given in table III.
Diagnosis influenced survival both at three months and at two years (table IV).
Prostatic disease was significantly associated with good survival and cardiovascular disease with poor survival.
Patients with prostatic disease were removed from the survival figures to see if they were a confounder for age; although overall survival was worse in the remainder, there was still no association with age (table II).
recovery of renal function
Recovery of renal function was examined in patients who survived more than three months.
The lowest recorded serum creatinine concentration was used, and figures were available for 59 of the 67 patients.
In only 21 (36%) did the serum creatinine concentration fall to normal (<110 µmol/l).
In all five patients under 50 creatinine values returned to normal.
In 12 patients (20%) the serum creatinine concentration did not return to below 300 µmol/l; one of these had a subsequent deterioration in renal function and two years later had started dialysis.
prognostic factors
Retrospective analysis of prognostic factors at presentation identified oliguria as the only factor significantly associated with death at three months.
Of patients with oliguria, 23% (13/57) survived more than three months compared with 63% (25/40) of the others (χ 2 =17.14, df=1, p<0.001).
Hyperkalaemia (χ 2 =0.18, df=1, p<0.75), degree of acidosis (χ 2 =2.05, df=1, p<0.25), and the presence of anaemia (haemoglobin concentration <110 g/l; χ 2 =0.79, df=1, p<0.5) were not related to survival.
Fifty nine patients (47%) were anaemic at first presentation.
referral patterns and workload
Only 45 patients (36%) were referred for a nephrological opinion, an annual rate of 51 (95% confidence interval 32.8 to 60.2) per million total population, or 62.1 (45.3 to 83.1) per million adults.
Only 18% of patients (5/28) living in the district with no renal unit were referred compared with 41% (40/97) of those living in the Exeter district (p<0.05, χ 2 =6.3, df=1; p<0.02).
On scrutinising the notes of the 80 patients not referred for a specialist opinion we concluded that a nephrological opinion might have helped management in 17 cases.
This subjective review gives a potential referral rate to nephrologists of 70 patients (95% confidence interval 53.4 to 89.3) per million population per year or 85.4 (65.5 to 109.5) per million adults per year.
Sixteen patients received acute dialysis or haemofiltration — a rate of 18 cases (10.3 to 29.2) per million population per year or 22.1 (12.6 to 35.8) per million adults per year; eight of these patients survived three months and four survived two years.
Of the 16 dialysed patients, seven had sepsis as a major contributory factor to their acute renal failure; only one survived more than three months.
Seven of the nine dialysed patients without sepsis survived longer than this (p=0.04; Fisher's exact test).
Discussion
A problem in studying acute renal failure is the lack of a clearly agreed definition.
Our definition is pragmatic, chosen such that the renal failure is severe enough to influence patient survival and morbidity, may need specialist advice, and may have workload and planning implications.
The definition is not equivalent to acute tubular necrosis; indeed, the study emphasises that many other renal insults cause severe acute renal failure.
The incidence found was probably an underestimate of true community incidence as the protocol did not pick up those people in whom, for whatever reason, the clinicians caring for them did not measure the serum electrolyte values.
There is likely to be an excess of elderly people in this category.
In addition, cardiac surgery was not carried out in the two districts studied.
Any renal unit serving a district with cardiac surgery facilities would have significantly more patients developing acute postoperative renal failure.
Our study also underestimates the incidence of acute renal failure in one other way.
Some patients who present with acute renal disease as an emergency to a renal unit, often with forms of rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis, do not subsequently recover renal function.
Although acute and an emergency at presentation, they do not fall within the definition used here of acute renal failure as they do not have adequate recovery.
Included in our definition were people who had mild chronic renal failure who suffered an acute or chronic deterioration of function and then made some recovery.
It is unlikely that many had progressive chronic renal failure, as at two year follow up only one patient had subsequently deteriorated and needed long term dialysis.
We do not, however, have the diagnoses of all patients who died between three months and two years, and it is possible that chronic renal disease was a factor in some of these.
With one exception previous studies of acute renal failure were renal unit based and did not include those patients who were not referred for specialist opinion.
Such studies do not give a true reflection of population needs, nor may the clinical indices used to predict survival or estimates of prognosis be applicable in the wider population of patients with severe acute renal failure.
The influence of age on survival is not clear; some studies show an adverse effect whereas others do not.
effects of age and sex
The lack of effect of age on survival in our study has significant implications for workload as it confounds the view that treatment of elderly people with severe acute renal failure is not indicated.
Furthermore, as the numbers of elderly people in the population increase so will the incidence of severe acute renal failure.
Our current estimate of 70 cases per million population per year is certainly the minimum for the reasons described.
This study shows that some patients are not referred for specialist opinion, the shortfall being mainly among elderly people.
If other practitioners' perception of the value of treatment of severe acute renal failure in elderly people changes nephrologists' workload will increase.
The study also confirms that referral rates are lower in areas where there is no local renal unit nearby.
The excess of male patients was unexplained.
Although this excess seems to be a constant feature of all studies of acute renal failure, it has not been commented on before.
This study shows that prostatic disease explains only part of the increased male incidence.
Sacks et al highlighted the importance of prostatic disease as a preventable and treatable cause of renal failure.
The high incidence of prostatic obstruction in this study emphasises that finding a raised creatinine concentration in any male necessitates careful palpation of the abdomen and prostate.
Many undiagnosed patients with prostatic obstruction were referred to the renal unit.
Other studies have also shown that oliguria and sepsis are associated with a poor outcome.
The finding of anaemia at presentation in almost half our patients is worth noting as it is still widely taught that this is an indicator of chronic rather than acute renal failure.
These results show it has little discriminatory value.
Most patients did not make a full renal recovery.
In some cases this is probably because the cause of acute renal failure itself was associated with a degree of permanent damage, and elderly people (who formed the bulk of our patients) may have less renal reserve and be less able to make a full recovery after an acute insult.
Kjellstrand et al showed that incomplete recovery from acute tubular necrosis was common in patients over 55, the age range of most of our patients.
There will also be a large number of people with already impaired renal function as these are probably more susceptible to further insults than people with normal, healthy kidneys.
Whatever the reason for the failure of full recovery sufficient patients remain with significant renal impairment that mid-term to long-term follow up of patients after an episode of severe acute renal failure is indicated.
This prospective community based study has given estimates of the incidence of acute renal failure in an unselected population, indicates a potential workload for renal services, and highlights the importance of preventable and treatable acute renal failure in the form of prostatic disease.
Fat and female fecundity: prospective study of effect of body fat distribution on conception rates
Abstract
Objectives —
To study the effect of body fat distribution in women of reproductive age on fecundity.
Design —
Prospective cohort study of all women who had entered a donor insemination programme.
Setting—
One fertility clinic serving a large part of the midwest of the Netherlands.
Subjects —
Of 542 women attending the clinic for artificial insemination for the first time, 500 women were eligible for study.
Main outcome measures —
Probability of conception per cycle and number of insemination cycles before pregnancy or stopping treatment.
Results —
A 0.1 unit increase in waist-hip ratio led to a 30% decrease in probability of conception per cycle (hazard ratio 0.706; 95% confidence interval 0.562 to 0.887) after adjustment for age, fatness, reasons for artificial insemination, cycle length and regularity, smoking, and parity.
Increasing age was significantly related to lower fecundity (p<0.05); very lean and obese women were less likely to conceive (p<0.10) as were women with subfertile partners (p<0.10).
All other exposure variables were not significantly related to fecundity.
Conclusions—
Increasing waist-hip ratio is negatively associated with the probability of conception per cycle, before and after adjustment for confounding factors.
Body fat distribution in women of reproductive age seems to have more impact on fertility than age or obesity.
Introduction
Little is known about the effects of body fat distribution on reproductive function in women.
Obesity is common among multiparous women but this may indicate that weight gain is the result of multiple pregnancies rather than a prerequisite for conception.
Menstrual disorders have been found to be related to obesity as well as to a predominance of fat in the abdominal region.
An abdominal type of fat distribution may be related to increased androgenicity of these women.
Frisch suggested that underweight women would also have impaired reproductive function owing to a lack of oestrogen produced in adipose tissue.
It is not known, however, whether body fat distribution has any effect on the ability to conceive (fecundity) independent of weight and menstrual disorders.
A population of women presenting for artificial donor insemination provides an opportunity to study prospectively determinants of fecundity while controlling for possible confounders.
We studied 500 women aged 20 to 42 years presenting for artificial insemination to determine effects of body fat distribution while controlling for weight and other variables on the chance of conception.
Subjects and methods
From January 1986 to January 1988 all women attending a single fertility clinic for the first time (n=542) were asked to participate in the study.
Three women refused to participate.
The 39 women who did not start treatment before January 1989 were excluded from the analyses.
Thus 500 women filled in a questionnaire and had anthropometric measurements taken at intake.
The self administered questionnaire included questions on age, smoking habits, and other lifestyle characteristics.
Regularity and length of the menstrual cycles, parity, degree of infertility of partner were ascertained by a doctor based on structured patient history.
Women were wearing only light indoor clothing without shoes when anthropometric measurements were taken.
These included weight (kg), height (cm), waist circumference at the umbilical level and hip circumference at the level of the widest symphisis (cm).
All measurements were taken by one doctor.
Quetelet's index (kg/m) was calculated as a measure of total fatness (body mass index) and waist to hip ratio as a measure of body fat distribution.
Women were referred to the clinic by a gynaecologist or other specialist (302, 61%) or by a general practitioner (101, 20%) or came to the clinic on their own initiative (85, 17%).
(No information was available on 12 (2%).)
The main reasons for presenting for artificial insemination were infertility (azoospermia) or subfertility (oligospermia) of the partner (152 (30%) and 236 (47%) respectively).
Other reasons included sterilisation of partner (14, 3%), genetic abnormalities of partner (11, 2%), no partner (63, 13%), and other reasons (24, 5%).
For the analysis women with azoospermic or sterilised partners and women with no partner were categorised in the subgroup with infertile partners.
Most women had tried to become pregnant for two or three years, and most (412, 82%) had never been pregnant when they entered the study.
Before the first insemination all women were examined by one doctor.
The mean menstrual cycle length was 28 days.
Cycle length was classified as short( <=24; days) in 30 women, normal (25–35 days) in 430, and long (1336 days) in 39.
At the start of the treatment 390 women reported having regular cycles (less than four days difference on average).
Forty seven women with very irregular and long cycles had ovulation induced by clomiphene.
None of the other women received drugs to improve fecundity at the start of insemination treatment.
The youngest woman entering the study was 20 years old, and 10 were 40 or older.
Smoking was reported by 260 women.
inseminations and follow up
Intracervical inseminations were applied in subsequent menstrual cycles.
Timing was based on previous cycle length, examination of the cervical mucus, and basal temperature charts.
Frozen semen was used from donors aged between 25 and 45 years with proved fertility (having fathered at least one child) and with sperm properties satisfying the World Health Organisation criteria.
Only first conceptions as a result of artificial insemination  were used for the analysis.
Insemination was defined as successful if the woman did not menstruate when expected and subsequently had a positive pregnancy test result.
The follow up period lasted three years, and the largest number of cycles observed was 33.
statistical methods
The cumulative probability of conception by insemination cycle was calculated with Kaplan-Meier estimates for two waist-hip ratio groups.
The 41 women who did not report the result of their last insemination cycle (over the entire follow up period) were recorded as not successful up to their last but one cycle.
The anthropometric measures were missing for 11 women.
Univariate proportional hazard regression analysis was used to analyse the relation between probability of conception per cycle and each of the following variables separately: waist-hip ratio, body mass index, age, regularity and length of menstrual cycle, smoking, parity, degree of infertility of partner.
Multivariate proportional hazard regression was used to analyse the relation between waist-hip ratio and probability of conception per cycle while controlling for the above variables.
Unadjusted and adjusted hazard ratio and 95% confidence intervals were calculated.
Both regression analyses were calculated from data on 448 women because of missing values in one of the exposure or confounding variables.
Results
Insemination was successful within 12 cycles in women, not successful in 274 women, including 38 women with an unknown result.
Table I shows the distribution of the women according to waist-hip ratio, body mass index, and age, and the percentage that became pregnant in each category.
The distribution of age, waist-hip ratio, and body mass index of the 30 women lost to follow up was not significantly different from that of women with known outcome (p>0.05).
Abdominal fat preponderance (waist-hip ratio >=50.80); was quite common (212 women).
The percentage of women who became pregnant fell with increasing waist-hip ratio from 63% to 32%.
Women with a body mass index under 20 kg/m were less likely to become pregnant than those with an index of 20–24.9 kg/m.
Only 22 women were obese (body mass index <=530; kg/m).
Just four of these women became pregnant, suggesting a curvilinear relation between weight and fecundity.
The percentage of pregnant women declined with older age and among the 62 who were aged between 35 years or older only 17 (27%) became pregnant.
The figure shows that the cumulative pregnancy rate by insemination cycle for women with waist-hip ratios <0.80 (pear shape) was significantly higher than for women with ratios >=50.80;(apple shape)(p=0.008).
Because of the small number of women completing 24 cycles or more the suggestion in our data that both groups will eventually have the same pregnancy rate, must be interpreted with caution.
Table II shows the unadjusted hazard ratios and 95% confidence intervals for the effect of waist-hip ratio, body mass index, age, regularity and length of cycle, smoking, parity, and reason for artificial insemination on probability of conception per cycle.
Waist-hip ratio, age and body mass index were separately related to probability of conception per cycle.
The multivariate proportional hazards regression in table II shows that the relation between waist-hip ratio and probability of conception per cycle, after controlling for all the other  mentioned variables, remained essentially the same: waist-hip ratio yielded the highest independent significant contribution to probability of conception per cycle (hazard ratio 0.706, 95% confidence interval 0.562 to 0.887).
Discussion
This study shows that increasing waist-hip ratio is associated with fecundity in healthy women, independently of age, fatness, length and irregularity of menstrual cycle, parity, degree of infertility of partner, and smoking habits.
Both underweight and overweight women had a lower chance of becoming pregnant than women with normal weight, although this effect was greater for the obese than for the lean women.
In addition, increasing age was associated with a reduced conception rate, which agrees with the results of our previous studies.
waist-hip ratio
Hartz et al showed that in about 12 000 American women aged 20–39 years participating in a slimming programme the degree of obesity and waist-hip ratio were independently and positively related to the prevalence of reported irregular menstruation, oligomenorrhoea (cycles longer than 36 days), and hirsutism.
Such a relation has been explained as the result of increased androgenicity.
Based on information of cycle length and cycle irregularity in the period before insemination only 9% of the women in our study required clomiphene to regulate their cycle.
Moreover, no obvious hirsutism was present in any of the women.
Our study population therefore contained mainly healthy women of normal weight with apparently normal cycles, which makes comparison with the American study impossible.
Obese women or women with abnormal fat distribution with normal length of cycles (25–35 days) may have less regular cycles than women of normal weight and fat distribution.
If this were true the decreased chance of conception could be explained by difficulties in timing of insemination, because timing may be less precise and therefore less successful in women with less regular cycles.
However, we found no relation between abnormal fat distribution or obesity and cycle regularity or whether ovulation had to be induced.
Therefore, after correcting for all these potentially confounding factors, the highly significant relation between waist-hip ratio and the chance of conceiving, essentially remained the same (table II).
The reasons for our finding remain unclear.
Insulin resistance (which is clearly associated with abnormal fat distribution or obesity) at an early stage might increase the androgenic microenvironment of the follicle thus decreasing oocyte quality and the chance of conceiving before androgen levels are raised in serum and before cycles become irregular.
Moreover, recent findings suggest that increased levels of luteinising hormone, which may also be associated with hyperinsulinaemia, might decrease the spontaneous chance of conceiving and increase spontaneous abortion rates.
Unfortunately, no pretreatment endocrine profiles were available in our study.
Weight loss often restores normal cycle regularity and sex hormone concentrations in obese women, which indicates that obesity itself and not primary endocrine dysfunction is the cause of the reproductive problems.
Further research is necessary to investigate mechanisms responsible for the low conception rate in normal weight women with an increased waist-hip ratio.
other factors affecting fecundity
We also observed a tendency of a reduced chance of conception in women with a body mass index under 20 kg/m.
The association between leanness and fertility has been extensively explored by Frisch, who has suggested that menstruation and ovulatory cycles can only start above a certain threshold ratio of lean body mass to fat mass.
At body weights close to the required minimum women may still have anovulatory cycles even if they are menstruating because of a lack of peripherally produced oestrogen in adipose tissue.
The problem can be reversed by gaining weight.
However, this explanation does not hold for our results because most of the lean women in our population had regular cycles with biphasic basal body temperatures and did not require induction of ovulation.
Moderate weight loss seems to lead to subtle ovulation disorders and therefore to decreasing fecundity.
Changes in weight and waist-hip ratio during the three year follow up period could have led to misclassification of women.
However, it is known that body mass index on average changes only 0.10 kg/m a year.
Likewise no appreciable changes in waist-hip ratio occur with small fluctuations in weight.
Proportional hazard regression analysis over a 12 cycle follow up yielded essentially the same results as that over the total follow up period.
Length and regularity of menstrual cycle were based on structured patient history at the start of the treatment.
Prospective information on cycle variability during treatment would have led to potential selection bias.
A minimum number of three cycles is needed to estimate variability, and women with low waist-hip ratios — that is more fertile women — would be more likely to be excluded from such an analysis, leading to an under–estimation of the relation between waist-hip ratio and fecundity.
Smoking has been associated with delayed conception.
In our study women who smoked had lower conception rates, though this did not reach significance.
In the adjusted analysis subfertility of the partner became indicative for the fertility of the woman because of the fact that within this subgroup women with lower fertility are over-represented among those entering a donor insemination programme.
conclusions
In summary, in a prospective study of healthy women presenting for artificial insemination treatment we observed that increasing waist-hip ratio was negatively associated with the probability of conception per insemination cycle, before and after adjustment for age, fatness, cycle characteristics, smoking, parity, degree of infertility, and partner.
Our results seem to agree with recent findings of a breast cancer study among postmenopausal women by Sellars et al .
They observed that a high waist-hip ratio, low parity, and greater age at first pregnancy were more important risk factors for breast cancer among women with a family history of the disease than among those without such a history.
However, older age at first pregnancy and fewer children were not independent factors.
They were unable to determine whether this risk profile reflected cultural inheritance or difficulty in becoming pregnant.
Our results suggest that the second is true: women with high waist-hip ratio have difficulty in becoming pregnant.
As the prevalence of a high waist-hip ratio among healthy women is larger than the prevalence of obesity (15% and 5% respectively in our study) body fat distribution apparently has more impact on fertility than obesity.
Our findings are based on a cohort of women seeking insemination treatment because their partners had a fertility problem.
Thus the population of women is primarily selected by the fertility of the partner and not the women and probably is a fair reflection on  the normal population of women.
Though our results need replication, this suggests that our results may be applicable to women attempting to conceive naturally.
Diary keeping in asthma: comparison of written and electronic methods
Abstract
Objective —
To determine the extent to which symptom diaries of asthmatic patients are inaccurate or based on retrospective recall.
Design —
Comparison of electronic and pencil and paper diaries.
Both forms were completed twice daily at home for 14 days.
Setting —
Outpatient clinic.
Subjects —
24 asthmatic outpatients also tested for severity of asthma and for anxiety.
Results—
More sessions were missed in the evening than in the morning for both types of diaries.
Significantly more retrospective entries were made in the evening (26 entries, 14 patients) than in the morning (6 entries, 3 patients).
Discrepant entries of peak expiratory flow accounted for 15% of those made on the appropriate day, and three quarters of patients made at least one discrepant entry.
Variation in peak expiratory flow was significantly related to number of discrepancies and number of missing days, and anxiety score was significantly related to number of missing days.
About a fifth of written entries may have errors.
Conclusion —
Poor diary completion may result from having unreasonable expectations of patients and giving incomplete instructions.
Electronic, time coded diaries could ensure better quality of records.
Introduction
Daily recording of diary cards of subjective and objective assessments of the severity of disease is commonly used to monitor chronic conditions, such as asthma, which exhibit an intrinsic variability.
Self completed diaries are preferable to single questionnaires or clinic based consultation because accurate recall of symptoms may be affected by memory bias and single measures may be misleading.
The validity of the diary method requires, however, that patients complete their diaries on the day stated rather than retrospectively, and that the patient's record — for example, of peak expiratory flow — is accurate.
Few researchers who use this method regularly will not have doubted, at one time or other, that these assumptions are not always met.
For example, symptom diaries that have been completed in blocks of different coloured ink arouse a suspicion that the patient may have been completing the diary in blocks of days rather than daily.
Some researchers try to counteract this problem by frequently collecting diary forms, but this is a burdensome procedure and the actual extent to which diaries are inaccurate or based on retrospective recall is unknown.
Developments in electronic diaries allow the problem of retrospective recall to be tested experimentally.
The Asthma Question Box is a modified Psion Organiser that is programmed to ask patients questions about their symptoms and to allow them to record peak expiratory flow.
The computer is also programmed automatically to store the actual date of data entry, without displaying this information.
The purpose of this study is to compare results from the Asthma Question Box with a conventional paper and pencil symptom diary to obtain information about missing records, retrospective completion (from an analysis of electronic date records), and accuracy (from comparison of data entry by the two methods).
Methods
As part of a larger study in which asthmatic outpatients were told that assessments were being  evaluated, 24 asthmatic patients (not experienced trialists) completed a paper and pencil diary and the Asthma Question Box at home, twice daily for 14 days.
Patients were instructed to fill in the two diaries for 14 days, but were not told that the computer automatically records date of data entry, nor were they given instructions of what to do should they have forgotten to make the daily entry.
Both types of diary required entry of twice daily measures of peak expiry flow.
Patients were asked to write down the highest of three blows for the paper and pencil diary and to enter the values of all three blows into the computer.
The effect of a provocative dose of histamine on forced expiratory volume (PC 2 ) was assessed in the clinic; the patient also completed the Spielberger test to measure dispositional anxiety.
Results
Some patients failed to record data on one or more days either on the written record or the electronic record (table I).
A Friedman non-parametric analysis of variance and subsequent analysis with the Wilcoxon signed rank test of the number of missing entries for each patient for each type of diary showed that more sessions were missed in the evening than in the morning for both the written (p<0.05) and electronic diaries (p<0.001), but differences for neither evening nor morning in the two forms of record keeping were significant.
Retrospective completion was defined by a missing entry on the Asthma Question Box followed by two or more entries on the next day.
Table II shows the raw data from one patient who on two occasions made a written record but not an electronic one, but has made two electronic records on the subsequent day.
In the total sample there were six (2%) retrospective completions during the morning and 26 (9%) in the afternoon.
Three patients engaged in retrospective completion in the morning (on 1, 1, and 4 occasions), and 14 patients engaged in retrospective recall in the evening (1–5 occasions).
A Wilcoxon signed rank test on the number of retrospective completions per patient showed significantly more (p<0.002) retrospective completions in the evening.
Discrepant entries were defined by a discrepancy between the written and electronic records of peak expiratory flow (table I).
Excluding days when patients had made multiple electronic entries (where the data are ambiguous), there was no significant difference between frequency of discrepant entries in the morning compared with the evening.
The total number of discrepant records was 75 (15% of those not made on multiple entry days), and 75% of patients made at least one (1–9) discrepant entry.
The mean discrepancy where a discrepancy occurred was 39 (3–200) l/min.
To explore possible reasons for the different kinds of error reported above the following calculations were made for each patient: total number of missing days, total number of retrospective completions, and total number of occasions on which a discrepancy occurred between written and electronic records.
These totals were then correlated with each patient's period maximal diurnal variation in peak expiratory flow (maximum evening value minus minimum morning value divided by maximum evening value), PC 2 histamine, and anxiety score.
The patients studied had a range of asthma severity, with maximal period diurnal variation in peak expiratory flow ranging from 23 to 79% and from 0.11 to 102.0 mg/ml being required to cause a 20% drop in forced expiratory volume (PC 2 ).
Significant (p<0.05) correlations were found between variation in peak expiratory flow and number of discrepancies (r=0.45), between peak expiratory flow variability and number of missing days (r=0.41), and between anxiety score and number of missing days (r=0.47).
Discussion
We compared the quality of data entry for a paper and pencil diary and an electronic diary.
Although the requirement for a double diary entry may have increased errors, our data showed that patients are more likely to make retrospective entries in the evening and are more likely to miss data in the evening than in the morning, but errors in data entry (inferred from discrepancies between the two forms of entry) are no more likely in the evening than the morning.
Adding the percentage of retrospective completions and the percentage of errors (discrepancies) provides an estimate of the maximum percentage of errors that could occur for the entries in paper and pencil diaries such as those used in clinical trials: 2%+15%=17% for the morning and 9%+15%=24% for the evening.
As discrepancies may well overestimate the number of errors that actually occur in a trial (for example, the electronic rather than the written record may be erroneous), the minimum estimate is that provided by retrospective completions alone — namely, 2% in the morning and 9% in the evening.
Examination of the correlations between the various measures of diary quality and other indices provides some insight into the antecedents of diary quality.
The numbers of missing and of discrepant entries were correlated (r=0.42, p<0.05), and both of these were also correlated with variability in peak expiratory flow; this variability also correlated with missing data.
It may be that a trait of general carelessness (apparently associated with anxiety) manifests as poor quality diary entry, as well as erratic usage of medication resulting in greater maximal variation of peak expiratory flow.
The antecedents of retrospective completion are less clear as this variable was not significantly associated with any other.
This study shows that the quality of diary completion is often poor.
Rather than blaming patients  for being too slap happy, it may be that accurate completion of a diary is an unreasonable expectation of patients, who like all humans, are prone to forget.
It would make sense to design studies that accommodate human forgetfulness and error and, in particular, to provide instructions that tell the patient what to do when a day is missed.
Coupled with such instructions, electronic, time coded diaries could provide a better method for ensuring the quality of diary records.
Diagnosis and management after life threatening events in infants and young children who received cardiopulmonary resuscitation
Abstract
Objective —
To determine the mechanisms and thereby appropriate management for apparent life threatening events treated with cardiopulmonary resuscitation in infants and young children.
Design —
Prospective clinical and physiological study.
Setting —
Royal Brompton Hospital or in patients' homes, or both.
Subjects —
157 Patients referred at median age 2.8 months (range 1 week to 96 months), 111 (71%) had recurrent events, 44 were born preterm, 19 were siblings of infants who had died suddenly and unexpectedly, and 18 were over 12 months old.
Interventions —
Multichannel physiological recordings, including oxygenation, in hospital (n=150) and at home (n=61).
Additional recordings with electroencephalogram, video, or other respiratory measures were used to confirm diagnoses.
Management involved monitoring of oxygen at home, additional inspired oxygen, anticonvulsant treatment, or child protection procedures.
Main outcome measures —
Abnormalities on recordings compared to published normal data and their correlation with clinical events; sudden death.
Results —
53 of 150 patients had abnormalities of oxygenation on hospital recordings, 28 of whom had an accompanying clinical event.
Home recordings produced physiological data from 34 of 61 patients during subsequent clinical events.
Final diagnoses were reached in 77 patients: deliberate suffocation by a parent (18), hypoxaemia induced by epileptic seizure (10), fabricated history and data (Munchausen syndrome by proxy; seven), acute hypoxaemia of probable respiratory origin (40), and changes in peripheral perfusion and skin colour without hypoxaemia (two).
Four patients died: three suddenly and unexpectedly (none on home oxygen monitors) and one from pneumonia.
Conclusions —
Identification of mechanisms is essential to the appropriate management of infants with apparent life threatening events.
Introduction
An apparent life threatening event has been defined as ‘an episode that is frightening to the observer and that is characterised by some combination of apnea (central or occasionally obstructive), color change (usually cyanotic or pallid), marked change in muscle tone, choking, or gagging’.
When mouth to mouth resuscitation is needed there is a particularly high risk of subsequent sudden death.
In one survey 10 of 76 patients with such events died.
We have used physiological recordings in hospital and at home to identify mechanisms for these events and report our findings in a subgroup that received mouth to mouth resuscitation.
Patients and methods
Over 44 months 157 patients (96 boys) who had suffered one or more events out of hospital and received mouth to mouth resuscitation were referred for clinical management to our department at the Royal Brompton Hospital.
One hundred and thirteen had been born at term and the others at a median gestational age of 32 weeks (range 24–36); none of the latter had been discharged from their neonatal unit on additional inspired oxygen.
Median postnatal age at referral was 2.8 months (range 1 week to 96 months); 128 were 6 months and under and 18 were over 12 months of age.
Forty six patients had a single event, 59 had two-five, 21 had six-10, and 31 had more than 10 events before referral.
Conditions considered as triggers for events, such as infections, anaemia, and biochemical disturbances, were excluded or treated.
In some cases electroencephalography (EEG), standard electrocardiography, 24 hour electrocardiography, barium swallow, or oesophageal pH studies were undertaken but failed to identify abnormalities considered relevant to the events.
In 19 a previous sibling had died suddenly and unexpectedly.
In nine patients suffocation was suspected at referral.
physiological recordings in hospital
Long term (8 hours to 3 weeks) analogue tape recordings of arterial oxygen saturation (Sao 2 )(Nellcor N-200 modified to provide beat to beat data), the plethysmographic (pulse) waveforms (to validate Sao 2 ), breathing movements (Graseby capsule), electrocardiograms, and skin (transcutaneous) po 2 with the sensor heated to 43°C (Kontron 821S) were performed on 150 patients.
Recordings were printed on an ink jet chart recorder (Siemens Mingograf) at 3.1 mm per second.
Seven did not undergo recordings.
Reasons were suspected deliberate suffocation (by a parent) in two, a single event in two older children (13 and 48 months), and lack of inpatient facilities in three.
In one of the latter, death occurred after referral but before admission.
physiological recordings at home
Thirty nine patients with recurrent events but normal recordings in hospital, 20 with abnormal  recordings in hospital but no captured clinical events, and two who did not undergo hospital recordings underwent oxygen event recordings (Research Monitoring Systems, or Kontron) at home.
Date, time, Sao 2 , plethysmographic waveforms, skin po 2 , breathing movements, and electrocardiograms were continuously monitored and recorded on to a 128 kB digital memory card (86×54×3 mm), which was continually updated with the last 20–30 minutes of data.
In addition a log of use of the event recorder was stored.
Skin po 2 was the only variable to register an alarm, thereby identifying sudden hypoxaemic episodes to the parent.
After an event the memory card was transferred for analysis.
analysis of data
Baseline Sao 2 was considered abnormally low if the value assessed from the recording was <95% (based on data from healthy term and preterm infants.).
Abnormal hypoxaemic episodes were considered present if more than three desaturations to <=80%; for >=54; seconds with apnoeic pauses occurred in a 12 hour hospital recording (95th percentile in healthy infants) or if there was any desaturation to <=80%; for >=4; seconds which was unassociated with an apnoeic pause — that is, when the onset of desaturation began >12 seconds after the onset of any pause.
Patterns of breathing and electrocardiograms were also examined.
If an event occurred a detailed clinical history was taken, including the time, state (awake or asleep), person(s) present at onset, the observed clinical signs, and the time at which the skin po 2 value resulted in an alarm.
These data were correlated with the signals and log of time on the recording.
The following patterns, and thereby potential mechanisms, were observed.
(1) Falls in skin po 2 but without falls in Sao 2 apnoeic pauses, or cardiac arrhythmia (considered to represent changes in skin perfusion).
(2) Falls in skin po 2 and Sao 2 associated with an attenuation, irregularity, or absence of breathing movements with tachycardia or bradycardia (considered to be true hypoxaemia suggestive of a natural, primary respiratory mechanism or of an epileptic seizure).
(3) Falls in skin po 2 and Sao 2 with or without bradycardia, preceded by the sudden onset and continued presence (for 40–80 seconds) of a large increase in amplitude and irregularity of the breathing movement signal.
For the first 40–80 seconds of these signals there were sinus tachycardia and artefact on the electrocardiograms or plethysmograph signals, suggesting large body movements.
This pattern, when accompanied by false or varying descriptions of the time or sleep state of the patient, was considered suggestive of suffocation (see below).
(4) Changes in signals that were inconsistent with parental history or with a natural pathophysiology.
These included parental reports of apnoea during sleep with recordings showing a breathing pattern characteristic of the awake state; a reported prolonged pause in breathing but an electronically straight line on the breathing movement signal unaccompanied by any changes in heart rate or Sao 2 levels and with a persisting respiratory sinus arrhythmia (produced by disconnection of the breathing capsule); and the parent's history being inconsistent with the time log on the event recorder.
Such inconsistencies suggested that the symptoms reported were fabricated (Munchausen syndrome by proxy).
Subsequent investigations included continuous recordings in hospital with the aim of capturing further events with signals additional to those on the event recorder (for example, three channels of electroencephalograms, nasal airflow, respiratory inductance plethysmography, transcutaneous or end tidal carbon dioxide).
Such recordings aimed to differentiate between epilepsy and a primary respiratory mechanism.
In cases of suspected induced or fabricated illness, a multidisciplinary planning meeting was set up among medical and nursing staff, police, and social services (usually the child protection team).
If it was considered that a parent was fabricating symptoms and manipulating recorded data a decision could be made to discuss this with the parent and family doctor.
If it was considered that events could be due to suffocation covert video surveillance was considered to be an appropriate option.
home oxygen monitoring
All patients were considered for skin po 2 monitoring at home.
It was not undertaken in 11 of those who had been subject to suffocation, five referred before the po 2 monitor was available, four patients >1 year with infrequent events, two for whom social problems resulted in a prolonged hospital stay, and one who died before admission.
Home monitoring was discontinued when there had been no events for at least two months or two months after discontinuation of oxygen (see below).
home oxygen treatment
Patients discharged on additional inspired oxygen received this by nasal cannulas (de Vilbiss).
Those with baseline hypoxaemia had the flow rate determined which would maintain normal Sao 2 levels in hospital (>95%; usually 0.1–2.0 l/min).
Parents then observed the values of skin po 2 and maintained these at home (usually >60 mm Hg).
Patients with recurrent events and hypoxaemic episodes on recordings received 0.5–1.0 l/min.
Additional inspired oxygen was discontinued only after an overnight recording performed 6–8 weeks after the last event had confirmed normal baseline and stable oxygenation.
follow up
Patients were usually followed up for at least 6 months after the last event.
Specific ethical approval was not obtained for physiological recordings, which were considered part of clinical management.
Results
physiological recordings in hospital
These were normal in 97 of 150 (65%) patients, including 66 out of 108 (61%) with recurrent and 31 out of 42 (74%) with single events.
Thirty five patients had abnormal hypoxaemic episodes, five had a low baseline Sao 2 , and 13 had both; thus 12% of the total had baseline hypoxaemia.
In 28 of the 48 (58%) patients with abnormal hypoxaemic episodes coincidental clinical events were observed by parents or hospital staff.
Twelve of the 18 patients with clinically undetected baseline hypoxaemia were born preterm.
No patient had evidence of the sleep related upper airway obstruction syndrome.
event recordings at home
Of the 20 patients who had abnormal recordings in hospital and underwent home event recording, three had no further events, four had further events but without changes in the physiological signals, and 13 had events with documented hypoxaemia.
In four of these hypoxaemia induced by epileptic seizure was recorded during subsequent events in hospital.
In the nine remaining patients documented hypoxaemic episodes were consistent with a primary respiratory abnormality.
Of the 73 patients with recurrent events and a hospital recording which was either normal or not performed, 41 subsequently underwent home event recording.
In 24 there were no further clinical  events.
The following diagnoses were suggested in the remainder: no changes in physiological signals in three, skin perfusion disturbances in three, severe hyoxaemic events (confirmed to be due to epilepsy) in one, suffocation in five, and fabricated data in five.
final diagnoses and management
No diagnosis was established in 80 patients.
In 46 no events occurred during hospital recordings and home recordings had not yet been developed; in 27 no events occurred during hospital or home recordings; and in seven events were recorded but no abnormal physiology was identified.
Of those without a diagnosis, 71 underwent home po 2 monitoring.
Of 77 patients with a diagnosis, two had disturbances in skin perfusion (one other patient had this, but was subsequently found to have fabricated illness); both had episodes of severe pallor and diagnosis led to reassurance for their parents.
In seven patients the data had been fabricated; confrontation was followed in all cases by cessation of symptoms and support for the parent.
Suffocation was diagnosed in 18.
This was confirmed in 14 patients by covert video surveillance.
Three patients had parental histories incompatible with event recordings and patterns on the recordings suggestive of suffocation; judicial proceedings resulted in separation of these patients from the suspected abusers, permanently in two and awaiting a decision in the third.
The mother of the remaining patient confessed to abuse and the child was placed in the care of the extended family.
After separation from the abuser events ceased in all patients.
Ten patients had hypoxaemic events induced by epileptic seizures.
In four there was abnormal encephalographic evidence between events.
In six the electroencephalogram between events was normal but recordings during events showed epileptic activity preceding the onset of prolonged apnoeic pauses or irregular breathing patterns, with falls in Sao 2 .
In six epileptic seizures were difficult to control; in four they stopped after treatment with carbamazepine.
The 40 remaining patients had proved hypoxaemic events — that is, a fall in skin po 2 and Sao 2 , or both — with no evidence of epilepsy or suffocation and for which the precise mechanism remains undetermined but was probably respiratory in origin.
Twenty nine of these 40 patients (15 with baseline hypoxaemia and 14 with recurrent hypoxaemic events) received continuous additional inspired oxygen.
Events stopped in 20, and in nine there was a reduction in their severity and frequency.
Subsequent events tended to recur at the time of intercurrent infections, at which time the flow rate of oxygen was increased; none subsequently required cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
Twenty seven of the 29 patients have discontinued oxygen therapy; the median duration of this treatment was 4 months (range 0.4–20.4).
Home po 2 monitoring was undertaken in 134 patients; in the 120 patients who have discontinued it lasted for a median duration of 5.5 months (range 0.3–17.5).
In the 19 patients who were siblings of victims of sudden infant death syndrome, a diagnosis of suffocation was made in five, all of whom had recurrent events.
In two patients with a history of single events these were considered to be of respiratory origin.
sudden death
Three patients died suddenly and unexpectedly at home.
One occurred between referral and admission, one had recurrent cyanotic breath holding but the parents did not use the prescribed home po 2 monitor.
The third patient had recurrent events but none were documented.
Home po 2 monitoring was undertaken for 3 months and then discontinued by us.
This patient died 1 month later (aged 6 months).
A fourth patient died from viral pneumonia, but this was in hospital and expected.
Discussion
Physiological recordings in the hospital and home between and during apparent life threatening events have aided diagnosis and management in 77 of 157 patients.
Even in the 46 patients with a single event a diagnosis was reached in nine.
The provision of home recordings has provided important benefits: the validity of parental observations was objectively determined; a log of compliance with home recording was obtained; and there were fewer time constraints on its use.
Although more signals can be recorded in hospital, there is a limit to how long it is appropriate to keep a patient on the ward.
We recognise that only patients reported to have received cardiopulmonary resuscitation by parents were studied.
A decision by parents to initiate resuscitation is subjective and some patients will have received this without a real need, as illustrated in patients whose subsequent and similar events were due to skin perfusion changes.
Conversely, there are patients with events who have not received resuscitation in whom the mechanisms responsible will be similar to those identified here.
As expected we identified a number of different mechanisms for these events.
The relative proportions of the different diagnoses reached must, however, be interpreted with caution.
Our unit provides a tertiary referral service and we probably see problematic cases.
Of concern, a third of the patients in whom we reached a diagnosis were subject to some form of child abuse: suffocation in 18 and fabrication of the history and physiological data in seven.
When we excluded patients in whom a diagnosis of suffocation had been considered before referral 16 out of 68 (24%) patients were found to be suffering abuse.
In those events in which definite hypoxaemia (falls in both Sao 2 and skin po 2 ) was identified and in which there was no evidence of epileptic seizure or suffocation the precise mechanism remains uncertain.
The administration of additional inspired oxygen seemed to be of benefit; in 15 patients with baseline hypoxaemia this would be expected as episodic desaturation has been reported to be more severe if baseline hypoxaemia is present.
Two thirds of those with baseline hypoxaemia had been born preterm and may have been suffering mild, clinically unapparent chronic lung disease.
None of these patients, however, had been discharged from neonatal units on oxygen treatment.
In patients with episodic hypoxaemia and a normal baseline Sao 2 the clinically apparent episodes were considered to represent severe manifestations of the self resolving hypoxaemic episodes that occurred on the physiological recordings.
These findings have been previously described in preterm infants with cyanotic episodes.
These episodes can be due to both apnoeic and non-apnoeic mechanisms, and some of the apparent benefits of additional inspired oxygen may arise through relaxation of bronchiolar or pulmonary arteriolar muscle tone, both of which may increase in response to airway hypoxia.
We emphasise that the use of oxygen was uncontrolled.
Our patients were manifesting potentially dangerous hypoxaemia, and we did not consider it ethically appropriate to withhold this form of treatment.
It is appropriate for infants who suffer events to be investigated for the presence of respiratory pathogens, particularly Bordetella pertussis and respiratory syncytial virus.
These infections may be accompanied by clinically undetected baseline and episodic hypoxaemia.
As part of our management we advised parents to avoid, when possible, their child's exposure to respiratory infections.
A standard electrocardiogram was recorded to exclude the long QT syndrome or other disorders of cardiac conduction.
The continuous recording of electrocardiogram and from it instantaneous heart rate was particularly valuable during events.
Thus epileptic seizures often began with a sustained tachycardia in spite of apnoeic pauses and severe hypoxaemia.
The presence of profound bradycardia helped validate the occurrence of hypoxaemia when skin po 2 signals were recorded without Sao 2 .
Although patients with events usually undergo biochemical and metabolic investigations, blood gas measurements on the arrival of such patients in the accident and emergency department are not routine.
Such measurements, particularly if they show acidosis, may be valuable not only as an indicator of the severity of the event but also to help distinguish between fabricated events and suffocation in those patients in whom child abuse is the cause.
Our management included a measurement of haemoglobin concentration and the treatment of any identified anaemia.
Infants suffering these events are more likely to be anaemic, and its correction has been reported to reduce the frequency and severity of both apnoea of prematurity and cyanotic breath holding.
The varied mechanisms highlighted in our patients apply only to the pathogenesis of apparent life threatening events.
A link between these mechanisms and sudden infant death could be validated by finding prospectively a similar pathophysiology during the first event in a previously well infant.
We suspect the relative proportions of the different mechanisms identified in our patients will be different quantitatively but perhaps not qualitatively from those responsible for sudden infant death.
Oren et al reported that 10 of their 76 patients died despite home monitoring of heart rate and breathing movements.
Follow up of our patients showed a much lower rate of sudden death (two out of 156 or 1.3%, leaving out the patient who died before admission).
Some of our patients with suffocation or hypoxaemia induced by epilepsy might have died without a definite diagnosis and appropriate management.
Even if they survive those patients undergoing suffocation are suffering unacceptable and repeated abuse.
For all of these reasons the mechanisms responsible for apparent life threatening events, particularly those receiving cardiopulmonary resuscitation, must be identified and treated.
Conventional management provided by paediatricians and general practitioners includes reassurance and the provision of apnoea monitoring at home: this approach may now be inappropriate.
Effects of self monitoring of triglyceride concentrations in non-insulin dependent diabetes
Cardiovascular disease is three times more common in diabetic patients than the non-diabetic population and is the main cause of death in people with non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus.
The importance of the plasma triglyceride concentration as a risk factor for coronary heart disease in the general population is still uncertain.
In diabetic patients, however, triglyceride concentrations are an important predictor of coronary heart disease, and patients with non-insulin dependent diabetes are twice as likely as non-diabetic people to be dyslipidaemic, hypertriglyceridaemia being the commonest lipid abnormality.
As diabetic patients have little feedback on their daily lipid concentrations we aimed at determining whether self monitoring of plasma triglyceride concentrations improved lipid concentrations (and perhaps indirectly glucose concentrations) in patients with non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus.
Methods and results
Twelve non-insulin dependent diabetic patients with fasting plasma triglyceride concentrations >1.7 mmol/l were recruited from diabetic clinics in Newcastle upon Tyne.
The local ethical committee's approval and patients' informed consent were obtained for the study.
No patients had fasting triglyceride concentrations >5.0 mmol/l or cholesterol concentrations >7.8 mmol/l, none were receiving lipid lowering treatment or insulin, and all had a haemoglobin A 1 c concentration <9.5 (reference range 2.8–4.4) % and a body mass index <35 kg/m.
At the time of recruitment the patients were reminded of the British Diabetic Association's dietary recommendations (55% carbohydrate, 30% fat, and 15% protein).
The patients were divided into two groups matched for age, sex, body mass index, and plasma triglyceride concentrations.
Patients in one group were given Reflotron machines (Boehringer Mannheim, Germany) and were asked to measure their triglyceride concentrations at home, before meals and before going to bed, twice a week and to record the results in diaries.
The other group acted as controls.
All patients attended the clinic monthly for six months.
They fasted before each visit, when they were weighed and had blood samples taken for measurement of triglyceride, cholesterol, high density lipoprotein cholesterol, apolipoprotein B, and haemoglobin A 1 c concentrations.
The mean plasma triglyceride concentration of the patients who monitored themselves fell significantly during the study (2.7 (SD 0.7) mmol/l at the start v 1.6 (SD 0.4) mmol/l at the end; difference=1.1 (95% confidence interval -0.1 to 2.3), as did their plasma cholesterol concentration (6.6 (0.9)v 6.1 (0.7) mmol/l; difference=0.5 (-0.3 to 1.3) and apolipoprotein B concentration (1.18 (0.19)v 0.96 (0.17) g/l; difference =0.2 (-0.12 to 0.52).
There was no significant change in haemoglobin A 1 c concentration (6.3 (1.4)v 5.8 (2.4) %; p=0.4) or body weight (77 (17)v 75 (20) kg; p=0.3).
Among the controls no significant changes occurred in any of the variables measured.
The accuracy of patients' self monitoring was shown by the good reproducibility of measurements of control solutions (Precinorm, Boehringer Mannheim) and by the good correlation between the monthly triglyceride concentrations measured in the laboratory and the mean monthly preprandial values measured at home (r =0.88, p<0.001.
There was a good correlation between individual triglyceride concentrations measured preprandially and at bedtime (r =0.84, p<0.001).
Three months after the end of the study triglyceride concentrations had risen in the patients who had monitored themselves from 1.6 to 2.2 mmol/l (NS), as had the patients' cholesterol concentrations (from 6.1 to 6.4 mmol/l (NS)).
Comment
In this pilot study we showed that self monitoring of hypertriglyceridaemia in patients with non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus improved lipid profiles over six months.
Among patients using blood testing for glycaemic control this may be a useful adjunct to self management, giving feedback, encouraging adherence to a low fat diet, and possibly allowing lipid lowering treatment to be avoided.
A larger study is required to establish whether improvement can be sustained.
Estimating urinary albumin excretion rate of diabetic patients in clinical practice
An increase in urinary albumin excretion is recognised as predicting impending renal failure in diabetic patients and cardiovascular disease in the general population.
Measurement of the albumin excretion rate requires an accurately timed collection of urine, which is difficult in routine clinical practice.
The albumin excretion rate correlates well with both the albumin concentration and the ratio of albumin to creatinine concentrations in first morning urine specimens.
It has therefore been accepted that the urinary albumin concentration or albumin:creatinine ratio can be used to screen patients.
Before the clinical importance of such variables can be assessed the variability in a patient's urinary albumin concentration and albumin:creatinine ratio must be known.
Data on individual variability have been published for small numbers of patients and controls, and coefficients of variation have been 31–43% under study conditions.
This study was designed to establish intraindividual variability in urinary albumin concentrations and albumin:creatinine ratios under routine clinical conditions.
Methods and results
Over two years patients routinely attending the diabetic outpatient clinic were asked to provide first morning urine samples from three consecutive days before each visit to the clinic.
The urine samples were tested for bacteriuria by a nitrite test (BM-Tests, Boehringer Mannheim) and were excluded if the result was positive.
Altogether 1391 patients provided two or three urine samples on each visit.
The mean number of samples per patient was 3.49 (range 2–18).
Albumin concentration was measured by immunoturbidimetry (coefficient of variation 5.1% over the working range between batches) and creatinine concentration by the kinetic Jaffé reaction (coefficient of variation 10% between batches).
For each patient the mean value and coefficient of variation for both the albumin concentration and the albumin:creatinine ratio were calculated from all the urine samples provided.
The data were then grouped according to the mean value.
For each group the mean coefficient of variation within the group was calculated as  where n is the number of patients and CV i is the individual coefficient of variation.
The mean coefficient of variation for each group of albumin concentrations ranged from 58 to 82% and showed no relation with the concentration (table).
Expressing albumin as a ratio to creatinine did not substantially reduce the variability.
To assess the effect of age the patients were divided into those equal to or under 45 and those over 45.
The mean coefficients of variation of patients in these groups were not significantly different.
A subgroup of 23 patients with a range of mean albumin concentrations of 5–877 mg/l provided three urine samples at each of three visits during the study.
There were no significant differences in the mean albumin concentrations between the first and second visits and the first and third visits.
Comment
We found greater variability in albumin concentrations and albumin:creatinine ratios under routine clinical conditions than has been found under study conditions.
This has serious implications for the use of albumin excretion as a predictor of nephropathy or cardiovascular disease in individual patients, when a reliable value is necessary.
Because of the wide variability indicated in this and other studies several samples would have to be analysed to obtain a reasonably accurate estimate of urinary albumin excretion, and this is not feasible in routine clinical practice.
If a patient provided three urine samples with a mean albumin concentration of 50 mg/l and a coefficient of variation of 60% (comparable to our findings) the 95% confidence interval would be 15.4 to 84.6 mg/l.
For 10 samples the confidence interval would be 31 to 69 mg/l.
To have 95% confidence that the mean value was within 10% of the true value would need 144 samples, and for the mean value to be within 5% would require 576 samples.
Clinicians must appreciate the wide variability in urinary albumin excretion if they are to avoid misclassifying patients.
Prevalence of procedures in childbirth
The Commons Health Committee's recent report highlights the paucity of national information on maternity services.
Data from the hospital episodes system are inadequate.
Despite increased research on interventions in childbirth the information needed to describe current practice and detect trends is lacking.
I present such information.
Methods and results
Two postal surveys were carried out, in 1984, when the methodology was validated, and 1989.
Ten areas in England (registration districts or combinations of registration districts) were chosen in 1984, and 20 different areas in England and Wales (to achieve a wider geographical spread) were selected in 1989.
The probability of choosing an area was proportional to the number of births in the area.
Births registered during one month in each area were randomly sampled.
In 1984 mothers were sent questionnaires four months after giving birth; 1508 of 1920 (79%) responded.
In 1989 mothers were sent questionnaires six months after giving birth; 1493 of 1977 (76%) responded.
Women who had elective caesarean sections (before starting labour) were not asked about other procedures.
Tests for differences between proportions and χ 2 tests were used in the analyses.
The proportion of caesarean sections increased between 1984 and 1989 (table).
This rise was confined to non-elective caesarean sections (carried out after labour started).
The proportions of women who had artificial rupture of the membranes before labour, episiotomy, stitches, shaves, and enemas decreased.
In 1989 shaves were associated with caesarean sections.
When caesarean births were excluded the proportion of women shaved decreased from 552/1317 (42%) in 1984 to 21/1269 (2%) in 1989 (p<0.001).
The reduced prevalence of stitches was associated with the decrease in episiotomies and was not significant when episiotomies were excluded (436/798)(55%) in 1984 and 467/880 (53%) in 1989.)
Primiparous women were twice as likely to have a non-elective caesarean section as multiparous women (50/635 (8%)v 31/837 (4%) in 1984, p<0.001; 69/670 (10%)v 43/802 (5%) in 1989, p<0.001).
The proportion of primiparous women was similar in 1984 (646/1507 (43%) and 1989 (671/1480 (45%)).
In 1989 primiparous women aged over 35 were more likely to have a non-elective caesarean section than those aged <=35;(9/46 (20%)v 59/618 (10%), p<0.05).
In 1984 primiparous women over 35 were too few for analysis.
The higher proportion of older primiparous women in 1989 does not fully explain the rise in the rate of non-elective caesarean sections since there was still a significant increase when they were excluded (77/1438 (5%) in 1984 v 102/1416 (7%) in 1989, p<0.05).
The areas studied in 1989 varied widely in the proportion of women receiving enemas (1/66 (2%) to 32/74 (43%), p<0.001), epidural anaesthesia (1/69 (1%) to 21/60, 35%), p<0.001, artificial rupture of the membranes before labour (2/80 (3%) to 18/69 (26%), p<0.01), and induction by drugs (7/58 (12%) to 25/67 (37%), p<0.05).
Other procedures did not differ significantly between areas.
Women's marital status, housing tenure, level of education, and ethnic group differed significantly between areas; age, parity, and the proportions of preterm deliveries and low birthweight babies did not.
Only ethnic group and educational level were associated with both area and procedures that varied by area.
Asian women were more likely than others to have their membranes artificially ruptured before labour (8/38 (21%)v 141/1333 (11%), p<0.05) and epidural anaesthesia (13/34 (38%)v 263/1326 (20%), p<0.01).
Mothers who had finished full time education before age 17 were more likely to have their membranes artificially ruptured before labour than more educated women (120/972 (12%)v 33/422 (8%), p<0.05).
Nevertheless, the differences between areas remained significant when these variables were controlled for.
Comment
These results, suggesting that obstetric practice is changing, reinforce the need for regular, complete, and accurate collection of national data.
If the rate of non-elective caesarean sections is increasing there may be financial, medical, and social implications.
Differences between areas in the rates of induction of labour, epidural anaesthesia, and enemas cannot be explained by differences between populations.
They may reflect variations in medical opinion, consumer demand, and facilities and should be investigated further.
GENERAL PRACTICE
Comparison of prescribing unit with index including both age and sex in assessing general practice prescribing costs
Abstract
Objective —
To examine and compare the prescribing unit and a new prescribing index adjusting for age and sex in assessing general practice prescribing.
Design —
Analysis of all prescriptions issued by two practices in one year.
Use of data to derive a prescribing index adjusting for age and sex.
Comparison of effect of prescribing unit and new index on relation between 80 practices' prescribing data and family health services authority average.
Setting —
Newcastle and Gateshead Family Health Services Authorities.
Two urban practices with eight doctors and combined list size of 16300 patients.
Main outcome measures —
Cost and number of prescriptions issued to each age and sex group.
Effect of index on relation between practice data and family health services authority average.
Results —
The number of items prescribed and total costs rose with age.
Although total costs were greater for women than for men, individual items cost more for men aged 25–84.
Comparison of data adjusted by the prescribing unit and the new index with authority averages produced no significant differences except for in a few practices with skewed age-sex demography.
Results with the two indexes differed by over 5% in 34% (27/80) of practices for costs and in 14% (11/80) for items prescribed.
Conclusions —
The age and sex profile of a practice does not explain interpractice variation in prescribing patterns.
Other unidentified factors need to be considered.
Introduction
Escalating prescribing costs and improved databases such as prescribing analysis and cost (PACT) data have resulted in attempts to rationalise general practice prescribing and contain expenditure.
Since elderly patients account for a large proportion of the increased prescribing seen in the past decade, any comparisons between data should take account of the age profile of practice populations.
Currently, practice data are standardised for age by converting list sizes to prescribing units and prescribing costs are expressed per prescribing unit rather than per patient.
The prescribing unit is a weighting factor created by the Department of Health, based on the observation that elderly patients receive overall three times more prescription items than others.
Patients below 65 years of age count as one prescribing unit and those aged 65 and above count as three.
Several reports have challenged the validity of the prescribing unit.
For example, patients in some other age groups such as the under 5s and the middle aged receive a disproportionate number of prescriptions and in general women are prescribed more items than men.
Variation in prescribing costs is apparent not only between practices but also between family health services authorities and health regions, even after adjustment with the prescribing unit.
Thus another indicator is needed that will correct for the major, rational influences on the number and cost of items prescribed and facilitate direct comparison of prescribing data.
We have analysed the influence of a combined index (the Newcastle prescribing index), which is based on patient age and sex, on the prescribing of general practitioners in two family health services authorities and evaluated its usefulness as a notional indicator of costs and items.
Population and methods
The study was performed in two urban practices in Tyne and Wear.
Chainbridge House is a five doctor practice in Gateshead Family Health Services Authority with 10200 patients and Denton Turret is a three doctor practice in Newcastle Family Health Services Authority with 6100 patients.
The age and sex profiles were similar to their family health services authority averages, although Denton Turret had 30% more patients aged over 65 years than the authority average (Denton Turret 1300, authority average 910).
The number of people in each sex and Körner age band ranged from 78 to 1295 (mean 824).
PACT data showed that the two practices were close to the average practice in respect of overall prescribing costs and patterns.
During 1 April 1991 to 1 April 1992 96% (136341) of all prescriptions were issued through the practice computer system (EMIS).
All hand written  domiciliary prescriptions were transferred to the computer and recorded in the study.
In May 1992 we searched the computer databases of both practices to establish age (Körner bands) and sex related data for all British National Formulary therapeutic groups and their related subgroups.
The information was collated in the form of four age and sex tables for each therapeutic group and covered the number of patients who had received a prescription, the number of items issued as acute prescriptions, the number of items issued as repeat prescriptions, and total prescription costs.
The data were combined on a spreadsheet to produce the average number of items prescribed, the average cost per patient, and the average cost per item for each age and sex group.
The Newcastle prescribing index was calculated from item and cost information.
The adjustment factors for the 20 age and sex groups were calculated as follows: item age and sex group adjustment factor=average number of items given to each patient in the age and sex group/average number of items given to the total population; cost age and sex group adjustment factor=average cost per patient in the age and sex group/average cost per patient in the total population.
The list size was converted to the Newcastle prescribing index by multiplying the number of patients in each age and sex band by the adjustment factor.
The current prescribing unit breaks practices into two age bands (under 65 and over 65 years) and takes no account of sex.
The adjustment factor was one for the under 65 group and three for the over 65 group.
The Newcastle prescribing index and the current prescribing unit were used to adjust the data for all 46 practices in Newcastle and the 34 in Gateshead to the respective family health services authority average.
Differences in costs and items between the practices and the authority averages were then examined with both the Newcastle prescribing index and the prescribing unit.
Results
Comparison with PACT data showed that in the two study practices, the 4% (5701) of prescriptions not recorded on the computer were in the category labelled in PACT level III as ‘special groups — non-BNF.’
These items are incomplete on the computer drug dictionary because of inconsistencies with the drug database at the prescription pricing authority.
Women received, on average, 46% more items than men a year (women 9.7, men 6.6 items).
The average for the total practice population was 8.2 items a year.
The number of items prescribed differed across the age bands (table I) with a small peak in patients under 5 years old and rising rapidly from the 5–16 to 75–84 age groups.
Female patients received more items than males, the difference being most marked in patients aged 17 to 64 years.
Women were prescribed drugs with average annual costs (£52.37) greater than the costs for men (£47.00).
The average annual drug cost for the total practice population was £49.78.
Prescribing costs varied across the age bands in a different manner to items (table II).
No initial peak was seen in costs in the under 5s and the increase up to the 75–84 age group was more gradual.
Costs fell in the over 84 year olds.
The difference in costs between the sexes was less than for items except in the 65–84 groups, in which prescriptions for men were more expensive.
The cost per item was highest in the 35–54 age group (table III).
Prescriptions for men cost more than for women aged between 25 and 84 years.
The cost per item profile explains the differing age and sex profiles for number of items received and total expenditure.
The average cost per item was 31% more for men than women (£7.07 compared with £5.38).
The average cost per item for the total population was £6.03.
Table IV shows the adjustment factors for age and sex used to derive the Newcastle prescribing index.
The prescribing unit for the two study practices was calculated to be 3.3 based on cost for patients over 65 years (men 4.1, women 2.8) and 3.9 for items (men 4.7 and women 3.3).
Overall there was no significant difference (by paired t test) in the variation between individual practices and the family health services authority average based on costs and items calculated by either the Newcastle prescribing index or the prescribing unit (figs 1 and 2).
However, for practices with skewed age-sex demography the deviation from family health services authority averages was different when the Newcastle prescribing index was used instead of the prescribing unit.
In one extreme case the Newcastle prescribing index increased the practice relation to the  family health services authority average by 50% for cost and yet decreased the relation for items by 1% (fig 3).
The variations from family health services authority averages calculated by the two methods differed by over 5% in 11 (14%) practices for items and in 27 (34%) practices for costs.
The overall variation mean was -0.29 (SD 4.08) % for items and 0.01 (9.92) % for costs.
Variation from authority averages by the two methods differed not only in size but in direction.
For example, one practice had its relation to the authority average increased by 30% for cost and decreased by 10% for items (fig 3).
Discussion
The trends in the number of prescribed items and drug costs with age and sex reflect previous findings.
By using an accurate new index (the Newcastle prescribing index) to adjust for the effect of patient sex and age on prescribing in the North East we have shown that a practice age and sex demography does not explain interpractice variation in prescribing habits.
Adjustment of prescribing data with the Newcastle prescribing index was more accurate than with the prescribing unit for practices with a skewed age and sex demography.
The prescribing unit was originally devised according to the differential in the number of items prescribed in elderly and non-elderly populations and does not take drug costs into account.
Extrapolations for drug costs cannot be made from the prescribing unit because of the age and sex related differences in costs per item that we have shown.
We believe that using the prescribing unit to adjust practice data for factors outside the practice's control and subsequent comparisons with family health services authority or national averages is unhelpful.
Questions need to be asked.
Firstly, are the influences on general practice prescribing tangible and quantifiable?
Several factors may modify prescribing such as the patient (morbidity, deprivation, health education, and expectations), the doctor (workload, repeat prescription systems, consultation style, and prescribing formulary), and external criteria (therapeutic advances, primary/secondary care interface, and drug company marketing).
The equation needed to adjust for practice demography will be difficult to validate.
Secondly, is the family health services authority average a good marker of quality?
In the blossoming environment of audit and acceptable peer review, general practitioners need a benchmark against which they can assess the quality of their prescribing.
Further work is required to create a model practice based on a panel of rational prescribers with which general practitioners can compare their data.
EDUCATION & DEBATE
What proportion of congenital abnormalities can be prevented?
Abstract
Objective —
To estimate the proportion of preventable congenital abnormalities in Hungary.
Design —
Analysis of available Hungarian databases and of the effectiveness of primary, secondary, and tertiary preventive methods.
Setting —
Databases of ad hoc epidemiological studies and of the Hungarian congenital abnormality registry.
Main outcome measures —
Prevalence at birth and prevalence after prevention in 73 congenital abnormality types or groups.
Results —
Preventive methods are available for 51 (70%) of the 73 congenital abnormality types or groups evaluated.
The birth prevalence of all congenital abnormalities could be reduced from 65 to 26 per 1000; thus 39 per 1000 (60%) are preventable.
Without congenital dislocation of the hip, which is unusually common in Hungary, the preventable proportion of congenital abnormalities is 52%.
Conclusion —
Many congenital abnormalities can be prevented, but as they do not represent a single pathological category there is no single strategy for their prevention.
Introduction
In countries where the infant mortality is low, a large proportion of residual infant deaths are due to congenital anomalies (defined as ‘structural-morphological, functional and/or biochemical-molecular defects present at birth’).
Further reduction of infant mortality and chronic handicap depends increasingly on prevention of such disorders.
The largest group of congenital anomalies are congenital abnormalities (or malformations), defined as structural defects present at birth, whether detected at that time or not.
We collected data on the birth prevalence of congenital abnormalities in Hungary, where the Hungarian congenital abnormality registry provides a long-standing information resource.
Congenital abnormalities can be divided into three groups: lethal if the developmental defect causes stillbirth or infant death in more than 50% of cases; severe if without medical intervention the congenital abnormality causes handicap or death; mild if the congenital abnormality requires medical intervention but life expectancy is good.
Lethal and severe defects together constitute major congenital abnormalities.
Minor anomalies or morphological variants without serious medical or cosmetic consequences are excluded from this discussion.
Preventive approaches are often classified as primary (avoiding the abnormality arising in the first place), secondary (early detection and medical treatment, or selective abortion), or tertiary (surgical correction).
A congenital abnormality is considered corrected when early paediatric surgery results in there being practically no residual defect, or no or minimal after effects.
We used the Hungarian congenital abnormality register and other collected data to estimate the proportion of congenital abnormalities that are, or can be, prevented by all these approaches when used to the best level of practice currently found in Hungary.
Methods
Over the past 20 years the National Institute of Hygiene has collected information on the prevalence at birth of congenital abnormalities in Hungary using three different approaches.
Firstly, in the 1970s and '80s ad hoc epidemiological studies were used for all of the common( >=1/10000); and most of the moderately common congenital abnormalities.
All institutions providing paediatric care or paediatric surgery were visited, and the records of all cases in the study period were reviewed.
Cases were ascertained and the validity of the diagnoses was checked.
Secondly, since 1970 the Hungarian congenital abnormality registry has kept a record of all stillborn and liveborn infants with a congenital abnormality detected before the age of 1 year in Hungary.
Physicians must report children with congenital abnormalities.
The registry has four main sources of information: practically all deliveries take place in hospital, and obstetricians report congenital abnormalities diagnosed at birth; paediatricians report malformed babies seen at inpatient and outpatient paediatric clinics; necropsy is obligatory in case of infant death and when the infant has a congenital abnormality pathologists send the autopsy report to the Hungarian congenital abnormality registry; the five prenatal diagnosis centres report congenital abnormalities in fetuses aborted after prenatal diagnosis of fetal defect — all diagnoses are checked, and abnormalities are classified as either isolated or multiple because of their different aetiologies.
In the 1980s our work concentrated on multiple congenital abnormalities.
Babies or fetuses with two or more different congenital abnormalities were considered as multimalformed.
Complex congenital abnormalities within the same organ (for example, tetralogy of Fallot) or sequences (for example , spina bifida cystica with hydrocephalus and clubfoot, or diaphragmatic defect with lung hypoplasia and dextrocardia) were classified as isolated.
Inherited disorders such as cystic fibrosis and functional anomalies such as mental retardation were excluded, but phenylketonuria, galactosaemia, and congenital hypothyroidism were included because they are routinely detected by neonatal screening in Hungary and they may manifest as a congenital abnormality (for example, microcephaly, cataract, umbilical hernia).
The unit of evaluation was affected children rather than individual congenital abnormalities.
The birth prevalence of some moderately common and rare congenital abnormalities not included in the ad hoc epidemiological studies was determined from  the database of the Hungarian congenital abnormality register.
Possible underascertainment has been carefully analysed, and a questionnaire was sent to parents, or those affected were invited with their families for a personal examination to check the diagnoses and to obtain necessary data.
Thirdly, for the remainder, the birth prevalence of rare or heterogeneous congenital abnormality groups was based on the Hungarian congenital abnormality register 1977–81.
We used the averages of the highest three annual birth prevalences to reduce underascertainment.
The proportions of cases in the whole database in the three groups were 78.7%, 8.3%, and 13.0%, respectively.
These estimates assume no significant ‘spontaneous’ decrease or increase with time and no significant regional differences in the birth prevalence of congenital abnormalities.
This is in fact the case for the great majority of congenital abnormalities in Hungary.
The data on which the calculations are based are summarised in table I.
The total prevalence of congenital abnormalities (N) was calculated per 1000 informative pregnancies (n)— that is, live births and stillbirths plus terminations of affected fetuses diagnosed prenatally.
In theory, the variability of the prevalence figures could be estimated by calculating the standard deviation either on the basis of observed annual figures within the study period or from a Poisson distribution , but we could calculate only from the Poisson distribution because with current preventive practice recent annual prevalence figures were not available.
The severity of congenital abnormalities has been evaluated previously from the Hungarian congenital abnormality registry database 1977–81.
Estimates of the effectiveness of preventive approaches for 73 congenital abnormality entities were based on data from the registry, epidemiological studies (such as for neural tube defect and Down's syndrome), studies of the effects of, for example, genetic counselling in reducing further conceptions in families at risk, avoidance of alcohol and other teratogens during pregnancy, and early paediatric surgery in congenital hypertrophic pyloric stenosis, congenital inguinal hernia, ventricular septal defect, etc.
The approximate effectiveness of preventive methods was calculated using the formula N*/n×100, where N* is the proportion of preventable congenital abnormalities.
Prevalence of each congenital abnormality entity after prevention was calculated from the birth prevalence and the percentage effectiveness of prevention.
Finally the figures were related to type of preventive approach.
As the standard deviations of the prevalence after prevention (the last column in table II) were derived from different study populations and study periods, we used the following calculation:  where m is the number of congenital abnormality entities and n i is the sample size.
The corrected sum of the number of cases with congenital abnormalities was calculated as  where N i is the number of cases with congenital abnormalities out of n i births.
Results
In Hungary the birth prevalence of all congenital abnormality entities was about 65 per 1000 births  (table I).
All figures corresponded closely to well established figures for Europe and North America, except for potential congenital dislocation of the hip, which is unusually common in Hungary and probably in other central and eastern European countries.
The birth prevalence of congenital dislocation of the hip was about 1/1000 in western Europe and North America, but a significant (threefold to ninefold) increase was recorded after early orthopaedic screening was introduced.
Table II summarises possible preventive methods.
Some preventive methods overlap but only one was considered for each congenital abnormality entity.
We included genetic counselling alone, for familial cases when no prenatal diagnosis is available, among primary preventive approaches.
Seven groups of secondary preventive approaches are listed.
These include treatable congenital abnormalities (such as analatresia) that may be diagnosed prenatally but for which termination of pregnancy is not indicated because effective treatment is available.
Prenatal diagnosis often improves the management of such cases by allowing the baby to be delivered at the best time and place for appropriate surgery.
We treated orthopaedic screening as a distinct category because some neonatal deformations (such as congenital dislocation of the hip) represent only a predisposition to congenital abnormality, and surgery is avoided by conservative treatment.
We classified specific medical treatments that mimic physiological processes (human chorionic gonadotrophin for undescended testis and indomethacin for patent ductus arteriosus) as secondary prevention.
Tertiary prevention consists of paediatric surgery.
Only congenital abnormalities in which there are no after effects or these are minimal and there is no need for further medical care after surgery are included.
Table II shows that preventive methods are available for 51 (70%) of 73 congenital abnormality entities evaluated, and their effective application could  theoretically reduce the birth prevalence of all congenital abnormalities by 60% (from 65/1000 to 26/1000).
When congenital dislocation of the hip is excluded the figure is 52% (from 52/1000 to 25/1000).
Primary and secondary prevention could in principle reduce the birth prevalence of congenital abnormalities by about 36%, from 65/1000 to 42/1000, the greater part of the effect being due to secondary prevention.
So called tertiary prevention — paediatric surgery — can provide an almost 100% effective solution in at least another 25% of cases.
Table III shows the birth prevalence, proportions, and proportion preventable of lethal, severe, and mild congenital abnormalities.
About 39% of the total — 25/1000 births — are major congenital abnormalities.
Preventive methods are most effective for mild, and least effective for severe, congenital abnormalities.
Checking for residual defects in the authors' clinic in Budapest
Discussion
As far as we know, this is the first detailed attempt to estimate the proportion of congenital abnormalities that are preventable.
A realistic analysis of current Hungarian data shows that preventive methods are currently available for 70% of congenital abnormality (malformation) entities, and 60% of these developmental defects are preventable.
With the exception of congenital dislocation of the hip, the Hungarian birth prevalences for congenital abnormalities resemble those of other areas where there is careful recording.
Hungarian figures excluding congenital dislocation of the hip (51.7/1000, of which 52% might be prevented) may be more appropriate for comparison with western Europe and North America.
Future estimates will probably prove more reliable and have more predictive value.
The analysis includes two sets of population based data.
Birth prevalences without prevention are real figures observed in ad hoc epidemiological surveys or in the database of the Hungarian congenital abnormality registry, as are birth prevalences after prevention involving selective abortion or neonatal screening.
On the other hand, the proportions of congenital abnormalities preventable by secondary and tertiary methods are estimates based on research studies of particular conditions (for example, ad hoc epidemiological studies for measuring the effectiveness of neonatal orthopaedic screening), or regions (for example , those having excellent ultrasound scanning and trained staff for diagnosing structural defects, or using the triple test for detection of Down's syndrome) or of expert groups (for example , specific postnatal treatment and early paediatric surgery).
The estimates for the effect of primary preventive approaches are theoretical calculations based on our previous papers.
preventive approaches
The contribution of primary prevention is small and limited mainly to avoiding single gene defects, teratogens (by rubella vaccination, for example) and teratogenic effects of maternal disorders.
Heterozygote screening and DNA probes will permit more effective prevention of genetic disorders in the future, and periconceptional multivitamin or folate supplementation will be advantageous in primary prevention of neural tube defects.
Among methods for secondary prevention, prenatal screening, especially ultrasonography, is particularly effective, though obviously abortion of a seriously malformed fetus is a last resort rather than an optimal solution.
Informed parents have to choose the lesser of two evils, and usually choose to prevent the birth of the affected fetus, but the decision can sometimes be very difficult.
There may be uncertainties in interpreting an ultrasound picture; the prognosis of the abnormality detected is not always known; and in some groups of defects, such as oesophageal atresia or obstructive defects of urinary system, it is not always clear whether the defect is so severe as to justify abortion or whether surgery might be successful.
It is often said that most congenital abnormalities are untreatable, but this overlooks the great contribution of tertiary prevention, and surgical techniques are constantly improving.
The figures in this report are based on the best current Hungarian practice.
Recent reports suggesting that 70–80% of severe congenital abnormalities may be detected by routine fetal anomaly scanning by trained non-medical operators with modern equipment would considerably increase the proportion of preventable congenital abnormalities.
It is also possible to increase the effectiveness of other forms of prenatal screening.
For example, it is estimated that about 60% of Down's syndrome and other trisomic syndromes can be detected using the triple test (maternal serum α fetoprotein, unconjugated oestriol, and human chorionic gonadotrophin, combined with maternal age).
Though neonatal screening for hypothyroidism, phenylketonuria, and galactosaemia is very effective, its contribution is limited.
Neonatal orthopaedic screening is particularly important in Hungary, where congenital dislocation of the hip is the commonest congenital abnormality.
As many congenital abnormalities can be prevented, these developmental defects should not be considered an irreducible component of perinatal mortality.
However, as they vary so greatly in cause and course there is no single strategy for prevention.
The efficacy of prevention could be improved considerably by promoting widespread use of the approaches that are now available, but this will require further support from public health authorities for periconceptional care and screening programmes.
The Hungarian example shows that each country represents a special situation with its specific problems, pattern of congenital abnormalities, resources, and needs.
The authors will supply, on request, the database of birth prevalences of different congenital abnormality entities and their references; the database of 73 congenital abnormality entities that was the basis of this calculation; and the data of congenital abnormality entities within different preventive approaches.
Health care in Brazil
Brazil has great geopolitical importance because of its size, environmental resources, and potential economic power.
The organisation of its health care system reflects the schisms within Brazilian society.
High technology private care is available to the rich and inadequate public care to the poor.
Limited financial resources have been overconcentrated on health care in the hospital sector and health professionals are generally inappropriately trained to meet the needs of the community.
However, recent changes in the organisation of health care are taking power away from federal government to state and local authorities.
This should help the process of reform, but many vested interests remain to be overcome.
A link programme between Britain and Brazil focusing on primary care has resulted in exchange of ideas and staff between the two countries.
If primary care in Brazil can be improved it could help to narrow the health divide between rich and poor.
Brazil has often been in the news because of the impeachment of President Collor, the Rio conference, widespread concern about environmental issues and violence, including the murder of street children, and, most recently, prisoners in Sao Paulo.
Much less has been written about the organisation of health care in the country.
Brazil is a country of contrasts.
These are exemplified in the health sector by gleaming tertiary care and research institutes in major cities such as Sao Paulo and poorly equipped or absent health posts in the ubiquitous shanty towns (favelas).
Brazil has a heavy burden of international debt, which is a major contributor to its economic and health problems, but wealth is also characterised by striking internal divisions.
The top 20% of the population have 26 times the income of the bottom 20%, one of the largest differentials in the world.
The statistics given in the table illustrate some of the schisms in Brazilian society.
The death rates in infants and children under 5 are higher than in countries of equivalent development.
The number of televisions per 1000 people is three times higher.
Although the ratio of doctors to nurses is high most of the population have poor medical facilities.
Organisation of health care
Until 1987, there were entrenched divisions in the organisation of health care.
Curative treatment and medical care were the responsibility of the social security ministry agency Instituto Nacional de Assistencia Medica Previdencia Social.
Care was provided by units run by the agency and accredited private services.
Preventive activities and communicable diseases were the responsibility of the health minister and state health secretariats, which ran health centres, public health laboratories, and hospitals specialising in transmissible diseases.
In 1988 Brazil  decided to set up a unified and decentralised health system and this process is now under way.
In the new system the health ministry has sole federal responsibility for health care but will be less involved in the delivery of health care.
The health secretariats in each of the states will coordinate health care and the local authorities (municipalities) will run local facilities.
This transition, however, is fraught with problems, including reluctance of authorities to devolve power and money and the difficulty state and municipal governments have in working together if they are controlled by different political parties.
Unless a consensus can be developed about priorities, health care may become a political football, with programmes being terminated by incoming administrations merely because they were introduced by an opposing party.
There is also a danger that the reforms will enshrine the division between primary, secondary, and tertiary care and make it difficult to coordinate their activities and to move funds from one sector to another.
In addition to public funding, much health care is financed privately by both companies and individuals.
Though the rich spend much more than the poor on health care, the poor spend a much greater proportion of their income (about 5% v 2%).
The rich tend to buy the services of doctors and the poor purchase mostly unprescribed medicines from pharmacists.
Privately financed and provided group medical plans are assuming greater importance.
A monthly capitation fee is paid to profit making companies.
Doctors' cooperatives are being formed which seek to prevent exploitation of doctors, but because of this care may be more expensive than that provided by group medical plans.
The box describes the effects of the health divide.
A considerable amount of the care (around 80% in 1991) funded from public sources is provided in private hospitals.
Construction of private hospitals was boosted by financial incentives during the period of economic growth in the 1970s.
The average costs of treating patients at private hospitals are less than those in public hospitals.
This is partly because private hospitals select simpler cases but may also reflect the lack of incentives to reduce admissions and length of stay in public hospitals and the absence of adequate community care for the impoverished populations which tend to use them.
The cost per admission varies in both private (nearly twofold) and public hospitals (over fourfold).
It has been suggested that the lack of control over the system of payment by the Ministry of Health has created ‘monumental distortions and fraud.’
Physicians in public service often have several jobs to provide an adequate income.
This means the time they spend in the public sector is often much less than that for which they are contracted.
They are often inappropriately trained to provide general primary medical care.
Favelas house Brazil's poorest citizens
Brazil's ninth national conference on health in August 1992 was an important opportunity to discuss the movement towards decentralisation and democratisation of health care and had as its motto ‘municipalisation is the only way.’
Figures presented in the conference report show that some states have been receiving more than their fair share of government resources for health care taking into account population.
For instance, Rio de Janeiro and the federal district (including Brasilia) seemed well resourced compared with many other parts of the country, particularly many of the impoverished states of the north east.
The conference took place at a time of great political turmoil, and there were calls for the resignation of President Collor and an end to corruption.
Many of the proposals dealt with the need to ensure that resources reached their intended destination and that they were augmented by the creation of new taxes on industrial and agricultural sectors.
The mood was exciting and sometimes emotional, with secretaries of health from many towns around the country participating.
Improving health care is clearly a priority for many local politicians — for instance, eight of 12 successful candidates for the city council in Rio de Janeiro mentioned health when asked about their priorities by the newspaper Jornal do Brasil .
Link programme
One of the key priorities for Brazil is to develop primary care in a system which has been completely dominated by hospital based medicine.
Demands for health care are likely to increase because of factors such as the aging population, the spread of HIV, and rising expectations.
Over the past three years my department has been collaborating with a training programme for general practitioners based at the Conceicao Hospital in Porto Alegre, a large city in the southernmost state of Rio Grande do Sul with a population of around 1.5 million.
Although the city compares favourably with other parts of Brazil in socioeconomic terms, there are areas of great poverty, particularly in favelas, many of which are inhabited by people moving from the countryside because of lack of employment and inequalities in land tenure.
Will Brazil's reforms improve her health care?
Some years ago the British Council identified primary care as one of the priorities for development of a link programme between Britain and Brazil.
Porto Alegre was identified because it has two of the very few general practice training programmes in the country.
The Conceicao programme produces about 15 general practitioners a year from a two year training programme (a third year is optional).
Training is given by experienced practitioners, many of whom have been through the programme.
Physicians trained in internal medicine are attached and function as consultants.
Unlike many of their colleagues in the public sector general practitioners in the Conceicao programme work for the full contracted eight hours a day.
The Conceicao programme has a few hospital beds but its main functions are to run community health centres in favelas and a large primary care clinic in the main hospital which caters for the local population.
The programme has closer links with the community than many general practitioners in Britain and works closely with local resident groups.
Although it is hampered by a lack of trained community nurses, it has undertaken a process of community diagnosis to determine local health problems and conducts numerous preventive and health education activities, including cervical cytology programmes, visits to schools, group work with mothers, and the training of health agents.
Health agents are members of the local community who are trained to provide preventive and simple curative care as members of the primary care team.
In addition, general practitioners sometimes act as advocates for the community, meeting with local officials to try to promote improvements in sanitation and basic infrastructure.
Whether doctors should concentrate solely on the clinical aspects of general practice or act in a wider capacity to tackle the underlying causes of ill health is a subject often discussed.
Preliminary data from a recent audit exercise have shown that uptake of immunisation has improved from 60% in 1986 to 90% in 1991.
The link programme has also developed contracts with one of the three medical schools in the city, the faculty of medicine of the Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul.
It operates from a large teaching hospital which until recently had no community links.
Undergraduate students have begun to recognise the importance of primary care.
An increasing number of them come to work with the general practitioners in the Conceicao programme for up to one month on a voluntary basis during their holidays.
Some go to other health centres including one at Vila Cruzeiro, a large favela community that has links with the department of social and preventive medicine.
The long term hope is that academic general practice will be developed in the faculty of medicine.
Exchange of staff
The role of the link programme is to promote an exchange of ideas and has led to visits in both directions.
Several Brazilian doctors have completed MSc degrees in Britain.
Research projects, particularly in qualitative research, have been set up following visits by Cecil Helman, a general practitioner and medical anthropologist.
These studies have focused on problems identified by Brazilian colleagues, including poor compliance with immunisation and other preventive measures, poor attendance at antenatal clinics, problems with the role and training of health agents, and the high rate of somatisation.
Elaine Fullard from Oxford, who has been influential in developing the role of nurse facilitators for prevention in primary care, and Anita Berlin from St Mary's Medical School, who has a particular interest in teaching communication skills, have also been to Brazil as part of the programme.
In October last year I was able to visit Fundacao Esperanca (Hope Foundation), which has developed a comprehensive training and support programme for health workers from villages along the Amazon and Tapajos rivers.
It has a well organised base clinic in Santarem, a city of around 250000 at the junction of the two rivers.
This provides medical, laboratory, and nursing back up for the village outreach programme and deals with health problems of local townspeople.
It also uses volunteer specialists, some recruited locally, but many coming from abroad on short visits.
In particular, they need surgeons and anaesthetists, pathologists, laboratory technicians, and teachers of health care and nursing (for address see below).
The clinic intends to focus in future on training local health professionals, community health workers, and planners for the process of ‘municipalisation’ of health care.
The future
A conference will be held in May in Porto Alegre to promote the process of decentralisation of health care in Brazil.
It will bring together interested parties from around the country to exchange experience and to develop a network for interested individuals, educational institutions, training programmes, and state administrations.
This is being undertaken under the auspices of Action in International Medicine, an organisation based in London which has the support of around 100 colleges and academies of medicine and allied health professions in over 30 countries (for address see below).
It is being organised in conjunction with several Brazilian institutions including the health secretariat of the municipality of Porto Alegre, the State Secretariat of Health of Rio Grande do Sul, the faculty of medicine of the Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, and the National Council of Municipal Secretaries of Health.
The growing role of municipalities in providing health care means that there is bound to be more emphasis on primary care.
Some states, such as that of Ceara in the north east, have taken radical steps.
The governor has authorised recruitment of 4000 women, many of them already lay midwives, to act as health agents, applying Unicef procedures.
Infant mortality has already been reduced by 32%.
In order to fund this process hospital building has been cut back.
Although for primary care to be effective in Brazil it must be allied to community development and participation and include non-professional health workers, health professionals have useful roles.
Brazilian medical schools have little commitment to training doctors for the health needs of the community as most will become specialists.
Once career opportunities exist for general practitioners there will be  more pressure on medical schools and postgraduate institutions to give appropriate training.
The Brazilian Society of Community and General Doctors is seeking to address this situation and could act as a catalyst, advocate, and pressure group, as well as promoting good quality training, just as the Royal College of General Practitioners has done in this country.
It is difficult to evaluate the effectiveness of the link programme, but we believe it has helped to broaden the perspective of both the British and the Brazilian  participants .
By providing an outside point of reference for the important work being undertaken by our Brazilian colleagues it has helped to give community based approaches to health care credibility within the country.
This is important because there are many interests which may try to stifle attempts to improve health care.
Potentially far reaching changes are occurring in Brazilian society and the health care system has become a focal point for change.
If the forces unleashed are sufficient to overcome bureaucratic inertia and corruption they could bring about a transformation which will have even greater impact and importance than the development of the NHS in Britain.
If they fail, the rapidly growing populations in the favelas of the great urban centres will become even more desperate in their quest for survival, with incalculable consequences for the stability and future of the country.
The potential for large population movements to wreak havoc on environmentally vital regions such as the Amazon basin means that the outcome of the struggle for health and development in Brazil is of international importance.
Lesson of the Week
Arsenic and mercury intoxication due to Indian ethnic remedies
We have recently seen two cases of heavy metal intoxication resulting from ingestion of Indian ethnic remedies.
The substances were dispensed by an Indian ethnic practitioner, or hakim, as a treatment for eczema and were found to contain toxic amounts of inorganic arsenic and mercury.
Case 1
A 35 year old Asian man presented with a three month history of progressive weakness of his hands and legs associated with distal sensory disturbance.
The patient had first become aware of the symptoms six weeks after a hakim had started treating him for atopic eczema.
On examination Mees' lines were present in the finger nails and there was hyperkeratosis of the soles of the feet.
Symmetrical wasting and weakness was present in the upper and lower limbs and all tendon reflexes were absent.
Cutaneous sensation was impaired in a glove and stocking distribution.
He could not stand from a sitting position without using his arms and walked with difficulty unsupported.
Electromyography suggested a peripheral sensorimotor neuropathy.
The presence of a raised urinary concentration of inorganic arsenic (63 µg/l; normal <2 µg/l, toxic concentration >2 µg/l) and a hair arsenic concentration of 20 µg/g on x ray fluorescence spectrometry (normal <1 µg/g) confirmed arsenic intoxication.
Samples of the ethnic remedies obtained from the hakim were analysed by flameless atomic absorption spectrophotometry and x ray diffraction analysis (table).
Packets of the mixed white and orange-brown powder most strongly implicated in this case each contained an average of 105 mg of inorganic arsenic trioxide (As 2 O 3 ).
The patient had been told to take two packets daily.
Chelation therapy with 2,3-dimercapto-1-propan-sulphonic acid (DMPS) 100 mg three times daily for three weeks and later dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA) 400 mg three times daily for two weeks was given without objective improvement in muscle strength.
Two years after the onset of symptoms the patient was still unable to return to work.
Case 2
A 32 year old Asian man presented with a three week history of poor appetite, weight loss, diarrhoea, sweating, tremor of the hands, and paraesthesia in the extremities and face.
Symptoms developed four weeks after treatment for eczema had been started by the same hakim who had treated the first patient.
On examination the patient was anxious, flushed, tachycardic, and hypertensive, with a fine tremor of the outstretched hands.
Neurological examination showed reduced pinprick sensation in both feet.
Standard laboratory investigations, including thyroid function tests, all gave normal findings.
Mercury poisoning was confirmed by a urinary mercury concentration of 105 µg/l (normal <10 µg/l, toxic concentration >100 µg/l) 12 weeks after the last exposure to the ethnic remedies.
Analysis of the handmade red-brown pills which the hakim had prescribed at a dose of six daily showed each to contain 30–42 mg of inorganic mercuric sulphide (table).
Comment
Both our patients presented with symptoms and signs of heavy metal intoxication within six weeks of exposure to remedies administered by the same hakim.
The presentation of the first patient with a subacute sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy is typical of intoxication with inorganic arsenic.
Peripheral neuropathy after use of arsenic containing ethnic remedies has been reported from India, but is not a recognised health hazard in the United Kingdom.
The symptoms in case 2, which included gastrointestinal and autonomic disturbance, closely resembled those reported in past cases of mercury intoxication.
Most large towns in Britain with sizable Asian communities have three or four resident hakims, and an unknown number visit Britain from abroad to practise for a few weeks several times a year.
The hakim who treated these two patients was a visitor.
Most hakims are medically unqualified and the main conditions they treat are fatigue and depression, digestive disorders, psychosexual problems, and skin conditions.
The services of hakims and the products used by them are widely advertised in Asian newspapers in Britain.
Some hakims manufacture their own remedies from raw materials bought in India, whereas others obtain commercial preparations directly from manufacturers in India or Pakistan.
Many are issued in unlabelled containers.
As illustrated by the first patient, recovery from arsenical neuropathy is generally poor, even after treatment with chelating agents.
Prompt removal from the source of toxic exposure is therefore mandatory.
Of greater concern is the fact that a single dose of arsenic trioxide of 200–300 mg may be fatal.
Since one of the preparations given to the first patient contained up to 187 mg of arsenic trioxide per dose, there is a potential for fatal poisoning.
To prevent further cases the Indian community in the United Kingdom should be made aware of the risks associated with the use of ethnic remedies, and their distribution and sale should be monitored.
Pituitary imaging is essential for women with moderate hyperprolactinaemia
All women with hyperprolactinaemia (>1000 mU/l) should be referred to an endocrinologist for further assessment and computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging of the pituitary
In patients with a macroadenoma (>1 cm in diameter) of the pituitary a plasma prolactin concentration of >4000 mU/l, >6000 mU/l, or >8000 mU/l has been reported to be diagnostic of a prolactin secreting adenoma.
A plasma prolactin concentration which is raised but is less than this can originate from a small prolactin secreting tumour (microadenoma) or from loss of normal inhibitory control by dopamine, as seen in compression of the pituitary stalk.
This secondary hyperprolactinaemia usually indicates the presence of a large pituitary tumour not secreting prolactin or a cyst.
Hartog and Hull stated that computed tomography of the pituitary does not have a role in cases of moderate hyperprolactinaemia because it is of little value in diagnosing a microadenoma.
They have, however, overlooked the possibility of moderate hyperprolactinaemia reflecting compression of the pituitary stalk.
We assessed the prevalence of large tumours in patients with moderate hyperprolactinaemia.
Methods
We studied 36 women (mean (SD) age 30.8 (8.2) years) who presented with oligomenorrhoea, amenorrhoea, infertility, or galactorrhoea to an endocrine or infertility clinic over two years and who had a plasma prolactin concentration of 1000–8000 mU/l (normal range 80–460 mU/l).
We excluded women with hypothyroidism and with hyperprolactinaemia related to drug treatment.
We recorded the patients' presenting symptoms and checked their visual fields with a confrontation test.
Computed tomography of the pituitary was performed on all patients, and all the scans were reported by two consultant radiologists by consensus.
Contiguous 2 mm coronal (or axial) scans  were obtained after injection of intravenous contrast medium.
In patients identified as having a macroadenoma visual fields were confirmed by Goldmann perimetry.:
Results
The mean plasma prolactin concentration in the 36 women was 2492 (range 1003–7180) mU/l.
All the women had full visual fields.
Pituitary scans were reported as normal in 11 cases and as showing an empty sella in one, a microadenoma in 18, and a macroadenoma in six (table I).
Among the patients with apparently normal pituitaries or a microadenoma the highest prolactin concentration was 4200 mU/l.
Headache and tiredness were more common presenting complaints in patients with a large tumour, although thyroid and adrenal function was normal in this group.
Secretion of growth hormone was not assessed.
In two of the patients identified as having a macroadenoma (cases 5 and 6) tumours, 10 and 11 mm in diameter, behaved as typical prolactinomas: menses were restored and plasma prolactin concentration was normalised by treatment with the dopamine agonist bromocriptine (table II).
The four other patients almost certainly had secondary hyperprolactinaemia, which in cases 2, 3, and 4 was associated with invasive non-functioning pituitary macroadenomas.
Discussion
Although treatment of secondary hyperprolactinaemia with a dopamine agonist may reduce plasma prolactin concentrations, it has little or no effect on the growth of a macroadenoma.
If the tumour is left untreated local invasion may cause compression of the optic chiasm with subsequent loss of vision.
Furthermore, although our patients were not deficient in adrenocorticotrophic or thyroid stimulating hormone, a full endocrine assessment is essential to screen for potentially life threatening hypopituitarism.
We conclude that all women with documented moderate hyperprolactinaemia should be referred, through a specialist, for routine computed tomography (or, where available, magnetic resonance imaging) of the pituitary.
This is essential if cysts or pituitary macroadenomas not secreting prolactin are to be identified and treated appropriately.
LETTERS
Re-emergence of tuberculosis
Editor ,— John M Watson's editorial emphasises the need for vigilance in Britain following outbreaks of multidrug resistant tuberculosis associated with HIV infection in the United States.
Watson notes that occasional multidrug resistant strains have been isolated in Britain recently but that there is no formal evidence that these are related to HIV disease.
This is in keeping with our recent experience at the Royal Free and Coppetts Wood Hospitals in London.
We reviewed the mycobacterial isolates obtained from the tuberculosis laboratory of the Royal Free Hospital during the period January 1991 to October 1992.
A total of 296 isolates were recovered from 105 patients, 79 (75%) of whom were infected with mycobacteria of the tuberculosis complex (78 with Mycobacterium tuberculosis , one with M bovis ).
The remainder were infected mainly with M avium intracellulare , reflecting the large number of samples received from patients with HIV disease.
The results of sensitivity testing of the tuberculosis complex isolates (performed using the rapid BACTEC radiometric method in our laboratory and subsequently confirmed at the Regional Tuberculosis Reference Laboratory) are shown in the table.
Isolates from two of the 79 patients showed multidrug resistant M tuberculosis with confirmed resistance to all of the standard first line agents.
Contact tracing identified a further three patients requiring either treatment or chemoprophylaxis.
These patients were all members of a family of Kurdish refugees who had recently arrived from Turkey, not patients from the AIDS wards or clinic.
None were clinically suspected of having HIV disease, although this was not formally excluded by testing.
Treatment regimens which included ciprofloxacin and amikacin were used successfully, although prolonged therapy was required.
Our survey also revealed an unexpectedly high level of isoniazid resistance, with seven of 79 patients (9%) showing resistance.
Three of these patients' organisms were also resistant to streptomycin.
Although the numbers are small, this is considerably higher than the 1–3% level of isoniazid resistance and the 0.8% level of resistance to more than one drug that the Medical Research Council found in its survey of England and Wales in 1988.
Clearly, the call for increased vigilance is a timely one, but it should be extended to the monitoring of patterns of resistance to single as well as to multiple drugs, and it should give extra attention to resistance in traditional high risk groups such as immigrants as well as in HIV patients.
Editor ,— In his clear and concise review of the international perspectives of BCG vaccination, Citron emphasises two factors that severely limit the usefulness of this vaccine in the global campaign against tuberculosis.
Firstly, the efficacy of BCG varies considerably from region to region; secondly, it is effective in preventing serious forms of primary tuberculosis but seems not to prevent the infected person from developing postprimary, often infectious, disease.
Citron stresses the importance of conducting epidemiological studies to determine the most effective way of applying BCG vaccine, and other workers are attempting, by genetic manipulation, to produce more effective vaccines based on BCG.
There is a third alternative which has some historical precedence and, if effective, would be very safe (even in people positive for HIV) and economical.
On the belief that self limiting forms of tuberculosis of bovine origin in childhood protect against pulmonary tuberculosis later in life (Marfan's law), Calmette attenuated a strain of Mycobacterium bovis for use as a vaccine.
There is, however, no logical reason why a vaccine for protection against tuberculosis should contain species specific antigens.
The fact that BCG affords protection against leprosy and lymphadenitis indicates that the protective antigens belong to the group shared by all mycobacteria.
It now seems that tubercle bacilli cause human disease because of their ability to induce necrotic tissue reactions, analogous to the Koch phenomenon in the guinea pig, rather than protective reactions.
Possession of species specific antigens could therefore be a disadvantage as these may be the ones that induce such necrotic reactions.
Indeed, one of the hypothesis explaining the variation in the efficacy of BCG from region to region is the ability of BCG to boost low levels of necrotic immune reactivity induced by prior exposure to certain slowly growing environmental mycobacteria.
With two exceptions,M chelonei and M fortuitum , rapidly growing mycobacteria do not cause human disease, almost certainly because they always induce protective responses but never tissue damaging ones.
At least one such species,M vaccae , has been shown actively to suppress tissue damaging reactions.
A rapidly growing species was selected by Friedmann as a vaccine and therapeutic agent and was used between 1905 and 1930, apparently with some success.
Unfortunately, he selected M chelonei (the turtle tubercle bacillus), one of the two rapid growers pathogenic for humans.
The ideal vaccine for the prevention of tuberculosis in both the uninfected and infected person may be a non-pathogenic rapidly growing mycobacterium such as M vaccae .
Although not yet evaluated as a protective vaccine, heat killed M vaccae has been shown to reverse the progress of tuberculosis, even that due to multidrug resistant strain.
Thus, while not abandoning the other studies advocated by Citron, a comprehensive trial of M vaccae as an immunising agent as well as an immunotherapeutic one would seem highly desirable.
Editor ,— John M Watson raises important issues relating to the changing face of tuberculosis in the United Kingdom — namely, immigrant populations, poverty, homelessness, and HIV disease.
The east end of London encompasses all these factors.
To assess the relation between tuberculosis and HIV in this area we screened 150 HIV positive patients at the Royal London Hospital over the period July 1991 to May 1992 with skin tuberculin tests and chest radiography.
Ten (7%) of the 150 patients screened were found to have active tuberculosis.
Of these 10 patients, seven had no symptoms classically associated with tuberculous infection.
Seven were indigenous whites, of whom six lived in Tower Hamlets, the other three patients being refugees recently arrived from Africa.
Five patients (four British whites, one African) had received BCG vaccination, further emphasising that BCG is not always protective.
Tuberculosis is a major cause of concern in Tower Hamlets, with standardised mortality rates of seven times the national average.
In addition, there is a high incidence of sexually transmitted infections, including genital ulcerative disease.
As the HIV epidemic continues to spread, particularly  rapidly in Africa and Asia, newly arrived immigrants from these areas are at particular risk of coinfection with HIV and tuberculosis.
Furthermore, our data suggest that we cannot be complacent about the risks of tuberculosis in the white population.
The diagnosis of tuberculosis may be difficult in HIV infected patients because of atypical clinical presentation and chest radiographic findings, and, as we have seen, it may be asymptomatic.
Skin anergy, long delays in identification of the organism and in determining resistance to antimicrobial therapy, and the development of multidrug resistant tuberculosis, all pose further challenges for prevention and control of tuberculosis related to HIV.
In view of the increasing prevalence of HIV in our population, we believe that HIV testing should also be offered to patients with tuberculosis.
Vigilance must be kept for possible new cases of tuberculosis both in immigrants and in the indigenous population.
Editor ,— K M Citron's editorial on BCG vaccination against tuberculosis appears at the right moment.
Recent reviews in American journals on the resurgence of this disease do not mention BCG.
Admittedly, where it is used for mass vaccination its reported efficacy has varied widely, as detailed by Citron.
A case for its use in people in close contact with open pulmonary tuberculosis remains — though the statistics have of necessity been suboptimal — and this is official policy in many countries, including the United Kingdom.
Its use has been advocated even for contacts who are HIV positive but symptom free.
The argument that ‘conversion’ to tuberculin positivity by BCG may hinder diagnosis of tuberculosis should surely be set against the laborious surveillance by periodic tuberculin testing and treatment with (not entirely innocuous) drugs if positivity should develop.
Writers on the American situation emphasise the difficulty of keeping in touch with contacts and the consequent risk of their developing clinical disease unknown to their physician; a single BCG vaccination should reduce this difficulty.
Is not a rethink by the American authorities of the role of BCG vaccination in contacts timely?
Is it not an option at least worthy of some sort of comparative retrial?
Editor ,— K M Citron's editorial highlights one of the many dilemmas faced in the AIDS era.
However, the discontinuation of BCG vaccination for teenagers is premature for a number of reasons.
The association between HIV infection and tuberculosis has been recognised for some time, and the emergence of multidrug resistance in the United States represents the latest development.
The story is currently somewhat different in Britain, where about 5% of people with AIDS develop tuberculosis.
This low figure is due to the high proportion of vaccinated people in the United Kingdom and the limited overlap between the population with HIV and those at risk of myco-bacterial reactivation.
Clearly, HIV infected individuals coinfected with tuberculosis could represent a serious public health hazard and suspension of the BCG programme would serve to increase this threat further.
It should be remembered that BCG is one of the safest (case fatality rate of 0.19 per million) and cheapest of vaccines ($0.055 per dose).
In Britain as well as many other countries the evidence for the efficacy of BCG vaccine is overwhelming.
Research will identify antigenic determinants important for host protection and hopefully engineer their increased expression in the vaccine, thereby improving its efficacy still further.
BCG's adjuvant qualities, heat stability and resistance to maternal antibodies, coupled with the economic and safety factors already mentioned make it a strong candidate for being the vehicle for a recombinant vaccine.
Numerous foreign viral, bacterial, and protozoal genes have already been successfully introduced and expressed in BCG.
If the school BCG programme is suspended will it be because everyone has received a somewhat different, recombinant form thirteen years earlier?
Editor ,— On 18 January the BBC's Horizon programme showed interesting accounts of the early development of chemotherapy, the tragedy of increasing numbers of AIDS patients with tuberculosis in Zambia, and the American experience of a rising incidence of tuberculosis and miniepidemics of incurable, multiply resistant disease.
The breakdown of the American tuberculosis service is a result of past underfunding of research, education, and public health programmes in an underclass suffering from poverty, HIV infection, and drug abuse.
It threatens not only the patients but their contacts, including nursing and medical staff.
The Horizon programme seldom referred to the research programme of the British Medical Research Council.
We therefore write to put the record straight.
The first controlled trial of streptomycin in pulmonary tuberculosis; the study of combinations of streptomycin, PAS, and isoniazid; and the first national sampling drug resistance survey were organised by the Tuberculosis Research Unit (director P D'arcy Hart).
The expansion in the 1950s to developing countries showed, in a classical trial in Madras, that domiciliary chemotherapy in appalling living conditions was as effective as the same regimen in a sanatorium.
Consequently, the widescale sanatorium service was doomed, an enormously cost effective benefit for both developing and developed countries.
The shift to domiciliary treatment led the MRC to develop fully supervised intermittent regimens and short course (4 to 6 months) chemotherapy, which together dramatically reduced the number of necessary drug doses.
As well, the MRC carried out studies of the bacteriology, drug mechanisms, and immunology of tuberculosis and the pharmacology of antituberculosis drugs, directed at preventing drug resistance and treating patients with resistant strains effectively, and also studied sociological, epidemiological, and community problems — including intensive work, lasting 40 years, on patient compliance in taking drugs, and the results achieved in service programmes.
The activities of the tuberculosis unit received worldwide recognition as examples of technically advanced countries benefiting from the MRC's close collaboration with a substantial group of developing countries.
The closure of the unit in the mid-1980s has left a large and unfilled worldwide gap.
As the numbers of socially deprived people, immigrants, and people with AIDS increase, and tuberculosis notifications no longer decline, who can dismiss the risks we may face in Britain in future?
Now is surely the time to revitalise a broad, multidisciplinary, high quality programme of basic and applied research in tuberculosis, including clinical trials, all necessary for the development of new regimens to simplify treatment even further and to combat drug resistance.
Diagnostic dilatation and curettage
Editor ,— Angela Coulter and colleagues point out that a high proportion of dilatation and curettage operations are performed on women under the age of 40.
Although they did not offer any pathological data, they suggest that dilatation and curettage may be inappropriate in many cases and that guidelines should be developed to agree on the most appropriate patients for the procedure.
We have undertaken the type of audit Coulter and colleagues suggest, using a small cohort of patients from Northwick Park Hospital.
We found that dilatation and curettage in women under 40 was often unhelpful.
However, careful use of criteria for surgery could increase the value and reduce the incidence of dilatation and curettage.
We assessed all curettings (not related to pregnancy) received from women under the age of 40 over a seven month period; 13% had minor abnormalities, including simple hyperplasia and chronic endometritis.
None showed malignant or premalignant disease.
These data reinforce the evidence that serious endometrial disease is rare in women under 40.
We designed ideal standard criteria for using dilatation and curettage: clinical suspicion of tuberculosis; failure of medical treatment for menorrhagia and dysmenorrhoea; severe menorrhagia presenting as symptomatic anaemia; to exclude early pregnancy at the time of tubal ligation; to remove an intrauterine contraceptive device if not possible in outpatients.
Contraindications  for dilatation and curettage were: menorrhagia and dysmenorrhoea without a trial of conservative treatment; to exclude endometrial polyp; curiosity, during another procedure such as laparoscopy or examination under anaesthetic; to see if ovulation has occurred.
When these criteria were applied, the incidence of endometrial disease picked up by dilatation and curettage increased only slightly, from 13% to 18%; again, no malignant or premalignant pathology was encountered.
However, using the guidelines suggested, more clinicians found the histology report influential in their clinical management of the patient (45% v 9%).
We have not yet investigated any change in the incidence of dilatation and curettage in young women since this audit, but we conclude that if a strict protocol for surgery is adhered to, the proportion of patients for whom useful histological information is gained should increase and the number of dilatation and curettage operations decrease with appropriate clinical and economic advantage.
We also agree that hysteroscopic biopsy may have a useful role to play in the investigation of these patients.
Editor ,— It is to be regretted that B V Lewis in his otherwise excellent editorial continues to perpetuate the myth of ‘post-pill amenorrhoea.’
The proposition that certain forms of secondary amenorrhoea are caused by the combined oral contraceptive was debunked several years ago.
Careful studies showed no difference in the prevalence of the diagnostic categories or the response to treatment of amenorrhoea ‘post-pill’ as compared with its occurrence ‘post-condom.’
Secondary amenorrhoea and use of the combined oral contraceptive are both common among women in their 20s.
The pill causes regular withdrawal bleeding, masking any amenorrhoea until it is stopped.
Indeed, the best treatment of investigated hypo-oestrogenic secondary amenorrhoea in young women not desiring the immediate return of their fertility is usually the pill.
Such amenorrhoea is associated with bone loss, and this can be prevented by the judicious use of cyclical hormones.
Editor ,— In 1991 the New England Journal of Medicine featured a review article on the management of abnormal genital bleeding.
In the correspondence that followed, Cates and Peterson from the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta criticised the article for failing to mention the potential role of sexually transmitted diseases as important causes of intermenstrual bleeding.
The same comments would seem to apply to B V Lewis's editorial on diagnostic dilatation and curettage in young women.
The possibility of endometritis should be considered in all young women with intermenstrual bleeding and, in particular, Chlamydia trachomatis infection, which is a well recognised cause of endometritis and is currently the commonest sexually transmitted bacterial infection in the United Kingdom.
Hysteroscopy and endometrial biopsy have an important role in the management of abnormal uterine bleeding, but all young sexually active women should have a cervical swab taken to detect chlamydia in the first instance, irrespective of the sexual history.
In view of the potential for chlamydia to damage the fallopian tubes we may even prevent a few cases of infertility in the process.
Editor ,— Angela Coulter and colleagues' concern about overuse of diagnostic curettage and the potential cost savings have wide implications both for gynaecologists and general practitioners.
To reduce the frequency of use of this procedure two key areas in primary care could be addressed.
Firstly, although referral patterns will reflect individual practice, continued use of dilatation and curettage by gynaecologists reinforces the notion for general practitioners and patients that it is appropriate treatment for menstrual irregularity in women under 40.
Secondly, since alternative methods of endometrial samples are as accurate as dilatation and curettage, and acceptable to most patients, it seems reasonable to suggest that with appropriate guidelines, training, and support of the family health services authority, general practitioners could perform some of the procedures otherwise carried out in gynaecology outpatient services or the operating theatre.
The role of the general practitioner in providing such a service can be disputed by gynaecologists and general practitioners alike.
Some gynaecologists may consider that there is a risk of missing serious endometrial pathology in such patients, although studies suggest that in this age group it is unlikely.
Specialist concerns about use and misuse of the procedure could be allayed if gynaecologists themselves formulated appropriate guidelines and provided thorough training in the technique of vabra curettage.
From the general practitioner's point of view, the constraints of time are likely to be more important than the modest financial outlay for equipment.
The fact that the endometrial sampling is not listed in the statement of fees and allowances (section 42, minor surgery) as a minor surgical procedure for which payment may be made would preclude most from adding vabra curettage to their repertoire.
This constraint may not apply to fundholding practices where, in addition to the obvious benefits to the patient, real financial incentives exist.
To conclude, close cooperation between providers of primary and tertiary care could contribute to the more appropriate use of dilatation and curettage and allow ‘office’ endometrial sampling to be performed by general practitioners with a concomitant reduction in day case and inpatient procedures.
Health promotion in schools
Editor ,— The paper by Don Nutbeam and colleagues is valuable, not least in view of the relative scarcity of rigorous evaluations of health education initiatives.
The authors plausibly suggest that the interventions may have been too late.
They also correctly point to the desirability of complementing educational efforts with other health promotion measures, implying that the interventions appraised are too little.
We are already aware, however, of dangerous interpretations of the paper by some people to the effect that schools health education as a whole has been shown to be ineffective, and that efforts should be diverted towards non-school policy measures and health education outside the school.
These interpretations are based on the common and fundamental error of inappropriate extrapolation of research findings.
Even if consideration had been confined to health education as opposed to the broader concept of health promotion, the interventions could readily have been predicted to be of limited value.
The initiatives are more examples of the topic based, ‘one off’ style of health education than of the sort of approach that is now generally advocated, which involves a comprehensive and coordinated programme of health education across the curriculum and throughout the school career.
This latter, which is being increasingly adopted within the United Kingdom and in Europe more generally, acknowledges common links in the origins of healthful and unhealthful behaviours.
Moreover, recognising the desirability of combining health education with other measures, it is centred on the notion of the health promoting school.
Due attention is paid to the ‘hidden curriculum’ and the total school environment, including such issues as policies on smoking on school premises.
We must push ahead with our efforts to develop in practice the concept of the health promoting school, including its essential educational component, and evaluate the effectiveness of these efforts.
We must not fall into the trap of rejecting modern schools health education on the basis of the failings of highly limited interventions.
Editor ,— Don Nutbeam and colleagues report that smoking education projects based in schools failed to show significant effects on smoking behaviour, knowledge, beliefs, or values.
Young people's knowledge about the harmful effects of  smoking is considerable; those who take up smoking are not doing so purely out of ignorance.
Recent health promotion has therefore concentrated on developing children's self confidence and ‘refusing skills’ so that they are empowered beyond ‘just saying no.’
Aidan Macfarlane, however, reflects much sociological work when he mentions the complex motivations that lead to young people's behaviour.
The ‘behind the bikesheds’ appeal that risk behaviours have for young people may be beyond the understanding of those who think that the residue of young smokers will be lured by the squeaky clean, sporty, sweet breathed image of abstinence.
Perhaps it is time to rethink the objectives of this aspect of health promotion.
If dissuading people from ever starting to smoke is the primary aim then limitation of long term cigarette smoking presumably comes second.
Cigarettes are certainly addictive, yet some 11 million people in Britain have managed to give up.
The continued advertising and promotion of tobacco should be  strenuously resisted, yet the government has not so far seemed inclined to upset the tobacco lobby.
There may, however, be a role for health promotion even while governments are still concerned about the patronage of multinational companies.
A deliberate shift of focus for health promotion could encourage people in their 20s to give up smoking.
Given that by then the teenage assumptions of invulnerability have tended to evaporate, what better time to put away childish things and give up that nasty teenage habit?
Undoubtedly far more smokers could give up if only health services were more alert.
Knowledge about the harmful consequences of smoking could be maintained in a low key manner through the school curriculum.
A reduction in the barrage of antismoking advice during the teenage years would thus be combined with an increase in health promotion aimed at a more responsive group.
This could even have the elusive and much desired effect of reducing the appeal of smoking as a ‘grown up’ activity through reconstructing it as an essentially teenage pursuit.
Editor ,— Don Nutbeam and colleagues evaluate two types of health education initiatives in schools.
We agree with Aidan Macfarlane that measures to combat smoking cannot rely exclusively on school education programmes, as this is a multifaceted problem amenable to other effective solutions.
It is right to distrust initiatives that depend only on the health and education sectors; in the current political climate this is indeed oversimplistic.
But it should not be taken for granted that these types of programmes are the ideal and only way to approach health education, whether in schools or by health professionals.
Both interventions involved minimal, project oriented teacher training and were circumscribed, involving three to five hours' delivery time overall.
The movement in health education now is to integrate such teaching into the curriculum as part of a wider process that educates the pupil fully, promoting personal skills development.
Even common sense will tell you that children under a variety of other social stresses are scantily equipped for life by a five hour programme.
The paper might have usefully addressed, for instance, the relation of social skills to socioeconomic status of the pupils and the different effects on recipients of the programmes.
Nutbeam himself has previously shown that students with a negative attitude to school are more likely to become smokers.
Health promotion has, rightly, moved away from the traditional approach, but let us not dismiss health education fully until it has been properly implemented, let alone evaluated.
Health promotion in general practice
Editor ,— I write to support Duncan M Williams in his criticism of the ineffectiveness of our GMC negotiators.
In my practice we increased our practice nurse staffing by 50% and provided a range of responsible and relevant health promotion clinics, in the spirit of the 1990 charter, but now face the prospect of a substantial reduction in income or to make the nurses redundant.
Which other trade union would boast that only 35% of its membership will suffer?
To add insult to injury, our family health services authority is returning our claims for Haemophilus influenzae type B immunisation unpaid.
We have doubled our medical input to our immunisation clinics and struggled through the difficulties of vaccine availability only to be informed that we are working for no reward.
We may receive some payment in September 1994 if we achieve targets.
Why have our negotiators not insisted on item of service payment until the date of introduction of target payments, as occurred with the other childhood immunisations?
In order to reduce our losses perhaps we should not renew our BMA subscriptions?
Lumbar puncture in acute bacterial meningitis
Editor ,— Minerva's statement that ‘Most children with suspected acute bacterial meningitis have no contraindications to lumbar puncture, which should be done promptly before treatment is started with intravenous antibiotics,’ may undermine the advice given by the chief medical officer in 1988 in relation to meningococcal infection.
This stated: ‘The classical features of meningococcal meningitis and of septicaemia may not always be present, particularly in very young children.
If the diagnosis is suspected, especially in the presence of haemorrhagic rash, it is important to consider giving parenteral benzylpenicillin before transfer to hospital.’
It is unwise for general practitioners and the staff of casualty departments to delay giving antibiotic treatment until a lumbar puncture has been performed, such a response may prove fatal.
Organ donation
Editor ,— We support several of the points in R M R Taylor's editorial on organ donations.
Firstly, whatever system is adopted to improve retrieval rates, it must have the approval of the intensive care staff and transplant coordinators since they are most closely concerned.
Secondly, there is no reason to believe that any computerised system for storing data on ‘opting in’ would be effective or practical.
We view so called elective ventilation of patients who might become potential organ donors with some trepidation.
Evidence in its favour is limited to one small British study.
As well as raising ethical and moral issues, such a policy might reduce further the provision of beds in intensive care units for patients with illness from which they may recover.
Britain already has one of western Europe's lowest ratios of intensive care unit beds to hospital beds.
We agree that the rate of refusal by relatives and the incidence of failure to ask for organs should be minimised.
There will always, however, be a few cases in which the clinician thinks that it is inappropriate to ask for organs.
This must be accepted.
In 1989 Bodenham et al reported that refusal of consent by the coroner was a greater problem than refusal of consent by relatives (28% v 17% of failures to retrieve organs).
At that time the refusal rate by the coroners in our region was effectively zero.
Today a change in policy has produced a refusal rate by the coroner of more than 10% and has resulted in clinicians not considering organ donation in certain types of case (from which criminal proceedings might arise).
Many suitable organs are being lost to avoid the possibility of difficulties at trial — that is, when and why did a patient die; who or what was the cause?
Whether this is necessary or desirable should be discussed at the highest level by the legal and medical professions.
This discussion will be even more urgent if it becomes common for criminal proceedings to arise from road traffic accidents.
Organ donation
Editor ,— G R Park and colleagues express grave reservations about the Exeter protocol for elective ventilation of potential organ donors.
Without  defining ethics, they believe that we have been acting unethically: they describe a typical case in which elective ventilation might be considered — a patient with a clearly diagnosed fatal cerebral injury who undergoes respiratory arrest.
They write, ‘Deliberately prolonging a patient's dying is unacceptable for any reason.’
But such patients die when breathing ceases; elective ventilation does not prolong the act of dying, for one is ventilating a corpse.
If that is wrong, let them tell us why, rather than differentiate between dead bodies on the basis of whether a diagnosis was made before or after death, or whether the patient stops breathing in the accident and emergency department rather than a medical ward.
We were taxed by ethical issues when we set up the elective ventilation protocol: ethics may be defined as what is right, and in turn that can be regarded as behaviour that causes no distress, offence, or indignity in the context of current societal values.
To act ethically, firstly, we must respect the wishes of the dead and dying; secondly, we must cause no unnecessary distress to relatives; and lastly, we must cause no emotional crisis for the staff of intensive care units.
We know from many surveys of public opinion that over 70% of the public would wish their organs to be used for transplantation after death.
In our unit one of the goals of elective ventilation is the respecting of these wishes.
It seemed to us illogical that patients who stop breathing before irreversible brain injury is diagnosed can become organ donors, whereas clinically identical patients who become apnoeic after diagnosis cannot.
Such patients often differ only in the time taken to reach hospital, and to claim that they differ in any more fundamental way is pure sophistry.
It is hard to see how the denial of a patient's right to be an organ donor after death is ethical behaviour.
The relatives of our electively ventilated organ donors do not feel that we act improperly; rather, they all consider that the process of organ donation allows them to make some sense of an otherwise inexplicable loss.
It is sad that Park and colleagues have not understood the logical and moral basis of elective ventilation.
We welcome this opportunity to restate our position and encourage other units to follow our lead.
Death rate from asthma
Editor ,— Our experience supports W T Berrill's conclusion that the death rate from asthma may be exaggerated.
In East and North Hertfordshire (estimated population 480000) during 1986–91 inclusive, 114 deaths from asthma at all ages were reported by the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys.
Even if the contribution of bronchial asthma to cause of death is interpreted generously — for example, part I of the death certificate states death from asthma and part II states chronic obstructive airways disease — only 63 of 100 deaths have so far been found to be attributable to asthma.
Fourteen sets of records remain to be examined.
The number of deaths in people aged over 65 — 22 of the 63 — reduces the potential for saving lost years of life.
Only 19 of the 63 deaths occurred below the age of 45.
Taking into consideration the circumstances in which many of these deaths occurred, we believe that there will be only a small health gain from reducing mortality.
We are therefore shifting some of our attention to exploring the opportunities for reducing morbidity.
Meanwhile it would be of great help if the accuracy of death certification could be improved, possibly through audit.
Initiatives to improve understanding of the burden of ill health due to asthma would be welcome.
Editor ,— W T Berrill implies that death should not be attributed to asthma in older people (over the age of 60) because asthma is ‘a disease of young people.’
Not only is reversible airways disease common in older adults but, as with most other conditions, older people are probably more likely to die of it than younger people.
Thus most people dying of asthma should be expected to be old.
Because of the underappreciation of asthma in elderly people such patients are treated with antibiotics for their respiratory infections but are left to suffer the dyspnoea and hazards of their respiratory obstruction.
Epidural analgesia in labour
Editor ,— An item by Minerva may mislead readers.
It states that epidural analgesia with bupivacaine is associated with factors that adversely affect the infant, such as lower maternal self esteem, prolonged labour, use of oxytocin, and forceps delivery.
No randomised study has ever shown that these negative aspects of childbirth are a result of epidural analgesia.
The study to which Minerva refers, by Sepkoski et al , compared women who received epidural analgesia, without randomisation, with poorly matched controls who had no pain relief; matching was based on criteria expected to affect the placental transfer of the local anaesthetic bupivacaine.
An attempt to match for the duration of the first and second stages of labour, the use of oxytocin, and the mode of delivery failed.
The authors assume that these are a direct result of epidural analgesia and refer to work in which, again, randomisation was not done.
It is not surprising that the women who had epidural analgesia had significantly longer labours, a greater requirement for oxytocin, and a higher rate of instrumental delivery as such factors increase the need for epidural analgesia and therefore cannot be assumed to result from it.
Moreover, they may themselves affect neonatal behaviour and interaction between the mother and her infant.
Non-randomised comparisons of epidural analgesia with no analgesia or other forms of pain relief are likely to be biased since those women experiencing long, difficult labours are more likely to request epidural analgesia.
Sepkoski et al used 0.5% bupivacaine in their study.
This high concentration is unnecessary and not standard practice in Britain as it results in an appreciable motor block, which impairs maternal satisfaction.
There are studies in which neonatal assessment has been made after attempts at randomisation of analgesia during labour.
In one, no adverse effects on neonatal outcome were found.
Other studies that were not randomised failed to show adverse effects on the baby.
Indeed, in many studies epidural analgesia has been shown to be beneficial.
Kangas-Saarela et al found that babies whose mothers had received epidural analgesia with bupivacaine had higher neurobehavioural scores than those whose mothers had not received such analgesia.
Two other studies showed no adverse effects of epidural bupivacaine in labour on neonatal neurobehavioural scores.
Minerva should take the scientific methods used in papers into consideration.
This would prevent questionable findings influencing a much wider readership.
Thromboembolic complications of laparoscopic cholecystectomy
Editor ,— The incidence of deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism in diagnostic laparoscopy is low.
It was reported as 0.2 cases/1000 procedures in a confidential inquiry into 50427 gynaecological laparoscopies.
In a single report of 100 laparoscopic salpingectomies deep venous thrombosis occurred in one patient.
Concern has been raised, however, about the increased potential for thromboembolism in patients undergoing laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
The true incidence of thromboembolism in this procedure is not known.
We have performed laparoscopic cholecystectomy on 438 patients, and thromboembolism has occurred in three: one deep venous thrombosis, one non-fatal pulmonary embolism, and one fatal pulmonary embolism.
All three cases were confirmed by phlebography or ventilation-perfusion scanning or after death.
Interestingly, two of the cases were diagnosed within four days of surgery, and both patients had been mobile up to the day of surgery.
All three patients received prophylaxis with subcutaneous heparin and compression stockings.
The patient with the deep venous thrombosis also had intraoperative stimulation of the calf.
We believe that thrombosis of leg veins or pelvic veins occurred intraoperatively, accounting for the early presentation in two of the patients.
In the laboratory we have shown hypertension in the common femoral vein in a pig undergoing laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication.
When pneumoperitoneum was established, the femoral venous pressure rose from 4 mmHg to 9 mmHg.
With duplex Doppler scanning of the common femoral vein in humans we have shown a considerable reduction in peak blood flow velocity and shortening of the flow cycle during the respiratory phase on two occasions, with a return to normal venous blood flow characteristics on removal of the intraperitoneal gas.
These cases highlight the potential for thromboembolism with laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
Our early experimental work suggests that the aetiology may be increased venous stasis caused by the raised intra-abdominal pressure associated with pneumoperitoneum.
Also, these procedures, in contrast to gynaecological laparoscopy, are performed in the reverse Trendelenberg position, which would compound any venous stasis already present.
Further work must be performed to document the incidence and aetiology of deep venous thrombosis and effective prophylaxis during prolonged therapeutic laparoscopy.
Until these issues have been resolved all patients undergoing laparoscopic cholecystectomy should be regarded as at risk of deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism.
They should have some intraoperative measure to reduce venous stasis of the lower limbs as well as routine preoperative and postoperative prophylaxis against deep venous thrombosis.
Consent for surgery for psychiatric patients
Editor ,— On three occasions in the past two years the duty surgical team have contacted me while on call as duty psychiatrist with a view to giving consent to a surgical procedure on behalf of a patient.
The patients were all detained under the Mental Health Act, required urgent surgery or invasive investigation, and were, in the opinion of the surgical team, unable to give informed consent.
On each occasion I felt that insufficient effort had been made by the surgical teams to decide on the capacity to give informed consent, and I was dismayed at the immediate assumption of incapacity because the patient had been sectioned.
I must emphasise that I was not asked to determine the capacity to give consent, but simply to complete the paperwork.
My understanding of the law is that an adult patient who is capable of doing so must give consent to any medical treatment if that treatment is to be lawful.
At the time of the decision the patient needs a capacity commensurate with the gravity of that decision.
If the patient lacks the requisite capacity, then the doctors must act in what they perceive to be his or her best interests, with information garnered from previous knowledge of the patient, discussion with family and friends, and taking into account any relevant directive previously made by the patient.
What the legal force and effect of any such directive might be is uncertain; it is unclear whether health care staff are required to carry out the terms of the directive or whether those who act in good faith with the terms of the directive are immune from civil or criminal prosecution.
There is, apparently, no case law on this point.
I was unable to find any legal basis under current English law whereby a psychiatrist might give consent (or otherwise) for a patient to have an invasive surgical procedure.
Speaking to colleagues informally, I find that this situation is not uncommon.
I would remind the surgeons involved in such instances that they, and not the duty psychiatrist, are in the best position to know if an operation is in the best interests of the patient.
Shetland oil spill
Editor ,— The study that has been mounted consequent on the grounding of the tanker Braer on 5 January 1993 has been inaccurately reported.
The study's aim, as approved by the Shetland Health Board Ethical Committee, is ‘to determine the human health effects of the Shetland oil spillage’ on the people resident within 5 km of the spill.
The project was designed in epidemiological terms, not as ‘health checks’ on the population.
A health check, in my opinion, involves a clinical examination and intervention, where appropriate, based on the findings.
This is the province of an individual's general medical or occupational health practitioner, not of an epidemiologist.
When this study was mounted participants were advised in writing that all findings would be reported to their medical practitioner, whom they should consult for their individual results.
Many laboratories have cooperated at short notice and are analysing large numbers of samples.
Over 1200 biochemistry and haematology specimens were examined and reported in an eight day period in the laboratory of the Gilbert Bain Hospital, Lerwick.
Samples are also being examined by the Department of Forensic Medicine and Science, Glasgow University, the National Poisons Unit, Guy's Hospital, and the Medical Research Council's cell mutation and toxicology units.
This inquiry is a joint initiative of the Shetland Health Board and the Environmental Health (Scotland) Unit, a Scottish Health Service organisation.
Though funded by the Scottish Office, Home and Health Department, the study is totally independent of central government and will present its findings directly to its clients, the people of the Shetland islands.
That the initial phase of the project has been carried out so quickly and smoothly is a tribute to the dedication and professionalism of many health care workers throughout Shetland.
I doubt such a venture could have been undertaken so rapidly elsewhere.
Receiving new patients' notes from FHSAs
Editor ,— New patients registering with our general practice often complain about the time it takes us to get their NHS notes from the family health services authority.
The patient's charter states that general practitioners should receive new patients' notes from their family health services authority within six weeks of requesting them.
To assess the extent of the problem and attempt to bring ourselves into line with the patient's charter we conducted a simple audit of the delays in our practice.
Manor House Surgery serves 7200 patients in a medium sized industrial town.
All patients new to the practice are given a temporary folder, which is stamped with the date that the permanent notes were requested from the family health services authority.
The temporary notes are then kept together in a box, separate from the other files of notes.
When the permanent notes arrive the two sets are joined up and filed in the usual way.
On 16 September 1992, 115 patients were waiting for their notes.
On that day we scrutinised all the temporary folders in the box and noted the time that had elapsed since the proper notes had been requested.
About half of the patients had been waiting for their notes for less than six weeks, but 19 had been waiting for over six months, 14 for over a year, and six for over two years.
The average wait was 20 weeks.
This simple audit, which took less than nine hours, has led us, as a first step, to chase up all notes that have not been received within 12 weeks.
This should reduce the average wait for notes from 20 weeks to 4.6 weeks.
This approaches the standard set by the patient's charter.
New patients' NHS notes are essential for general practitioners: they contain specific details of past treatment and confirm what the patients say about their current treatment.
General practitioners are best placed to ensure that this particular specification in the patient's charter is met.
What the regions say
Editor ,— In West Midlands Regional Health Authority ‘one or two’ providers have been ‘in difficulty,’a spokesperson said.
Those are weasel words.
The West Midlands is a desert.
Take our non-trust district general hospital.
We had finished most of the contractual work by late November 1992.
If we had continued to treat patients at the same rate — there has been an unprecedented, inexplicable, and hence unforeseeable rise of 12% in medical emergencies — we would have been at least £0.5m in the red by the end of the financial year.
To husband that 1.7% of our income we have had to close half of our operating sessions, a third of our operating theatres, and a sixth of our beds, most of them surgical.
We also closed beds at the satellite rheumatology hospital — a subregional centre.
The effect on staff has been dreadful.
The spectre of redundancy has been raised, and morale from top to bottom has become a cause for deep concern.
All this six years after the hospital was opened at a cost to the taxpayer of £27m (the region's ‘flagship’).
In short, we are seriously poor.
True, we have reopened a few beds — for the patients of fundholding general practitioners.
And we treat emergencies, ‘urgencies,’ and also-rans who may or may not survive two years on a waiting list.
So that's all right, then.
Just a small local difficulty.
The future of FHSAs
Editor ,— June Huntingdon's article on the future of family health services authorities contains several misleading assertions.
I practise in the London Borough of Newham and also give medical advice to the family health services authority through the department of general practice and primary care of the Joint Medical Colleges of St Bartholomew's and the London Hospitals.
As medical adviser, I have met some of the practitioners with ‘typically small lists,[who]have trained overseas and entered general practice before vocational training became mandatory.’
My experience of practitioners trained overseas and with small lists is that most are good doctors committed to caring for their patients to the best of their ability.
Historically, they were exploited because of their lack of understanding of the complex regulations related to the status of ‘independent contractor,’ and in this respect I agree that proper vocational training would have been beneficial.
Their delivery of services has also been handicapped by inadequate investment in both community and primary care services and practice resources.
The evidence suggests that they have ‘clamoured for more staff and for improved premises,’ but the family health services authority has not had the resources to support this, nor were suitable vacant sites in which premises could be developed easily available in inner London.
With regard to deprivation payments, the system for remuneration in general practice before the 1990 contract took no account of the increased cost of living, increased cost of running a practice, and increased workload of general practitioners in inner London.
Deprivation payments only partially redress the financial inequity that general practitioners in inner London suffered.
There is much to be done to develop primary care services in inner London, of which general practice is an essential part.
An appreciable proportion of practices in east London are of the type cited in the article.
A properly planned and monitored investment programme is needed, but ill informed and pejorative assertions are unhelpful.
Editor ,— June Huntington's article on the future of family health service authorities needs clarification and ratification to prevent misunderstanding and disharmony.
The account, I consider, is not conducive to professional or racial harmony.
General practice is a British success.
It is achieved entirely through the contribution made by practitioners before the inception of the vocational training scheme (VTS), by those trained overseas and subsequently by vocationally trained practitioners.
These practitioners' eligibility to do their job was approved by the Medical Practices Committee.
June Huntington's allegation that these practitioners are businesslike rather than professional questions the selection procedure of the committee.
Some of the practices that do not comply with the 1990 contract targets are situated in demographically less attractive parts of the cities.
Most of these practices have practitioners trained overseas or before the vocational training scheme became mandatory.
Their dedication, determination, commitment to the profession, responsibility, and challenge to serve the community should not be undermined.
These premises are often inadequate to support good practice.
The threat of vandalism and burglaries deter practitioners from investing money in property and equipment.
The difficulties in achieving the contract target and offering child health surveillance and minor surgery after meeting the demand for patient care without proper facilities, equipment, and computerisation needs to be appreciated.
The inducement offered in the form of deprivation allowance is not adequate.
The fundamental deficiencies in promoting care are poor quality of information, inadequate record systems, bad communication, and lack of coordination between health care agencies.
Lack of resources and strong resistance to breaking down barriers between health care agencies are other contributing factors.
Mobilising resources, even with a clear account of their use, is often difficult.
I sincerely hope the prejudice of my overseas training and lack of vocational training do not account for my lack of success in gaining access to resources.
To preserve the image and integrity of the profession and to build bridges between the existing gaps in our service it is necessary to unite and not to create divisions with personal prejudices.
The Hippocratic oath does not permit professionals to find a peg in class, cast, colour, and creed to hang our deficiencies.
Editor ,— Virginia Morley gives an example of locally sensitive purchasing, attributed to North Derbyshire Health Authority.
There is no recognised project in the north of England at this stage and on the basis of existing interest it is likely that there will be an 80% uptake of general practitioner fundholders by the third wave, covering a similar ratio of the district's population.
I can see no greater option to empower general practitioners than in practices themselves holding funds for purchasing responsibility for their practice population.
This requires family health service authorities to develop a much more facilitative role of management and also for district health authorities to review the manner in which they plan services.
The whole concept of fundholding is to move the purchasing power to the closest point of delivery of the service to patients.
I find that too many people are hung up in retaining the bureaucracy of organisations under the premiss that they are purchasing services when in fact they are funding activities that already exist — a referral, for example.
Clearly, the fundholding uptake will not be mirrored across the country, but that is not the case in Derbyshire.
Editor ,— Andrew Harris put forward some suggestions for improving research in general practice.
He says that we should harness the expertise of the various agencies involved in health care.
I have a project running which aims to achieve collaboration between patients, general practitioners, and researchers.
For many constraints, including time, finance, and perhaps inclination, research will not be an option for most general practitioners.
However, in the same way that they are ideally placed to assess patients' needs, so they have an idea of the important areas requiring research.
In addition, their training in the scientific method and their daily exposure to clinical problems results in the development of ideas and the formulation of questions and hypotheses.
Unfortunately, most of these useful and innovative ideas go to waste without investigation.
There is no outlet for the thoughts and observations of the non-researching general practitioner.
I am therefore setting up Exe Directory .
This is a collection of research ideas, proposals, and hypotheses collected initially from general practitioners.
The ideas should be less than 20 words, dated, and with the name and address of the contributor.
The directory will then be made available to students, trainees, and researchers who are better placed to carry out the studies.
This would be on a charitable basis and any cash surplus would be made available to fund research projects.
Thus those with good ideas would still keep credit for having them, and researchers would benefit from a source of interesting proposals generated at the front line.
Research should be done by experts to ensure useful results.
The subjects of research can be suggested by those closest to the problem.
With improved conditions more general practitioners may wish to combine these roles.
Otherwise,Exe Directory is a way of matching the supply and demand of research ideas.
In this way every general practitioner could shape and contribute to the future research and development of primary care.
Any contributions can be sent to the address below.
Editor ,— I must disagree with Graham Butland's generalising statements about general practitioners lacking plans for development and decision making due to the ‘dependency culture’ related to their methods of payment.
General practitioners have always had to manage and plan their businesses and are constantly adapting to changes in medical care.
Survival has always involved flexibility.
Although family health services authorities may have been oblivious to these activities, this does not indicate their absence.
Before 1990 many general practitioners were improving the quality of care of their patients in a spontaneous desire to improve standards.
General practitioners have served on numerous planning committees with no remuneration, and many are dedicated to undergraduate and postgraduate education, evolving professional standards and performing research.
General practitioners generally cope with whatever is thrown their way, be it the shift of complex clinical management of cases into the community with less hospitalisation, changes in hospital policy resulting in a shift of costs to the community budget, underfunding of secondary sector posts and beds, the 1990 general  practitioner contract, or patients' increased expectations in a cost cutting climate of health care.
If anything it is the managers in family health services authorities and the NHS who have failed to anticipate and plan for the first three of these contingencies that has caused the current workload crisis.
Dedicated, hardworking general practitioners have kept the system running in the interests of their patients and are not led by ‘whim,’ as the writer's subsequent comment on accreditation seems to suggest.
Butland seems to have failed to appreciate that in the government reforms the general practitioner is the  purchaser of services and the family health services authority's role is to facilitate this and not to act as Big Brother.
General  practitioners are in a position to plan because they have survived many changes, and to fail to reappoint them on the basis of a local health policy ‘whim’ conflicts with individual patients' rights in choosing their own general practitioner.
If managers were better informed of practice activity before 1990 and spent time equipping general practitioners instead of attacking them, they would learn from the general practitioner how to maintain quality of care.
This aspect is being addressed very successfully by the Medical Audit Advisory Groups.
Editor ,— Graham Butland describes with good intention and formidable lack of insight the procedures that will destroy general practice.
This new generation of NHS manager is, it seems, here to stay and brings with it a quality meter to measure our healthcare and a sledgehammer to dismantle the old order.
Many products can have their quality measured in simple terms.
How are we to measure the quality of primary care?
Consumer sensitive businesses work well when the product is something being purchased by a consumer with a wide choice of suppliers.
When the product is the supplier it is naive to suppose that the same rules apply.
When the consumer does not directly pay for the product the entire basis of the business model is unsound.
Repeated surveys have shown a high degree of patient satisfaction with general practice.
There is always room for improvement — few would argue that recent incentives (immunisation targets, for example) have not helped to produce better health for our patients.
But to take Butland's theories to their probable conclusion would produce large, impersonal, primary care centres where indeed the measurable parameters of quality will be readily demonstrable.
They will be staffed by teams of doctors and other professionals working in shifts in much the same way as hospitals are run.
A triage worker will assess the problem (‘Hi — I'm Tim your triage worker, how can I help you?’) and direct the customer to whichever doctor, therapist or care provider seems appropriate.
Why does this ‘seamless care’ merely seem careless?
I was taught that a consultation in general practice can last many years.
When Butland measures the ‘skills and talents’ of general practice he does not appreciate that they rely on stability and knowledge of the patient.
Doctors on fixed term contracts will never reach the pinnacle of understanding that can sometimes bring true but unmeasurable quality to a consultation.
Perhaps we should not be too surprised when we find ourselves in the new world of quality primary care.
When a successful grocer was asked by a grocer's daughter how to run the health service, what could we have expected if not a supermarket chain enterprise — open all hours.
Editor ,— The chief executive of a family health services authority wishes to impose greater control over general practitioners.
He suggests that family health services authorities appoint and, where advisable, sack primary care workers; define services to be provided in local contracts; set standards for the structure and process of general practice; provide practices with expertise in management; and be involved in reaccreditation of general practitioners.
Audit of general practitioner services is generally regarded as desirable, but funding is scarce.
Reaccreditation is acceptable to many general practitioners.
Better tuning of capitation and item of service payment to reflect the work involved in earning them might also improve the performance of primary care.
But imposition of direct management by local family health services authority executives will demotivate those many general practitioners for whom responsibility directly to patients is a major source of vocational pride.
General practitioners may need viable alternatives to Graham Butland's proposals to avoid losing responsibility for their practices.
Am I alone in feeling threatened at the thought that audit is supervised by direct employees of the family health services authority?
Medical audit advisory groups do not tell us their procedures to prevent gossip and simplistic interpretation of raw statistics weighing on the minds of family health services authority managers with discretionary powers.
Interim guidelines state that confidentiality of patients and clinicians is an important aspect of audit.
Doctors should insist on suitable procedures for medical audit as a precondition for collaboration.
Audit and standard setting of measures common to all or most practices may best be designed and supported by a central body with nationwide aegis.
This will avoid invidious comparisons between standards and procedures of different family health services authorities and permit interdistrict comparisons of results.
Such a body may also be more consistent in applying discretionary funds for research and innovative practice.
It could be charged with the task of determining priorities for primary care funding.
By having direct links with national policy makers and avoiding duplication of research effort it would be more cost effective than channelling research funds through local bodies.
Reaccreditation could be handled most convincingly by a body drawn from the caring and scientific professions, with additional publicly elected or appointed representatives.
As with audit a nationwide body is needed for nationwide consistency.
Some health workers may benefit from education, examination, and resources for wise management.
Providing these will result in stronger management than having authority imposed by workers without a clinical background.
Editor ,— I have grave concerns about the underlying message in the paper by Graham Butland, in which he implies that management of general practice by family health services authorities will provide better quality service than peer review.
While his aims for promoting and facilitating the process of standard setting are admirable, there still remains the conflict between general practitioners wishing to provide a high standard of clinical care and the family health services authorities' agenda for managing the structure and process of the provision of care with inadequate funding.
Provision of asthma care in the community is one example of the problems we face.
While the 350 strong General Practitioners in Asthma Group felt that the advent of asthma clinics in general practice was a positive step, we have concerns about the variety of provision of care in these clinics.
In anticipation of the forthcoming changes in the provision of care for patients with chronic disease in general practice, the group surveyed all family health services authorities and health boards throughout the United Kingdom.
This survey aimed to provide some baseline information regarding their current procedures for ensuring quality of care in general practice asthma clinics.
We received 97/117 (83%) completed questionnaires (four refusals).
Most respondents (76%) relied on their own medical adviser to agree the protocols for purposes of payment, but only 49% of the people making these decisions had any expertise in asthma care; 15% relied on individuals who were not trained in medicine or nursing.
Only 52% required a qualification or further training in asthma management, while 86% accepted that the nurse's role included adjustment of therapy according to practice protocols.
The commitments of family health services authorities or health boards to reimburse the costs of initial and continuing training for nurses were low.
What hope is there for asthma care in the future if the family health services authorities and health boards continue to rely on staff not trained in medicine or nursing to make ‘quality of care’ decisions?
While the new proposed arrangements for provision of care for asthmatic patients in general practice are admirable, the proposed remuneration of £400 per general practitioner per year is inadequate to implement the new scheme.
It is not 35% of general practitioners who will lose out — our patients will be the ultimate losers.
Mozart's scatological disorder
Editor ,— I share Oliver Sacks's doubts about Benjamin Simkin's twice previously proposed hypothesis that Mozart suffered with Tourette's syndrome.
Not only has Simkin been unable to produce evidence of a family history of this genetic developmental disorder, but he has also failed to satisfy the essential diagnostic criteria.
Simkin's case rests on his proposed association of coprolalia, palilalia, and echolalia with alleged examples of facial and bodily motor tics, which occurred during Mozart's adult life.
However, with the solitary exception of Sophie Haibel's mention of ‘extraordinary grimaces with his mouth,’ which might qualify for a complex motor tic, Simkin then proceeds to deflate his argument by begging the question when he assigns inappropriately several examples of Mozart's humorous hyperactivity to the category of motor ‘Tourettisms.’
It must be emphasised that tics, the essential feature of Tourette's syndrome, are ‘involuntary, sudden, rapid, recurrent, nonrhythmic, stereotyped, motor movements or vocalizations’ which, though experienced as irresistible, can be suppressed for varying lengths of time.
Neither the variability of Mozart's facial expression, which portrayed his frequent alterations of mood, nor his compulsion to beat out, with repetitive movements of his hands and feet, the rhythm of the harmonies which continually filled his head, comply with the above definition of motor tics.
Nor are the decisive, deliberate, well coordinated movements of leaping over tables and chairs, or miaowing like a cat while turning somersaults on the floor, in the category of tics.
Surely there is nothing ‘Tourettish’ about Mozart stamping his feet and shouting ‘Damn!’when he was frustrated?
Nor is the isolated petting episode with Hummel, after this child prodigy had won Mozart's admiration with a scintillating performance on the clavier and remarkable feat of sightreading, even remotely to be confused with a complex motor tic.
Furthermore, Joseph Lange's description of Mozart's excited speech disturbance is more in keeping with flight of ideas.
Although there are many other causes of coprolalia, the essential diagnostic criteria for the diagnosis of Tourette's syndrome is the onset, before the age of 21, of multiple motor and one or more vocal tics, which have recurred frequently and persisted for more than a year.
Mozart's nightly ritual, until his tenth year, of singing ‘Oragna figata marina gamina fa’ with his father, is in no way a manifestation of tic disorder.
Nor are Wolfgang's imaginative adventures as king of his dream world, Kingdom of Back, in any way pathological.
Simkin's failure to document even one solitary motor tic during Mozart's childhood and youth, let alone multiple recurrent motor tics before the age of 21, excludes the diagnosis of Tourette's syndrome from further consideration.
On the contrary, Mozart's tomfoolery, scatty humour, puns, plays on words, amusing irrelevancies, distractability, clanging, echolalia, palilalia, and psychomotor hyperactivity are characteristic of the upswings in mood of a cyclothymic bipolar disorder.
Editor ,— Benjamin Simkin claims on false evidence that Mozart suffered from Tourette's syndrome, a tic disorder.
Tics are involuntary movements.
Like Martial and Rabelais, Mozart's lavatory humour in his letters, poems, and canons (for example, ‘Leck mich im Arsch’: lick my arse, K231) was not involuntary but intentional.
Scatology was common in Mitteleuropa: Goethe (in Götz von Berlichingen ) and Michael Haydn (canon ‘Scheiss nieder, armer Sünder’: shit fast, poor sinner) used it.
Anyone who ignores the spectrum of Mozart's wit and limits his interest to faecal parlance is bound to misdiagnose his personality.
Mozart relished puns, spoonerisms, anagrams, repetitions, nonsense phrases (jabberwockies), and, like Joyce, words generated by alliterations and assonances.
However, Hildesheimer notes, he was ‘always keeping the connotation in mind’: his linguistic games were intentional.
Thomas Szasz warns to beware of the psychiatrist who analyses jokes instead of laughing at them.
Stafford describes various Mozart myths: his eccentricity ‘may have a basis in fact, but fact that has been selected, heightened and coloured…by its emphasis and selectivity it runs the risk of exaggeration.’
Two leading psychiatrists studying musical creativity concluded that Mozart was mentally healthy.
How are such myths constructed?
Simkin starts from the film Amadeus , although for its author ‘it does not even remotely represent a documentary life of Mozart.’
Secondly, to construe Mozart's ribaldry, Simkin analyses the proportion of scatological letters through the fallacious comparison of Mozart's complete correspondence with selected fragments of his father's and sister's correspondence.
(Whether his mother's percentage differs from his raises tricky statistical questions since Mozart's correspondence is not homogeneous, due to the cluster of scatological Bäsle letters; moreover in the English edition of the Mozart letters Emily Anderson includes only family letters written during Mozart's lifetime — that is, a biased sample.)
Thirdly, Simkin claims to quote Schlichtegroll's Nekrolog (1793) but actually refers to a doubly inaccurate translation from and of Stendhal.
The expression ‘tic or  idiosyncrasy ,’ corresponds, in Stendhal's French translation from Schlichtegroll, to ‘manie,’which means inveterate habit.
Moreover Schlichtegroll's Nekrolog mentions neither tics nor inveterate habits.
Fourthly, Simkin writes that Joseph Lange attributed vulgar platitudes to Mozart.
Actually Lange mentioned platte Alltäglichkeit — commonplace banalities.
Finally, concerning the alleged ‘miaow’ preoccupation, Mozart wittingly indicated the form of the last movement of the parodic K298: Rondieaoux (for Rondeaux).
There is no miaow.
The next cattish tourettisms concerns the duet, K625, in which the soprano sings a constant ‘miau.’
However, the words were written by Schikaneder; Mozart partially orchestrated Schack's score.
Tourette's disorder is the latest Mozart's myth.
It sounds like a disparagement disguised as a diagnosis.
Editor ,— Although I cannot add to the debate about whether Mozart had Tourette's syndrome, I would like to explore three points raised by Benjamin Simkin's article.
Firstly, as shown by one of the illustrations in this article, the last movement of Mozart's quartet in A major for flute, violin, viola, and cello (K298) is entitled ‘Rondieaoux.’
While this is a bizarre, and probably unique, variant of ‘Rondo’ or ‘Rondeau,’why Simkin translates it as ‘Rondomiaow’is unclear.
This movement is in fact based on a theme from Giovanni Paisiello's opera Le Gare Generose , which was first performed in 1786.
Secondly, the vocal duo ‘Nun, liebes Weibchen, zeihst mit mir’(K625) is not clearly authenticated as being by Mozart.
It may have been composed by Benedikt Schak (1758–1826) and subsequently orchestrated by Mozart.
Finally, Simkin alludes to the longstanding tradition that Mozart could ‘write down whole compositions, previously composed in his head.’
The implication is that Mozart found composition easy and was able to put large works down on paper in a finished state without prior sketches or drafts.
To a large extent, this tradition has been discredited by evidence gleaned from study of Mozart's autograph scores and other manuscripts.
For example, manuscript paper analyses have illuminated Mozart's compositional procedure in the case of several major works.
These studies provide substantial evidence that, at least in the case of the keyboard concertos K449, K488, and K595 and the string quarter K458, the process of composition was spread out over many months.
Similarly, the existence of sketches for the Prague symphony (K504) and the keyboard concerto K503 argues strongly against compositional spontaneity.
Indeed, the data, as opposed to the romantic myths, lead to the unsurprising conclusion that the mature Mozart was a careful and deliberate worker.
In this respect at least, Mozart resembles his comparably productive contemporary Joseph Haydn.
The rescuers
Editor ,— Tony Delamothe reviews cynically the newspaper articles opposing Tomlinson's recommendations to close St Bartholomew's Hospital.
A misconception accepted by many is that with increased care in the community the numbers of hospital beds could be reduced.
A similar policy for mentally ill people moved patients at record speed from asylum to cardboard box, tent, and lions' cage.
Overcrowding, homelessness, violence, drug and alcohol abuse, crime, and large numbers of migrant workers and tourists throw a great strain on providers of illness care, and we have no control over these problems.
London suffers not from too many hospital beds, but from too many people who need to use them.
It is not a paradox that London has more doctors or hospital beds and more disease: it is an inevitable consequence of the social conditions in London.
It is unhelpful for the health secretary to spout spurious statistics about increasing throughput and efficiency in the manner, and with the same hollow ring, of a beetroot producer or tractor manufacturer in the former Soviet Union reassuring commissars that norms were being exceeded.
How should we oppose government plans?
Our trade union has been unhelpful, and the only support I have received is a booklet on redundancy, which at the age of 37 I feel is somewhat premature.
A campaign by our supporters is the only option left, inevitably consisting of emotive stories and personal opinions, since reasoned articles in the health columns of the broadsheets will mobilise few people.
The newspaper  articles supporting Barts are drawn from the experiences of our patients or their relatives and cannot simply be ignored.
Of course many of the stories are hyperbolic, but Tomlinson's arguments against Barts and other threatened hospitals are specious and are based on prediction rather than fact.
Prediction is inaccurate, and one is reminded that economic recovery has been forecast for years by a party in government that is supposed to have great financial expertise.
The same issue of the BMJ reports that the North Herts NHS Trust is handing over its laboratory services to a Swiss company.
Perhaps the Private Eye story hinting at a takeover of Barts by a private concern is not as farfetched as Tony Delamothe suggests.
There is very little left for the government to privatise, and attention will soon swing to the NHS, which has been a financial embarrassment to the Tories for too long.