

A novel tenascin type III repeat is part of a complex of tenascin mRNA alternative splices
ABSTRACT
Sequence analysis of two human tenascin encoding cDNA clones from a cDNA library of the U251 glioblastoma cell line revealed the presence of a novel 276 bp tenascin type III fibronectin like repeat.
This alternatively spliced type III repeat designated AD1 is located between the previously identified repeats 10 and 11 and has sequence homology with human, chicken and mouse tenascin type III repeats.
These results show that tenascin has at least 16 consecutive fibronectin like type III repeats.
PCR amplification of random primed mRNA with specific type III repeat primers revealed a pattern of multiple alternative splices of AD1 and flanking type III repeats.
The alternative splice variants were confirmed by direct sequencing.
Differences were observed in the expression of the various alternative splices of tenascin mRNA between tumor and normal cells and may thus indicate differences in tenascin isoform expression and function in normal and tumor cells.
PCR and Southern analysis of genomic DNA indicate that AD1 is coded by a single exon present in both human and mouse genome.
INTRODUCTION
Tenascin is a multifunctional extracellular matrix glycoprotein which is characterized by its expression in fetal tissues and association with the neovasculature and stroma of tumors (1–5).
It is involved in numerous cellular functions including adhesion, migration and differentiation, angiogenesis, wound healing, embryonic development and tumor cell metastasis (6, and reviewed in 3,4).
Structurally, tenascin is composed of repeating EGF-like repeats and fibronectin-type III-like domains (7).
At least one tenascin type III repeat, repeat 3, contains a specific cell binding site.
This cell binding site serve as a ligand for RGD dependent integrin class receptors (8,9).
In addition there may be a heparin binding site in repeat 12 (10).
Other type III repeats as well as EGF repeats may mediate other cellular interactions involved in cell proliferation, neural cell adhesion, and immune modulation (11–15).
It is likely therefore that multiple type III repeats may mediate specific matrix or receptor interactions.
It is also apparent that multiple tenascin isoforms are detectable at the mRNA and protein level.
Alternative splicing is one mechanism by which tenascin isoforms are generated.
Such isoforms and their relative abundance could mediate specific cell type or matrix interactions.
This mechanism of functional regulation by alternative splicing has been demonstrated for collagen II, collagen VIII, collagen IX, elastin and fibronectin (16 -24).
Multiple forms of fibronectin have been shown to arise as a consequence of alternative splicing of the mRNA at three sites (25,26).
Fibronectin alternative splice forms in the V region result in the alternative expression of an α 4 β 1 integrin binding site in cellular fibronectin and its deletion in plasma fibronectin (27).
Similarly, several alternative splice forms have been observed in tenascin which appear to be regulated during development (28,29).
The most obvious splice forms involve splicing out repeats 6 to 11, coding for nearly 100 kd of the molecular weight of human tenascin (30–34).
However, in an examination of human tenascin cDNA and type III alternative splicing we have found an additional type III domain encoded between the previously identified type III repeats 10 and 11, bringing the total number of type III repeats to 16.
This novel type III domain appears to be spliced as part of a complex pattern of alternative splices among its flanking type III repeats, thus indicating that multiple tenascin isoforms may be present in tissues and cells of normal and neoplastic origin.
These alternative splices have been identified at the mRNA level through cDNA sequencing, PCR analysis and PCR product sequencing.
The alternative splicing of tenascin mRNA may well result in the expression of at least 8 tenascin isoforms.
We speculate that such isoforms may well result in varied functional populations of tenascin.
At least one alternative splice involving AD1 may be tumor associated.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Isolation of tenascin cDNA clones from U251 MG glioma cDNA library and their sequencing
A random primed human glioblastoma U251 MG cDNA library in λZAP II was custom made by Stratagene (La Jolla, CA) from poly-A mRNA.
Multiple cDNA clones were identified by screening the U251 library with a bacterial lysate absorbed polyclonal antiserum against human tenascin.
The positive cDNA clones were plaque purified and the Bluescript phagemid (Stratagene) rescued.
Sequencing was performed on plasmid DNA by the method of Sanger (35).
The Sequenase Version 2.0 (United States Biochemical) and 35 S-dATP (Amersham) were used to sequence cDNA clones.
Overlapping regions of the DNA were sequenced by using specific oligonucleotides as sequencing primers.
RNA extraction and first strand cDNA synthesis
Total RNA from human glioblastoma lines: U251MG and U87MG; neuroblastoma: SK-N-SH; osteosarcoma: MG-63; human fibroblast cell line IMR 90, and human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) was isolated by using the guanidinium isothiocynate/cesium chloride method (36).
Poly-A RNA was prepared using a mRNA purification kit (Stratagene La Jolla, CA) and random primed with poly hexanucleotides (Pharmacia) for the preparation of cDNA using M-MLV reverse transcriptase (BRL)(100 units/µl).
Analysis of the alternate splicing pattern of poly-A RNA by RT-PCR and Southern blot
Reverse transcribed mRNA from the different cell lines was PCR amplified using flanking oligonucleotides.
These include 3'AD15: TGTAATGACAAAGGCAGTGA; 5'AD13:ACCAAAGCCACAGTTGGGCA; 3'8E2:GCTGTCAAAGGCATTCTCCGATGCC; 5'3200: GCTACCCCCTAGTACTGATTTTATTGTCTA; 3'5316:CTGGTCTGAGTCTTGGTTCCGTCC.
PCR was performed for 30 cycles (94°C for 1 min, 55°C for 30 sec and 72°C for 2 min) with final soak at 72°C for 10 min using the GeneAmp kit (Perkin Elmer Cetus).
The PCR amplified DNA samples (15%) were run on an agarose gel and the different fragments purified using the PCR Prep kit (Promega).
Each of the PCR products was sequenced either directly with specific oligonucleotides as sequencing primers using 32 P-dATP or subcloned into pCR-1000 vector (Invitrogen) and the plasmid DNA containing the different inserts from each of the PCR analysis were sequenced using M13 forward and reverse primers or specific primers as described above.
All sequences were analyzed using the PC gene software package (Intelligenetics).
Southern analysis was performed with 30 µg of human genomic DNA on nylon membrane as described (36).
AD13 and AD15 oligonucleotide probes were end labelled with γ 32 P-ATP and hybridized at 55°C overnight.
The blot was washed twice with 2 SSC/0.1%SDS at room temp and once with 0.1 SSC/ 0.1%SDS at 55°C at high stringency and exposed at -70°C.
RESULTS
Sequencing of two tenascin cDNA clones (TN3.1 and H1) selected from a U251 MG human glioma cDNA library revealed a new 276 bp sequence designated AD1 (additional domain 1) between previously identified type III repeats 10 and 11.
The sequence codes for 92 amino acids inframe with the known tenascin coding sequence (Fig. 1).
The AD1 protein sequence is clearly a type III repeat based on its overall homology with the other type III repeats of human tenascin.
Alignment of the protein sequence of AD1 with human tenascin type III repeats is shown in Fig. 2.
The alignments are ordered by their degree of homology.
Searches of the Genbank, EMBL, and PIR data bases with the AD1 nucleotide and protein sequences did not find an identical match.
However, the searches did find related sequences.
The highest levels of protein sequence homology were with human tenascin type III repeat 11, mouse tenascin type III repeat 9 and chicken tenascin type III repeat 7 with 36%, 35% and 37% identity respectively.
In addition, the AD1 protein sequence was found to have 23 to 27% homology with type III repeats from fibronectin of various species.
Comparing the AD1 protein sequence with that of its flanking type III repeats 10 and 11 revealed that AD1 had 34% and 36% identity respectively, with these repeats.
Many of these conserved amino acid residues are at positions characteristic for type III repeats (Fig. 2).
The AD1 domain appears to be spliced as part of a pattern of multiple alternative splices.
Sequence analysis of the two cDNA clones TN 3.1 and H1 revealed that clone H1 had type III repeats 11 and 12 spliced out and the AD1 domain was contiguous with repeats 10 and 13 while TN3.1 was not spliced and the AD1 domain was contiguous with repeats 10 and 11.
Additional splice variants were identified in mRNA from different cell types by PCR.
Primers were prepared from the AD1 sequence at its 5' (*AD13) and 3' (*AD15) ends, and at positions 86 bp 5' of AD1 in the type III repeat 10 (*3200), and 95 bp 3' of AD1 in type III repeat 11 (*8E2).
These primer pairs allowed for PCR not only of the AD1 sequence but across its junction with either flanking type III repeat or across the junction of both 5' and 3' flanking repeats.
In addition, a 3' primer located 140 bp from the 5' end of type III repeat 13 (*5316) was made to allow for PCR flanking type III repeats AD1, 11 and 12 (Fig. 3).
PCR analysis of the TN3.1 cDNA with internal primer pairs from AD1 (ie., AD13/AD15), repeats 10 and 11 (ie., 8E2/3200), and repeats 10 and 13 (3200/5316) resulted in the generation of the expected full length products of 276, 460 and 1072bp confirming the sequencing data from cDNA (Fig. 3).
The mRNA from 4 tumor cell lines including the glioblastomas: U251, U87, neuroblastoma: SK-N-SH, osteosarcoma: MG 63; and two normal cell types: normal lung fibroblast, IMR-90 and HUVEC's expressing tenascin (as determined by ELISA, data not shown) were primed for cDNA using random primers.
The cDNA were then subjected to PCR with the internal AD1 primers and appropriate AD1 and flanking primers.
Primers derived from human β actin were used as internal PCR controls resulted in a 623 bp product (data not shown) and was used to ensure that the PCR worked consistently each time and the actin product acted as an additional size marker.
Single PCR products for the AD1 internal, 5' flanking, and 3' flanking primer combinations were observed for U251, U87, MG 63 and SK-N-SH cells (Fig. 4a-d).
These products corresponded to the predicted sizes of 276 bp for the AD1 internal primer pair, 365 bp for the 3' flanking primer pair and 371 bp for 5' flanking primer pairs.
The results confirm that the AD1 sequence is represented in the mRNA of cell lines expressing tenascin and is contiguous with the known tenascin sequence.
Although, IMR90 and HUVEC did yield the predicted 276 bp product for the AD1 internal primer pair and the 371 bp 5' flanking product, the mRNA from these normal cells did not reveal the presence of detectable levels of the 3' product suggesting that either repeat 11 alone or both AD1 and type III repeat 11 were spliced in normal cell lines (Fig. 4).
We next examined the larger pattern of PCR products resulting from PCR priming across type III repeats 10, AD1, 11 and repeats 10, AD1, 11, 12 and 13.
The primer pair immediately flanking AD1 on both the 5' and 3' ends produced two products; a 460 bp fragment which included AD1 and a second 185 bp fragment in which AD1 is spliced (Fig. 5).
As determined by sequencing, the larger PCR product corresponds to the AD1 sequence plus the 5' and 3' flanking type III sequence while the 185 bp product represents an alternative form in which AD1 is spliced and only the flanking sequence of type III repeat 10 and 11 are present.
While not quantitative the relative amounts of the 461 bp and 185 bp products from all cell types examined indicate that the AD1 sequence flanked by repeats 10 and 11 as represented by cDNA clone TN3.1 may be relatively rare.
The results are similar to those in Fig. 4 in that priming with 8E2 from type III repeat 11 did not result in detectable PCR products in normal cells.
The alternative splice pattern was further examined with primer pairs (3200/5316) spanning type III repeat 10 to 13 (Fig. 5).
For the four related repeats 10, AD1, 11, and 12, four alternative splice forms were identified by PCR and confirmed by sequencing.
Five PCR fragments corresponding to approximately 1072 bp, 800 bp, 650 bp, 520 bp and 250 bp were detected.
Sequencing of the PCR fragments confirmed that the largest PCR fragment observed in the U251 mRNA included type III repeats AD1, 11, 12 and flanking type III repeats 10 and 13 sequences.
The predicted size of this fragment was 1076 bp, however, the full length fragment was not discernable in the other cell lines tested suggesting that it's occurrence is rare.
Alternatively the low levels detected could be the result of disproportionate priming of the shorter PCR products.
The 800 bp fragment which was observed in all the cell types analyzed represents mRNA in which AD1 was spliced out.
The 520 bp fragment is the major PCR product observed and sequencing of this fragment obtained from the different cell types indicated that repeats AD1 and 11 are spliced together.
The smallest PCR product includes only the 5' flanking repeat 10 sequence and 3' flanking repeat 13 sequence.
In each case sequencing confirmed a single sequence and an in frame translation product with the expected type III repeat junctions.
The 800, 520 and 250 bp fragments indicate that the type III repeat AD1 is spliced alone or in combination with repeats 11 or 11 and 12, respectively.
In each of these splice variants entire type III repeats are spliced out.
However, an additional 650 bp PCR fragment was observed in the different cell lines tested.
Although this fragment size could conceivably represent an internal exon splice indicating the presence of one and a half type III repeats being spliced, sequence analysis of the cloned 650bp fragment from the different cell types did not correspond to any of the known tenascin type III repeats.
We have inferred from the pattern of type III repeat alternative splices (34) that AD1 corresponded to a single exon.
To examine this question, human genomic DNA was analyzed by PCR and Southern analysis.
The 5' and 3' AD1 internal primers amplified a single 276 bp product, corresponding to the complete AD1 type III repeat (Fig. 6a).
The exon/intron junctions are inferred from PCR with primers flanking the type three repeats junctions between 10 and AD1 and AD1 and 11.
No PCR product was observed with these primer pairs indicating there are large intervening sequences between the putative exons (Fig 6a).
Similarly, Southern analysis suggests that AD1 is encoded by a single gene (Fig. 6b).
Human genomic DNA was digested with either EcoR1 or BamH1 and probed with the internal AD1 primers.
Hybridization of the EcoR1 digested genomic DNA with γ 32 P-ATP labelled AD13/AD15 primer pair from the 5' and 3' ends of AD1 resulted in the presence of a single restriction fragment.
Digestion of genomic DNA with BamH1 which has one restriction site within the AD1 domain resulted in the detection of 2 fragments (Fig. 6b).
These results together confirm the presence of the AD1 sequence in the genome and indicate that this type III repeat is encoded by a single gene.
In addition the presence of a 276 bp PCR product was also observed in mouse genomic DNA when primed with the AD1 internal primers.
Sequence analysis of the subcloned mouse 276 bp PCR product revealed it to be a homologue of the human AD1 sequence.
The results demonstrate the presence of AD1 in human and mouse genomic DNA.
DISCUSSION
The results presented here describe the identification from tenascin coding cDNA of a new alternatively spliced exon sequence encoding a single 92 amino acid type III repeat between the previously identified tenth and eleventh type III repeats.
Tenascin, therefore, has at least 16 consecutive type III repeats.
Tenascin mRNA from human, mouse, and chicken are highly homologous, leading us to speculate that human AD1 related repeats may be present in mouse and chicken tenascin genes.
This has been subsequently confirmed for mouse.
Structurally the AD1 repeat is closely related to the three flanking repeats 10, 11 and 12 based on both its nucleotide sequence and the deduced amino acid sequence (Fig. 2).
These four type III repeats form one of several type III homology groups.
Based on their level of homology the type III repeats 6–9 form a group as do repeats 3, 5, 14 and 15.
It would appear that duplications of type III repeats have given rise to the present group of type III repeats.
What functions the AD1 and flanking repeats may have is unknown but it is not unlikely that one or another of these repeats represent functional domains.
At least two type III repeats of tenascin contain functional sites.
The repeat 3 includes an RGD cell binding site which interacts with integrin receptors (8,9) and repeat 12 likely includes a heparin binding site (10).
Within the group of repeats 10, AD1, 11 and 12, we have identified at least five alternative splices (Fig. 4 and 5).
Two tenascin cDNA clones that we identified to have the AD1 sequence indicate the presence of two possible splice forms ie., a full length transcript (clone TN3.1), and one in which repeat 11 and 12 are spliced (clone H1).
PCR analysis of a random primed mRNA from several cell lines revealed additional tenascin splice variants.
The PCR of mRNA with primers from type III repeat 10 and type III repeat 13 revealed multiple PCR products (Fig. 5).
The largest product corresponds to predicted full length product spanning the 3' end of repeat 10, AD1, 11, 12 and the 5' end of repeat 13.
In descending order of size the PCR products corresponded to an 800 bp product in which AD1 is spliced; a 500 bp product in which AD1 and repeat 11 are spliced; and finally a 250 bp product which included only the repeat 10 and repeat 13 sequences.
For each of the PCR products we have confirmed by sequencing the splices described.
In each case the splices result in appropriate splice junctions and a single open reading frame.
In examining the alternative splice patterns of mRNA from normal and neoplastic cells differences are seen.
When PCR was performed with internal primers AD13 and 8E2 flanking AD1 and repeat 11, the mRNA of all the tumor cell types studied (U251, U87, MG-63 and SK-N-SH) revealed the presence of a 365bp product.
However, the two normal cell type (fibroblasts and endothelial cells) mRNA lacked this band and this product was not observed when PCR was performed for up to 35 cycles, thus suggesting that repeats AD1 and 11 either singly or together were spliced out in these normal cells (Fig. 4).
This was further substantiated by PCR using primers flanking AD1 in repeats 10 and 11.
Although the 460 bp full length product was observed in all tumor cell lines, this fragment was not present in both normal cell types analyzed, consistent with the finding that AD1 and repeat 11 singly or together were spliced out in normal cells (Fig. 5).
Additionally the full length product spanning repeats 10–13 was observed only in tumor cell lines, particularly in U251 mRNA although its occurrence appears to be rare in the different cell lines tested.
The absence of certain splice variants involving the AD1 in normal cells even after performing PCR at saturating levels, suggest that there may be a tumor associated pattern of splicing involving AD1 and flanking repeats.
Such tumor associated splice variants have been suggested for the splicing of type III repeats 6–11 and 6–12 (37).
In addition to the splice variants involving AD1 and its flanking type III repeats other splice variants have been described (Fig.7).
These alternative splices include deletion of type III repeats 6–9 in combination with deletion of repeat 11 or deletion of 10–12 (32–34).
We now know these splice variants must also include deletion of AD1.
Sequencing of yet another cDNA clone H4 that we have recently identified (Fig. 7), revealed that type III repeats 6–11 including the AD1 could be spliced out.
This splice and the splices represented i clone P31 (30) in which repeats 6–12 were spliced represent splice variants equivalent to previously identified splices in chicken tenascin mRNA (11).
Based on results from the present investigation and those described by others (11,29–32) it appears that alternative splicing of tenascin mRNA may result in the expression of at least 8 variants of tenascin (Fig. 7).
In addition we have observed the presence of a highly conserved AD1 repeat homologue in the mouse genomic DNA.
Alternative splicing appears to be a means by which multiple tenascin isoforms could be generated.
We would speculate that like fibronectin, tenascin isoforms could represent functionally discrete forms of tenascin.
Alternate splicing of fibronectin mRNA is an important process that helps in tissue specific and developmentally regulated gene expression in eukaryotes (25,26,38,39).
Analysis of the alternative splicing in the fibronectin primary transcript, reveals that multiple forms arise because of splicing at three sites; EIIIA, EIIIB and the variable (V) region (IIICS)(22–26).
EIIIA and EIIIB are single type III repeats encoded by a single exon that are either skipped or included during splicing.
These variants are found in a subset of cellular fibronectin subunits.
Such a splicing within the coding sequences gives rise to 5 variants in humans (25).
In addition, 12 different combinations of the three alternatively spliced segments of fibronectin have been observed in rats (40).
The requirement of different combinations of alternative spliced fibronectin variants for the secretion of fibronectin dimers has also been demonstrated (41).
Further, the expression of a α4β1 binding site in the cellular form and its deletion in plasma fibronectin and the involvement of fibronectin in blood clotting as well as secretion and synthesis of fibronectin have all been reported to be differentially affected by alternative splicing (27,41).
These results lend support to the idea that tenascin alternative splice forms may also have functional significance at the protein level.
Further insights into the differential expression of alternatively spliced variants of tenascin will help us to understand differences between normal and tumor cell expression and function.
Figure 1.
Nucleotide and amino acid sequence of AD1 as determined from clones TN3.1 and H1.
A U251 cDNA library was screened with bacterial lysate absorbed polyclonal antiserum against human tenascin.
Tenascin coding clones were obtained, subcloned into bluescript and sequenced using either T3 and T7 primers or used internal primers derived from cDNA sequencing.
Figure 2.
Alignment of the protein sequence of AD1 with other human type III repeats.
The amino acid alignments as determined by computer analysis (PC gene software) are ordered by their degree of homology.
Amino acids identical or lightly conserved with AD1 are underlined in type III repeat.
Figure 3.
PCR analysis of clone TN3.1. cDNA from clone TN3.1 was subjected to PCR analysis with primer pairs (1) AD13/AD15; internal primer pair for AD1,(2) 3200/8E2; corresponding to repeats 10 and 11, and (3) 3200/5316; corresponding to repeats 10 and 13.
The PCR was performed for 30 cycles and the samples were analyzed on 1.2% agarose gel.
Figure 4.
RT-PCR of mRNA from (a ) U251,(b ) U87,(c ) MG 63,(d ) SK-N-SH,(e ) IMR-90 and (f ) HUVEC.
One µg of mRNA was reverse transcribed using M-MLV RT and subjected to PCR using the following internal primer pairs:(1) AD13/AD15,(2) AD13/8E2 (3) AD15/3200.
The PCR amplified samples were analyzed on a 1.2% agarose gel.
Figure 5.
Alternate splicing of tenascin mRNA in different cell lines by PCR. mRNA from (a ) U251,(b ) U87,(c ) MG 63,(d ) SK-N-SH,(e ) IMR-90 and (f ) HUVEC was evaluated by RT-PCR as described above.
The cDNA was PCR amplified with the following internal primer pairs:(1) 3200/8E2 corresponding to primers from repeats 10 and 11, and (2) 3200/5316 corresponding to primers from repeats 10 and 13.
The samples analyzed on a 1.2% agarose gel, the fragments purified and sequenced.
Figure 6.
(A ) PCR of human genomic DNA for the analysis of exon organization of AD1.
Genomic DNA from human lung fibroblasts was PCR amplified with primer pairs from (1) AD13/8E2,(2) AD13/AD15 and (3) 3200/8E2.
PCR was performed as described earlier, and the samples analyzed on a 1.2% agarose gel.
(B ) Southern analysis of the human genomic DNA digested with (1) EcoR1 (2) BamH1 and probed with 32 P-labelled AD13/AD15 primers.
Figure 7.
Diagrammatic representation of AD1 within the 15 type III repeats of human tenascin and possible alternative variants as identified by cDNA cloning and PCR analysis.
a ) clone TN3.1 (present investigation),b ) clone P29 (29),c ) clone HT-33 (32),d ) PCR analysis,e ) clone H1 and f ) clone H4 (present investigation),g ) clone P31 (29), and h ) clone HT-5 and PCR analysis (32).
The EGF repeats are shown in circles.
The squares represent the tenascin type III repeats.
The carboxy terminal fibrinogen like domain is shown as a triangle.
A complete nucleolin cDNA sequence from Xenopus laevis 
Nucleolin is a nucleolar specific protein that is thought to play a role in the processing of pre-ribosomal RNA as ribosomes are assembled (1).
A full length Xenopus nucleolin cDNA was constructed from overlapping sequences recovered from an ovary cDNA library.
The intact cDNA is 2443 bp in length with the ATG start codon at bps 64–66 and the TGA stop codon at bps 2017–2019.
A stop codon at bps 19–21 is in frame with the ATG start codon suggesting that the cDNA is complete.
The deduced protein is 651 amino acid residues in length (Fig. 1).
Like other vertebrate forms of nucleolin, the amino terminal third of Xenopus nucleolin contains alternating basic and acidic domains, while the carboxy two-thirds consists of four RNA-binding domains and a glycine/arginine rich domain (2).
The largest basic domain within the amino terminal third of chicken (3), CHO (4), and Xenopus nucleolin (underlined in Fig. 1) are compared in Fig. 2.
Both nucleolin TPA/GKK motifs (underlined in Fig. 2) and histone H1 SPKK motifs are substrates for p34 cdc2 kinase (5, 6), and we have previously shown with a monoclonal antibody, that various vertebrate nucleolin proteins share an antigenic epitope with histone H1 (7).
The largest basic domain from the amino terminal third of Xenopus nucleolin compares well with sea urchin gonadal histone H1 (Fig. 3A), specifically, the spacing of proline residues (asterisks).
Similar periodicities of proline residues are evident when the largest basic domain within the amino terminal region of CHO nucleolin is compared to Xenopus histone H1A (Fig. 3B).
The similar periodicity of proline residues in nucleolin and histone H1 suggests similar structures, perhaps reverse β-turns (8, 9) or kinking alpha helices (10, 11).
Figure 1.
The deduced amino acid sequence for intact Xenopus nucleolin.
The largest basic domain within the amino terminal region is underlined.
Figure 2.
Amino acid comparisons for the largest basic domain within the amino terminal regions of chicken, CHO, and Xenopus nucleolin.
Proline residues are marked (*).
Figure 3.
A. The largest basic domain within the amino terminal region of Xenopus nucleolin is compared with sea urchin gonadal histone H1.
Periodicity of proline residues (*) in the two proteins is similar.
B. The comparable domain of CHO nucleolin also shares a similar proline periodicity with histone H1, this one from Xenopus .
Cloning and sequence of the rat retinoblastoma (Rb) gene cDNA
The retinoblastoma (RB) susceptibility gene serves as a model for the study of tumor suppressor genes.
The human and mouse RB genes have been thoroughly characterized (1, 2).
The human gene is approximately 200 kb, contains 27 exons, and produces a message of 4.7 kb in humans and 4.6 kb in mice.
Inactivation of the human retinoblastoma susceptibility gene, as a result of deletion or mutation, has been associated with the development of a variety of human cancers (3–6).
Oncogenic mutations in this gene consistently appear to be recessive, loss of function mutations that result in an absent or non-functional protein.
Most of the inactivating mutations that have been reported occur in conserved regions of the gene, that codes for critical functional domains such as phosphorylation sites and DNA binding regions of the pRB protein (4, 6).
In order to understand the involvement of the RB tumor suppressor gene in rat carcinogenesis, we have undertaken to isolate and sequence the rat RB cDNA.
About 1 10 6 phage from a rat cDNA library in λgt10 were screened with a human retinoblastoma cDNA probe (1).
One positive clone (R961) was identified and DNA was purified.
The 2.1 kb cDNA fragment was then subcloned in the bacterial sequencing vector, pUC19 (7).
Subclone fragments were then sequenced in both directions using M13 universal and reverse sequencing primers and aligned based on the method of Staden using the GCG's Fragment Assembly Programs (8).
The complete nucleotide sequence of 2113 bp is available from GenBank (Accession No.
L07126).
The rat R961 RB cDNA sequence is homologous to the 3' region of mouse and human Rb genes.
Homology between rat and mouse (2) is more than 92%, and between rat and human is about 81% (1).
We observed a short polyA stretch at the 3' end of R961.
A consensus polyadenylation sequence (AATAAA) was also found within 18 nt of the start of the polyA stretch.
An open reading frame was found to start from nt 2 and ended at nt 349 (Figure 1).
Only 4 amino acids did not match with the human sequence, whereas 9 amino acids did not match with mouse peptide.
The deduced amino acid sequence from this cDNA sequence is about 97% homologous with that of the human RB protein (pRB) sequence at the carboxy terminus.
Human pRB with a deletion of this carboxy-terminus domain fails to interact with E2F transcription factor (9).
This region of pRB may also be a target for phosphorylation by the CDC2 kinase (10).
Thus the carboxy-terminus domain has a definite role in pRB-mediated repression of E2 transcription which might also explain why extensive homology has been maintained among the peptide sequences of rat and two other (human and mouse) known RB proteins.
PCR amplification of DNA sequences from nitrocellulose-bound, immunostained bacterial colonies
The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) has been used previously to amplify DNA from single bacterial colonies (1).
It has also been used to amplify DNA bound to nitrocellulose filters (2).
As part of our studies investigating the regulation of gene loci involved in lipopolysaccharide (LPS) biosynthesis in Haemophilus influenzae we routinely immunoblot single colonies of H.influenzae immobilized on nitrocellulose filters with LPS-specific monoclonal antibodies (mab).
This allows identification of colonies which are expressing particular variably-expressed LPS epitopes.
The biosynthesis of these epitopes is dependent on the expression of genes within a number of loci (e.g. lic1, lic2, lic3 ) which share the common characteristic that they can be regulated by variation in the number of tandem repeats of the tetramer DNA sequence 5'-CAAT-3' (3).
In order to correlate the expression state of a particular epitope with the number of CAAT repeats, it was necessary to develop a technique which avoided regrowth of immunoblotted colonies.
Regrowth of the colony could result in additional phase variation events.
Single H.influenzae colonies were immunoblotted with LPS-specific mabs.
Colonies displaying either a positive or negative reaction to the mab were excised from the nitrocellulose membrane and used as a template for the PCR amplification of the region surrounding the CAAT repeats.
Method: H.influenzae was grown overnight on BHI medium containing Levinthal's base.
Single colonies were lifted onto nitrocellulose filters (Schleicher and Schuell BA 85/20) which were allowed to dry.
Filters were blocked with 3% bovine serum albumin (BSA)(Sigma) at room temperature for at least one hour.
LPS-specific monoclonal antibody was added in a solution of PBS containing 0.05% Tween 20, 1% BSA and 0.05% sodium azide (PBSB-Tween) and incubated for a further hour at room temperature.
Filters were washed three times with PBS-0.05% Tween 20.
Peroxidase conjugated sheep anti-mouse immunoglobulins (Amersham) were added at a 1/2000 dilution in PBSB-Tween and incubated for 1 hour at room temperature.
The filters were washed three times in PBS-0.05% Tween 20.
Bound antibodies were detected by the addition of 0.5 mg/ml diaminobenzidine (Sigma) and 0.005% 20 volume hydrogen peroxide (Sigma).
As is typical of H.influenzae , colonies displaying variable reactivity with the mabs were observed.
To correlate the level of reactivity of individual colonies with the number of CAAT repeats in the lic loci, single ‘on’ or ‘off’colonies were excised from the filter using a scalpel blade.
These were placed into a microfuge tube with 50 µl of water and boiled for 5 minutes.
The water was decanted into a second tube since the presence of the filter inhibited subsequent PCR reactions.
10 µl of this supernatant was used as template DNA in a 100 µl PCR reaction which included 2 units of Taq polymerase (Cetus or Boehringer), reaction buffer with 2.5 mM MgCl 2 and dNTPs at a final concentration of 400 µM.
Oligonucleotides for priming the PCR were 20 mers based on sequence flanking the lic genes.
One of the primers was biotinylated to facilitate subsequent direct sequencing.
In this case colonies were screened with mab 4C4 which recognizes an LPS epitope encoded by lic2 .
Thirty or forty cycles of PCR were used to generate sufficient amounts of DNA for sequencing.
Each cycle consisted of denaturation at 94°C for 2 minutes, annealing at 42°C for 2 minutes with subsequent extension at 72°C for 2 minutes.
th volume of the PCR reaction was run on an agarose gel (Figure 1, track 1 and 2).
A band is clearly visible at about 220 bp in both the ‘on’ colony and the ‘off’colony.
The remaining PCR product was then bound to streptavidin-coated Dynabeads (Dynal) according to manufacturer's instructions (4) and denatured using 100 µl 0.1 M NaOH.
The bound biotinylated strand was ‘pelleted’ with the magnetic beads using the Dynal MPC-E and washed once with 100 µl TES (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA pH8.0, 0.1 M NaCl) and twice with 100 µl distilled water.
The DNA was finally resuspended in 14 µl of distilled water and 3.5 µl used as sequencing template.
Sequencing reactions were carried out using a Sequenase kit (USB) with a non-biotinylated primer.
Figure 1 track 3 and 4 shows A and C sequencing reactions generated from ‘on’ and ‘off’PCRed immunostained colonies.
The immobilization of a single colony to nitrocellulose, followed by binding of antibodies and reaction with peroxidase reagents does not preclude the subsequent use of that same colony in PCR.
The PCR product thus generated can also be sequenced directly, enabling the immunological characteristics of a single bacterial colony to be correlated with the DNA sequence controlling that phenotype.
Therefore, regrowth of bacteria in such a highly variable system, with the possibility of DNA and immunological changes, can now be avoided.
This procedure has been used extensively to analyse the CAAT repeat region from several different lic loci derived from a variety of H.influenzae strains and has proved to be highly reproducible.
In addition, it is envisaged that this method could also be extended to allow the amplification and direct sequencing of DNA from positive clones following immunological screening of gene libraries.
This would allow rapid identification of cloned DNA sequences thus avoiding the necessity to reculture the clones.
Interspersed repetitive sequence (IRS) -PCR amplification of pulsed-field gel fractionated DNA to derive markers from the incontinentia pigmenti 1 (IP1) locus
Positional cloning relies on closely spaced regional DNA markers.
Here, we report on the combined use of preparative pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) and interspersed repetitive sequence (IRS) polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification to isolate two DNA markers from a 660 kb Sfi I fragment that contains locus DXS14 and maps to a region between disease-specific incontinentia pigmenti type 1 (IP1) chromosome translocation breakpoints (1).
Genomic DNA from a somatic cell hybrid containing a human X chromosome (GM06318) and a radiation hybrid (RH 128) containing approximately 10% of a human X chromosome, including DNA markers spanning the IP1 X-chromosomal translocation breakpoints within Xp11.21 (2), was digested with Sfi I and fractionated by PFGE.
By Southern blot analysis, probe p58.1 (DXS14) and probe 30C E 2.8 (DXS370) detected a 660 kb and a 400 kb fragment, respectively, in both hybrid DNA samples (Figure 1).
Sequential hybridizations of the same membrane with human and hamster genomic DNA indicated that most human and hamster Sfi I fragments ranged from 250 kb to 600 kb in size.
These results suggested that the 660 kb Sfi I restriction fragment within RH 128 (a) had not undergone rearrangement during hybrid construction and (b) could be separated from most human Sfi I fragments by PFGE.
To recover the 660 kb Sfi I fragment containing locus DXS14, RH 128 DNA (30 µg) was digested with Sfi I and fractionated by PFGE.
The preparative portion of the gel was sliced into 14 serial 5-mm sections (A through N; Figure 1); preparative slice F contained DNA fragments ranging from 600 kb to 670 kb in size and included the Sfi I restriction fragment containing DXS14.
To obtain DNA markers from the 660 kb Sfi I fragment, DNA was electroeluted from preparative slice F, extracted, precipitated, and subjected to IRS-PCR (3).
PCRs were 100 µl in volume and contained 5 ng of preparative slice F human DNA, 50 mM KCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl, 1.6 mM MgCl 2 , 0.01% gelatin, 250 µM each dNTP, 1 µg RNase A, and 0.5 µM primer A-TC65N (3, 4).
PCR reactions were incubated at 37°C for 1 hr, 94°C for 9 min, and, after the addition of 5 U AmpliTaq DNA polymerase (Perkin-Elmer/Cetus), 36 cycles of 94°C denaturation (1 min), 55°C annealing (1 min), and 72°C extension (4 min) were performed as described (4).
Amplification yielded at least 24 distinct products ranging from 0.5 to 4.3 kb in size (Figure 2).
A portion of the amplification products was digested with Not I and cloned into a plasmid vector to yield 20,000 potentially recombinant independent clones; of 98 recombinants examined, 41 unique amplification products ranging from 0.8 to 4.0 kb in size (mean size = 2.4 kb) were identified.
Of these, 19 products were found to contain low-copy DNA fragments.
By hybridization to an IP1 somatic cell hybrid mapping panel (1), one fragment, probe p49A (DXS740), mapped to a region between IP1 X-chromosomal translocation breakpoints.
A second fragment, probe p75A, was mapped to a region within 10 kb of DXS14 by hybridization to a yeast artificial chromosome (YAC) clone containing a portion of the targeted Sfi I restriction fragment.
To determine the origin of the cloned IRS-PCR products, amplification products were used as probes and hybridized to Sfi I partially digested GM06318 DNA; all 7 products tested hybridized to a fragment between 600 and 670 kb in size and multiple smaller fragments (data not shown).
These results suggested that most of the IRS-PCR products recovered from preparative slice F DNA were derived from partially digested restriction fragments of the expected size range.
This method provides a means of obtaining DNA markers distributed along the length of a specific restriction fragment.
Compared to previous studies that used PFGE fractionated DNA to construct bacteriophage lambda libraries (5, 6), this method yields human-specific products and obviates the need to screen a large number (10 4 ) of recombinant clones.
Additionally, in contrast to PCR-based strategies using non-specific, ligation mediated primers and fluorescent-activated cell-sorted chromosomal DNA (7), this method is applicable to somatic cell and radiation hybrid DNA.
Furthermore, by isolating amplification products contained on partially overlapping restriction fragments, it may be possible to use repeated rounds of IRS-PCR amplification to march along contiguous restriction fragments.
Figure 1.
Southern blot analysis of the flanking lanes of a preparative PFGE gel containing Sfi I-digested cell line GM06318 (lane 1) and RH 128 (lane 2) DNA; a single filter was sequentially  hybridized with probes p58-1, 30C E 2.8, and total human and total hamster DNA.
The preparative portion of the gel containing Sfi I-digested RH 128 DNA was cut into 5 mm gel slices (A-N).
Probe p58.1 detected a similar 660 kb fragment in both lanes within a region corresponding to preparative gel slice F. Probe 30C E 2.8 recognized a similar 400 kb fragment in both lanes.
Total human and total hamster DNA hybridized to a smear of restriction fragments; most of the fragments detected ranged from 250 to 600 kb in size.
DNA was fractionated by CHEF electrophoresis in 1.2% LMP agarose (0.5 TBE) using 200 V at 14°C; switch times were 60 sec for 15 hours and 90 sec for 9 hours.
Figure 2.
Comparison of A-TC65N primed PCR amplification products obtained from hamster, cell line GM06318, RH 128, and preparative gel slice F (RH 128 Sfi I-F) DNA electrophoresed in 1.2% agarose.
RH 128 Sfi I-F DNA yielded at least 24 distinct products ranging from 0.5 to 4.3 kb in size; compared to the other samples containing human DNA, RH 128 Sfi I-F DNA yielded a reduced number of products; hamster DNA failed to yield products.
Differential expression of human nicotinic acetylcholine receptor α subunit variants in muscle and non-muscle tissues
ABSTRACT
The nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) is an oligomeric transmembrane glycoprotein consisting of four homologous subunits in stoichiometry of α2, β (γ or ε).
Recently the presence of a novel exon (P3A) in human α AChR gene has been reported.
Two variants of the human α subunit arise from alternate RNA splicing, one with and one without the P3A exon.
However, the evolutionary origin of the P3A exon and the regulation of the expression of the two variants in human muscle and non-human tissues is currently unknown.
Examination of genomic DNA from various species shows that the P3A exon sequence is present only in hominoids, old world and new world primates species and is absent in the muscle cDNA or genomic DNA from rat, mouse or dog, indicating that P3A exon is evolutionary conserved for at least 50 million years.
The P3A + variant of α subunit was found to be constitutively expressed in skeletal muscle, brain, heart, kidney, liver, lung and thymus, while P3A -variant was differentially expressed only in skeletal muscle.
Thus it appears that the P3A + variant is generated by ‘default’ selection by the splicing machinery, while expression of the P3A -variant is regulated by tissue-specific factors in the skeletal muscle.
Mechanisms regulating differential expression of the α subunit variants may be pertinent to the pathophysiology of myasthenia gravis.
INTRODUCTION
The nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) is a well characterized, ligand-gated cation channel that mediates cholinergic synaptic transmission (1).
The receptor in the postsynaptic membrane of skeletal muscle is composed of five subunits with stoichiometry, α2, β, ε, and δ.
Immature muscle expresses a γ subunit in place of ε.
The α subunit carries a binding site for cholinergic ligand and is a target for pathogenic autoantibodies in the neuromuscular disease myasthenia gravis (MG)(2, 3, 4, 5).
What initiates or sustains the immune response against α subunit in MG is unknown.
However, expression of nAChR or an AChR-like protein in the human thymus has been reported, and its role in the etiology of MG has been implicated.
Recently Beeson et al.(6) identified a previously unrecognized exon (P3A) in the α nAChR gene of human muscle, and the human cell line TE671 (7).
Alternate RNA splicing gives rise to two forms of α subunit, P3A + and P3A -.
Expression of P3A protein variant has also been reported in the human cell line TE671 (8).
It is known that nAChR expression is tissue-specific, and the four subunits are coordinately regulated in muscle development (9, 10).
However, nothing is known about the expression of the two individual α subunit variants in human muscle or other tissues.
Moreover, the involvement of the P3A + subunit in the pathogenesis or the development of MG is unknown.
For these reasons, this study was undertaken to investigate the evolutionary origin of the P3A exon and to gain insight into the tissue specificity of expression of each variant.
Here we show that the P3A exon is present only in primates and man and it is conserved through primate evolution.
Moreover, while the P3A -variant is expressed in a tissue specific manner in human skeletal muscle, the P3A + variant in constitutively expressed in all tissues examined, suggesting that P3A + and P3A -variants are generated by constitutive and regulated RNA splicing, respectively.
Expression of P3A + variant in thymus, which is believed to play a central role in the induction of autoimmune MG, may have important clinical implications.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Genomic DNA from primates was obtained from Dr A.Wilson (U.C. Berkeley) and Dr Christopher Green, SRI, International, Menlo Park, CA.
Genomic DNA from human, rat, mouse, cow, and dog were obtained from Clonetech Lab (Palo Alto, CA).
DNA was prepared by standard procedure (11) from human skeletal muscle and thymic tissues, obtained as surgical waste from Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, and from the human rhabdomyosarcoma cell line TE671 (American type culture collection No.
HT 139), which was grown at 37°C in 5% CO 2 /95% air in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) with 10% fetal calf serum.
mRNA preparation, reverse transcription and PCR
Poly A + mRNA was isolated from the cell line TE671 and human tissues using a Fast Track mRNA isolation kit (Invitrogen, San Diego).
1 µg of mRNA was resuspended in 10 µl dd H 2 O containing 2 µg oligo dt (11–12 mer, Promega Biotec, Madison, WI) and was incubated at 65°C for 10 minutes.
After cooling, the mixture was incubated at 42°C for 60 minutes with 200 U of MMLV reverse transcriptase (Bethesda Research Laboratories), 1 mM dNTPs (United States Biochemical Crop.) and 25 U of RNAsin (Promega Biotec, Madison, WI) in buffer (100 mM Tris HCl, pH 8.3, 150 mM KCl, 6 mM MgCl 2 , 20 mM DTT) The tubes were then heated to 95°C for 5–10 minutes, and 80 µl dH 2 O was added to the 20 µl of reaction mixture.
Oligonucleotide primer pairs of selected α subunit sequences were synthesized (Biosearch 8600, Biosearch, San Rafael, CA) and purified using NENSORB columns (DuPont Co., Wilmington, DE).
For amplification of genomic DNA, the α AChR gene's P3A/P4 region (6) was used with a forward primer containing the first 21 bases of exon P3A, 5'GGG.AAT.TCG.ACA.TGG.TAG.ATC.TGC.CAC 3' (position 235–256) and the reverse primer containing 22 bases of exon P4, 5' AAA.GCT.TCC.ATT.TTA.GGT.TGT.
AAT.CCA.CCC.AT 3' (position 312–337).
Forward and reverse oligonucleotide primers were altered to include digestion sites for the enzymes EcoR1 and Hind III, respectively.
For cDNA amplification we prepared two oligonucleotide primers encompassing the P3A exon: a forward primer that hybridizes to the α subunit sequence 61–83 5' GGG.AAT.
TCATG.TCC.GAA.CAT.GAG.ACC.CGT.
CTG.GT 3' (position 61–83), and a reverse primer that hybridizes to sequence 734–756, 5'AAA.GCT.TTC.ATT.ACA.TGA.CGA.AGT.GGT.AGG.TGA.TGT 3'.
These primers also were altered to include EcoR1 and Hind III sites, respectively.
PCR amplification was carried out according to Perkin Elmer Cetus instructions in a final volume of 50 µl with 50 pmoles of 5' and 3' primers, 200 mM dNTPS, 0.5U of Taq polymerase (Cetus Corp.) in PCR buffer (2.5 mM MgCl 2 , 50 mM KCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl [pH 8.3], 0.001% gelatin).
Denaturation for 60 seconds at 94°C, primer annealing for 60 seconds at 60°C and chain extension for 60 seconds at 72°C was repeated in 30 cycles, the last being extended to 7 minutes at 72°C.
Five µl of the PCR product was analyzed by electrophoresis in 2% agarose gel.
Identity of the amplified bands was verified by their predicted size, restriction enzyme digests giving appropriately sized fragments and in some cases cloning into TA plasmid ( Invitrogen , San Diego, CA) and sequencing by dideoxy chain termination using Sequenase 2.0 Kit (United States Biochemical, Cleveland, OH).
RESULTS
Evolutionary conservation of the P3A exon
To investigate the evolutionary origin of the P3A sequence in the αAChR gene, genomic DNA from humans, primates, and four non-human species was investigated, using oligonucleotides complementary to the 5' ends of exons P3A (235–256) and P4 (312–337) for PCR amplification (Fig. 1B).
The sequence of the P4 exon used as reverse primer is highly conserved in human, mouse, and bovine cDNA (5, 6, 12).
The 385 bp product, corresponding to the P3A exon, P3A intron and 5' end of the P4 exon was found in genomic DNA of the human rhabdomyosarcoma cell line, TE671, and muscle of humans and primates but was absent in cow, dog, rat and mouse.
The presence of the P3A exon only in primates and man, and its absence in other species suggests that insertion of the P3A exon in the AchR gene  occurred relatively late in the evolutionary line.
Moreover, the results revealed conservation of the P3A exon sequence in new world monkey (Capuchin monkey), old world monkey (Rhesus monkey, African green monkey, Baboon and Langur), and in Hominoids (man and chimpanzee).
It is estimated that divergence of new world-old world monkeys-hominoid lineage happened about 50 million years ago, indicating that the P3A exon is conserved through primate evolution.
Further sequence analysis and sequence comparisons from these species will be necessary to identify any sequence variation in this exon during primate evolution.
The P3A exon is absent in non-primate species
Results shown in Fig. 2 indicate that the P3A exon is absent in most if not all non-primate species.
However, if the sequence of P3A diverges between human and cow, dog, rat or mouse, a primer based on the human sequence would not amplify an analogous exon, although it seems unlikely, given the overall homology between bovine, murine and human sequences of this gene.
Nevertheless, to address this question, cDNA from mouse, rat, and dog muscle was amplified by using a 5' oligonucleotide primer complimentary to the N-terminal end of α AChR (coding sequence 61–83) and a 3' oligonucleotide primer of sequence 734–756.
These primers would span the α subunit's extracellular portion, including the P3A exon.
This PCR analysis (Fig. 3) revealed just a single variants of α, corresponding in size (644 bp) to that lacking P3A.
Similar results were obtained when cDNAs from mouse, rat, and dog muscle were amplified for the complete α subunit by using a different set of primers (data not shown).
These results are consistent with those of Beeson et al.(6) and Wheatley et al.(13), who similarly were unable to detect a P3A + α subunit transcript in muscle of chicken, calf or mouse, mouse thymus or torpedo electric organ.
The P3A + variant is constitutively expressed
In innervated muscle the nAChR protein is concentrated at neuromuscular junctions (14), and the expression of its four subunits in mammalian muscle is regulated by muscle specific promoters (15–19).
To analyze the expression of the two variants of the α subunit in human skeletal muscle and in non-muscle tissues, we used cDNA from human skeletal muscle, the rhabdomyosarcoma cell line TE671, and human brain, heart, kidney, liver, lung and thymus. 5' and 3' primers spanning the α subunit's extracellular region, including the P3A exon were used to analyze α subunit expression.
As shown in Fig. 4(A) and Fig. 4(B), the P3A + variant was found to be expressed constitutively in all tissues analyzed, including skeletal muscle and thymus.
The presence of the P3A + variant was further verified in non-muscle tissues by utilizing a 5' exon specific primer and partial sequencing of amplified product (data not shown).
The P3A -variant was expressed only in skeletal muscle tissue and muscle cell line TE671 (Fig 4A).
This finding suggests that the P3A + variant of α is generated by ‘default’ selection by the splicing machinery, while expression of the P3A -variants is regulated by tissue-specific factors in skeletal muscle.
DISCUSSION
The study draws two major conclusions.
First, the results presented here suggest that the P3A exon of the nAChR α subunit may have a biological function in primates since its presence is restricted to primates, including man, and it has been conserved for > 50 million years of evolution.
The functional implications of this insertion into the α subunit gene, which is highly conserved across species (5), is not yet known.
Inclusion of an additional 25 amino acids on alternative forms of the α subunit could lead to further diversification of nicotinic receptors of muscle as has been noted in other ionic channels, most notably in shaker class of K channel from Drosophila (20), and N-methyl-D aspartate (NMDA) receptor in rat brain (20a).
The second important finding of this study is that the P3A + variant is expressed constitutively both in muscle and non-muscle tissues, in contrast to the tissue specific expression of the p3A -variant in skeletal muscle.
Earlier studies have suggested that the nAChR α subunit gene is expressed specifically in muscle and perhaps in thymus, and closely related α genes are expressed specifically in brain (21).
Our data revealed that the P3A + variant of the α gene is expressed in many, if not all tissues.
Similar findings were recently reported for another muscle-specific gene; a variant form of dystrophin mRNA containing the distal portion of native dystrophin preceded by an alternative first exon and encoding a 75 kDa protein was found widely distributed in non-muscle tissues (22).
The relevance of this variant protein to Duchenne muscular dystrophy is not known.
The P3A + protein variant is expressed in the muscle cell line TE671 (8), but assembly of P3A + into a pentameric nAChR protein has not yet been demonstrated in muscle tissue.
It is of note that in human thymus we found only the P3A + variant of the α subunit is expressed, and therefore may have a role in the etiology of MG.
The thymus is believed to play a central role in the induction of autoimmunity in MG, and thymectomy generally leads to clinical improvement (23).
Moreover, transplantation of thymic tissue from MG patients into SCID-mice lead to signs of MG in the mice (24).
The presence of muscle type nAChR or nAChR-like protein in the thymus has been reported previously (25–27), however antibodies and probes used in these studies would not have differentiated between the two variants of α.
This report provides the first direct evidence for expression of P3A + variant mRNA in human thymus.
Acetylcholine receptors are highly concentrated in the post-synaptic membranes of neuromuscular junctions (14).
In mouse and chicken muscle, expression of the α, β, γ, and δ subunits is believed to be regulated by a muscle specific promoter (15–19).
However, whether the expression of P3A -and P3A + variants of α subunit in humans is transcriptionally regulated by the same or by a different promoter/enhancer element is not known.
Results presented here suggest that the two α subunit variants in humans may be regulated by alternate splicing.
The P3A + variant which is constitutively expressed, may be generated by ‘default’ selection by the splicing machinery, while the expression of P3A -variant in skeletal muscle may be regulated by cell specific trans acting factors.
Further experiments will be necessary to understand both the mechanism by which this alternate splicing is regulated in skeletal muscle and its functional significance.
Since the α subunit is believed to be a prime target for pathogenic autoantibodies in the neuromuscular autoimmune disease MG (2), differential expression of the variants may have clinical implications.
Alterations in RNA splicing have been noted previously in transformed human cells (8), metastasizing tumor cells (29), and in a number of inherited diseases.
In Ehler-Danlos syndrome, Type IV (EDSIV) G to T transition at the splice donor site causes skipping of the preceding exon and production of defective Type III collagen (30).
Splicing mutation has also been detected in patients with opA xerodera pigmentoseum (31), in the ornithine aminotransferase (OAT) locus in gyrate atrophy (GA)(32) and in the dystrophin gene in Duchenne muscular dystrophy (33).
We are currently investigating the differential expression of P3A -and P3A + variants in muscle and thymus of MG patients.
Figure 1.
Structure of the genomic region encompassing exons P3, P3A and P4.
A. The arrangement of introns and exons in human AChR's α subunit.
Filled boxes represent exon sequences.
Upper and lower connecting lines show the alternate splicing that generates two variants, P3A -and P3A + .
B. Nucleotide sequence of genomic region encompassing exon P3A, P3A intron and 5' portion of P4 exon (6).
Sequences in capital letters are exons, while lower case letters indicate intron sequences.
Corresponding amino acid sequence of AChRα are noted below exon sequences.
The nucleotide sequence of AChRα is numbered forward and reverse starting with ATG (5).
5' and 3' oligonucleotide sequences used as primers for amplification of genomic sequence are shown by the arrows.
Figure 2.
PCR analysis of genomic DNA region P3A/P4 of AChRα gene.
Genomic DNA from humans, primates, and other species was amplified with oligonucleotide primers described in Materials and Methods.
385 bp product corresponds to the P3A exon, P3A intron and P4 exon (Fig. 1B).
Figure 3.
PCR amplification of mRNA. cDNA was synthesized from poly (A + ) RNA and used in PCR amplification with primers described in materials and methods.
The PCR product was run on 1.0% agarose gel.
Figure 4.
(A).
Expression of AChRα variants in muscle and non-muscle tissues.
cDNA was synthesized from poly (A + ) mRNA and used in PCR amplification with primers spanning extracellular region of the α subunit as described in Materials and Methods.
The PCR product was electrophoresed in 1.23% agarose gel.
Expected size of P3A -and P3A + variants ∼ 644 bp and ∼ 719 bp respectively.
(B).
Expression of AChRα variants in human thymic tissue.
cDNA was synthesized from poly (A + ) mRNA from skeletal muscle or thymic tissue from two different individuals’ samples, using primers for amplification as described from Fig. 4A. the PCR product was electrophoresed in 1.23% agarose gel.
cDNA cloning of human N-Oct 3, a nervous-system specific POU domain transcription factor binding to the octamer DNA motif
ABSTRACT
Octamer transcription factors (Oct or OTF) are a subset of the POU family of transcription factors which regulate transcription of cellular and viral genes by binding to the octamer sequence motif ATGCAAAT.
Neurons and astroglial cells harbour, in addition to the ubiquitous Oct 1 factor, at least four specific factors termed N-Oct 2,3,4 and 5.
Here we report the cloning of a human brain-derived cDNA that encodes the N-Oct 3 protein (443 aa) which is the human counterpart of the murine brain-2 gene product.
Extracts from mammalian cells transfected with an N-Oct 3 expression vector yield three octamer DNA binding complexes in the electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA): N-Oct 3 and two smaller complexes comigrating with the N-Oct 5A and 5B proteins of brain extracts.
We present data suggesting that the N-Oct 5A and 5B proteins are generated by alternative translation initiation at internal AUG residues which are located before the POU domain.
In contrast to the putative N-Oct 5 proteins, which are transcriptionally inert, the N-Oct 3 protein activates transcription from a reporter gene promoter with an octamer sequence, when transiently expressed in HeLa cells.
INTRODUCTION
Transcription factors are proteins that control gene expression via specific binding to regulatory DNA sequences in gene promoters and enhancers.
These proteins interact with additional transcription factors, and/or other ubiquitous components of the transcription machinery to direct RNA synthesis.
The transcription proteins that bind to the octameric DNA sequence ATGCAAAT (or its complement ATTTGCAT) are called Oct factors.
The octamer sequence was first recognized in the histone H2B gene and in the heavy and kappa light chain immunoglobulin genes and later identified as a regulatory sequence motif for many other cellular and viral genes (reviewed in [1]).
For example, a simple promoter composed of such an octameric sequence next to a TATA-box functions preferentially in B lymphocytes [2][3].
The observation that a single DNA motif allowed ubiquitous as well as cell type-specific gene activation became explainable by the findings and subsequent characterization of a number of (cell type-specific) Octamer binding proteins.
The Oct-1 protein is detectable in virtually all cells and regulates generally active genes that contain an octamer sequence motif [4].
The Oct-2A and Oct-2B proteins are abundant in B lymphocytes and macrophages [5][6].
The Oct-2 proteins are thought to be effectors of octamer-dependent immunoglobulin gene transcription and certain cytokine genes [7].
The Oct-4 (also referred as to Oct-3 or NF-A3 protein) and the Oct-6 protein are transcriptional regulators in embryonic stem cells and tissues (reviewed in [8]).
The latter has also been identified in proliferating Schwann cells where it has been termed SCIP [9].
The human or murine cDNAs encoding Oct-1, Oct-2A, Oct-2B, Oct-3/4, and Oct-6 have now been cloned (reviewed in [8]).
A common feature of Oct proteins is a conserved DNA-binding domain referred to as the POU domain [10].
Using polymerase chain reaction (PCR), Rosenfeld and colleagues isolated clones of POU domains from rat and human brain which they termed Tst-1 (identical with Oct-6; SCIP), brn-1, brn-2, and brn-3 [11].
They also mapped the distribution of the respective transcripts in both adult and developing brain by in situ hybridization.
The brn-1 and brn-2 POU domain RNAs are highly expressed at the neural tube stage during forebrain development and are widely present in the adult brain.
Therefore, they are thought to be important regulators of brain development (reviewed in [12]).
However, it was not known at that time whether the cloned cDNA segments termed brn-1, 2 and -3 were octamer-binding proteins.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) with extracts of mouse brain [13]glia and neurons [14]have revealed a complex pattern of at least four nervous tissue-specific Oct (N-Oct) DNA-binding proteins which were termed by us N-Oct 2, N-Oct 3, N-Oct 4 and N-Oct 5A/5B.
Here we report the cloning of the human N-Oct 3 cDNA.
The cloned human N-Oct 3 appears to be the counterpart of the murine brain-2 factor recently cloned by others [15].
We show that expression of the cloned human N-Oct 3 cDNA in mammalian cells gives rise to three proteins: N-Oct 3 and the two putative N-Oct 5A and 5B proteins which have different transcriptional activities.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cloning and sequencing
Approximately 5 105 plaques of a human fetal brain ZAP II cDNA library (Stratagene; Catalog Nr.936206) were transferred in duplicates to Plaquescreen Filters (DuPont) and then screened with a randomly primed mixture of 5 106 cpm of radiolabelled POU domain DNA fragments of the oct-2 cDNA (pos. 586–1077) and the oct-6 cDNA (pos. 706–1232; generously provided by Dr. Hans Schöler, Heidelberg) according to standard procedures described in detail in chapter 6.3 in [16].
Phages from plaques that gave rise to identical signals on both filters were purified by another round of plating and screening and were then subcloned to Bluescript plasmids according to the manufacturer's (Stratagene) instructions.
The cDNAs which encoded octamer DNA binding proteins were identified by in vitro transcription of the cDNA inserts and subsequent in vitro translation followed by EMSA as described in [17].
The reticulocyte lysate was from Amersham.
For enzymatic sequencing of both strands of the N-Oct 3 cDNA the Sequenase-kit (USB) was used with ‘universal’ and ‘reverse’primers matching to the flanks of the plasmid polylinker.
Several deletion mutants were prepared by exploiting singular restriction sites in the cDNA to enable progressive sequencing.
Gaps were resolved by using internal primers and ambiguities were rectified by chemical sequencing.
For compilation and analysis of sequence data we used the MacVector (IBI) and GCG software [18](supplied by ETH Zürich).
The nucleotide sequence has been deposited at the EMBL sequence data library under the accession number Z11933.
Northern blot
The Northern blot filter with 2 µg poly A+ RNA isolated from various human organs was purchased from Clontech.
The filter was hybridized overnight with a randomly primed DNA probe (106 cpm/ml) of the 3' region of the N-Oct 3 cDNA (position 1539 -1944) at 42°C in 50% formamide, 5 SSC, 1 Denhardt's and 200 µg/ml denatured herring sperm DNA.
The blot was washed twice for 20 min in 2 SSC, 1% SDS at room temperature and then at 65°C in 0.2 SSC, 1% SDS for 20 min.
The autoradiograph was developed after 3 days exposure.
Analysis of N-Oct 3 protein by EMSA
The EMSA and the DNA probes used were performed exactly as described in [14].
For proteolytic clipping assays 0.4 U of ArgC protease (Boehringer Mannheim) was used.
The cDNAs were subcloned from the Bluescript vectors into the expression vector pEVRF0 [19]by standard procedures.
COS 7 cells (2 106) were transfected with 1 µg DNA and 500 µg DEAE-Dextran (Pharmacia) in 1 ml Hanks-balanced salt solution (Kantonsapotheke Zürich) for 30 min, shocked in 25% DMSO solution in Hanks for 3 min and then incubated for 30 hr in fresh DME-Medium containing10% FCS.
Miniextracts were prepared as described [20].
Buffers A and C contained 1mM DTT, 1mM PMSF, 1% aprotinin; 2 µg/ml Leupeptin as protease inhibitors.
Transfection and RNAse protection assay
HeLa cells (mycoplasma-free) were cultured in DMEM with 5% foetal calf serum (GIBCO) and antibiotics.
These cells were transfected by the CaPO 4 -DNA precipitate method [16]with 10 µg test gene plasmid, 1 µg reference gene plasmid and the indicated amount of either trans-activator plasmid or herring sperm DNA overnight.
Cells were then shocked with 25% DMSO in Hanks solution for 3 min and then incubated for 30 hours in fresh DME-Medium containing 10%FCS at 37°C with 5% CO 2 .
The RNA and proteins were then prepared as described [20].
The RNAse protection assay with 10µg RNA was exactly done as described in [7].
RESULTS
Cloning and sequence analysis of N-Oct 3
To isolate N-Oct cDNAs we screened a human fetal brain cDNA library with radiolabelled POU DNA fragments of the oct-2 [7]and oct-6 cDNAs [21].
These probes were chosen on the basis of conserved sequences within the POU domain of octamer DNA binding proteins [8].
We identified several cDNAs which, when transcribed and translated in vitro, produced proteins that bound specifically to the octamer sequence in the EMSA (data not shown).
Four cDNAs yielded a protein which comigrated in the EMSA with the N-Oct 3 protein of a human brain extract.
These cDNAs showed an identical restriction pattern in the coding region but varied in length between 1.95-4 kb (data not shown).
The cDNA of 1.95 kb which was longest 5' to the ORF was chosen for sequencing.
The predicted open reading frame (ORF) encoded a protein of 443 amino acids with a M r of 47 kDa (Figure 1).
This value fits well with the expected M r of 50 kDa determined previously for the N-Oct 3 protein [14].
The ATG codon that initiates this ORF is located at nucleotide position 163 and a TGA stop codon is located at position 1492.
Two additional ORFs initiating at nucleotide position 700 and 757 are nested in the same frame (deduced M r 29 and 27 kDa, respectively)(Figure 1).
Neither of the three potential ATG translation initiation sequences matched exactly to the extended Kozak consensus (ccAcc ATG G [22].
A putative polyadenylation signal (AATAAA) present at position 1817 is apparently not used.
No poly A sequence was found, probably because the library was constructed by mixed oligo T and random priming.
The N-Oct 3 cDNA sequence (available with the accession number Z11933 at the EMBL file server) shows a striking prevalence of CpG dinucleotides in both the 5' untranslated region and in the coding region, with a mean frequency of 1 in every 10,5 dinucleotides and for GpC dinucleotides of 1 in 7,3.
This distribution resembles a CpG island [23]and is to our knowledge an unusual high CpG density in a coding region of a human cDNA.
The 3' untranslated region is more A+T rich.
Within this region we noted two short T n A elements and one ATTTA element that may account for the low steady-state levels of RNA seen in transfected cells (see below).
Inspection of the deduced amino acid sequence reveals that the N-Oct 3 protein harbours at the carboxyl terminus a POU type DNA-binding domain.
In the N-terminus of the protein homopolymeric regions of 21 glycines and 21 glutamines separated by a 36 amino acid spacer are found (Figure 1).
The POU domain of N-Oct-3 is identical to brain (brn) -2 published recently as a peptide sequence of 124 amino acids [11].
While this manuscript was in preparation, the genomic clone of the mouse brain-2 gene was isolated and sequenced [15].
Alignment of the mouse brain-2 DNA sequence with the human N-Oct 3 DNA sequence revealed a homology of 94.4% in the coding region (data not shown).
At the amino acid level, the homology is 99.3%.
N-Oct 3 expression in the brain
A Northern blot experiment using a radioactive N-Oct-3 probe detected a single band corresponding to a 5 kb RNA transcript in human brain (Figure 2, lane 2) but not in human heart, lung, pancreas, liver, spleen and skeletal muscle (lanes 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, respectively), indicating specific expression in the nervous system.
The same size and the same tissue specificity was reported recently for the mouse brain-2 mRNA [15].
The human brn-2 POU fragment cloned by He et al.was reported to hybridize to a 7 kb transcript from rat brain [11].
The discrepancy in the size of this transcript compared to the 5 kb transcript identified here might be explained by a difference between species.
Expression of N-Oct 3 yields three proteins
To further characterize the authenticity of the cloned cDNA, it was subcloned into an expression vector (Figure 3b; plasmid III) and transfected into COS 7 cells which are devoid of N-Oct proteins.
The extracts of the transfected cells showed only weak expression of the cDNA product when tested by EMSA (Figure 3a, lane 5).
RNA instability may have caused the low level expression of protein, so we generated a deletion mutant that eliminated 0.5 kb of 3' untranslated sequences of the cDNA (Figure 3b, plasmid IV).
When this shortened cDNA was transfected into COS 7 cells, we observed high level expression, as shown by a complex comigrating with the N-Oct 3 protein and, surprisingly, an additional double band complex comigrating with the two N-Oct 5 complexes of the brain extract (Figure 3a, lane 6).
We conclude that a potent RNA destabilizing determinant appears to be located in the 3' untranslated region.
Three Octamer-DNA binding complexes, N-Oct 3 and two additional proteins co-migrating with brain N-Oct-5A and -5B, were generated when the cDNA transcript was translated in vivo but not in vitro.
This observation might be explained by the cDNA sequence which contains two internal ATG triplets encoding methionine residues which are in frame with the adjacent POU domain (Figure 1).
We  hypothesized therefore that the N-Oct 5 complex is generated by alternative translation initiation.
The internal ATG triplets were indeed used for translation initiation in a 5' deletion mutant, where 650 bp including the first ATG codon used for N-Oct 3 translation are missing.
In vitro transcription/translation of this mutant (Figure 3b, plasmid II) yielded an EMSA band corresponding to the lower, stronger, band of the brain N-Oct 5B complex (Figure 3a, lane 1 and 4) indicating that the second available AUG was preferentially used for in vitro translation initiation.
The EMSA of extracts of COS cells transfected with this deletion mutant (Figure 3b, plasmid V) showed that the protein in the lower complex (N-Oct 5B) was expressed at high levels and that in the upper complex at low levels (N-Oct 5A), which is also the pattern seen in brain extracts (Figure 3a, lane 7 and 1).
We also considered the possibility that the upper (weaker) band (N-Oct 5A) seen in vivo reflected a posttranslational modification of the faster complex (N-Oct 5B).
However, when cells were transfected with the longer N-Oct 3 cDNA (Figure 3a, lane 6, Fig. 3b plasmid IV) there was an inverse intensity of the two N-Oct 5 bands.
This effect may be to due a different RNA secondary structure affecting the accessibility of the internal AUG codons.
Taken together, it appears that N-Oct 5A and 5B are generated by alternative translation initiation of the N-Oct 3 mRNA, rather than by alternative spicing or posttranslational modification such as a specific proteolytic processing (see Discussion).
We next analyzed the octamer DNA binding specificity of the recombinant proteins produced in transfected COS 7 cells.
When an excess of unlabelled octamer competitor fragment was present in the reaction mixture of N-Oct-3 proteins and labelled octamer probe, both binding of N-Oct-3 and N-Oct 5A/5B was strongly reduced (Figure 3, lane 9) compared to no competitor (lane 8) or mutated octamer DNA as a competitor (lane 10).
To see whether the N-Oct 3 complex seen in brain extracts and the cloned protein were identical, we performed a comparative proteolytic clipping EMSA [5].
Extracts of COS 7 cells transfected with N-Oct-3 cDNA and of brain tumor were treated with ArgC before performing EMSA.
The protease preferentially degraded the N-Oct 3 protein in both extracts in a similar, if not identical way, leading to the occurrence of two new protein bands (Figure 3, lane 11–14).
We conclude therefore, that the recombinant protein corresponds to the brain-derived N-Oct 3 protein.
N-Oct 3 activates an octamer-containing promoter
In order to assess the functions of the N-Oct 3 and N-Oct-5 proteins in gene transcription, we performed cotransfection experiments in HeLa cells.
As a test gene we used a β-globin gene whose promoter consists solely of an octamer sequence and a TATA box.
We supplied in trans different octamer-binding proteins by cotransfection of the respective expression plasmid.
It was previously shown that the transcription of this test gene critically depends on quantity and quality of ectopically expressed octamer binding proteins [7].
Addition of expression vector containing the B-cell derived oct-2 cDNA led to transcriptional activation (Fig. 4b, lane 2 and 3, for amount of Oct-2 protein see the respective lanes in Fig. 4c).
Expression of the N-Oct 3 cDNA (Fig. 4b, lane 4 and 5) also activated transcription, though to a lesser extent than Oct-2.
Transfection of the N-Oct 5 expression plasmids however, had only marginal effects on test gene transcription (Fig. 4 lanes.6, 7).
Since N-Oct 5 proteins contain only the POU DNA-binding domain and lack the homopolymeric glutamine and glycine stretches (see Figure 1 and 2), it seemed possible that N-Oct 5 would inhibit N-Oct 3 by competing for DNA-binding.
However, N-Oct 5 are transcriptionally inert since cotransfection of N-Oct 3 and N-Oct 5 gave the same test gene expression as N-Oct 3 (Figure 4, lanes 8, 9).
Thus, N-Oct 3 acts as a weak transcriptional activator under these assay conditions whereas the N-Oct 5 proteins were inert, neither activating transcription by themselves nor inhibiting N-Oct 3 action.
DISCUSSION
In this paper we describe the cloning and functional characterization of the human transcription factor N-Oct 3.
We have presented data which suggest that three proteins, N-Oct 3 as well as N-Oct 5A and 5B are translated from the same mRNA by alternative translation initiation; only the largest protein, N-Oct 3, was able to stimulate transcription from an octamer promoter under our assay conditions.
We also showed that the N-Oct 3 protein, previously identified by EMSA as the major Oct-factor in cells of the nervous system [14], is identical to brn-2, a partial clone, generated by PCR, comprising solely the POU domain [11].
Recently, the complete cDNA and genomic sequences of the murine brain-2 gene were published [15].
The amino acid sequence of the human N-Oct 3 (brain-2) and the murine brain-2 protein is identical  except for two additional amino acid residues in the mouse protein.
As discussed below, several lines of evidence suggest that the N-Oct 3/brain 2 protein plays an important role during brain development.
The CAG cluster; a hot spot for triplet repeat mutations?
The glutamine-rich region in the N-Oct 3 protein is encoded mainly by CAG residues.
This type of triplet repeat was recently recognized as the molecular basis for an unusual mutation mechanism that leads to amplification of the triplets, which can it turn to disease, such as fragile-X-syndrome or myotonic dystrophy (reviewed in [24]).
If such mutations should occur in the CAG cluster of the N-Oct 3 gene it might easily lead to loss of function by aberrantly expanding the bona fide transcription activation domain, or to loss of DNA-binding if a frame shift is introduced.
It will be of considerable biological and medical interest to experimentally address the question whether the N-Oct 3 gene is sensitive to this mutation mechanism and if so, if a disease is associated with it.
Three proteins out of one (unstable) transcript
Efficient N-Oct 3 expression in vivo depends on deletion of a large portion of the 3' untranslated sequence, implying that it is likely to be a determinant of RNA instability.
These sequences contain one copy of the AUUUA motif that is known to mediate RNA instability in a number of short-lived cytokine transcripts (reviewed in [25]).
The other surprising result was observed when a stable RNA was expressed after removal of the 3' sequences; three proteins were apparently generated.
We consider it most likely, that alternative translation initiation is the mechanism for generation of the N-Oct 5 proteins.
Which other mechanisms may be causal?
The murine counterpart of N-Oct 3, the brain-2 gene does not have introns.
At present, the genomic structure of the human N-Oct 3 gene is not known but given the short evolutionary distance between mouse and human, we assume that the human N-Oct 3 gene does not have introns as well .
Therefore, we consider alternative splicing as mechanism for the generation of N-Oct 5 proteins unlikely.
It is conceivable, though unlikely, that ectopic expression of N-Oct 3 induces expression of another gene(s) that encode(s) the N-Oct 5 proteins.
Post-translational proteolytic processing of N-Oct 3 may be possible.
However, no consensus sites for proteases are detectable which might generate the N-Oct 5 proteins.
Moreover, the inverse intensity of N-Oct 5 bands seen with the different expression constructs argue against the proteolytic processing mechanism but rather for a different transcript structure that affects  accessibility of the AUG translation initiation sequences.
Alternative translation initiation was also shown to be effective for the RNA of POU proteins pit-1 [26]and Oct-4 [17]where in each case two isoforms were detected.
Descombes and Schibler have recently shown that the RNA of the liver transcription factor LAP (liver activatory protein) also translates a smaller protein, termed LIP (liver inhibitory protein) which lacks the transcription activation domain.
The LIP protein could efficiently inhibit the action of LAP [27].
This was apparently not the case in the co-transfection experiment with N-Oct 3 and N-Oct 5 expression plasmids (Figure 4).
At present, we have no evidence for a heterodimerization among these proteins which might impair DNA-binding.
Therefore, N-Oct 5 protein probably can inhibit only when it is in large excess to N-Oct 3.
However, under our assay conditions we were not able to achieve a sufficiently high concentration of N-Oct 5 protein in the transfected cells to test this hypothesis.
In light of the potential regulatory effects of alternate expression of the three proteins it will be of interest to examine expression patterns during development or in different cell types.
Sequence specificity and possible target genes
The N-Oct 3 protein binds specifically to the octameric regulatory motif ATGCAAAT (or its complement ATTTGCAT).
However, another typical feature of octamer-binding POU-domain factors, such as Oct-1, Oct-2, Oct-6 and the recently cloned brain-4 factor (identical with N-Oct 4; A. Tobler and E. Schreiber, unpublished results), is that they can also bind to the heptamer sequence CTCATGA which is naturally located adjacent to the octamer sequence in the immunoglobulin heavy chain promoter [28][29][30].
We have previously shown that gel-purified N-Oct 3 protein also binds to the heptamer sequence [14].
In addition, many variants of the octamer sequence have been shown to be functional binding sites for Oct-proteins (reviewed in [31]).
This remarkable variety in binding sites hampers the identification of target genes.
A candidate gene that could be regulated by N-Oct 3 is the human calcitonin/CGRP gene which contains a consensus octamer motif in the promoter.
Moreover, this gene is expressed in a number of neuroectoderm-derived cell types that also express N-Oct 3 (E. Schreiber, unpublished observations).
Rosenfeld and his colleagues reported that the corticotropin releasing hormone promoter is transcriptionally up-regulated by brain-2 (N-Oct 3)[32].
The recent development of biochemical and genetical target detection assays, if applied to the N-Oct 3 factor, will certainly help to answer this major question.
It will also be of interest to investigate whether N-Oct 3 causes the transcriptional repression of the Herpes simplex virus immediate early genes in neuronal cells that was reported to be mediated by an as yet unidentified neuron-specific Oct-protein(s) [33].
N-Oct3 (brain-2), a primordial transcriptional regulator in the neuroectoderm cell lineage?
This work and previous studies have shown that the expression of the N-Oct 3 (brain-2) transcript and protein is confined to cells of the nervous system in which it is the predominant Oct-protein [14][11, 15][13].
Rosenfeld and colleagues have shown by in situ hybridizations with embryonal and adult rat brain sections that the brn-2 mRNA is abundant during all stages of neurogenesis and is present at a lower level in distinct neuronal subsets in the adult CNS [11]These data were corroborated by EMSA studies showing a similar abundance and distribution of the N-Oct 3 protein [13][14].
N-Oct 3 expression is not confined to the central nervous system but detectable in most cell derivatives of the neuroectoderm, including neural crest derivatives.
For example, we have previously shown N-Oct 3 expression in neuroblastoma cell lines; melanoma cells as neural crest derivatives also contain the N-Oct 3 protein [14][34].
However, N-Oct expression is not ubiquitous in all cells of the nervous system; Schwann cells, the glia cells of the peripheral nervous system, lack N-Oct proteins but contain the Oct-6 protein in addition to the Oct-1 protein [35].
The early and abundant expression of N-Oct3 (brain 2) during neural development and the widespread expression in neural- and glial and other neural crest-derived tissues suggest an important role as gene regulator in the nervous system.
The abundance and the functional effects of N-Oct 3 may be regulated by different mechanisms:(i) transcription of N-Oct 3 may be regulated in a temporal and tissue specific manner,(ii) the RNA half life might be controlled by sequences in the 3'  untranslated region as suggested by our findings (iii) a bias in translation in favour of N-Oct 5 proteins may serve to neutralize the effects of the N-Oct 3 protein.
The cDNA described here will be instrumental to experimentally address these issues.
Figure 1.
Amino acid sequence of the N-Oct 3 and N-Oct 5A and 5B proteins.
Methionine residues are high-lighted; the POU DNA binding domain is printed in bold face type.
Figure 2.
Northern blot analysis of N-Oct 3 with RNA extracted from various human organs.
Lane 1: heart, lane 2: brain, lane 3: placenta, lane 4: lung, lane 5: liver, lane 6: skeletal muscle, lane 7: kidney, lane 8: pancreas.
Figure 3.
A. Identification of recombinant N-Oct 3 and N-Oct 5 proteins by EMSA.
In lane 1 the extract of a human brain tumor indicates the position of migration in the EMSA of previously described N-Oct proteins.
Lane 2: unprogrammmed reticulocyte lysate; lane 3: lysate programmed with RNA of the N-Oct 3 clone (in vitro transcribed from Asp 718 linearized plasmid I).
Lane 4: lysate programmed with RNA of the Sma1 5' deletion mutant (Fig. 3B: plasmid II).
Lane 5: extract of COS 7 cells that were transfected with the full length N-Oct 3 cDNA (Fig. 3B: plasmid III).
Lane 6: extract of COS 7 cells transfected with plasmid IV where untranslated sequences 3' of the Xho 1 site were removed.
Lane 7: extract of COS 7 cells transfected with plasmid V, the Sma 1 5' deletion mutant.
The additional band migrating between N-Oct 3 and 5 was also observed in brain extracts after longer exposure, perhaps from binding of a cofactor to the N-Oct 5 complex rather than a dimer of N-Oct 5 which is expected to migrate slower.
Lanes 8–10 competition experiment: extracts of N-Oct 3 transfected COS 7 cells were incubated before EMSA with no specific competitor DNA (lane 8), with a 250-fold molar excess of wild type unlabelled octamer probe (lane 9) or with the same amount of a mutated octamer probe (lane 10).
Lanes 11–14 proteolytic clipping EMSA: unproteolyzed brain tumor extract (lane 11) and ArgC proteolyzed brain extract (lane 12) is compared with the pattern of N-Oct 3 transfected COS 7 extract (lane 13 no ArgC, lane 14 with ArgC).
B .
Plasmids used in this experiment; the 1.95 kb N-Oct 3 cDNA is depicted as a black bar flanked by EcoR1 sites; the white open bar indicates coding sequences; The black POU box represents the sequences encoding the DNA binding domain; arrows point to translation initiation and stop sites; relevant restriction sites for the construction of deletions are shown; the broken line and the (A) n-symbol indicate external splice and polyadenylation signals, respectively; T3 symbolizes the T3 RNA polymerase promoter of a bluescript plasmid; CMV symbolizes the CMV enhancer/promoter of the mammalian expression vector pEVRF0 [19].
Figure 4.
Octamer promotor activation by cloned N-Oct 3.
A. Plasmids used in this experiment: a) expression vector with oct-2 cDNA; b) expression vector with N-Oct 3 cDNA (identical with plasmid IV, Fig. 3B); c) expression vector with N-Oct 5 cDNAs (identical with plasmid V, Fig. 3B), d) β-globin test gene plasmid with the octamer site (symbolized by 8) in 5 bp distance to the TATA-box (symbolized by T) and downstream located SV 40 enhancer; e) the same plasmid but the octamer site is mutated from ATGCAAAT to CTGAACAT; f) truncated β-globin reference gene; g) radioactive antisense RNA probe spanning positions -37 to +179 of plasmids d and e.
Plasmids a, d, e, f and probe g were described in detail in [7].
B Autoradiograph of an RNAse protection assay with RNA of transfected HeLa cells and C. autoradiograph of an EMSA performed with nuclear extracts of these transfected cells to monitor the amount of expressed proteins. lane 1: cells transfected with DNAs d, f; lane 2: cells transfected with DNAs d, f and 5 µg DNA a; lane 3: cells transfected with DNAs d, f and 10 µg DNA a; lane 4: cells transfected with DNAs d, f and 5 µg DNA b; lane 5: cells transfected with DNAs d, f and 10 µg DNA b; lane 6: cells transfected with DNAs d, f and 5 µg DNA c; lane 7: cells transfected with DNAs d, f and 10 µg DNA c; lane 8: cells transfected with DNAs d, f and 5 µg DNA b and 5 µg DNA c; lane 9: cells transfected with DNAs d, f and 5 µg DNA b and 10 µg DNA c; lane 10: cells transfected with DNAs e, f; lane 11: cells transfected with DNAs e, f and 5µg a, lane 12: cells transfected with DNAs e, f and 5µg b, lane 13: cells transfected with DNAs e, f and 5µg c.
M: molecular weight size marker; test: correctly initiated testgene transcripts; ref: reference gene transcripts.
Domain structure of a human general transcription initiation factor, TFIIF
ABSTRACT
The structural and functional domains of a general transcription initiation factor, TFIIF (RAP30/74, FC), have been investigated using various deletion mutants of each subunit, both in vivo and in vitro.
An in vivo assay showed that the N-terminal sequence containing residues of 1–110 of RAP30 that is located close to a σ homology region interacts with a minimum sequence of residues 62–171 of RAP74 to form a heteromeric interaction.
Reconstitution of in vitro transcription activity by deletion mutants of RAP74 clearly indicated that both N-terminal residues 73–205 and C-terminal residues 356–517 are essential for full activity, the former interacting with RAP30, thus complexing with RNA polymerase II.
From these data, the functional significance of domain structure of TFIIF is discussed in terms of its σ homology sequences and complex formation with RNA polymerase II in the initiation and elongation of transcription.
INTRODUCTION
The initiation of transcription of protein-coding genes is a complex process involving multiple components (1).
The development of a soluble cell-free system composed of minimal or core promoter DNA, RNA polymerase II, and protein factors in nuclear extract has led to the identification of basic transcription factors essential for specific and accurate initiation of transcription in vitro(2,3,4,5,6,7,8).
So far, at least six factors have been found to be required for transcription initiation, TFIIA, IIB, IID, IIE, IIF and IIG (9,10), and additional factors probably exist (11,12).
Recently, cDNAs encoding TFIID (13,14), IIB (15), IIE (16,17,18) and IIF (19,20,21) have been successfully cloned and the primary structure of each factor reported.
However, detailed analysis of structure and function of each factor is essential in order to understand the basic molecular mechanism of protein-protein interaction in the transcription initiation reaction.
TFIIF (22,23), also termed FC (24), RAP30/74 (25), βγ in rat (26), or factor 5 in Drosophila (27) is one of the general initiation factors.
TFIIF can bind directly to RNA polymerase II (22,24,25) and suppresses nonspecific binding of RNA polymerase II to DNA (24,28,29).
Studies on the assembly of transcription initiation complexes using the gel shift assay show that TFIIF is required for RNA polymerase II to assemble into a preinitiation complex formed by promoter DNA and the general factors TFIID, IIA and IIB (30,31).
Furthermore, TFIIF also stimulates transcript elongation by RNA polymerase II (22,27,32).
Thus, TFIIF is not only an initiation factor but an elongation factor.
TFIIF could be a target of regulation at these two steps of mRNA synthesis.
TFIIF is a heteromer composed of a small (RAP30) and a large (RAP74) subunit (23,24,25).
We have recently cloned cDNA encoding the large subunit of TFIIF that interacts with the small subunit in vivo and shown that bacterially expressed proteins of both could replace the transcription initiation activity of native TFIIF (20).
In this article, the structure of TFIIF was investigated by using various deletion mutants of each subunit both in vivo and in vitro.
We show that a small portion of N-terminal domain of RAP74 interacts with RAP30 while the C-terminal region is also essential for transcription activity.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Expression of recombinant protein
Plasmids for expression of recombinant RAP30 (r30) and RAP74 (r74) were constructed by insertion of each full length open reading frame into the NcoI and BamHI sites of the T7 expression vector, pET-3d as described (20).
To construct plasmids expressing C-terminal deletion mutants of RAP74, the NcoI site at the translation initiation site was first converted to an NdeI site by inserting a synthetic oligonucleotide.
Restriction fragments from the NdeI site to the SalI site, to each of three StuI sites, to the FspI site and to the HindIII site, encoding from the first methionine to amino acids 435, 356, 256, 136, 205 and 73, respectively, were prepared.
The nucleotides corresponding to the C-terminal region of each encoded peptide were converted to a BamHI site by filling in with Klenow polymerase and ligating on BamHI linkers.
These modified C-terminal fragments were subcloned into the NdeI and BamHI sites of the His-tagged expression vector, pET15b.
Plasmids expressing N-terminal deletions of RAP74 were constructed by inserting restriction fragments from HindIII, FspI or StuI sites to the BamHI site that encodes polypeptides from the 73rd, 205th and 356th amino acid to the C-terminal end, respectively, into the NdeI and BamHI sites of pET15b.
The sequences around both the initiation and termination regions of each clone was determined by the di-deoxy method and confirmed to be in frame with the N-terminal 6-His sequence of pET15b.
BL21(DE3) cells were transformed by each plasmid and the cells were grown at 37°C in an LB medium containing 100µg/ml ampicillin until A 600 reached 0.6, at which time IPTG was added to a final concentration of 1.0mM and the cells were allowed to grow for an additional 3 hours.
The cells were collected by centrifugation at 4,000g for 10 minutes and suspended in 1/20 of the original culture volume using lysis buffer containing 20mM Tris-HCl (pH7.9), 5mM EDTA, 25mM NaCl, 0.5mM PMSF and 14mM β-mercaptoethanol.
After sonication and centrifugation at 10,000g for 15 minutes, RAP74 and its deletion mutants were solubilized in the supernatant but RAP30 was retained in the pellet.
Protein purification
The supernatant fraction containing expressed RAP74 was applied onto a P11 column equilibrated with buffer B (20mM Tris-HCl (pH7.9), 0.2mM EDTA, 20%Glycerol, 10mM β-mercaptoethanol) containing 0.1M NaCl.
After washing the column by buffer B/0.5M NaCl, RAP74 or its deletion mutants were eluted stepwise by B/1.0M NaCl.
C-terminal deletion proteins of r74(1–73) and r74(1–136), and N-terminal deletions of r74(205–517) and r74(356–517) were sequentially purified on a Nickel column to near homogeneity according to the pET-His protocols of Novagen.
For other deleted RAP74s proteins, the fractions from the P11 column that contained approximately 500µg of the protein were subjected on SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, and stained with 4M Na-acetate.
The protein was eluted from the gel and renatured as described (33) with minor modifications.
Briefly, the protein was eluted into 2ml of 20mM Tris-HCl (pH7.9), 0.1mM EDTA and 0.15M NaCl by rotary shaking overnight.
The eluted protein was then aceton-precipitated, rinsed twice by 80% aceton, and dissolved into 50µl of 6M guanidine-HCl.
After diluting with 250µl of buffer B containing 0.3M NaCl, the protein was renatured by dialysis against the same buffer at 4°C overnight.
RAP30 protein was prepared from a pellet of cell lysate as described before (20).
Production of anti-RAP74 and anti-RAP30 anti-serum
The full-length RAP74 (∼1mg) and RAP30 (∼20mg) prepared as above were separated on 10% SDS-PAGE and visualized by staining with 4M Na-acetate.
The band containing each protein was cut out and the gel was emulsified in Freund complete adjuvant for injection.
Two female New Zealand White rabbits were each injected with approximately 100µg of RAP74 or 300µg of RAP30 a week after preimmune serum had been bled.
After three timed boosting injections with 75µg of RAP74 or 200µg of RAP30, serum against each protein was obtained at days 38 and 50.
In vivo binding by CAT assay
Plasmids for expressing GAL4-RAP30 or VP16-RAP74 fusions were constructed by inserting PCR-generated fragments of RAP30 or RAP74 into the EcoRI site of plasmid pSG424 (34) or pAASVVP16 (35), respectively, as in (20).
PCR fragments were generated by standard methods with primers encoding the amino acids at both ends of each fragment and containing extraneous nucleotides comprising EcoRI sites at their 5' ends.
The junctions of the resultant constructs were sequenced to ensure the fragments were in frame.
The reporter plasmid, G5EC, which contains five binding sites for the GAL4 protein and the E1B TATA box in front of the CAT gene, was kindly provided by Drs.
I.Sadowski, and M.Ptashne.
CV1 (African green monkey kidney) cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% FCS.
The reporter and effector plasmids (10µg each) were cotransfected by calcium phosphate precipitation into 10 6 CV1 cells in 10cm plates.
After 6 hours, the cells were treated with 15% glycerol in complete medium for 3 minutes, washed and maintained in the same medium.
After 48–72 hours, cell extracts were prepared and assayed for CAT activity (36).
Assay of in vitro transcription
In vitro transcription activity of recombinant TFIIF was assayed as before (20,24) with minor modifications, and RNA transcripts were analyzed on 6% polyacrylamide-7M urea gel.
A mixture of r30 and r74 was first incubated at 29°C for 30 minutes, then incubated for another 30 minutes with other factors containing the D1P2 fraction (a crude fraction containing FA and FB by our nomenclature, see reference 9), 0.4µg FE and 0.5µg RNA polymerase II.
The preinitiation complex was allowed to assemble by adding a mixture of 5ng recombinant TFIID and 2µg pMLC2AT.
After incubating at 29°C for 30 minutes, nucleotide triphosphates were added to a final concentration of 600µM ATP, UTP and 5µM [α- 32 P]CTP (∼5µCi).
After 60 minutes, the reaction was stopped and radioactive RNA was isolated and analyzed.
Recombinant TFIID and the plasmid pMLC2AT were provided by Dr A.Berk (14) and Dr R.Roeder (37), respectively.
Other procedures
SDS-PAGE was performed as in Laemmli (38), and the gel were stained by 2D-SILVER STAIN II from Daiichi.
Immunoblotting was performed by using alkaline phosphatase-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG as a second antibody as in the Western Light TM protocol provided by Boehringer.
Methods for subcloning and di-deoxy sequencing were as described in (39).
RESULTS
Size and western blot of recombinant TFIIF
Bacterially expressed subunits of TFIIF, r74 and r30, were purified as described in Materials and Methods, and analyzed on 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.
As shown in Fig. 1A, r74 and r30 migrated at rates consistent with molecular weights of 76 and 29.2kDa, respectively, compared with 78 and 30kDa for native HeLa TFIIF.
This suggests that both subunits are post-translationally modified in vivo.
Western blot analysis using anti-serum against expressed proteins detected each corresponding subunit of HeLa TFIIF (Fig. 1B, 1C) providing immunological evidence that the recombinant proteins are derived from expression of cDNAs for each subunit of TFIIF.
Fig. 2 shows the polypeptide pattern of various mutant RAP74s prepared as in Materials and Methods.
We found that the RAP74 C-terminal deletions larger than r74(1–136) and the N-terminal deletions larger than r74(205–517) were consistently contaminated with two major NH 2 -terminal fragments of sizes around 20 and 30kDa.
These two NH 2 -terminal fragments co-chromatographed with intact RAP74 in anion-exchange or gel filtration columns and were detected by immunoblot (data not shown).
These smaller N-terminal polypeptides were retained on a Nickel column even in the presence of 6M guanidine-HCl or 8M urea indicating the presence of a histidine repeat at their N-terminus.
When the cell lysates were prepared in the presence of various protease inhibitors (PMSF, antipain, benzamidine and chymostatin) the sizes and quantities of these smaller fragments did not change, and other fragments corresponding to proteolytic products were not observed.
It is speculated that these small fragments might result from unique terminated or inefficient translation at one or more sites between the 136th and 205th amino acid, and not from proteolysis.
Therefore, we employed a gel-extraction method (33) and renatured the eluted protein as described in Materials and Methods.
It is noted here that feasibility and applicability of the method, especially for the purpose of efficient renaturation of the eluted protein, seem to be dependent on the amount of protein in addition to its own renaturability.
So an experiment was performed on a large scale using approximately 500µg of expressed protein.
From the mobility of each polypeptide of the expressed proteins on SDS-PAGE, the M.wt. of r74s containing the C-terminal sequence down to the 435th, 356th, 256th, 205th, 136th and 73rd amino acid were calculated to be 74, 62, 32, 27, 21 and 16kDa, respectively.
The M.wt. of proteins N-terminally deleted down to the 73rd, 205th and 356th residue were 69, 56 and 27kDa, respectively.
The proteins were all immunologically shown to be RAP74 deletions by immunoblots using anti-RAP74 antibodies (data not shown).
Interaction of RAP74 with RAP30 in vivo 
The RAP30 subunit of TFIIF has been shown to bind to RNA polymerase II (25,29,40).
Interaction of RAP74 with RAP30 is essential for transcription initiation activity (23,24,25,26).
Cotransfection of GAL4-RAP30 and VP16-RAP74 has been shown to transactivate the expression of the chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT) gene containing a GAL4 binding site as a cis-acting element at an upstream sequence, indicating RAP74 and RAP30 interact in vivo(20).
The above experiment was extended to determine the sequence of both subunits essential for this interaction as described in the Materials and Methods.
Fig. 3 showed that the clones of RAP74 whose C-terminal sequences were deleted up to the 171th amino acid residue (lanes 2,3 and 4) stimulated the CAT activity to the same extent as the wild type clone, but further deletion of the C-terminal sequence up to the 128th residue resulted in a complete loss of the CAT activity (lane 5).
By contrast, transfection with clones encoding various regions of C-terminal (lanes 6 and 7) or internal sequences (lane 8,9 and10) did not show any CAT activity.
This indicates that the region of RAP74 responsible for the interaction with RAP30 in vivo is located at its N-terminal domain.
The peptide consisting of amino acids 62–171 was the smallest fragment responsible for the effect although its activity was only 13% of the intact clone (lane 12).
Clones 1–171 and 62–205 showed activities higher than that of the clone 62–171 suggesting that the flanking regions of 62–171 at both the N-terminus (up to 1) and C-terminus (down to 205) have positive effects on the interaction.
Fig. 4 showed the CAT activities of various deletion mutant clones of RAP30.
The clones of sequential deletions from the C-erminal end up to the 110th residue stimulated the CAT activity while the 1–110 clone showed only control levels of activity (lane 2,3 and 4).
It was also found that C-terminal flanking sequence down to the 127th or 165th amino acid residue slightly stimulated the activity of clone 1–110.
Further deletion of the C-terminal 11 amino acid residues from the clone 1–110 totally abolished the stimulation (lane 5).
Other clones containing various regions of RAP30 sequence could not stimulate the CAT activity.
This indicates that region 1–110 of RAP30 contains a minimum sequence essential for interacting with RAP74 in vivo.
Catalytic activity of the expressed proteins
Recombinant RAP30 (r30) and RAP74 (r74) together substitute for the transcription activity of TFIIF in vitro(20,21).
As shown in Fig. 5A, r30 and r74 were indeed active in our assay.
The specific activity of the bacterially expressed TFIIF was estimated to be 5–10% of the native HeLa factor, and its activity required preincubation with other transcription factors derived from HeLa nuclear extract.
Under these conditions, each of the deletion mutants of RAP74 was assayed along with a stoichiometrical equivalent amount of r30 for their activity of supporting in vitro transcription.
Fig. 5B showed that only two RAP74 C-terminal deletions, r74(1–517) and r74(1–435), were active.
In contrast, other truncated forms of RAP74 containing a shorter C-terminal region were all inactive.
Since r74(1–435) was reproducibly less active than r74(1–517), a fixed amount of r30 was mixed with varying amounts of each of these r74 proteins (Fig. 5C).
The activity of the mixture augmented with increasing amounts of r74 and reached a plateau at a molar concentration of r74 which was approximately equal to that of r30 (Fig. 5C).
The profile has been also observed when HeLa TFIIF activity was reconstituted by each subunit separated under denaturing conditions (24).
At this plateau, the activity for r74(1–435) was 62% of that of full length r74.
Thus deletion of C-terminal 82 amino acids from RAP74 still provided an active protein that supported in vitro transcription at a lower efficiency, and further deletion of the C-terminal region up to the 356th amino acid residue resulted in a complete loss of activity.
Fig. 6 shows the effect of the N-terminal deletions of RAP74 on its catalytic activity.
r74(73–517) was about as active as a full length protein, while two other forms, r74(205–517) and r74(356–517), were inactive.
These data strongly indicated that both N-terminal 73–205 and C-terminal 356–517 regions are essential for RAP74 to function as a transcription factor.
DISCUSSION
TFIIF, a transcription initiation factor for mammalian RNA polymerase II, has been analyzed in terms of structural and catalytic function using deletion mutants of each subunit.
The N-terminal sequence 62–171 of RAP74 and N-terminal sequence 1–110 of RAP30 were shown to be minimum domains essential for interacting with each other to form a heteromer, although both N- and C-terminal flanking sequences of RAP74 and a small portion of C-terminal sequence of RAP30 stimulated the interaction (Figs. 3 and 4).
These sequences form a slightly hydrophobic domain compared with other region of the proteins, as deduced by computer analysis.
It is conceivable subunits of TFIIF associate with each other by hydrophobic interaction.
However, it is also possible that these domains might not be directly involved in the association but that deletions of these regions might induce a conformational change of each protein, affecting the interaction.
RAP30 has been reported to contain a sequence homologous to region 1b and 2 of σ factors of bacteria, which has been shown to be a binding site for the core component of E.coli RNA polymerase and possibly for mammalian RNA polymerase II (19,40).
Since there are sequence similarities between the large subunits of prokaryotic and eukaryotic RNA polymerases (41,42,43,44,45), it is likely that RAP30 interacts with the largest subunit of mammalian RNA polymerase II.
Thus, RAP30 forms a large complex with RAP74 and RNA polymerase II at the closely located sequences, 1–110 and 111–152, respectively, although these sequences might overlap.
In contrast to hydrophobic interaction between RAP30 and RAP74, binding of RAP30 to RNA polymerase II is likely to be electrostatic, easily dissociable at a salt concentration of 0.2–0.4M (24,46).
RAP74 is also found to contain σ homology sequences as shown in Fig. 7.
N-terminal homology sequences correspond to regions 2.1, 2.3 and 2.4 of E.coli. σ 70 , while the last two homologies are repeated in tandem and also overlap with the sequences homologous to region 4.1.
At the C-terminal sequences 400–425, there is another sequence homologous to region 4.2.
Interestingly, these sequences are localized in the N-terminal domain essential for associating with RAP30 (Fig. 3) or the C-terminal domain required for the transcription initiation activity of TFIIF (Fig. 5B).
However, functional significance of the σ homology sequences of RAP74 are unknown.
A more detailed mutagenesis analysis of these sites, would be essential to elucidate the molecular significance of these sequences during the heteromeric interaction of TFIIF and its association with RNA polymerase II.
Reconstruction of in vitro transcription activity by deletion mutants of RAP74 showed that catalytic activity of r74 requires the presence of both N-terminal and C-terminal regions.
Since N-terminal sequences are involved in associating with RAP30, thereby forming a complex with RNA polymerase II, the C-terminal region probably plays an additional role for full activity.
It is intriguing to note that the C-terminal region of RAP74, which is essential for transcription activity, is homologous to a region of s between 400 and 425 (Fig. 7).
It also contains regions homologous to the phosphate binding loop (P-loop) of human thymidine kinase, which is imperfectly repeated between 428 and 446, as reported by others (21).
RAP74 is proposed to be structurally separated into three regions, a globular N-terminal domain (1–179), a charged domain (180–356), and a globular C-terminal domain (357–517)(20,21).
Our results indicate that the functional domains are apparently correlated with the proposed structure.
A minimum sequence of amino acids 62–171 essential for binding to RAP30 is localized in the N-terminal globular domain, and there are sequences required for transcription activity at the C-terminal globular domain.
The central charged domain was not sufficient for either heteromeric interaction with RAP30 or transcription activity by our assays although a small portion of the N-terminal sequence of this domain stimulated association with RAP30 (Fig. 3).
We observed that the bacterially expressed RAP74 protein forms a tetrameric aggregate in solution, and this property was assigned to an internal region from 73 to 356 (data not shown).
Therefore, the central domain might provide the protein with the ability to form the tetrameric self-aggregate seen with native HeLa TFIIF (24).
TFIIF is required for RNA polymerase II to associate with DAB complex (30,31), while neither the RAP30 nor RAP74 component of TFIIF are likely to interact directly with a component(s) of the DAB complex.
Recently physical interaction of the carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II with TATA-binding protein has been shown and it was proposed that the CTD is one of the components of the RNA polymerase II that interacts with the DAB complex during recruitment of the enzyme (47,48).
TFIIF, possibly along with TFIIE, might be involved in a change of DNA conformation around the initiation site that is induced by binding of RNA polymerase II to the preformed DAB complex and represents a transition from a closed to an open complex (30).
Overall there remain many questions about molecular function of TFIIF in formation of preinitiation complex, initiation and elongation of transcription.
Our present study could be an initial step toward elucidating the functional role of TFIIF in a complicated process of protein-protein interaction in transcription.
Figure 1.
SDS-PAGE analysis and immunoblots of recombinant and HeLa native TFIIF.
(A ) Recombinant RAP30 (r30) and RAP74 (r74) expressed and purified as in Methods were analyzed on 10% SDS-PAGE along with HeLa native TFIIF purified as in (24) and visualized by silver staining. 1.
size marker 2. r30 (20ng) 3. r74 (50ng) 4.
HeLa TFIIF (60ng).
(B ) and (C ) After two different amounts of r30 (10ng in lane 1 and 5, 30ng in lane 2 and 6 in B) or r74 (20ng in lane 1 and 5, 60ng in lane 2 and 6 in C) along with HeLa TFIIF (30ng in lane 3 and 7, 90ng in lane 4 and 8 in both B and C) were separated on 10% SDS-PAGE, proteins were electroblotted to nitrocellulose membrane and immunoreaction was performed using 1:2000 dilution of preimmune (lanes1–4) or anti-RAP30 anti-serum (lanes 5–8 in B), or preimmune (lanes 1–4) or anti-RAP74 anti-serum (lanes 5–8 in C) prepared as in Method.
The second antibody was 1:10000 diluted anti-rabbit IgG.
A rainbow protein marker from Amersham was used as monitoring electroblotting and also as a size marker.
Figure 2.
SDS-PAGE of various deletion mutants of RAP74.
C-terminal deletions (A) and N-terminal deletions (B) prepared as in Methods were analyzed on 11% SDS-PAGE and stained by silver staining to determine both their purity and the amounts of protein that gave apparent stoichiometry to r30.
(A ) C-terminal deletions. 1.
marker 2. r30 3. r74(1–517) 4. r74(1–435) 5. r74(1–356) 6. r74(1–256) 7. r74(1–205) 8. r74(1–136) 9. r74(1–73).
(B ) N-terminal deletions. 1.
marker 2. r30 3. r74(1–517) 4. r74(73–517) 5. r74(205–517) 6. r74(356–517).
Figure 3.
CAT assay by VP16-RAP74 mutants and wild-type GAL4-RAP30.
Two effector plasmids for expressing the deletion mutants of RAP74 fused to VP16 activating domain and the wild-type RAP30 fusion with GAL4 DNA binding domain were cotransfected with the reporter plasmid G5EC into CV1 cells.
CAT activity of cell extracts was assayed as in (36) and typical results of several experiments are shown in A .
In B , the structures of a series of deletion mutants of RAP74 used in the study are shown with their relative activities to the full length protein.
Figure 4.
CAT assay by GAL4-RAP30 mutants and wild-type VP16-RAP74.
Two effector plasmids for expressing the deletion mutants of RAP30 fused to the GAL4 DNA binding domain and the wild-type RAP74 fusion with the VP16 activating domain were cotransfected with the reporter plasmid G5EC into CV1 cells and CAT activity of cell extracts was assayed.
In A , typical results of the experiments are shown.
In B , the structures of RAP30 mutants are shown with their relative activities to that of wild clone.
Figure 5.
In vitro transcription activity of the C-terminal deletion of RAP74.
Each transcriptional activity of r74s of C-terminal deletions prepared as in Methods was reconstituted with a stoichiometric amount of r30 and assayed as described in Methods.
(A ) Each amount of full length RAP74 protein, r74(1–517) and r30 shown in Fig. 1A was assayed. 1.
HeLa native TFIIF 2. none 3. r74(1–517) and r30 4. as in 3. plus 0.5µg/ml α-amanitin.
(B ) Various C-terminal deletion r74s were assayed with r30 using each amount of protein shown in Fig. 2A. 1.
r74(1–517) 2. r74(1–435) 3. r74(1–356) 4. r74(1–256) 5. r74(1–205) 6. r74(1–136) 7. r74(1–73).
For r74s shorter than r74(1–356), different amounts of proteins were assayed, but no activity was observed (data not shown).
C ) r74(1–517) (circles) and r74(1–435) (squares) was each titrated against the fixed amount of r30 and resulting transcripts were quantitated by an image analyzer (Fuji BAS2000) and expressed as an arbitrary unit.
Figure 6.
In vitro transcription activity of N-terminal deletion of RAP74.
Each r74 of N-terminal deletions prepared as in Methods was assayed with r30 for its supporting TFIIF activity.
Amounts of each protein employed are shown in Fig. 2B. 1.
r74(1–517) 2. r74(73–517) 3. r74(205–517) 4. r74(356–517).
Assays by using different amounts of r74(205–517) and r74(356–517) were negative (data not shown).
Figure 7.
Alignment of RAP74 sequence with σ 70 .
The predicted RAP74 amino acid sequence was compared with that of the major σ factor of E.coli , σ 70 , using the Sequence Analysis Software Package, GCG version 7.1 of the Institute of Medical Science of University of Tokyo.
Bold face letters represent amino acids identical or similar between two proteins with the numbers of amino acid residues.
The two C/EBP isoforms, IL-6DBP/NF-IL6 and C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β, are induced by IL-6 to promote acute phase gene transcription via different mechanisms
ABSTRACT
The promoter regions of three IL-6 inducible genes, hemopexin (Hpx), haptoglobin (Hp) and C-reactive protein (CRP) contain cis- acting IL-6 responsive elements (IL-6REs) which are necessary and sufficient to induce IL-6 transcription activation.
Transcription factors of the C/EBP family interact with IL-6REs.
Among these, IL-6DBP/NF-IL6 plays a key role in IL-6 signal transduction because its trans -activation potential is induced by IL-6 in the human hepatoma cell line Hep3B.
We show here that a different C/EBP-related factor, C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β, is the major IL-6 induced protein interacting with IL-6REs in the nuclei of Hep3B cells.
In contrast to IL-6DBP/NF-IL6, whose activity in Hep3B cells is modulated by IL-6 via a post-translational mechanism, C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β is transcriptionally induced by IL-6.
Another contrasting feature is that the C/EBPδ cDNA transfected in Hep3B cells activates transcription from an IL-6RE synthetic promoter in a constitutive manner which is not further enhanced by IL-6.
Therefore, in Hep3B cells, two distinct members of the C/EBP family are recruited in the IL-6 signal transduction pathway via different mechanisms.
INTRODUCTION
The acute-phase (AP) response is characterized by changes in the blood level of several plasma proteins in response to infection, inflammation or other pathological conditions (see 1–2 for reviews).
Two classes of AP proteins can be distinguished: the so called positive AP reactants (e.g. haptoglobin, hemopexin, C-reactive protein) whose plasma concentration increases during inflammation, and the negative AP reactants, including albumin and transferrin, whose levels decrease.
Changes in the levels of AP reactants are correlated with changes in the transcription rate of the corresponding genes.
Several cytokines have been shown to play an important role in the regulation of AP response.
These include interleukin 1 (3–4); interleukin 6 (IL-6; 5–6); leukemia inhibitory factor (7); glucocorticoids (8–9); interleukin 11 (10), transforming growth factor beta (11) and very recently also Oncostatin M (12).
Amongst these, IL-6 is the most important mediator of transcriptional activation for the majority of AP genes.
IL-6 is involved in several biological responses (for reviews, see 13–14).
Although substantial information has recently accumulated on how IL-6 interacts with two distinct receptor molecules on the surface of target cells (15–16), as yet very little is understood about the signal transduction pathway which mediates its effects.
We have addressed this problem by directly analysing the nuclear events following IL-6 interaction with target cells, with the aim of identifying the molecular processes involved in the signalling pathway.
The human hepatoma cell lines Hep3B and HepG2 have proven to be a good model for the study of IL-6 induced gene expression (17–18).
Transfection experiments have led to the identification of cis -acting IL-6 responsive elements (IL-6REs) in the promoter of three prototypical AP responsive genes (those encoding C-reactive protein (CRP), hemopexin (Hpx) and haptoglobin (Hp)(19–21).
These IL-6REs are both necessary and sufficient for IL-6 induced transcription activation of reporter genes.
Various proteins of the C/EBP family bind to IL-6REs, yielding a complex profile in electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) and show identical footprinting and methylation interference patterns (19–21).
Initial attempts to identify which C/EBP members are involved in IL-6 signal transduction led to the isolation of the transcription factor IL-6DBP (22).
This protein has also been cloned independently in other laboratories from human, mouse and rat and named NF-IL6 (23); LAP (24); AGP/EBP (25); CRP2 (26); and C/EBPβ (27).
The role of this protein in IL-6-dependent AP gene transcription might be important, as its transactivation potential is post-translationally activated by the cytokine (22).
In contrast to this, C/EBPα activity is not enhanced by IL-6.
We show here that another member of the same family, namely C/EBPδ (also called NF-IL6β, CELF, CRP3)(26–29), is activated by IL-6.
Unlike IL-6DBP, its activity is modulated at the transcriptional level in Hep3B cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Recombinant Plasmids, transient transfections and CAT assays
The cDNA clone for C/EBPδ in an eukaryotic expression vector, under the control of the murine sarcoma virus long terminal repeat, was a generous gift from Dr. McKnight.
The EcoRI/BamHI insert from this clone was ‘filled-in’ with Klenow polymerase and cloned into the SmaI site of PhD vector, under the control of the SV40 enhancer (30).
Monolayers of human hepatoma cell line Hep3B were maintained in Dulbecco modified Eagle's medium supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum.
Human IL-6 was obtained from a recombinant vaccinia virus as described previously (19) and used at a concentration of 1000U/ml.
DNA transfections were performed according to the calcium phosphate method (31).
For CAT assays, the precipitate contained 12µg of reporter (4xα CRP; 21), 5µg of recombinant plasmid and 1µg of Rous Sarcoma Virus-luciferase plasmid (32) as an internal control for transfection efficiency.
The precipitate was divided into two 5 cm plates and left for 16h.
The precipitate was removed, the cells were washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and fed with 6 ml of culture medium, with one plate being treated with IL-6.
Cells were harvested 48h after transfection and analysed for both CAT (33) and luciferase activity (32).
The CAT activity was normalized to the luciferase value, and each transfection was repeated at least three times.
Preparation of nuclear extracts and EMSA
Nuclear extracts from Hep3B cells (either untreated or stimulated with 1000U/ml IL-6) were prepared essentially as described (34) except that the buffers contained the phosphatase inhibitors, sodium fluoride (50mM) and sodium pyrophosphate (10mM).
For cycloheximide (CHX) inhibition experiments, the cells were pre-treated with CHX (10µg/ml) for 2h, and then stimulated in its presence with IL-6 for various time intervals (0, 20min, 40min, 1h, 5h).
The maximal time of CHX treatment was 7h (5h stimulation with IL-6).
In these conditions, the inhibition of protein synthesis and cell-death was 91% and 24% respectively as judged by metabolic labelling with 35 S methionine and 3 H-uridine, followed by scintillation counting of TCA precipitated total cell lysates.
For EMSA, nuclear extracts (4µg made to 13µl with 40mM KCl, 0.1mM EDTA) were preincubated in a 20µl reaction volume containing 34mM KCl, 5mM MgCl 2 , 3µg poly (dI-dC), 2.5mM DTT.
After 10min on ice,32 P labelled probes were added and the incubation continued for 30 min at room temperature.
Free and DNA-protein complexes were resolved on 6% polyacrylamide gels in 0.25 TBE (45mM Tris base, 45mM boric acid, 2mM EDTA).
When antisera were added to the EMSA, nuclear extracts and antisera (1:50 dilution) were incubated for 30 minutes on ice, after the addition of the labelled probe.
The following oligonucleotides were used as probes:
EMSAs relative to the CHX experiments were performed with the following adjustments in order to obtain a better resolution of the various retarded bands: after the incubation with the probe, the samples were centrifuged for 5' at 4°C in microfuge and electrophoresed on a 30 cm. long 6% polyacrylamide gel in 0.25 TBE at 4°C which was prerun for 30' at 4°C.
Northern, Western blot and immunofluorescence analysis
Exponentially growing Hep3B cells were treated with IL-6 for several time intervals (0, 1, 2, 4, 6, 12 and 24h) and total RNA was prepared according to the procedures of Chomezynski and Sacchi (35).
15µg of each RNA sample were electrophoresed through denaturing formaldehyde-agarose gels (36), transferred to HyBond-N+ (Amersham), and probed with radiolabelled antisense oligonucleotide corresponding to positions 781 to 741 of the C/EBPδ coding sequence (27).
For preparation of whole cell extracts, Hep3B cells were washed with PBS and scraped off the tissue culture dish with 3ml of TEN (40mM Tris, pH 7.5, 1mM EDTA, 150mM NaCl).
Cells were pelleted in a microcentrifuge tube and resuspended in 6 volumes of high-salt buffer (10mM Hepes, pH 7.9, 400mM NaCl, 0.1mM EDTA, 0.5mM DTT, 5% glycerol, 0.5mM PMSF, 1mM Benzamidine).
After 15min on ice, the cells were pelleted again and the supernatant was stored at -80°C.
Equal amounts of protein (30µg) were precipitated with trichloroacetic acid (TCA), and electrophoresed through a 12.5% SDS-polyacrylamide gel (37).
The proteins were then transferred onto nitrocellulose and probed with a 1:1000 dilution of polyclonal antibodies against C/EBPδ (a gift from S.L.McKnight; 27) or IL-6DBP (22).
Antigen-antibody complexes were then detected by use of alkaline-phosphatase coupled goat anti-rabbit antibodies.
Immunofluorescence staining was done by use of cells grown on coverslips.
Cells were fixed in 5% acetic acid in ethanol for 5min at -20°C, washed twice for 5min each with solution A (PBS, 0.2% gelatine), and then blocked with solution B (PBS containing 3% bovine serum albumin, 20mM MgCl 2 , 0.3% Tween 20).
Probing with primary and secondary (rhodamine conjugated antirabbit or antimouse) antibodies were performed in PBS for 1h in a humid chamber.
The slides were washed twice with solution A containing 1% Triton X100 after incubation with each antibody, mounted using paraffin and analysed by microscopy.
RESULTS
C/EBPδ represents the IL-6 induced complex that interacts with IL-6RE
We have previously shown that upon incubation with human hepatoma nuclear extracts from Hep3B cells, DNA segments carrying IL-6REs form multiple DNA-protein complexes which yield a complex pattern in EMSA (19–21).
Whilst the exact pattern of retarded bands varies depending upon the IL-6REs used, a common prominent feature is that a new DNA-protein complex appears in nuclear extracts derived from IL-6 treated cells, which is not present in those that are untreated.
As shown in Figure 1, the IL-6 inducible complex (indicated by a dark arrow) is reproducibly observed in EMSA using IL-6REs from the promoter of Hpx (A site), Hp (C site)(panel A) and from the CRP promoter (α site)(panel B).
The appearance of this complex was correlated to induction of acute phase gene transcription (19–21).
The majority of the other complexes involves the presence of nuclear proteins with DNA binding specificity and dimerization properties identical to C/EBP (22).
In the light of the recent finding that both IL-6DBP/NF-IL6 and C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β mRNA are induced by IL-6 in vivo in mouse liver (23, 28), we tried to determine their involvement in the induction of acute phase gene expression in Hep3B cells.
In a first set of experiments we used polyclonal antibodies raised against rat IL-6DBP or C/EBPδ to identify if the IL-6 induced DNA-protein complex can be attributed to one of these two proteins.
In a preliminary set of experiments we were able to see that these antibodies are specific to each protein.
In fact, antibodies raised against IL-6DBP (22) are able to immunoprecipitate both in vitro synthesized rat IL-6DBP and the human counterpart NF-IL6 but not rat C/EBPδ and the human counterpart NF-IL6β.
The opposite behaviour is shown by antibodies raised against rat C/EBPδ (27)(data not shown).
As can be seen in Figure 1, the inducible complex obtained with each of the three probes (shown by the dark arrow) cannot be ‘supershifted’ or inhibited by using anti-IL-6DBP antibodies.
It is interesting to observe that the use of our anti IL-6DBP antibody preparation, while not leading to reduction or elimination of the IL-6 induced band, often gives rise to the appearance of a slow migrating band on the top of the gel (shown by an open arrow).
This new complex is specifically induced by the immune antisera since it is not present when the pre-immune serum is used (Figure 1, panel B).
Furthermore, as shown in the experiment with the CRP probe, it can be detected both in uninduced and in IL-6 induced extracts.
This finding can be interpreted as an antibody-triggered induction or stabilization of IL-6DBP/NF-IL6 binding to the IL-6RE.
In contrast, antibodies against C/EBPδ (27) completely abolish the IL-6 induced complex suggesting that it contains C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β.
This is further substantiated by EMSAs performed with extracts from cells transfected with a C/EBPδ expression vector and using the CRP (α site) IL-6RE as a probe (Figure 2).
These extracts show several new complexes which are presumably all due to heterodimeric combinations of the newly synthesized recombinant C/EBPδ protein.
The most abundant species, which we interpret as the C/EBPδ homodimer, co-migrates with the IL-6 induced complex seen in untransfected cells.
The mRNA and protein levels of C/EBPδ and not IL-6DBP are induced in Hep3B cells by IL-6
We have previously produced some evidence that the IL-6 dependent complex is at least partially independent of de novo protein synthesis because its induction is also observed when cells are treated with IL-6 in the presence of cycloheximide (20–21).
Therefore we have investigated the properties of C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β biosynthesis in Hep3B cells by Northern blot, Western blot and Immunofluorescence analysis.
RNA and total cell extracts were prepared from Hep3B cells treated with IL-6 for various times.
As shown in Figure 3, C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β mRNA is present in trace amounts in untreated cells, and is induced by IL-6 in a time-dependent manner.
These results are also mirrored by Western blot analysis using antibodies against C/EBPδ.
Figure 4 shows a time course expression of C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β after Hep3B stimulation with IL-6.
Two major protein species are detected which are probably due to post-translational modifications.
The same two forms are also obtained after transfection of the C/EBPδ cDNA in uninduced cells (Fig. 4, upper panel, right most lane).
In contrast, IL-6DBP/NF-IL6 is present constitutively in Hep3B cells, and its levels do not change upon IL-6 treatment (Fig. 4).
Recently, Metz and Ziff (38) have shown that in pheochromocytoma cells PC12, cAMP causes IL-6DBP to trans -locate to the nucleus.
To understand whether this is the mechanism by which IL-6 induces the activity of IL-6DBP/NF-IL6 in Hep3B cells, we performed immunofluorescence analysis of cells transfected with a IL-6 DBP-TAG cDNA which codes for full-length IL-6DBP protein fused at the carboxy-terminus to a 14 aminoacid peptide (TAG) which is specifically recognized by a monoclonal anti-peptide antibody (39).
Our results show that immunofluorescence due to anti-TAG reactivity is always localized exclusively in the nuclear compartment both in cells which were not subjected to IL-6 stimulation (-IL-6) and in stimulated cells (+IL-6).
The percentage of positive staining cells was about 10% and was not changed by IL-6 treatment.
In contrast, C/EBP δ/NF-IL6b; is not detectable in untreated cells and is present exclusively in the nucleus of cells treated with IL-6 (Fig. 5), again supporting the conclusion that C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β is induced by IL-6 only through de novo gene transcription and protein synthesis, and not by nuclear translocation of pre-existing cytoplasmic protein.
In this last case, since we are detecting endogenous C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β production, virtually all Hep3B cells became immunostained after IL-6 treatment.
The evidence presented above that the IL-6 induced DNA-protein complex is due to C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β and that the biosynthesis of this protein is induced at the transcriptional level in Hep3B cells, is in contradiction with our previous findings (21–22), and so we sought an explanation for this discrepancy.
Hep3B cells were first pre-treated for 2h with CHX (10µg/ml) and then stimulated in the presence of CHX with IL-6 for various time intervals (Fig. 6).
Nuclear extracts were used in a high resolution EMSA using the CRP (α site) IL-6RE as a probe.
In these improved conditions (see Materials and Methods section) it is evident that the major IL-6 dependent complex (attributable to C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β) is indeed affected by CHX but, in addition to this, a slower migrating complex can be detected which is unaffected by CHX, but also by IL-6.
In the experiment shown in Figure 6 this complex (shown by an open arrow) is weaker than the IL-6 induced complex identified as C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β in the previous paragraphs (shown by a dark arrow).
Substantial variations in the relative intensity of these two retarded species are observed in different  experiments , depending on variations in cell responsiveness to IL-6, cell density, etc.
Most likely in the previous set of experiments we used conditions which were not able to resolve these two complexes and therefore reached a mistaken conclusion.
C/EBPδ activates transcription of a promoter containing IL-6REs from an acute phase gene
In order to investigate the role of C/EBPδ in IL-6 induced transcription activation, we performed transient expression experiments in Hep3B cells.
In this assay system, the ability of C/EBP-related transcription factors produced by eukaryotic expression vectors to stimulate transcription of an IL-6RE-CAT reporter gene construct in the presence or absence of IL-6 can be investigated.
The reporter plasmid used contains four copies in tandem of the IL-6RE of the CRP gene fused to its own TATA box and transcriptional initiation site (21).
In these conditions, we have already shown that the activity of the transfected IL-6DBP is very low in the absence of IL-6 and is increased several-fold by IL-6 stimulation (22).
As shown in Table 1, when C/EBPα was constitutively expressed under the control of the SV40 enhancer/early promoter, we obtained a strong transactivation of our reporter gene which, however, was not further enhanced by IL-6.
The same behaviour was also observed when C/EBPδ was expressed under the control of the same promoter.
DISCUSSION
A family of C/EBP-related factors interacts with IL-6REs in the promoter regions of several acute-phase genes (Hpx, Hp, CRP)(19–21).
Several members of this family have recently been cloned and it has been shown that they are capable of dimerizing in all intrafamiliar combinations (22,26,27).
These include: C/EBP (C/EBPα; 40); IL-6DBP (also called LAP, NF-IL6, AGP/EBP, CRP2, C/EBPβ; 22–24); CRP1 (26); Ig/EBP (also named C/EBPγ; 41,27); CHOP (42) and C/EBPδ (CRP3, CELF, NF-IL6β; 26,27,29).
IL-6 regulates the intracellular concentration and/or the activity of the members of this family.
C/EBPα mRNA levels are down-regulated in mice by IL-6 (43) and since it has been demonstrated that this protein interacts with the albumin promoter, a negative AP gene,(44) this could explain the IL-6 dependent down-regulation of the albumin protein levels.
In contrast to C/EBPα, the level of IL-6DBP/NF-IL6 mRNA in mice is increased by IL-6 (20, 43).
More recently also C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β has been shown to be transcriptionally regulated by LPS (and presumably by IL-6) in mice (28).
These findings imply that these two factors are involved in regulating positive AP reactants.
However, in light of the findings of Descombes et al.(24) and Williams et al.(26) that IL-6DBP mRNA levels do not correlate with the protein levels, it is clearly essential to obtain other data on the changes in the protein level in vivo .
From studies on living organisms it is impossible to learn details of the molecular events in IL-6 induced gene expression.
This is mainly due to the complexity of the AP response, which involves several tissues with possible feed-back loops.
The hepatoma cell line Hep3B is a good experimental system for the investigation of the role of IL-6 and C/EBP-related factors in the activation of AP gene transcription (7, 8, 17).
Using this system, we have previously shown that IL-6DBP activity is post-translationally modulated by IL-6 (20).
We confirm here that IL-6DBP is expressed constitutively in Hep3B, but we also show that it is not present in the major IL-6 induced complex protein DNA.
This result is in contrast with what has been observed by Isshiki et.
al.
(43) in HepG2 cells, where immune serum against NF-IL6 is able to inhibit the IL-6 induced complex in gel retardation experiments.
The same antiserum (generous gift of Dr T.Kishimoto) in our conditions does not show any detectable inhibition using extracts from either untreated or IL-6 treated Hep3B cells (data not shown).
In these cells the IL-6 induced complex contains C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β as shown by competition with specific antibodies.
Furthermore, both the mRNA and protein levels of C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β, are induced by IL-6 in a time-dependent manner.
In Hep3B cells the activity of IL-6DBP/NF-IL6 is enhanced by IL-6 through a modulation of pre-existing nuclear protein whereas C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β participates in AP gene regulation through de novo protein synthesis.
C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β is able to trans-activate AP gene expression as shown by cDNA transient transfection experiments, in which the level of activation is not altered by IL-6.
The findings of this paper provide a possible model for events of AP gene transcription in response to IL-6.
During the early phase, IL-6 induces the activation potential of pre-existing nuclear IL-6DBP/NF-IL6 by a post-translational mechanism.
However, this event may not be enough for full induction of AP genes.
Indeed, Natsuka et al.(45) have recently shown that in Hep3B cells stably expressing exogenous copies of NF-IL6, no IL-6-dependent activation of fibrinogen, another AP gene, can be observed.
In addition, the average induction of Hp production in these cells is substantially lower than in non-transfected cells, suggesting that another factor would be required.
It is conceivable, therefore, that both these C/EBP family members participate in the regulation of AP gene transcription with different kinetics, a fast one for IL-6DBP/NF-IL6 and a slow one for C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β.
Given the extreme complexity of the system, it is obvious that only genetic approaches (antisense oligonucleotides, ribozymes or gene targeting) aimed at reducing the quantity of a specific C/EBP-related protein will allow the role of individual factors in AP gene expression to be clearly defined.
As the activities of IL-6DBP/NF-IL6 and C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β are induced by different mechanisms (post-translational for IL-6DBP/NF-IL6 and transcriptional for C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β), IL-6DBP/NF-IL6 may be involved in the transcriptional activation of C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β.
However, several lines of evidence suggest that the situation may be more complex.
In fact, since C/EBPα can also act as a repressor on some promoters or enhancers (46–47), it is possible that down-regulation of C/EBPα by IL-6 may be responsible for the induction of C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β.
Alternatively, transcription of C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β may be induced by other factors that do not belong to the C/EBP-family.
For example, IL-6 has been shown to transiently induce JunB transcription (48).
These speculations must clearly await the characterization of the C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β promoter.
Figure 1.
Identification of the IL-6 induced IL-6RE binding complex as C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) were carried out using either the HpX (a site) or the Hp (c site) IL-6 RES as probes (Panel A ) or the CRP (α site) IL-6REs (Panel B ) and 4 µg of nuclear extracts from Hep3B cells either uninduced (-) or IL-6 induced (+) for 5 hrs with 1000 U of hIL-6.
The IL-6 inducible complex is shown by the big dark arrow.
Antisera against C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β and anti-IL6DBP antibodies were added to the binding reaction, as indicated in the Materials and Methods section.
Figure 2 .
The transfected C/EBPδ cDNA gives rise to a major complex which comigrates with the IL-6 induced complex.
EMSAs were carried out on nuclear extracts of non transfected Hep3B cells (END) in the presence (+) or absence (-) of IL-6, and on nuclear extracts of uninduced Hep3B cells transfected with C/EBPδ.
The CRP (α site) was used as a probe.
The arrow indicates the IL-6 induced protein-DNA complex.
Figure 3.
C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β mRNA is induced by IL-6 in a time-dependent manner.
Northern blot analysis on total RNA prepared from Hep3B cells at various time intervals after IL-6 stimulation (see Materials and Methods).
Figure 4 .
C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β synthesis is induced by IL-6 in Hep3B cells.
Hep3B total cell lysates were prepared at various time intervals after IL-6 stimulation.
30 µg were loaded for each lane.
After a 12.5% SDS PAGE, proteins were transferred to nylon membranes and revealed by antibodies to C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β (gift of Dr. McKnight) or to IL-6-DBP/NF-IL6β (22).
The larger size of the bands in the control lane in the upper panel is due to the use of a larger slot former for the loading of proteins extracted from C/EBPδ transfected cells.
Figure 5.
IL-6-DBP/NF-IL6 and C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β proteins are both nuclear proteins.
Immunofluorescence analysis of Hep3B cells: Cells transfected with IL-6DBP-TAG and either treated (+) or not treated (-) with IL-6, were fixed in acetic acid and probed with a monoclonal anti-TAG antibody.
Polyclonal anti-C/EBPδ antibodies were used on untransfected Hep3B cells in the presence (+) or absence (-) of IL-6.
The signal was revealed in both cases by rhodamine conjugated secondary antibodies.
Figure 6 .
C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β induction is inhibited by cycloheximide.
EMSA were carried out on nuclear extracts from Hep3B cells stimulated for various time intervals with IL-6 in the absence (-) or presence (+) of 10 µg/ml. of cycloheximide (CHX).
The DNA used as a probe is the CRP (α site).
The dark arrow indicates the IL-6 inducible complex corresponding to C/EBP δ/NF-IL6; β.
The open arrow indicates a slower-migrating cycloheximide-insensitive complex.
Sequence-specific and mechanism-based crosslinking of Dcm DNA cytosine-C 5 methyltransferase of E.coli K-12 to synthetic oligonucleotides containing 5-fluoro-2'-deoxycytidine
ABSTRACT
The product of the dcm gene is the only DNA cytosine-C 5 methyltransferase of Escherichia coli K-12; it catalyses transfer of a methyl group from S-adenosyl methionine (SAM) to the C-5 position of the inner cytosine residue of the cognate sequence CC A /T GG.
Sequence-specific, covalent crosslinking of the enzyme to synthetic oligonucleotides containing 5-fluoro-2'-deoxycytidine is demonstrated.
This reaction is abolished if serine replaces the cysteine at residue *177 of the enzyme.
These results lend strong support to a catalytic mechanism in which an enzyme sulfhydryl group undergoes Michael addition to the C 5 -C 6 double bond, thus activating position C-5 of the substrate DNA cytosine residue for electrophilic attack by the methyl donor SAM.
The enzyme is capable of self-methylation in a DNA-independent reaction requiring SAM and the presence of cysteine at position *177.
INTRODUCTION
Methylation of 2'-deoxyuridine-5'-monophosphate (dUMP) to deoxythymidine-5'-monophosphate (dTMP), catalysed by thymidilate synthetase, is the paradigmatic case of a reaction that proceeds via a covalent adduct, formed reversibly by Michael addition of the enzyme to the C 5 -C 6 double bond of its pyrimidine substrate; for a review see Pogolotti and Santi (1).
The attacking nucleophilic centre of the enzyme was identified as the sulfhydryl function of a particular cysteine residue (1–3).
Nature utilizes this route also for other reactions of nucleic acids metabolism, such as tRNA uracil-C 5 methylation (4), tRNA/aminoacyl tRNA synthetase interaction (5) and possibly several others (5).
In 1983, D.V.Santi and colleagues conjectured that the same basic mechanism may be underlying postreplicative DNA cytosine-C 5 methylation (6).
This idea immediately offered an explanation of the inhibitory in vivo effect of nucleoside analogues such as 5-azacytidine (7, 8) or 5-fluoro-2'-deoxycytidine (8) on DNA methylation.
In analogy to the blockage of thymidilate synthetase by 5-fluoro-2'-dexoyuridine-5'-monophosphate —the active form of the tumor-inhibitory drug 5-fluorouracil (9) —one could now envisage covalent and irreversible adduct formation between any given DNA cytosine-C 5 methyltransferase and DNA carrying at one of its target sites of methylation a 5-azacytosine or 5-fluorocytosine (5-FC) residue (see Figure 1).
This proposal was further supported by a number of investigations in which in vitro DNA/protein crosslinking could be demonstrated after one or the other of the nucleoside analogues mentioned above was incorporated into DNA, either in vivo (10, 11) or by DNA polymerase reaction in vitro (12).
While these observations were clearly compatible with the assumption of the enzyme being trapped after Michael addition to the modified cytosine residue, they did not furnish structural proof and, in particular, since site-specific analogue incorporation was not possible, they did not provide information pertaining to sequence selectivity of the crosslinking reaction.
This, however, is an important point, since one has to demand sequence specificity of the irreversible adduct formation, if it is to be accepted as a true mechanistic model of the first steps of enzymatic methyltransfer.
Recently, synthesis of DNA containing 5-fluorocytosine residues at specific positions was independently accomplished by three different laboratories, once by a combination of standard oligonucleotide synthesis and site-specific enzymatic 5-FC incorporation (13), twice by direct chemical synthesis of 2'-deoxyoligonucleotides containing 5-fluoro-2'-deoxycycytidine (14, 15).
In two cases (13, 16), crosslinking of a DNA cytosine-C 5 methyltransferase to such DNA substrates was demonstrated.
Until present, however, no proof of sequence specificity and hence of a truly mechanism-based reaction has been furnished.
With the experiments described here we provide unequivocal evidence of sequence-specific crosslinking of the Escherichia coli K-12 DNA cytosine-C 5 methyltransferase (Dcm) to a 5-FC residue replacing the inner cytosine of the cognate sequence CC A /T GG.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Oligonucleotide synthesis
2'-Deoxyoligonucleotides were synthesized by the phosphoramidite method (17) with cyanoethyl as the phosphate protecting group (18), implemented on automated DNA synthesizers (Pharmacia GeneAssembler and Applied Biosystems 380B).
Oligonucleotides containing 5-fluorocytosine residues, were prepared as described earlier (15).
Oligonucleotides were purified by H.P.L.C. essentially as described (19).
The following 2'-deoxyoligonucleotides (all 15mers, sequences reading 5' to 3' left to right) were synthesized (F = 5-FC): GTATCCCAGGAATCG (CCUP), CGATTCCTGGGATAC (CCLO), GTATCC F AGGAATCG (CFUP ), CGATTC F TGGGATAC (CFLO ), GTATC F CAGGAATCG (FCUP ), CGATT F CTGGGATAC (FCLO ), GTATCCCGAGAATCG (CTUP ), CGATTCTCGGGATAC (CTLO ).
Enzymes and chemicals
Restriction endonucleases were from Boehringer Mannheim or Gibco/BRL; T4 polynucleotide kinase was purchased from Boehringer Mannheim;[γ- 32 P]ATP (3000 Ci/mmol) was from Amersham Buchler and [3 H]-SAM (73 Ci/mmol, terminal methyl group of methionine side chain labelled) was from NEN (Du Pont).
SDS was from BioRad, S-adenosyl methionine (SAM) from Boehringer Mannheim.
Sinefungin was purchased from Sigma, all other chemicals from Merck.
Bacterial strains and plasmids
E.coli strain RP4182 (source: J.S.Parkinson): Δ (supD-dcm-fla ), trp, gal, rpsl , was applied for gene expression.
Expression vectors pMc5edcm and pMa5edcmS are members of the pMa/c family of phasmids (20) and were constructed as described elsewhere (Hanck and Fritz, manuscript in preparation).
pMc5edcm contains the dcm gene of E.coli K-12 under control of a phage lambda promoter; pMa5edcmS is a derivative of pMc5edcm with a serine codon at codon position *177 of the dcm gene instead of the wild-type cysteine codon.
Buffers
DCM reaction buffer: 50 mM Tris-HCl, 5 mM EDTA, 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 100 mM NaCl, pH 7.8; kinase buffer: 40 mM Tris-HCl, 10 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM DTT, 5% glycerol, pH 9.0; loading buffer: 5% (v/v) glycerol, 10 mM DTT, 0.05% (w/v) bromophenol blue; sample buffer: 62.5 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 70 mM SDS, 5% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol, 0.0025% (w/v) bromophenol blue; TE: 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8), 0.1 mM EDTA; TBE: 90 mM Tris, 90 mM boric acid, 2.5 mM EDTA.
Radioactive labelling of synthetic oligonucleotides and construction of oligonucleotide duplexes
5 pmol of oligonucleotide were incubated in kinase buffer with 60 µCi [γ- 32 P]-ATP (3000 Ci/mmol) and 8 units polynucleotide kinase at 37°C for 30 min.
Excess [γ- 32 P]-ATP was removed by passing the reaction mixture through a NAP-5 column (G25-Sephadex, Pharmacia) with water as the eluent.
Oligonucleotide duplexes were constructed by mixing 80 fmol of the radioactive labelled oligonucleotide (corresponding to 20 nCi) with a 20-fold excess of the unlabelled, complementary oligonucleotide in TE.
The samples were incubated at 80°C for 3 min and at room temperature for 10 min.
Non-radioactive oligonucleotide duplexes were prepared the same way by mixing 2 pmol each of the complementary strands.
Preparation of Dcm and Dcm/Cys177Ser protein
Dcm DNA cytosine-C 5 methyltransferase and the mutant Dcm/Cys177Ser enzyme were produced by overexpression of the respective cloned structural genes in E. coli RP4182 and purified to near homogeneity as described elsewhere (Hanck and Fritz, manuscript in preparation).
In vitro methylation of C 5 -unmethylated DNA
3 µg double stranded pMc5–8 DNA (20), prepared from transformed RP4182 and therefore C 5 -unmethylated, was incubated at 37°C for 30 min with 1 µg purified Dcm or Dcm/Cys177Ser protein in 50 µl DCM reaction buffer containing 80 µM SAM.
The volume was adjusted to 400 µl with TE (pH 8), extracted with phenol/chloroform/isoamyl alcohol (50:48:2) and DNA was precipitated by addition of ethanol.
The DNA was sedimented by centrifugation and redissolved in 20 µl TE buffer.
Determination of the specific activity of Dcm DNA cytosine-C 5 methyltransferase
12 µg C 5 -unmethylated, double stranded pMc5–8 DNA (20)(corresponding to 5 pmol phasmid DNA or 80 picoequivalents of DNA cytosine residues susceptible to methyltransfer by Dcm) were mixed with 50 ng Dcm (1 pmol) or 500 ng Dcm/Cys177Ser (10 pmol) and 150 pmol [3 H]-SAM (10 µCi, 73 Ci/mmol) in 110 µl DCM reaction buffer (total volume).
The reaction mixture was incubated at 37°C.
Aliquots of 10 µl each were withdrawn from the mixture at various time points and quenched by adding 10 µl ice-cold 20% (v/v) aqueous trichloro acetic acid (TCA).
Precipitated high molecular weight material was retained on glass fibre filters (GF50, Schleicher and Schuell).
Filters were washed with ice-cold 10% (v/v) TCA solution, dried, and transferred to scintillation cocktail (‘Ready Save’, Beckman).
Radioactivity was measured in a liquid scintillation counter (TRI-CARB 1900 TR, Packard).
Specific activity was calculated from the slope of the linear incorporation of radioactivity observed during the first 25 min of the reaction.
One unit of enzyme transfers 1 pmol [3 H]-labelled methyl group per minute to TCA-precipitable material (21).
Gel electrophoretic retardation assay of non-covalent DNA/protein association
The procedure was adapted from literature (22).
Duplex DNA, prepared and [32 P]-5'-endlabelled as described above, was mixed with 10 µg Dcm or Dcm/Cys177Ser protein in 20 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 50 mM NaCl, pH 7.5 in a total volume of 20 µl.
The mixture was incubated at room temperature for 20 min.
An equal volume of loading buffer was added.
Samples were electrophoresed through a pre-cooled (4°C) 5.1% polyacrylamide gel (30: 0.8 acrylamide: bisacrylamide, 200 250 1.6 mm, 1 TBE), at 4°C, 7. 5 V/cm for 6 h (1 TBE as running buffer).
The gel slab was transferred to a sheet of blotting paper (Schleicher & Schuell, GB 003) and dried.
For autoradiography of the electrophoretic pattern, Kodak-XOMAT-S film was exposed with an intensifier screen (Amersham Buchler) at -80°C overnight.
Gel electrophoretic analysis of covalent DNA/protein crosslinking
[32 P]-5'-endlabelled or non-radioactive duplex DNA, prepared as described above, was mixed with 10 µg Dcm or Dcm/Cys177Ser protein in DCM reaction buffer.
Optionally, 80 µM SAM or 1 µCi [3 H]-SAM (73 Ci/mmol) and 80 µM sinefungin were added; the volume was adjusted to 20 µl.
The samples were incubated at 37°C for 30 min; an equal volume of 2 sample buffer was added and the samples were kept at 100°C for 10 min.
Samples were electrophoresed through a 10% polyacrylamide gel (30: 0.8 acrylamide: bisacrylamide, 200 250 1.6 mm) containing 2% SDS according to Laemmli (23).
Running conditions: 20 V/cm for 3 h. [3 H]label was visualized by fluorography as follows.
After fixing the gel for 45 min in 10% (v/v) acetic acid, 30% (v/v) EtOH, the gel was soaked in Entensify Part A (Du Pont) for 45 min and in Entensify Part B (Du Pont) for another 45 min.
Transfer to filter paper and film exposure (up to 1 week) were as described above.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Qualitative assay of sequence-specific methyltransfer activity
Both purified proteins, Dcm and the Dcm/Cys177Ser (residue *177: serine instead of cysteine), were tested for their ability to methylate C 5 -unmethylated DNA, prepared from a Dcm - strain.
C 5 -unmethylated DNA was incubated with Dcm or Dcm/Cys177Ser and S-adenosyl methionine at 37°C for 30 min.
DNA was isolated from the reaction mixtures and checked for its susceptibility to cleavage by restriction endonuclease Eco RII, which fails to cleave CC A /T GG sites methylated at the inner cytosine residue.
From the results displayed in Figure 2, it is evident that the reaction with the wild-type enzyme renders the DNA resistant to challenge by Eco RII cleavage (see Figure 2, lane 6), whereas incubation with the Dcm/Cys177Ser mutant protein does not (lane 8).
The catalytic inactivity of the mutant protein cannot be attributed to a defect in overall folding since Dcm and Dcm/Cys177Ser show indistinguishable DNA binding properties (see below: Figure 4).
Thus, residue Cys 177 is identified as essential for catalysis.
In addition, the assay provides confirmatory evidence that the overproduced Dcm gene product indeed catalyses the methylation of the expected target cytosine residue.
Determination of the specific activity of Dcm DNA cytosine-C 5 methyltransferase
The time course of enzymatic methyltransfer from [3 H]-SAM to high-molecular-weight DNA was followed by a TCA-precipitation assay (Figure 3).
The incorporation catalysed by Dcm (open circles) was linear for the first 25 min of the reaction.
The slope indicates a specific activity of 18,000 units/mg; for comparison, the specific activity of purified M. Eco RII has been determined to 21,100 units/mg (24).
In first approximation, the Dcm/Cys177Ser protein is a null mutant; there is, however a small but significant increase with time of TCA-precipitable radioactive material (Figure 3, filled circles) corresponding to a formal specific activity about 1000 times lower than that of the wild-type enzyme.
If this increase is indeed brought about by a specific methyltransfer reaction, it could be caused either by residual activity of the Ser 177 -form of the enzyme or, more likely, by a contamination of the mutant protein by ca. 0.1% wild-type enzyme, due to translational misincorporation at position *177 of cysteine instead of serine.
Such mechanisms have been documented (25) and were discussed earlier in the context of protein engineering (26).
Misincorporation may be especially pronounced under conditions of forced and massive gene overexpression.
On the basis of the data presented here, we cannot distinguish between these two most plausible explanations for the residual activity observed with Dcm/Cys177Ser.
Both wild-type Dcm and the Dcm/Cys177Ser mutant bind to cognate DNA
The Cys177Ser mutant of the Dcm enzyme is deficient in methyltransfer (see above).
Since we want to address the question of involvement of cysteine residue *177 of the enzyme in the molecular mechanism of methyltransfer catalysis, it is necessary to demonstrate that the loss of catalytic activity of the Cys177Ser mutant is not due to a folding defect.
This is possible by exploiting the fact that the function of sequence-specific DNA methyltransferases can be dissected into two separate aspects: binding of the enzyme to the target sequence and subsequent catalysis of the methyltransfer reaction.
With Figure 4 we demonstrate that the wild-type Dcm enzyme and the Cys177Ser mutant are equally competent in binding to oligonucleotide duplexes containing a recognition sequence (CC A /T GG).
Radioactively labelled duplex DNA molecules were prepared from oligonucleotides CCUP and CCLO or, respectively, from CFUP and CFLO as described under Materials and Methods.
They were incubated with either wild-type Dcm enzyme or its Cys177Ser mutant; incubation with heat-denatured proteins served as a control.
Reaction mixtures were subjected to electrophoresis through polyacrylamide gel under non-denaturing conditions.
In all four experiments, the radioactive band was shifted to a position of lower mobility (Figure 4, lanes 2, 3, 5, 6; controls: lanes 1 and 4).
Results obtained for the wild-type and for the mutant protein are virtually indistinguishable.
Titration of the radioactively labelled DNA duplexes with increasing amounts of wild-type Dcm enzyme or its Cys177Ser mutant confirmed near identity of the DNA binding properties of the two forms of the enzyme in quantitative detail (data not shown).
We regard this result as strong evidence against a possible structural defect of the Dcm/Cys177Ser mutant.
The data shown in Figure 4 further demonstrate that replacement of the inner cytosine residue of the Dcm target sequence by 5-fluorocytosine does not interfere with protein binding.
Analogous replacements in other DNA cytosine-C 5 methyltransferases of cysteine residues for serine have lead to loss of methyltransfer activity; the folding status of the corresponding stable gene products, however, was not characterized (27, 28).
Dcm forms a detergent-stable adduct to DNA that contains a 5-fluorocytosine residue at the substrate position
A duplex DNA molecule was constructed by hybridizing oligonucleotides CFUP and CCLO.
In this duplex, the Dcm recognition sequence is tagged by a cytosine-5-fluoro function at the second position in the upper strand, C[5-FC]AGG, whereas the lower strand carries the unmodified sequence CCTGG.
The upper or lower strand, alternatively, of this DNA duplex was 5'-endlabelled with [32 P]as indicated by asterisks in the header of Figure 5.
Incubation of the CFUP/CCLO duplex with both wild-type Dcm enzyme and S-adenosyl methionine (SAM) leads to formation of a DNA/protein adduct that is stable to 10 min boiling in 2% SDS and subsequent electrophoresis through a polyacrylamide gel containing 2% SDS indicating presence of a covalent bond between DNA and protein.
The crosslink occurs specifically to the DNA strand containing the 5-fluorocytosine residue (slow moving band in Figure 5, lane 5 and absence of this band in lane 2).
The crosslinking reaction depends on addition of the methyl donor SAM (Figure 5, lane 4) and is partially suppressed by addition of sinefungin (lane 6), a competitive inhibitor of DNA methyltransferases (29).
Replacement of the cysteine sulfhydryl function at position *177 of the enzyme by a serine hydroxyl group abolishes the reaction (Figure 5, lanes 7–12).
Clearly, these data lend strong support to the reaction mechanism outlined in Figure 1 and they also identify the sulfhydryl group of cysteine residue *177 as the function that undergoes Michael addition to the C 5 -C 6 -double bond of the DNA cytosine residue.
The DNA/protein crosslinking reaction is sequence specific
Strong but circumstantial evidence for the DNA/protein crosslinking reaction being mechanism-based was already provided by the SAM-dependence we and others (13, 16) observed and by the suppressing effect of sinefungin described above.
It was, however, still conceivable that the addition reaction of the enzyme to a DNA could occur in a sequence-unspecific way with any cytosine residue the enzyme makes contact with (for example while sliding along the DNA in search of its specific substrate sequence).
Linkage of the addition reaction to the molecular mechanism of catalysis therefore depends on demonstration of sequence specificity.
Evidence pertaining to this point is presented in Figure 6.
Oligonucleotides CFLO, FCLO and CCLO, each 5'-endlabelled with [32 P], were hybridized to unlabelled oligonucleotide CCUP.
The three resulting duplex DNA molecules were separately subjected to reaction conditions that lead to covalent DNA /protein crosslinking as demonstrated above.
Similar to the results obtained with duplex CFUP/CCLO (Figure 5), DNA duplex CCUP/CFLO undergoes SAM-dependent crosslinking (Figure 6, lane 2).
Swapping of the modified and the unmodified cytosine residues within the Dcm recognition sequence (CCUP/FCLO), however, abolishes the reaction (lane 4; compare lane 6 for result obtained with completely unmodified duplex).
The positive result documented by lane 2 also shows that the reaction does not depend on the special sequence context of the Dcm recognition site provided by the upper strand (compare experiments documented by Figures 5 and 6) and, in addition, that the reaction is not restricted to the C[5-FC]AGG half-site but also works with C[5-FC]TGG.
Minute amounts of slower moving material are also visible independent of SAM addition and presence of a 5-fluorocytosine residue at the correct position within the Dcm recognition sequence (lanes 1, 3–6).
This may be due either to the covalently but reversibly crosslinked intermediate formed prior to methyltransfer (Figure 1, structure 2) or to an unspecific side-reaction (e.g. presence in the synthetic oligonucleotides of trace quantities of reactive molecular species of unknown structure and capable of unspecific crosslinking cannot strictly be ruled out).
The stable DNA/protein adduct contains the methyl group donated by SAM
Three molecules are involved in the Dcm-catalysed methylation reaction, substrate DNA, the enzyme itself and SAM, the methyl donor.
The observed dependence of the covalent crosslinking reaction on presence of SAM suggests that the DNA /protein adduct is stably locked only after methyltransfer has occurred (Figure 1, structure 3).
This aspect of the reaction was tested by following the fate of the transferred methyl group after reaction of [3 H]-SAM.
Oligonucleotide duplexes indicated in the header of Figure 7 were prepared as described above, they were either [32 P]-5'-endlabelled in one strand (Figure 7, lanes 1, 2, 7, 8, 13) or unlabelled (lanes 3–6, 9–12).
Duplexes were incubated with Dcm or Dcm/Cys177Ser under standard reaction conditions of methylation with [3 H]-SAM,[1 H]-SAM and sinefungin added as indicated.
Reaction of tritiated SAM with unlabelled DNA yields three radioactive products (Figure 7, lane 3).
Of these, the slowest moving one corresponds to the covalent DNA /protein adduct, as evident from its position in the gel (compare lanes 1 and 2, which again display the product of the reaction illustrated in Figure 5) and also by the effect of sinefungin addition (compare lanes 3 and 4).
The two faster moving bands of lanes 3 and 4 are independent of the presence in the substrate DNA of a 5-fluorocytosine residue (lanes 5 and 6) but completely dependent on the presence of a sulfhydryl function at position *177 of the enzyme (lanes 7–12).
Thus it seems that these two species are the product of methylation of the protein by SAM.
Furthermore, partial suppression of this reaction by sinefungin (compare lane 3 with lane 4 and lane 5 with lane 6) suggests that the reaction proceeds via SAM bound to the active site of the enzyme.
It is not possible at present to decide whether the Cys 177 sulfhydryl group is itself the ultimate recipient of the methyl group or whether it is required for catalysis of automethylation of the enzyme at some other site.
The faster moving of the two bands presumably corresponds to a proteolysis product of Dcm; in later experiments with a fresh batch of enzyme it was no longer observed (compare Figure 8).
The fastest moving material in lanes 5 and 6 is methylated oligonucleotide; since the film is saturated in that area, no influence of sinefungin addition on methylation is discernible.
Methylation of the enzyme by SAM does not require presence of substrate DNA
For M. Hha I DNA cytosine-C 5 methyltransferase, an ordered mechanism was deduced from kinetic data in which the enzyme first binds DNA, then SAM (30).
Since methylation of Dcm seems to proceed through binding of SAM to the active site (see above) it seemed plausible that this reaction may be stimulated by the presence of DNA.
Dcm DNA cytosine-C 5 methyltransferase (wild-type or Cys177Ser mutant) was incubated under standard conditions with [3 H]-SAM and a variety of different oligonucleotide duplexes or with [3 H]-SAM alone as indicated in the header of Figure 8.
Again, the reaction is totally dependent on presence of the sulfhydryl group at position *177 (compare lanes 1–7 with lanes 8–14).
Lanes 1, 3 and 5 demonstrate, that there is no influence of the nucleotide sequence on protein methylation; DNA can even be totally omitted from the reaction mixture with no loss of band intensity.
Note that formation of the covalent DNA/protein adduct is possible only with duplex CFUP/CFLO (lane 1, slowest moving band).
Lane 15 shows a marker of Dcm enzyme; this part of the gel had been cut off before fluorography and stained separately with Coomassie blue.
The band visible at the bottom of lane 10 is caused by methylated oligonucleotide and reflects the small but significant activity of the mutant enzyme discussed in detail above.
In contrast, amounts of methylated oligonucleotide in lane 3 are so large as to cause an extended area of blurred, saturated blackening of the film.
These results confirm the notion that, under the reaction conditions applied, Dcm is methylated by SAM to a significant extent either directly at its active residue Cys 177 or in a reaction requiring Cys 177 for catalysis.
Methyltransfer from SAM to a protein cysteine residue that is part of a ProCys motif —as is Cys 177 of Dcm —has been observed earlier with various other DNA- or protein methyltransferases, either as a photo-affinity labelling reaction or in a self-catalysed fashion; cases in point are M. Eco RII (31), CheR (32) and —in a more general way —Ada; in the latter case the methyl donor is a DNA O 6 -methylguanine residue (33).
The functional significance, if any, of the protein methylation reaction we observe with Dcm is unclear at present.
CONCLUSION
Residue Cys 177 of DNA cytosine-C 5 methyltransferase forms a covalent crosslink with DNA 5-fluorocytosine residues in a sequence-specific and mechanism-based reaction.
Therefore, the resulting DNA /protein adduct, which carries the methyl group donated by SAM, is a bona fide model of the key intermediate in the catalytic process (Figure 1, structure 3).
Ready availability both of Dcm and of chemically synthesized 2'-deoxyoligonucleotides containing 5-fluorocytosine residues (15), open the door to a full structural description of the adduct and hence to an understanding of the stereochemical course of the methyltransfer reaction.
This information may be of rather general nature, because all DNA cytosine-C 5 methyltransferases are structurally related (28, 34, 35); conservation of the active-site ProCys motif also extends to thymidilate synthetase (36).
DNA-independent methylation of Dcm by SAM in a reaction depending on active-site residue Cys 177 is an interesting reaction of yet unknown functional potential.
Figure 1.
Proposed mechanism of enzymatic DNA cytosine-C 5 methylation.
A cysteine residue of the catalytic centre of the DNA cytosine-C 5 methyltransferase undergoes Michael addition to the C 6 /C 5 double bond of the target cytosine residue activating its C 5 atom as a nucleophilic centre [(1)(2)].
Methyltransfer [(2)(3)]is followed by regeneration of the catalyst via β-elimination [(3)(4)].
If a 5-fluorocytosine residue is attacked by the enzyme (X = F ), the final step of the reaction is blocked and a stable, covalent adduct of enzyme and substrate DNA results.
Figure 2.
Qualitative assay of methyltransfer activity of Dcm and Dcm/Cys177Ser.
C 5 -unmethylated, double stranded phasmid DNA was incubated with S-adenosyl methionine (SAM) and Dcm or Dcm/Cys177Ser as described under Materials and Methods.
Subsequently, the DNA was exposed to Eco RII restriction endonuclease; samples were electrophoresed through a 1% agarose gel containing 0.5 mg/l ethidiumbromid.
Eco RII-RE:Eco RII restriction endonuclease : enzyme kept at 100°C for 10 min;: untreated enzyme.
Plus and minus symbols indicate presence/absence of the respective reagent in the assay mixture.
Lane 11: Mixture of DNA fragments obtained by cleaving phage λ DNA with Hind III.
Figure 3.
Time course of methyltransfer reaction.
C 5 -unmethylated phasmid DNA was incubated with S-adenosyl-[ 3 H]-methionine and Dcm or Dcm/Cys177Ser; aliquots of the reaction mixture were removed at the time points indicated and DNA precipitated with 20% aqueous TCA.
Precipitated material was collected on glass fibre filters and radioactivity measured by liquid scintillation counting as described under Materials and Methods.
Note that a ten-fold higher amount of Dcm/Cys177Ser was used relative to Dcm. [cpm]: counts per minute.
Figure 4.
Electrophoretic mobility shift of oligonucleotide duplexes containing a target sequence of Dcm DNA cytosine-C 5 methyltransferase by wild-type Dcm and its Cys177Ser mutant.
Purified proteins (wild-type Dcm or Dcm/Cys177Ser) were incubated with radioactively labelled DNA duplexes.
Mixtures were electrophoresed through a native 5.1% polyacrylamide gel (see Materials and Methods).
CC:Hybrid of oligonucleotides CCUP and CCLO (normal target sequence).
CF:Hybrid of oligonucleotides CFUP and CFLO (with inner cytosine residue of target sequence replaced by 5-fluorocytosine).
: protein boiled for 5 min. : untreated protein.
Figure 5.
Demonstration of a covalently crosslinked adduct between Dcm enzyme and an oligonucleotide containing a 5-FC residue at the site of methylation.
Purified Dcm enzyme (wild-type or Cys177Ser mutant) was incubated at 37°C for 30 min with hybrids of oligonucleotides CFUP and CCLO, 5'-endlabelled with [32 P]alternatively in the upper, 5-FC containing strand (*CFUP ) or the lower, unmodified strand (*CCLO ).
Optionally, SAM and/or sinefungin (80 µM) were added as indicated.
Mixtures were electrophoresed through a 10% PA-gel containing 2% SDS (see Materials and Methods).
Lane 13 shows a marker of *CFUP/CCLO.
Figure 6.
Demonstration of sequence specificity of covalent adduct formation.
Experimental conditions were as described in the legend to Figure 5.
DNA duplexes were prepared from oligonucleotide CCUP, hybridized to either CCLO, CFLO or FCLO as indicated.
In all three duplexes, a [32 P]5'-endlabel was present in the lower strand (asterisk).
Figure 7.
Presence in the trapped reaction intermediate of a 3 H-methyl group donated by [3 H]-SAM.
Purified Dcm enzyme (wild-type or Cys177Ser mutant) was incubated with various oligonucleotide hybrids as indicated (asterisks stand for presence of a [32 P]5'-endlabel).
Optionally,[1 H]-SAM (80 µM),[3 H]-SAM (1µCi, 7.5 µM) or Sinefungin (80 µM) was added as indicated.
Mixtures were electrophoresed through 10% polyacrylamide gel containing 2% SDS (see Materials and Methods).
Bands visible in lanes 1, 2, 7, 8 and 13 are due to[32 P]5'-end labels introduced into the synthetic oligonucleotides as indicated; bands in the other lanes are due to 3 H introduced into the reactions as tritiated methyl group of SAM.
Autoradiography/fluorography conditions were as described under Materials and Methods.
Figure 8.
Methylation of the enzyme by SAM.
Purified Dcm or Dcm/Cys177Ser protein was incubated with non-radioactive DNA duplexes and analysed by electrophoresis through a 10% polyacrylamide gel containing 2% SDS.
CF:Hybrid of oligonucleotide CFUP and CFLO (with 5-FC residue at inner cytosine position of target sequence; lanes 1, 2, 8, 9);CC:Hybrid of oligonucleotide CCUP and CCLO (normal target sequence; lanes 3, 4, 10, 11);CT:Hybrid of oligonucleotide CTUP and CTLO (scrambled target sequence, nor recognized by Dcm; lanes 5, 6, 12, 13);+:2 µCi [3 H]-SAM added (lanes 1, 3, 5, 7, 8, 10, 12, 14).
Lane 15 was cut off the gel before fluorography and instead stained with Coomassie Blue.
E.coli RNA polymerase, deleted in the C-terminal part of its α-subunit, interacts differently with the cAMP-CRP complex at the lac P1 and at the gal P1 promoter
ABSTRACT
A deletion of the C-terminal part of the α-subunit of RNA polymerase is known to affect differently promoters activated by CRP depending on the location of the CRP binding site at the promoter.
When the CRP binding site is located at -61.5, as at lac P1 (a type I promoter), activation is strongly impaired while it is not significantly affected at gal P1 where CRP binds 41.5 bp upstream of the start of the message (type II promoter).
We have investigated the differences in the architecture of the corresponding open complexes by comparing the positioning of holoenzymes reconstituted respectively with native or with truncated α-subunits (containing the first 235 or 256 residues of a) at two ‘up’ promoter mutants of the lac P1 and gal P1 promoters (respectively lac UV5 and gal 9A16C).
First, the affinity of wild-type RNA polymerase for both promoters is increased by the presence of CRP and cAMP.
By contrast, holoenzymes reconstituted with truncated α-subunits, show cooperative binding at the gal P1 promoter only.
Second, footprinting data confirm these observations and indicate that the truncated holoenzymes are unable to recognize regions of the promoter upstream from position -40.
The absence of contacts between the truncated enzymes and CRP at the lac P1 promoter can explain the deficiency in activation.
At the galP1 promoter, where the CRP site is closer to the initiation site, protein-protein contacts can still occur with the truncated polymerases, showing that the C-terminal part of the α-subunit is not involved in activation.
INTRODUCTION
Positive control of transcription often involves stimulatory protein-protein interactions between regulatory factors and RNA polymerase.
Mutants deficient in contacts between the enzyme and the positive activator map either in the genes coding for the different subunits of RNA polymerase or in the activator gene.
The most straightforward argument for direct protein-protein contacts between the activator and RNA polymerase involves the isolation of suppressor mutations mapping at a precise locus in one of the RNA polymerase genes which specifically suppress the defect of positive control mutations in the activator or vice versa [1,2].
The cAMP-receptor protein, CRP, controls the initiation of transcription of numerous genes [3,4], especially those involved in carbon source utilisation.
Mutations defective in activation have been reported at the crp locus and in the rpo genes.
‘Positive control’ mutants in crp that affect transcription activation without altering the ability of the regulatory protein to recognize its target site have been isolated by different groups [5–8, and R.Ebright, quoted in 8].
They map on an exposed loop between residues 156 and 162 in the C-terminal part of the CRP protein.
Mutations in this domain prevent transcription activation at many CRP dependent promoters.
For proximal CRP activating sites located around -41 relative to the transcription start, both subunits of the CRP dimer are able to contact RNA polymerase.
At those promoters designated as type II, revertants of the positive control mutations such as the double mutant H159L K52N have been isolated [5,7].
This mutant superactivates class II promoters but is totally inactive with respect to the activation of transcription from promoters carrying the CRP site at -61.5 (called type I promoters)[5,7].
Hence, at type II promoters, a second domain may be involved in transcription activation, whereas at type I promoters only the one patch around residue 159 is efficient.
RNA polymerase mutants altered in CRP activation have been isolated and the mutations located in genes coding for three different RNA polymerase subunits, σ [9], β [10,11]and α [39, and R.Ebright, quoted in 41].
Immunochemical [12]and biochemical data support the involvement [13]of the α-subunit in CRP activation at least for the lac promoter and other related type I promoters.
In fact holoenzymes reconstituted in vitro with truncated α-subunits, α-235 or α-256, containing respectively the first 235 and 256 amino acids of the 329 residues of the α protein were perfectly able to initiate transcription at constitutive promoters, but were unable to respond to CRP activation at type I promoters [13].
It was also shown that the gal P1 and the pBRP4 promoters, members of the class II promoters where the CRP site is centered at -41.5 and overlaps the -35 region of the promoter, could be recognized in the presence of the CRP-cAMP complex by the α-truncated RNA polymerases and transcribed [14].
As the activation mechanism by CRP-cAMP appears to be different at the lac P1 and gal P1 promoters, we have decided to test the binding of the reconstituted polymerases to lac and gal up promoter variants in the presence and in the absence of the CRP-cAMP complex.
We show here that cooperative binding takes place at both promoters between the two proteins when an holoenzyme is reconstituted with an entire a-subunit.
Cooperativity is maintained when truncated α-subunits are used in the reconstitution and when the enzyme is assayed at the gal P1 promoter.
Cooperativity is lost when the mutant enzyme is assayed at the lac P1 promoter.
Footprinting data confirm these results and suggest a plausible interpretation for these findings.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
DNA
The gal 9A16C promoter contains the A  C change at -16, in order to eliminate the  acitity of the gal P2 promoter and the G  A change at -9 to enhance the activity of the gal P1 promoter [40].
The 203 bp lac fragment [15]containing the lac UV5 promoter and the 144 bp gal fragment containing the gal 9A16C promoter [40]were purified by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.
The 130 bp fragment carrying the T7A1 promoter [16]was a gift from Drs.
W.Metzger and H.Heumann (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, München-FRG).
All fragments were labelled using Klenow fragment of DNA polymerase I with α 32 P dATP in the presence of the other three dXTPs, unless otherwise specified.
Proteins
CRP protein was purified from the overproducing strain BS646 by the method of Ghosaini et al.[17].
It was 75% active in DNA binding as measured in gel retardation assays.
RNA polymerases:After isolation of each RNA polymerase subunits ββ’ and α as well as truncated a-subunits α-235 and α-256, three different core enzymes containing the wild-type α-subunit or the truncated α-235 or α-256 subunits were reconstituted and purified as previously described [13].
For reconstitution of holoenzymes, the reconstituted core enzymes were mixed with four-fold molar excess of σ 70 subunit.
The RNA polymerases were found to be between 15% and 20% active using a titration with the strong T7A1 promoter at 9 nM in gel retardation assay (described below).
The values of dissociation constants given in Table I are not corrected for this measured activity of the enzymes.
Gel retardation assays
4 µl of a mixture of 32 P radiolabelled DNA (concentration ≥0.2 nM) and cAMP (400 µM) in glutamate buffer (40 mM Hepes pH 8, 10 mM MgCl 2 , 100 mM K glutamate, 500 µg/ml BSA) with or without CRP protein (30 nM) were gently mixed with a RNA polymerase solution (5–80 nM) in glutamate buffer.
The sample was incubated at 37°C for 30 min; 3 µl of an heparin xylene cyanol-blue sucrose solution (150 µg/ml heparin, 0.1% dye, 50% sucrose) in glutamate buffer containing 200 µM cAMP and no BSA was added and the mixture loaded on a 4.5% polyacrylamide gel (38:1 acrylamide bis) in TBE buffer containing 200 µM cAMP as quickly as possible.
The gel was run at room temperature at 13 V/cm until the dye had migrated through half of the gel (∼2 hr).
200 µM cAMP was present in the gel reservoir at the cathode.
The gel was fixed with a mixture of water ethanol-acetic acid (70:20:10) and dried and exposed on a Phosphorimager 400A (Molecular Dynamics).
The ratio of free to bound DNA was used to estimate the dissociation constant for RNA polymerase, Kd.
Each value given in Table I is the average of ten experimental points.
The cooperativity factor is defined as the ratio between dissociation constants determined in the absence and in the presence of CRP.
The nature of the competitor and also the CRP concentration can affect the extent of cooperativity observed: phage M13 single-stranded DNA is a milder competitor than heparin; it does not remove CRP from its binary complex.
In the presence of M13, the cooperativity factor at the lac promoter is increased from 3 to 5.
In the case of the strong T7A1 promoter, the specific activity of the labelled DNA fragment was not high enough to directly determine the dissociation constants for the promoter; we used a competition assay with the lac UV5 promoter, hence the large errors associated with the values presented in Table I.
Footprinting studies
The 203 bp lac fragment labelled with either α 32 P dATP and Klenow fragment or γ 32 P ATP and T4 polynucleotide kinase was cut with Pvu II restriction endonuclease (Boehringer).
All footprinting experiments were performed at 37°C in glutamate buffer with 200 µM cAMP; RNA polymerase was at 75 nM and CRP when added at 40 nM.
The methods were those used in Spassky et al.[18]for DNAaseI footprinting studies, in Tullius and Dombroski [19]for cleavage by hydroxyl-radicals, and in Buckle et al.[20]for laser photocrosslinking experiments.
RESULTS
In vitro , the α-truncated RNA polymerases alone recognize three different promoters with the same hierarchy as wild-type RNA polymerase
Intermediate and open complexes of RNA polymerase with promoter DNA can be isolated from free promoter DNA by non denaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (cf. for example[16,21]).
We used this method to determine the affinities of the holoenzymes for three different strong promoters, the phage T7A1 promoter, the lac UV5 promoter and the gal 9A16C promoter, which carries simultaneously a down mutation in the P2 Pribnow box which abolishes gal P2 activity and an up mutation in the P1 Pribnow box which increases the efficiency of the gal P1 promoter [40].
The radiolabelled DNA promoter fragments were incubated with various concentrations of reconstituted holoenzymes at 37°C for 30 min to reach equilibrium between the free species and open complexes; preformed complexes were challenged with heparin and separated on a 4% native polyacrylamide gel (Fig. 1).
No difference in the mobility of complexes formed with either wild-type or α-truncated RNA polymerase was detected under these conditions.
Apparent dissociation constants, Kd, for open complex formation are given in Table I-A.
Three conclusions can be drawn:
The three polymerases show slightly different affinities for the same promoter.
Whilst the increase in the mean estimate of the Kd values in general parallels the extent of the deletion of the α-subunit, it is most noticeable in the case of the gal promoter.
All three polymerases exhibit the same hierarchy.
They bind preferentially to the T7A1 promoter then to lac UV5 and least well to gal 9A16C.
The discriminating factor between the three promoters appears to be the same for each RNA polymerase.
All polymerases bind the T7 promoter with an affinity 10-fold higher than the lac promoter and 20 to 50-fold higher than the gal promoter.
In summary, the deletion of parts of the C-terminal segment of the α-subunit affects, in a qualitatively similar manner, the overall association of RNA polymerase with the three promoters.
α-truncated RNA polymerases bind synergistically with the cAMP-CRP complex at the galP1 promoter, but not at the lacP1 promoter
Cooperative binding between the cAMP-CRP complex and RNA polymerase at the lac P1 and gal P1 promoters has been widely supported by a variety of footprinting studies [18,22,24].
Even in the absence of DNA, both proteins have been shown to interact weakly [25,26].
In order to investigate the role of the C-terminal part of the α-subunit in cooperative binding with CRP at different promoters, we repeated the band-shift experiments with the reconstituted polymerases after preincubation with CRP and cAMP.
As shown in Table I-B and I-C, the CRP-cAMP complex increases the affinity of the three enzymes for the gal P1 promoter by 6 to 8-fold.
Although CRP permits a better interaction of the wild-type enzyme at the lac P1 promoter, it does not affect the affinity of the α-truncated polymerases for the lac fragment.
Furthermore, a subtle difference can be noticed in the migrations of the open complexes formed with the wild-type and mutant enzymes in the presence of CRP and cAMP at the lac promoter (Fig. 1; compare lane 3 to lanes 2, 4, 5 and also lane 8 to lanes 7, 9, 10).
In the case of the intact polymerase, the final complex gives rise to two bands on the autoradiogram (lane 3).
We confirmed the results obtained by Zinkel and Crothers [27]using antibodies directed against CRP: the upper band contains the CRP protein and the lower band does not.
In the case of the α-truncated enzymes, only the lower band which does not contain the CRP protein can be detected on the gel.
These experiments were carried out in the presence of heparin which is known to rapidly and completely dissociate the CRP-DNA binary complex.
Hence in the ternary complex formed with the α-truncated RNA polymerases, at the lac promoter, CRP can be completely chased by heparin whereas the wild-type enzyme partially protects CRP against this challenge.
In the case of the gal P1 promoter carried by the 144 bp fragment, only one band is observed on the autoradiogram irrespective of the presence of CRP in the polymerase-promoter complex.
When present in the incubation mixture, CRP was detected in this single band of complex on the gel by revelation with antibodies directed against CRP.
The extent of binding synergy between the various polymerases and CRP at the lac and gal promoters is confirmed by a direct competition assay between the two promoters.
In the absence of CRP, all polymerases bind better to the lac fragment than to the gal fragment (Fig. 1, lanes 7 and 9); in the presence of CRP, with the truncated polymerases, a better binding at gal is observed (Fig. 1, lane 10) consistent with the absence of cooperativity found at the lac promoter.
As explained in Materials and Methods, the nature of the competitor  affects the extent of cooperativity observed.
The results however are quite clear: positive cooperativity always occurs at the gal P1 promoter, independent of the C-terminal part of the α-subunit but is only observed with the intact wild-type enzyme at the lac promoter.
These results are perfectly consistent with observations [13]indicating that the mutant RNA polymerases did respond to CRP activation at the gal promoter (and more generally at type II promoters), but not at the lac promoter (at type I promoters).
Upstream promoter regions are not recognized by the truncated RNA polymerases in contrast to the wild-type enzyme
Since the activation of transcription by CRP (a kinetic process) and the  occurrence of positive interactions between the two proteins in the open complex (an equilibrium process) go hand in hand, we have studied in greater detail the structure of those open complexes (at lac wild-type and at lac UV5) where deletions of the α-subunit affect positive cooperativity.
At the lac wild-type promoter, RNA polymerase does not correctly position itself in the absence of CRP [14,42].
By contrast, the presence of CRP allows occupancy of the lac P1 promoter, giving an extensive protection against DNAaseI cleavage from -80 to +20 interrupted by some hypersensitive bands [14,22,23].
The cooperativity between α-truncated polymerases and CRP is lost at the lac promoter, consequently it was expected that binding of CRP at its target in the -60 region would not lead to the occupancy of lac P1 by the mutant enzymes.
Such was indeed the case.
We were unable to obtain a footprint of the α-truncated polymerase at wild-type lac promoter in contrast with the wild-type enzyme which, in conjunction with CRP and cAMP, gave an extensive protection from -80 to +20 interrupted by several hypersensitive bands.
The lac UV5 promoter is able to bind the mutant RNA polymerase independent of the presence of CRP-cAMP.
We reasoned that the lack of cooperativity at the UV5 promoter should result from the loss of productive interactions between the two proteins and could probably be visualized on the promoter DNA at the hinge region between the binding sites of the two proteins.
We therefore tested the binding of wild-type and mutant holoenzymes at lac UV5 promoter in the presence and in the absence of CRP and cAMP by different techniques: DNAaseI footprinting [18](Fig. 2), hydroxylradical footprinting (iron EDTA [19](Fig. 3) or copper-phenanthroline reactants [28](Fig. 5)) and laser crosslinking [20](Fig. 4).
None of these techniques were able to detect any difference in the pattern of wild-type and mutant RNA polymerases downstream of -38, indicating that crucial recognition patterns in the -10 and -35 regions were not visibly modified.
However, noticeable modifications appeared upstream of -38 with the α-truncated RNA polymerases both in the presence and in the absence of CRP-cAMP at lac UV5.
In the absence of CRP , wild-type RNA polymerase covers about 70 bp, protecting the upper strand against DNAaseI cleavage from positions -49.5 to positions +19.5 (Fig. 2a, lane 3) and the lower strand from positions -54.5 to positions +16.5 (Fig. 2b, lane 3).
Upstream of position -20, strong hypersensitive bands appear.
They are phased with the helical pitch of the DNA.
The two α-truncated polymerases do not show the same extent of protection in the extreme upstream part of the footprint; the protection actually stops at -39.5 on the upper strand (Fig. 2a, lanes 5 and 7) and at -43.5 on the lower strand (Fig. 2b, lanes 5 and 7) with no further modification downstream.
The phosphodiester linkages at -41.5 and -42.5 (upper strand) and -45.5, -46.5 remain sensitive to DNAaseI cleavage.
Surprisingly, the same phosphodiester bond at -41.5 remains sensitive to DNAaseI on the gal P1 promoter and on the malT P1 promoter (data not shown).
These results appear rather striking since DNAaseI is a bulky enzyme and phosphates alkylated at -39.5, -38.5, -37.5 and -36.5 are known to interfere with RNA polymerase binding [29,30].
In summary, the α-truncated RNA polymerases are unable to protect the final upstream helical turn of the promoter from DNAaseI cleavage in contrast to wild-type enzyme and this prompted us to suspect that the mutant enzymes had lost important contacts with the phosphates near the -40 region.
To test this hypothesis, we performed a hydroxyl-radical cleavage with both types of enzymes (Fig. 3a).
The protection pattern of the polymerase complexes (Fig. 3a, lanes 2 and 5) is essentially divided into two domains (as proposed by Schickor et al.[16]), the melting domain with a complete protection of the non template strand from -8 to +16 and the recognition domain upstream of -14 with a series of protected sugars every 10–11 nucleotides, indicating that the enzyme faces towards one side of the DNA.
This last domain contains six subdomains which exhibit different protection by the wild-type enzyme against hydroxyl-radical cleavage, the strongest protection being observed at -20, -30 and -40, this becoming progressively weaker at -50, -60 and -70 (Fig. 3a, lane 2; Fig. 3b, row 2).
For the mutant polymerases, however, only the two most downstream regions -20 and -30 are protected (Fig. 3a, lane 5; Fig. 3b, rows 3 and 4): this is consistent with the loss of contacts in the -40 region.
In order to obtain more information about those RNA polymerase subunits which make contacts in the -40 region, we also carried out protein-DNA crosslinking experiments with both enzymes, using a UV laser (Fig. 4).
Identification of photochemical products or potential protein DNA-contacts was performed by primer extension assay [20].
A faint band at position -45 seen with the wild-type enzyme (Fig. 4 lane 5) is absent in the mutant (lane 3).
This band could represent a contact between RNA polymerase and G-46 in the major groove of DNA.
We have not yet identified the subunit which makes this putative contact.
In the presence of CRP and cAMP , the cooperative binding of CRP and the wild-type enzyme at the lac UV5 promoter is accompanied by various changes in the footprint which do not occur, either with RNA polymerase alone, or with CRP alone.
With DNAaseI (Fig. 2), one observes a better protection of the hinge region between the two proteins (phosphodiester bonds at -46.5 on the upper strand and at -49.5 on the template strand are almost insensitive to DNAaseI attack), and a more extended footprint in the upstream part of the CRP site at least on the upper strand, with the protection of phosphates at -81.5, -82.5 and the appearance of two hypersensitive bands at -84.5 and -85.5 (Fig. 2a, lane 2).
This observation is supported by the iron-EDTA cleavage pattern where two additional regions around -80 and -90 seem to be protected (Fig. 3a, lane 3); in addition, the protection around -70 is now much more intense and more extended than the protection due to CRP alone (Fig. 3b, +CRP row 2).
The lac template strand is particularly sensitive to the attack by another hydroxyl-radical reagent, the copper-phenanthroline complex which produces strong cleavages in the -70 region (-72, -73), in the -50 region (-52, -50, -49), in the -35 region (-35 to -28) and in the Pribnow box (Fig. 5, lane 4)[28].
RNA polymerase alone protects the -35 region and the Pribnow box, producing three hypersensitive bands at -4, -5, -6 in the single-stranded region (lanes 3, 6, 8 and 9), whereas CRP alone renders the -75 to -55 region inaccessible to the reagent (lane 2).
If the combined footprint for CRP and polymerase were simply the sum of the footprints of each protein, then the -50 region should remain highly sensitive to cleavage.
However, the whole region is protected by the presence of both proteins (lanes 1 and 5).
In contrast, the mutant polymerases and CRP produce a pattern which is simply the sum of the individual CRP and polymerase footprints.
Further evidence for a conformational change of the -50 region is given in Fig. 4.
Following irradiation by the UV laser we observed that the presence of both wild type polymerase and CRP inhibits the formation of the thymine dimer between T-50 and -51 on the template strand (Fig. 4, lane 6)[20].
All the conformational changes observed in the -50 and upstream regions require the presence of both CRP and wild-type RNA polymerase: none of them occur with the mutant enzymes.
All the patterns observed with a truncated polymerase and CRP are the juxtaposition of the individual patterns of CRP and α-C deleted polymerase consistent with the idea that both proteins bind independently to the lac UV5 promoter.
DISCUSSION
The gel retardation assay is a rapid method which allows to compare at least semi-quantitatively the affinity of RNA polymerases for different promoters in the presence of heparin.
It has the advantage of requiring only minute amounts of material.
Using this technique, we have shown that the α-truncated RNA polymerases do recognize strong promoters with the same hierarchy as wild-type enzyme, albeit with a somewhat lower affinity.
We also noticed that the reconstituted wild-type enzyme had a 5-fold lower affinity than a preparation of native enzyme taking into account the fraction of active enzymes.
We have no explanation for this differential behaviour unless additional factors associated with RNA polymerase other than its five subunits (α 2 ββ’ and σ) might enhance or stabilize open complex formation.
However, we have observed no difference in the footprinting patterns of reconstituted and native wild-type enzymes using all the methods described above.
In contrast, the α-truncated polymerases produce a differential footprint for the open complex when compared to the wild-type enzyme.
The defect is localized in the upstream region of the promoter (upstream from position -38), but the downstream part of the footprint remains identical, indicating that crucial recognition patterns in the -10 and -35 regions are not modified.
In particular, the copper phenanthroline hypersensitive bands at positions -4, -5, -6 (Fig. 5 lanes 1, 3, 5–10) which are characteristic of the unwound DNA structure of the open complex appear with the same intensity for all enzymes.
This result suggests that the truncated holoenzymes are able to open the DNA duplex in the (-10 to +1) region; this is not surprising since σ 70 of RNA polymerase is supposed to promote strand opening of the promoter (34).
However, at lac UV5, the upstream region of the promoter is not recognized by the truncated polymerases in contrast to wild-type enzyme; the DNAaseI protection of the truncated polymerases stops at position -45.5 on the lower strand and at position -41.5 on the upper strand (the same upstream border was found for the gal 9A16C and malT p1 promoters) whereas wild-type enzyme protects eight phosphate linkages further upstream.
Moreover, we observed that the -40 region on the upper strand and the -43 region on the lower strand (data not shown) were much more accessible to hydroxyl-radical cleavage when complexed with the α-C deleted enzymes (Fig. 3b rows 3 and 4) than with the wild-type enzyme (Fig. 3b row 2).
Native enzyme seems also to protect albeit only partially the minor grooves located at -50, -60, -70 and probably up to -80, suggesting that DNA can wrap partially around the enzyme and establish some non-specific contacts in the conditions reported here.
No such wrapping is detectable with the truncated enzymes.
Consequently, the truncated enzymes have lost the ability to bind to promoter regions upstream from position -38.
Two alternative explanations can be proposed: 1) the C-terminal part of α-subunit makes contacts with the upstream region of the promoter; 2) the C-terminal deletion of α induces a conformational change in RNA polymerase which makes the truncated holoenzyme unable to bind to the upstream part of the promoter.
No definitive argument can yet be advanced in favour of either hypothesis.
In particular, no contact has been demonstrated yet between the α-subunit and any part of the promoter and the most upstream contact obtained by a rather indirect crosslinking method lies at -46, -47 [31].
 Undoubtedly the most straightforward explanation of our results would be that the α-subunit contacts the lac UV5 DNA in the -40 and -45 regions.
Furthermore, the positioning of the σ-subunit seems to be perfectly correct in the -35 region by all footprinting criteria.
The recognition helix of the helix-turn-helix motif of σ 70 is supposed to make specific contacts with the base pairs of the DNA in the major groove from positions -32 to -36 [36, 37].
If the σ-subunit were also contacting the adjacent minor groove, at -40 instead of α, one good candidate to perform this task would be the non-recognition helix of the HTH motif.
However, it is difficult to imagine how the specific contacts in the major groove could be achieved by the recognition helix when the non-specific contacts of the anchoring helix are inexistent.
This weakens the argument for an indirect effect of the deletion.
There is presently no reason to reject the simpler idea that the C-terminal part of the α-subunit contacts DNA in the -40 and -45 regions.
The differences between wild-type and truncated polymerases are more striking in the presence of the cAMP-CRP at the lac UV5 promoter.
Wild-type enzyme and CRP bind cooperatively to the strong lac UV5 promoter whereas the truncated enzymes show exactly the same affinity in the presence or absence of CRP (Table I).
Moreover, immunoblotting experiments and the appearance or disappearance of the upper band characteristic of the open complex containing CRP at lac are consistent with a single explanation: CRP in the ternary open complex with the mutant enzyme is totally chased by heparin whereas it is partially resistant in the complex with wild-type RNA polymerase.
The cooperative binding of CRP and the wild-type enzyme at the lac UV5 promoter is accompanied by significant changes in the footprint with respect to the two binary complexes: 1) the DNAaseI footprints of RNA polymerase and CRP overlap (Fig. 2; and [18]), moreover, at least on the upper strand, an extension of the footprint of the CRP site is observed up to position -84.5; 2) a more intense protection of the -40, -70 and -80 regions to hydroxyl-radical cleavage is observed (Fig. 3); 3) CRP and RNA polymerase induce a conformational change of the -50 region, which can be detected by the copper-phenanthroline reagent (Fig. 5) or after UV irradiation (Fig. 4; and [32]).
All the changes reported above indicate a conformational change of the DNA at the borders of the CRP site (-70, -80 and -50) and suggest a more extensive deformation of the DNA around the CRP-wild-type RNA polymerase complex.
This explanation is consistent with the increase in bending angle reported to take place in the ternary complex and interpreted in a similar way by Zinkel and Crothers [27].
Buckle et al.have also interpreted an increased reactivity at position -46 to singlet oxygen  occurring only in a ternary active complex, as an increase in bending allowing better contacts between the two proteins [32].
α-C deleted RNA polymerases provide good controls for those suggestions.
Indeed all the signatures of an active ternary complex are lost when these altered enzymes are substituted for wild-type RNA polymerase.
In this case, all cooperativity of binding of the two proteins is suppressed.
DNAaseI and copper phenanthroline footprints of both proteins are now separate suggesting that CRP and the truncated RNA polymerase do not share any significant contact on the DNA.
The loss of a direct contact between CRP and the C-terminal part of an α-subunit is the most likely source of those differences.
In this case, the contact in the CRP dimer should involve the exposed loop around residues 158–162 of the subunit positioned closer to the promoter start at lac UV5 since this is the location of the positive control mutations affecting type I promoters [5–7; and R.Ebright, unpublished results].
This proposal is further supported by the discovery of point mutations between residues 261 and 270 of the α-subunit which prevent CRP activation at lac ([39, and R.Ebright quoted in 41].
Point mutations are less likely than large deletions to cause substantial rearrangements in the ternary structure of the protein.
Alternative (indirect) models are less probable than a direct contact model involving the C-terminal part of α and the 156–162 loop of CRP at lac .
This loop is located on the three dimensional structure of the co-crystal at 15 Å from the -50 region of the promoter (cf. for example Fig. 2 in [7]).
Hence, our proposal that the C-terminal domain of α should span from this CRP contact site to the -50 -40 region of the promoter where it could contact the DNA in the open complex.
At the gal P1 promoter, a member of type II promoters, both the wild-type and the α-truncated RNA polymerases bind cooperatively with the CRP protein with a synergistic ratio around 6–8.
The truncated enzymes also show a shorter DNAaseI footprint than the wild-type enzyme and protection against hydroxyl-radical cleavage does not extend further upstream from position -42 (lower strand)(data not shown).
As the CRP site is centered at -41.5 this still allows contacts of the truncated enzyme with the downstream subunit.
Another important feature of the gal P1 promoter is that upstream curved sequences differentially affect the kinetic step at which CRP accelerates the rate of formation of an open complex [40].
However, the overall increase in affinity of RNA polymerase for the gal P1 promoter due to CRP binding is roughly the same whether those sequences are present or absent.
This point illustrates the limits of a purely static approach for delineating the operational contacts taking place between RNA polymerase and an activator at a given promoter.
At type I promoters, the truncation of the C-terminal part of the α-subunit affects the modulation of ‘on’ rate constants by CRP; this is reflected in changes in cooperativity of binding of CRP and RNA polymerase.
At type II promoters we can only conclude that the precise nature of the interactions between CRP and the truncated and wild-type polymerases, and their role in the activation mechanism, remain to be determined but that the C-terminal part of the α-subunit of RNA polymerase is not involved in this process.
Figure 1.
Visualization of complexes between the 203 bp lac UV5 and the 144 bp gal 9A16C promoter fragments and wild-type or α-235 RNA polymerases after heparin challenge.
Lanes 1 to 5 contained lac DNA; lanes 6–10 gal and lac DNA; lanes 11–16 gal DNA.
In lanes 3, 5, 6, 8, 10, 13 and 15, CRP was added at a concentration of 15 nM.
Note the absence of CRP-DNA complexes, due to the presence of heparin added before loading the samples on the gel.
In lanes 1, 6 and 11, no polymerase was added.
Lanes 2, 3, 7, 8, 12 and 13 contained wild-type reconstituted RNA polymerase and lanes 4, 5, 9, 10, 14 and 15, α-235 reconstituted RNA polymerase.
Figure 2.
Protection of the lac UV5 promoter by the wild-type or mutant RNA polymerases in the absence and in the presence of CRP against DNAaseI cleavage (a: upper strand; b: lower strand).
The CRP site is indicated by a thin bracket.
The truncated RNA polymerase site is marked by a thick bracket and extends into the downstream region in the direction of the arrow.
The additional upstream footprint due to wild type RNA polymerase is indicated by the dashed bracket.
When added, the CRP and RNA polymerase concentrations were respectively 40 and 75 nM.
Figure 3.
Hydroxyl-radical cleavage of the lac UV5 promoter (upper strand) with wild-type or α-235 RNA polymerases in the absence and in the presence of CRP. a : autoradiogram of the gel.
b :32 P scans of an extended sequencing gel from positions -92 to -35, also showing the pattern of the CRP-DNA binary complex and the patterns of the α-256 polymerase DNA complexes without or with CRP.
Figure 4.
Primer extension pattern on the lac UV5 upper strand promoter fragment after laser irradiation of open complexes formed with wild-type or α-235 RNA polymerases in the absence and in the presence of CRP.
Figure 5.
Copper phenanthroline reaction on the lac UV5 lower strand with wild-type or mutant RNA polymerases in the absence and in the presence of CRP.
In lanes 1 and 3 wild-type native RNA polymerase was added, whilst in lanes 5 and 6 wild-type reconstituted RNA polymerase was used.
Cloning and analysis of the S2 ribosomal protein cDNA from Drosophila
We report here the characterization of a 0.96 Kb cDNA clone which contains the coding sequence of ribosomal protein S2 from Drosophila melanogaster .
The S2 gene is transcribed to a 0.9 Kb mRNA which, like other ribosomal proteins (1, 2), is particularly abundant in ovaries and preferentially transcribed in exponentially growing Drosophila cells (Data not shown).
Drosophila ribosomal protein S2 has 267 aminoacids and contains clustered basic residues.
Ribosomal protein S2 has been previously cloned from rat (3).
Sequence comparison of the predicted protein shows that both are identical at 81% of the positions (Figure 1).
Out of 267 possible matches there are 215 identities, 21 substitutions are conservative and 30 are not conservatives.
As in rat protein S2, the NH 2 -terminal region of S2 from Drosophila is rich in arginine-glycine (RG) repeats, including six of them in positions 21–36, and one copy of RGGF motif in position 12–15 (Figure 1).
RG and RGGF sequences have been found in several proteins related with nucleolar localization and binding to RNA (4, 5).
Restriction endonuclease digestion and hybridization analysis of Drosophila genomic DNA revealed that there are several copies of S2 gene (Figure 2).
Many other ribosomal protein genes exist as multigene families (3, 6).
However, for these proteins it has been shown that only one (or a few) copies are functional genes and the remaining copies are processed pseudogenes (6).
S2 ribosomal protein is related to yeast S4 and to E.coli S5 ribosomal proteins (3).
These proteins participate in aminoacyl-tRNA ribosome binding, controlling the fidelity in the translation of mRNA.
It is possible that S2 serves the same functions in the ribosomes from high eukaryotes.
Figure 1.
Comparison between the protein sequences of Drosophila and rat ribosomal protein S2.
The RGGF and RG motifs are shaded.
(|) no substitution,(:) conservative substitution,(.)
semi-conservative substitution.
Figure 2.
Genomic DNA from D.melanogaster adult flies (10 µg) was digested with Hin dIII (1),Pst I (2),Bam HI (3) and Eco RI (4) and hybridized with S2-ribosomal protein specific probe.
Size markers were fragments from wild-type phage λ DNA digested with Bst EI and their molecular size are given in kilobasepair.
IS1151, an IS-like element of Clostridium perfringens
Mobile genetic elements have been found in most microorganisms where they have been sought (for a review see 1).
However, insertion sequences (IS) have not yet been described in Clostridium perfringens .
From a C.perfringens type D (strain NCTC2062) plasmid library constructed in pUC 19 (2), an IS-like element, IS1151, was identified and located 96 bp upstream from the epsilon-toxin structural gene (3).
This sequence (1696 bp) possesses two 23 bp stretches, one at each extremity, which constitute a perfect inverted repeat.
A search in the EMBL data bank revealed homologies with the IS231 family of Bacillus thurigiensis insertion elements (4, 5), and with IS4, IS186, and IS421 insertion sequences of E.coli (6, 7, 8).
The inverted repeats of IS1151 are homologous to the corresponding sequences of the IS231 and IS4 insertion elements but diverge from those of IS186 and of IS421.
The left inverted repeat sequence of IS231A diverges also from those of IS4 and IS1151 (by 3 internal base-pairs) but the left inverted repeat sequences of IS4 and IS1151 differ even more (by 6 internal base-pairs).
The internal sequence of IS1151 possesses potential boxes at positions -35 and -10 (TCAACC-17-TATAAT), a Shine-Dalgarno sequence, a 1422 bp open reading frame, and a potential transcriptional stop signal.
The amino-acid sequence deduced from the open reading frame (474 aa) resembles the potential transposase sequences of the IS231 family and of IS4, IS186, IS421, and Tn5 (9).
The amino-acid sequence between positions 339 to 355 (YSLRWQIEIIFKVWKSL) is particularly conserved.
After multiple alignment of the various amino-acid sequences with the ClustalV package (10), IS1151 appears to be more closely related to IS231A (32% homology) than to IS4 (16%), IS186 (17%), IS421 (17%), and Tn5 (17%).
A phylogenetic tree constructed from the inverted repeated sequences and from the deduced amino acid sequences suggests that IS1151 and IS4 are derived from IS231.
Like IS231 in B.thurigiensis , IS1151 may be involved in virulence gene transfer in C.perfringens .
Indeed, an IS1151-like element was located near the epsilon-toxin structural gene in all 19 type B and type D isolates studied by Southern blotting (3).
A DNA-DNA colony hybridization study (11) performed with an IS1151 probe internal to the ORF sequence (nucleotides 314 to 1303) also revealed homologous sequences in some non-epsilon-toxin-producing strains: in all 7 type C strains (beta-toxin-producing), in 3 out of 8 enterotoxin-producing type A strains, but only in a very few non-enterotoxigenic type A strains (5 of 108).
Moreover, some type C strains having lost the capacity to produce beta-toxin failed to hybridize with the IS1151 probe.
Further studies are under way to explain the role of IS1151.