

BI-BII transitions in B-DNA
ABSTRACT
Molecular modelling is used to study the conformational and energetic aspects of B I -B II transitions within the backbone of a B-DNA dodecamer d(CATGACGTCATG) whose fine structure has previously been determined by molecular modelling combined with NMR spectroscopy.
It is shown that while the dodecamer under investigation does not contain any B II junctions, the central CpG step can most easily undergo the transition.
More generally, it is also found that the base sequence and hence the backbone geometry of a DNA segment, strongly influences both the conformational impact of the transition, the associated energy barrier and the stability of the resulting B II state.
INTRODUCTION
Single crystal X-ray analysis of DNA oligomers has brought to light a wealth of structural detail within the double helix.
Sequence effects are now known to include a wide variety of conformational changes, concerning both mutual base positions and modifications of the phosphodiester backbones.
In many cases however there is, as yet, no clear understanding of the energetics of such deformations or of the mechanisms of associated structural transitions.
One particularly interesting case involves the so-called B I and B II conformations which have been observed crystallographically within B-DNA oligomers (1,2).
These conformations influence the position of the phosphate group with respect to the grooves of the double helix.
The more common B I state places the phosphate in a roughly symmetric position with respect to both grooves, while the B II state swings the phosphate around towards the minor groove.
This transition involves coupled changes of two dihedral angles ε (C4'-C3'-O3'-P) and ζ (C3'-O3'-P-O5') which pass from (t, g-) in B I to (g-, t) in B II .
The conformation of the phosphate within a given dinucleotide junction can thus be characterized by the difference ε-ζ which passes from roughly -90° in B I to roughly +90° in B II .
Whether the less common B II state actually exists in solution is not clear and it has been suggested that its appearance may be linked to crystal packing effects (3–5).
Unfortunately solution studies involving NMR spectroscopy are hindered by the fact that neither ε nor ζ can be determined unambiguously.
Heteronuclear 31 P- 1 H COSY spectroscopy gives access to the H3'-C3'-O3'-P coupling constant which, with the help of a modified Karplus curve (6), can be linked to the ε dihedral.
For typical coupling constants, this curve (figure 1) however yields two conformationally feasible values which can generally correspond to either B I or B II states.
Although the value corresponding to a B I conformation is generally chosen, more data is actually required to eliminate the second possibility.
An alternative route to determining the B I -B II state involves the chemical shift of the phosphorus atoms within an oligomer.
It has also been proposed that low field signals correspond to B II conformations, or to equilibria in which B II conformations make a substantial contribution (7,8).
In one case, involving a GA mismatch, this technique, combined with a molecular dynamics simulation (9), has been used to justify the presence of a B II conformation at the level of the mismatch, a conclusion also supported by crystallographic studies (10).
In an attempt to clarify the conformational and energetic aspects of B I -B II transitions within DNA oligomers we have undertaken a systematic modelling study using the JUMNA program (11) which is specifically designed for modelling nucleic acids.
We have chosen to study a biologically relevant DNA sequence, the dodecamer CATGACGTCATG whose central hexamer corresponds to the CRE (cyclic AMP responsive element) binding site (12–13).
We have recently been able to present a detailed fine structure for this oligomer based on JUMNA energy minimisation combined with extensive NMR NOESY and COSY data (14).
This dodecamer is a good example for study, firstly, because an excellent agreement with the NMR data gives us confidence in the fine structure that has been proposed.
Secondly, this structure shows a number of interesting departures from the canonical B form which may well be involved in its specific recognition.
Most notably the 31 P data show that the phosphates of 3 dinucleotide junctions (T3pG4, C6pG7, C9pA10) resonate at relatively low field and this could be indicative of B II conformations.
In the fine structure proposed we have only found a tendency towards the B II state (with ε-ζ values of roughly -30° compared to -90° in B I and +90° in B II ).
In the present study we go beyond this result by making controlled B I -B II transitions involving most of the dinucleotide junctions of the dodecamer and discussing both the energetic and conformational aspects of such transitions.
This data enables us to draw clear conclusions concerning the presence of B II conformations within the dodecamer under study and also points to more general rules which influence the probable appearance of such conformations within other sequences.
METHODOLOGY
The JUMNA (Junction Minimisation of Nucleic Acids) program, described in detail in earlier publications (15–19), has already been employed for studying base sequence effects within the various allomorphs of DNA and RNA, the conformation and stability of triple helices, the mechanism of base pair opening and the specificity of DNA-drug interactions.
The use of internal coordinates combined with helicoidal parameters which position each nucleotide within a nucleic acid fragment, reduce the number of variables representing the molecule and thus speed up and facilitate conformational searches.
This approach also simplifies the introduction of helical symmetry and enables helical deformations to be modelled in a controlled way.
The force field used has also been fully documented (20–22).
Solvent effects are currently modelled by a simple distance dependent dielectric function of sigmoidal form (21,23) and counterion damping is dealt with by a reduction of total phosphate charges to -0.5e.
This approach seems to be well adapted to modelling DNA oligomers since earlier work has shown many successful correlations with experimental data.
In the case of the CRE dodecamer (CATGACGTCATG), unconstrained minimisation with the JUMNA program led to a conformation, termed I(a), almost identical to that obtained with full NMR constraints, termed Ia(C).
The two conformations differ only by a slight repuckering of a single sugar (30° change in phase) and were separated by less than 2 Kcal/mol in internal energy.
In the following study the conformation Ia(C) is used as a starting point for the calculations.
B I to B II transitions are induced by imposing chosen values for the ε dihedral of the desired dinucleotide junction via harmonic constraints (using a force constant of 200 Kcal/mol/rad 2 ).
In cases where it was necessary to verify if the resulting conformations were compatible with the NMR data on the CRE dodecamer, we also imposed constraints on the phase angles of the deoxyribose rings using harmonic constraints (again with a force constant of 200 Kcal/mol/rad 2 ) outside the experimentally determined bracket of possible values.
NOESY distance constraints were not imposed in these cases since they contribute little towards the determination of the dodecamer conformation once the sugar puckers have been fixed.
This finding is discussed in detail in our earlier publication (14).
Note that since the CRE sequence exhibits inversion symmetry, the conformation of the dodecamer would also be expected to respect this symmetry.
That this is indeed the case is justified by the NMR data which show that both strands of the duplex are identical.
The backbone conformation of the junction C1pA2 in the first strand is thus the same as that of the corresponding junction in the second strand (at the opposite end of the dodecamer).
Similarly if any B I -B II transitions occur within the dodecamer, the resulting conformations must also respect this symmetry.
B II states will therefore always occur at two equivalent junctions (one in each strand).
In the case of the central C6pG7 junction such a transition will thus lead to two B II phosphates facing one another.
For the remaining junctions the transitions will be staggered and result in a B II phosphate facing a B I phosphate.
Both these possibilities are investigated in the following study.
Comparisons with crystallographic data are limited to 5 recent high-resolution decamer structures (5,10,24,25) which due to their crystal space groups are apparently less susceptible to packing effects than earlier dodecamer results.
Both these experimental conformations and the model conformations obtained with JUMNA are analysed using the CURVES algorithm (26,27) which determines a full independent set of helicoidal parameters related to an optimal curvilinear helical axis.
These parameters obey the Cambridge convention for DNA (28).
This approach enables fine details of DNA structure, including axis kinking or bending, to be compared in a reliable and quantitative way.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Using the CRE dodecamer as an example we will now look at the energetics and structural aspects of B I -B II transitions and attempt to answer the question of whether any B II junctions can play a significant role in the solution conformation of this oligomer.
Energetics of the B I -B II transition
For each dinucleotide junction of the dodecamer studied the starting conformation was that obtained in our earlier work taking into account constraints to NMR data (14).
The B I -B II transition was provoked by fixing the appropriate ε dihedral at values varying from roughly 180° to -70°.
As this change is made, the adjacent ζ dihedral undergoes coupled changes (g  t) leading to the conformational transition desired.
The characteristic measure of ε-ζ is found to change roughly from -100° to +100°.
The first study concerns the steps whose phosphates resonate at relatively low field, T3pG4, C6pG7 and C9pA10, and which show conformations slightly deformed towards the B II state within the dodecamer conformation.
As mentioned above, only the central step C6pG7 will have B II in both strands at the same dinucleotide level (figure 2, left).
The other two steps lead to two B II phosphates which do not face one another(figure 2, centre).
Due to this difference, we have also considered a coupled transition of T3pG4 and C9pA10 which leads to two dinucleotide steps with B II in both strands (figure 2, right).
The deformation energy curves for these transitions are given in figure 3 (left hand side) as a function of ε-ζ.
Minima found after releasing constraints on ε are indicated by stars.
In all cases the transition is seen to involve an energy barrier at an ε-ζ value of roughly 70°.
We can thus conclude that the ε-ζ values of roughly -30° observed for these steps in the dodecamer conformation clearly belong to the B I family.
It can also be seen that the B II minima are more sharply defined than the B I state.
In connection with the location of the energy barrier separating the two states, it is interesting to remark that some crystallographic results have been interpreted as containing B II phosphates when in fact these conformations correspond to ε-ζ values of roughly +30° (see, for example, 10) which in the light of our findings should be considered B I .
The barrier heights and transition energies are given in the upper part of table 1.
From this data it can be seen that the central CpG dinucleotide can transit very easily to the B II state, losing less than 2 Kcal/mol after crossing a barrier of less than 5 Kcal/mol and causing only local structural changes (see below).
The other two junctions yield less stable B II conformations and also have higher transition barriers.
Surprisingly, the coupled transition of T3pG4 and C9pA10 leads to the most stable state, but this requires passing a very high energy barrier of 15 Kcal/mol and, as we will see shortly, leads to major structural changes.
The remaining junctions we have studied (G4pC5, A5pC6, G7pT8, T8pC9) do not resonate at low field and thus would not be expected to be in the B II state.
However, from the transitions shown graphically in figure 3 (right hand side) and the energies given in the lower half of table 1, we can see that these transitions are not notably more difficult than those of the junctions already discussed.
It is also interesting to note that in the case of A5pC6 and T8pC9 junctions, the transition to B II almost causes the facing phosphate to change at the same time with final ε-ζ values of +18° and +26° respectively.
Analyzing the energy components of the transition energy, it is found in passing from the B I to the B II state, roughly 0.5–1.5 Kcal/mol of stacking energy is lost at junctions where only one strand is in the B II state, whereas 5–9 Kcal/mol are lost when both phosphates transit.
This effect has also been observed and discussed in terms of base overlap in interpreting the effects of B II junctions in crystals (10,25).
It is also found that, for the junctions whose phosphates do not resonate at low field, the torsional energy of the B II conformation is uniformly less stable than that of the starting structure.
Despite this finding, the two classes of junction we have created on the basis of their phosphorus chemical shift cannot be clearly distinguished in terms of the energetics of the B I -B II transition.
However, as we will see in section (iii), the structural impact of the transition within each class is very different.
Comparison with NMR data for the CRE dodecamer
We first question we would like to answer is whether any of the B II junctions created above are actually present in the solution structure of CATGACGTCATG or whether they could play a significant role in an equilibrium of different solution conformations.
To answer this query we have compared the available NMR data (14) with the values derived from the model conformations before and after the B I -B II transition.
The results in figure 4 involve the junctions whose phosphates resonate to low field and figure 5 shows the remaining junctions investigated.
In each case only those parameters changing significantly during the transition are shown.
Although figures 4 and 5 only indicate parameter values corresponding to the B I and B II energy minima the changes occurring during the transition are found to be smooth and monotonic.
For the first class of junctions shown in figure 4, the structural changes are localized at the step and in the strand where the B I -B II transition takes place.
The only exception to this rule occurs for the combined transition of the steps T3pG4 and C9pA10 where changes are also seen to occur in the centre of the dodecamer.
However, the most important point to note is that the B II conformations lead to a poorer correlation with the NMR data in all cases.
It thus seems that B II conformations do not occur for these steps.
Moreover since the structural changes associated with the transition occur monotonically, it seems that a significant B II contribution to a conformational equilibrium can also be ruled out.
It can also be added that if these steps deform towards more negative values of ε-ζ (around -100° rather than their naturally stable values of roughly -30°) the associated inter-proton distances hardly change, however the sugar phases resemble those of the B II state and are therefore once again in disagreement with the NMR data.
For the remaining steps shown in figure 5, structural changes occur in the sugar puckers at and beyond the site of the backbone transition leading to much worse correlation with the NMR data.
The inter-proton distances are also in much poorer agreement with the NMR data after the creation of B II sites.
The overall correlation coefficient is found to decrease from 0.97 to 0.82, many distances being violated by more than 1Å and a number of important qualitative base-base distances being lost.
Neither of these effects are observed with B I conformations.
The only exception to this result involves the G4pA5 site which does not suffer any major perturbation upon the introduction of a B II conformation.
However, a B II site at this junction can be ruled out by the very high chemical shift of the associated phosphate.
In this test, we have compared the minimal energy conformations of the dodecamer before and after B I -B II transitions.
It should however be remarked that these optimized B II forms are not compatible with the B II e values deduced from the COSY coupling constants via the modified Karplus curve.
These latter values lie close to -70° as shown in table 2 rather than around -100° as found in oligomer crystals and by the modelling we have carried out.
We have thus tried to fit to the NMR data by imposing these ε values (on one junction at a time) while also constraining the sugar puckers to agree with the COSY data.
The results of this test are that the energy required to reach this state is much higher than that leading to the optimized B II conformations, overall losses varying from 12 to 40 Kcal/mol (with the exception of the C6pG7 junction which nevertheless loses 6 Kcal/mol).
In all cases the final structures are unstable and releasing the constraints results in a passage to the previously optimized B II conformations with ε around -100°.
The structures under constraint, in common with the relaxed B II conformations, also show poor agreement with the NMR interproton distances.
Combinations of more than one B I -B II transition have also been attempted and always led to even greater energy losses.
It thus seems possible to conclude that no B II junctions play significant roles in the solution conformation of the CRE dodecamer.
Structural aspects of the B I -B II transition
We will begin by discussing the role of sugar puckering which we have recently suggested is central to characterising the fine structure of the DNA double helix (17).
We have shown that, within the B family of conformations, sugars adopt one of three states (see figure 6): high phase, low amplitude C2'-endo (termed ‘S’), low phase, high amplitude C2'-endo (termed ‘X’) and O1'-endo (termed ‘E’).
A dinucleotide junction can therefore be described by two letters indicating the two sugar puckers involved (in the conventional 5'  3' direction).
If we consider the B II conformations we have created within the CRE dodecamer in this light, it is found that they all belong to junctions of the type XS or XX.
As shown in figure 7, sugar phase and amplitude are clearly correlated and this both for our modelling conformations and for crystallographically resolved oligomers.
The three phosphates resonating at low field in the CRE dodecamer already belong to XS junctions in the B I state.
The other junctions are all of the type SX in the B I state, but are forced to become XS or XX after the imposed transition.
During these transitions, both the phase and the amplitude of the sugar at the 5'-side of the junction are closely coupled to the value of ε-ζ.
The fact that B II junctions are synonymous with XS or XX sugar puckers finds support in recent crystallographic data (5,10,24,25).
Of the 15 B II junctions observed in these studies all correspond to XS or XX sugar puckers.
One can also note that these 15 cases, are pyr-pur (9 cases) or pur-pur (6 cases).
The occurrence of B II junctions in both strands at the same level is also strongly favoured for pyr-pur steps (8 out of 9 cases) compared to pur-pur sequences (2 out of 6 cases, one involving a GA mismatch and the other involving a methylated cytosine).
It is interesting to remark that the pur-pyr junctions in the CRE dodecamer have the highest barriers to the B II transition.
The pur-pyr G7pT8 junction also led to the creation of a C3'-endo sugar pucker in the nucleotide at the 5'-end of the junction (C6).
The rotation of the phosphate group towards the minor groove following a B I -B II transition (involving the central CpG junction) is shown in figure 8.
One can note that this rotation has little effect on the orientation of the adjacent phosphate.
Note that ε and ζ respectively are the two dihedrals lying below the phosphate groups.
The relationship between ε and ζ is shown in figure 9.
This correlation is roughly linear for ζ values below -150°, but quadratic for less negative values.
The crystallographic results show a good correlation which the modelling results, both for the extreme B I and B II states and for the intermediate transition region, although there is a bigger scatter of ε values in the B II zone than the modelling would suggest.
Lastly, we consider the helicoidal parameter changes occurring after B I -B II transitions.
When the final conformation results in a B II junction facing a B I junction in the other strand, little change is seen in the helicoidal parameters (figure 10).
The only significant modifications involve shift and slide which increase slightly (by up to roughly 0.4Å).
On the other hand, when two B II junctions face one another large changes are seen (figure 10).
In these cases, shift increases by up to 1Å and Xdisp also increases sharply.
It is worth stressing that both modelling and experimental results show that Xdisp can become strongly positive in these cases (up to +2Å) indicating that the rotation of the phosphate groups towards the minor groove pushes the base pairs away and into the major groove.
To avoid losses in global stacking energy, this movement can occur even far from the B II junctions, causing more positive Xdisp values throughout an oligomer.
Rise is also found to increase (by up to 0.8Å) and roll becomes strongly negative (up to -35°) inducing a local kink of the double helix towards the minor groove (figure 11).
Analyzing the crystallographic oligomers which exhibit B II junctions also shows the presence of negative roll, however no overall curvature is seen since the neighbouring steps adopt positive rolls (5).
This observation has been interpreted as crystal packing effect, which would seem to agree with our observations.
In the case of junctions which were not initially XS, we also observe an increase in twist (figure 11), in agreement with the correlations already noted in our previous studies of B-DNA (17).
Since XS junctions already have high twist before transition, all our calculations show B II states to be associated with high twist.
This is in agreement with both crystallographic data and recent NMR studies where a B II junction is found to occur at a base pair mismatch site (9).
CONCLUSIONS
This modelling study leads to the conclusion that B II conformations are incompatible with the solution structure of the CRE dodecamer.
Junctions whose sugar puckers can be classified as XS can be transformed to the B II state with less structural perturbation and, in particular, little effect on the facing strand, but this does not imply that the energetics of the transition is easier in these cases.
Junctions which are initially SX create more disturbance, are transformed to either XS or XX puckers and push the facing junction in the direction of smaller ε-ζ values (between 26° and -12°).
It should be noted that these conformational properties of B II junctions are confirmed by crystallographic data, even for oligomers containing other perturbations such as mismatches or methylation, and, also, independently of any possible crystal packing effects.
It should also be noted that this study confirms our earlier remarks concerning the importance of the backbone conformations in determining the helical structure of DNA and, notably, twist angles.
This opinion has recently been supported by results of NMR refinements taking specifically into account data on backbone dihedral angles (29).
The CpG within the central tetramer (ACGT) of the dodecamer studied appears to be a special case.
Although its passage from B I to B II represents a small loss in energy, the barrier to the transition is very low.
Once the B II state is generated local structural perturbations lead to a kink towards the minor groove.
Other modelling studies using molecular dynamics to investigate DNA oligomers have also observed rapid, but infrequent, B I -B II transitions (30–32).
In two different studies, which both simulated DNA surrounded by water and counterions, a single transition occurred during respectively 60ps and 140ps.
In the former study the transition occurred within a homopolymeric AT sequence, while in the second a GpA junction (of type XS) was concerned.
Figure 1.
Modified Karplus curve relating the coupling constant J (Hz) for H3'-P to the dihedral angle ε (C4'-C3'-O3'-P) in degrees.
Figure 2.
Schematic diagram indicating the symmetry equivalent sites for B II junction conformations within the CRE dodecamer.
Each B II site is indicated by a horizontal ‘V’.
The cross indicates the centre of inversion symmetry of the dodecamer.
Left: C6pG7, Centre: C9pA10, right: T3pG4 and C9pA10.
Figure 3.
Deformation energy (Kcal/mol) associated with the B I -B II transitions as a function of ε-ζ (°).
Squares indicate the B I minima and stars the B II minima.
The numbers indicate the junctions involved:(1) T3pG4,(2) C9pA10,(3) C6pG7,(4) T3pG4+C9pA10,(5) G4pA5,(6) A5pC6,(7) G7pT8 and (8) T8pC9.
Figure 4.
Correspondence between the optimized conformations and the NMR data of the CRE oligomer for steps with phosphates resonating at low field.
Only those data changing by more than 5° or 0.2Å are shown.
Left: sugar phase angles (°), right: interproton distances (Å).
Values coming from B I model conformations are indicated by squares, while stars show the values after the transition to B II junctions.
Horizontal lines indicate the NMR error bars.
Figure 5.
Correspondence between the optimized conformations and the NMR data of the CRE oligomer for steps with phosphates not resonating at low field.
See caption to figure (4) for details.
Figure 6.
Definition of the pucker states denoted S, X and E on the pseudorotation ring.
 Successively larger circles indicate amplitudes of 30°, 40° and 50°.
Open rectangles correspond to pyrimidines, hatched rectangles to purines and cross-hatched rectangles to all nucleotides.
Figure 7.
Correlation between sugar phase and amplitude (°) for junctions involving B II phosphate conformations: Model results are indicated by (*) for the 5'-sugar and () for the 3'-sugar, while crystallographic results are indicated by () for the 5'-sugar and () for the 3'-sugar.
Figure 8.
Stereographic diagram showing the B I (below) to B II (above) conformations of the central phosphate linkage (C6pG7, indicated by an arrow) within a short backbone segment of the CRE oligomer.
Figure 9.
Correlation between ε and ζ.
Dots correspond to model conformations and squares to crystallographic results.
The diagonal line ε- ζ=; 70° corresponds to the separation between B II conformations and intermediate or B I conformations.
Figure 10.
Conformations of the CRE oligomer with and without B II junctions.
Centre: optimal conformation with only B I junctions, Left: a central B II junction in both strands at C6pG7 causing kinking of the duplex, Right: two symmetry related single strand B II junctions at C9pA10 (indicated by arrows).
The optimal helical axis is shown in each case.
Figure 11.
Structural deformations linked to the B I -B II transitions.
The upper diagram shows the evolution of local curvature (angle between successive helical axis vectors in degrees) as B II sites are created (numbers indicate the junctions involved, see caption to figure 3).
The lower diagrams show roll and twist as a function of ε-ζ for minimal energy model conformations (crosses) and for crystallographic results (squares).
Mitochondrial genes in the colourless alga Prototheca wickerhamii resemble plant genes in their exons but fungal genes in their introns
ABSTRACT
The mitochondrial DNA from the colourless alga Prototheca wickerhamii contains two mosaic genes as was revealed from complete sequencing of the circular extranuclear genome.
The genes for the large subunit of the ribosomal RNA (LSUrRNA) as well as for subunit I of the cytochrome oxidase (coxI) carry two and three intronic sequences respectively.
On the basis of their canonical nucleotide sequences they can be classified as group I introns.
Phylogenetic comparisons of the coxI protein sequences allow us to conclude that the P.wickerhamii mtDNA is much closer related to higher plant mtDNAs than to those of the chlorophyte alga C.reinhardtii .
The comparison of the intron sequences revealed several unusual features:(1) The P.wickerhamii introns are structurally related to mitochondrial introns from various ascomycetous fungi. (2) Phylogenetic analyses indicate a close relationship between fungal and algal intronic sequences.
(3) The P. wickerhamii introns are located at positions within the structural genes which can be considered as preferred intron insertion sites in homologous mitochondrial genes from fungi or liverwort.
In all cases, the sequences adjacent to the insertion sites are very well conserved over large evolutionary distances.
Our finding of highly similar introns in fungi and algae is consistent with the idea that introns have already been present in the bacterial ancestors of present day mitochondria and evolved concomitantly with the organells.
INTRODUCTION
Two types of introns have been identified in mitochondrial genes.
Their classification into group I and group II is based on canonical nucleotide sequence motifs and on conserved characteristics of the secondary structure potentially formed by the intron RNA (1, 2, 3).
Numerous fungal species contain both groups of mitochondrial introns (reviewed by 2, 4) and the variation in intron number is considerable.
The gene for subunit I of the cytochrome oxidase (coxI), for example, contains 16 introns in the filamentous fungus Podospora anserina and up to seven introns in various strains of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae , but none in the common laboratory strain of Neurospora crassa (5, 6, 7, 8).
So far, only few introns have been detected in mitochondria from angiosperms and gymnosperms and all belong to group II (9, 10, 11).
However, numerous group I and group II introns were identified in mitochondria of the liverwort Marchantia polymorpha (12).
The variability in the distribution of intron types and numbers is highly suggestive for an unorthodox way of their propagation.
Their particular site of insertion which is mainly located in well conserved regions of the genes is another peculiar feature of mitochondrial introns (13).
Several introns are even inserted at identical positions of homologous genes of unrelated species, such as ascomycetous fungi and liverwort (12, 13, 14, 15).
Due to the conserved structure and the  occurrence of identical insertion sites of mitochondrial introns, it has been speculated that they may already have existed in the progenitor of fungal mitochondria (7).
Other considerations have led to the suggestion that introns could have been transferred horizontally between different species (13, 16, 17, 18, 19).
Our current knowledge is too restricted to retrace the pathway of mitochondrial evolution among the main eukaryotic kingdoms on the one hand and to eubacteria on the other hand.
Accordingly, we are still unable to define the origin of mitochondrial introns and their distribution throughout eukaryotes.
We expect to find the missing information in the largely unexplored group of algae and protozoans.
So far, only one green algal mitochondrial genome has been extensively characterized: that of C.reinhardtii has been almost completely sequenced (for a review see 20).
Partial mitochondrial sequences of the green algae Scenedesmus obliquus and Chlamydomonas smithii have also been published (21, 22).
The mtDNA from C.reinhardtii is strikingly unlike the plant or any other known mitochondrial genome from eukaryotes and there is little indication that C.reinhardtii and plants share a common mitochondrial ancestor (23, 24).
In order to extend our knowledge of the green algal/plant lineage, we recently started to analyze another chlorophyte mtDNA, namely that of the colourless alga Prototheca wickerhamii .
Comparative analysis of the mitochondrial small ribosomal subunit RNA (mtSSUrRNA) indicates that the mtDNA from P.wickerhamii is very different to that of C.reinhardtii and considerably related to higher plants (25).
In this paper we will analyse intron sequences detected in the coxI and LSUrRNA genes of P.wickerhamii mitochondria which unexpectedly resemble fungal introns.
The peculiarity of this result is supported by our phylogenetic analyses which place the P.wickerhamii mtDNA at the basis of higher plant mtDNAs and far from that of fungi and C.reinhardtii .
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Strains, vectors and gene libraries
Prototheca wickerhamii (strain 263-11) was obtained from the ‘Sammlung von Algenkulturen, Göttingen, Germany’ and grown as described (25).
Lambda vectors EMBL3 and EMBL4 (Stratagene) were used for the cloning of partial Sau 3AI and Eco RI digests of extranuclear DNA, enriched by CsCl centrifugation.
Random restriction fragment libraries for sequencing were subcloned using vectors M13mp19 (26) and pBluescriptII KS+ (Stratagene).
The recombinant lambda-phage LPw2-13 was isolated from the EMBL4 gene bank by probing with the recombinant plasmid pGW1, which contains a 4.3 kbp Hind III fragment of P.wickerhamii mtDNA coding for the 3' part of the coxI gene and the SSUrRNA gene (25).
Screening of the EMBL3 gene bank with terminal Eco RI fragments from LPw2-13 identified the overlapping clone LPw3-1.1.
The recombinant phages LPw2-13 and LPw3-1.1 contain P. wickerhamii mtDNA fragments of 13.5 and 9.6 kbp length, respectively.
Possible rearrangements of the insert DNA were excluded by hybridizing subfragments of the lambda inserts with corresponding extranuclear DNA fragments (results not shown).
Isolation of nucleic acids, gel electrophoresis, hybridization conditions, oligonucleotide synthesis and standard in vitro recombinant techniques were carried out as described elsewhere (27, 28).
cDNA cloning .
Total RNA from P.wickerhamii was isolated according to(28), and primed with oligonucleotide 164 (5' CTCCAGTTAAACCACCTAC) followed by reverse transcription (27).
The resulting cDNA was amplified by the polymerase chain reaction using oligonucleotide 164 and oligonucleotide 198 (5' TGTATGGGCTGTATTTATTAC) as primers.
The PCR fragments were cloned into M13mp19 and six independent clones were analysed by DNA sequencing.
DNA sequencing and computer analysis .
The dideoxy chain termination method was used (29).
High resolution polyacrylamide gels for long range reading were prepared according to(30).
Computer analysis included homology searches with FASTA (31), Multalin (32) and programs developed by (32, unpublished data).
Phylogenetic trees based on coxI amino acid sequences were established either with (i) a parsimony program (34) or (ii) the neighbour joining program of (35) using a distance matrix calculated with ‘protdist’(Felsenstein, unpublished).
Phylogenetic trees based on the nucleic acid sequences of introns inserted at the identical position as intron 1 of the LSUrRNA gene from P.wickerhamii were calculated with a maximum parsimony program (36), a maximum likelihood and a neighbour joining program (35).
The results of the maximum parsimony program were submitted to a bootstrapping procedure (36).
RESULTS
The coxI gene of Prototheca contains three group I introns
Isolation of recombinant lambda phage LPw2-13 containing the coxI gene is described in the Material and Methods section.
The complete sequencing of the recombinant phage revealed the gene organization of this mitochondrial DNA segment including the coxI gene as shown in Fig.1.
The coxI gene of P.wickerhamii is 5369 nucleotides long and contains three intervening sequences at amino acid position 129, 235 and 239 splitting the amino acid coding region in four exons of 387, 319, 11, and 828 nucleotides, respectively (EMBL acc. no.
X68721).
The existence of the mini-exon 3 and the positions of the adjacent intron splice points were verified by cDNA sequencing.
The deduced protein is 514 amino acids in length (Fig. 2).
All introns in the coxI gene of Prototheca contain the canonical P, Q, R, S sequence elements and can be folded into the conserved potential RNA secondary structure characteristic for group I introns (2, 37).
The first and third intron (1451 nt and 1323 nt, respectively) each contain an open reading frame (ORF) for 342 and 277 amino acids in length, respectively.
Intron 2 is shorter (1056 nt) and possesses no ORF.
As its potential RNA folding is extraordinarily similar to that of the Podospora anserina coxI intron 8 (Pa ai8)(7), we analyzed its structure in detail.
Fig. 4a shows that the P.wickerhamii ai2 carries all postulated helices (P1-P9) in the conserved core sequence and displays the characteristics of subgroup ID introns: a CUA sequence motif separates P6 and P7 and a UGUA motif occurs between P8 and P7' (7, 15).
Group I introns in the LSUrRNA gene of P.wickerhamii 
The gene organization of the mitochondrial LSUrRNA identified by DNA sequencing of lambda phage LPw3-1.1 is depicted in Fig. 1.
(The complete sequence, EMBL acc. no.
X68722, and the secondary structure model of the LSUrRNA will be published elsewhere.)
Fig. 3 shows the secondary structure of the fifth domain in which two introns of 375 nt and 500 nt length are inserted at position 2721 and 3096, respectively.
The structure of the P.wickerhamii domain V is almost identical to the corresponding model of the LSUrRNA from E.coli (38) and the introns are located in highly conserved stretches.
Both introns display all distinctive features of group I introns (2, 39) and, moreover, are members of subgroup IA which is characterized by the existence of an additional stem-loop in the P7 region (P7.1)(19)(Fig. 4b).
Close phylogenetic relationship between Prototheca and plant mitochondria
The phylogenetic distances of the coxI protein from various eukaryotes were calculated with the program of (34) and Felsenstein's ‘PROTDIST’ plus ‘NEIGHBOR’(Felsenstein, unpublished, 35) using 16 sequences from species including monocots, dicots, mosses, green algae, fungi and animals.
Both programs gave essentially the same result (Fig. 5).
Obviously, the tree is consistent with phylogenies based on nuclear SSUrRNA sequences: animal and fungal sequences each form a cluster, the higher plants form a separate branch divided into monocots and dicots,M.polymorpha branches close to higher plants and Prototheca near the root of plant mitochondria.
Only Chlamydomonas reinhardtii which has been chosen as an out-group is unreliably  positioned in the presented tree as the bootstrap values are lower than 80% between the connecting intermediate modes of the three eukaryotic kingdoms of fungi, plant, and animals.
The recurrent difficulty to position mitochondrial sequences from C.reinhardtii in phylogenetic trees is due to the extreme branch length of C.reinhardtii and is expected to disappear with the availability of more data from green algal species.
Phylogeny of mitochondrial introns in domain V of LSUrRNA
To date, five species are known which contain a group I intron at an identical position of the mtLSUrRNA (Fig. 3): the four ascomycetes P.anserina (intron ri2),N.crassa (intron ri1),A.nidulans (intron ri1),S.cerevisiae (intron ri1) and P.wickerhamii (intron ri1)( references are given in the legend of Fig. 3).
A phylogenetic analysis was performed with five corresponding algal and fungal intron nucleotide sequences.
Fig. 6 shows the phylogeny of these LSUrRNA introns, constructed with a maximum parsimony program (36).
The tree is robust as indicated by its bootstrap values (all above 93%).
Consistent results were obtained by using informative positions varying in numbers between 453 and 98 or by applying further algorithms like a maximum likelihood approach and a neighbour-joining method (35).
Two main aspects of the presented tree can be noted.
i) It is congruent with the traditional fungal taxonomy and with phylogenetic trees of fungi based on nuclear SSUrRNA data: the two pyrenomycetes (P.anserina and N.crassa ) branch very closely together and their distance to A.nidulans , a representative of the plectomycetes, is shorter than that to S.cerevisiae , belonging to the endomycetes. ii) The position of P.wickerhamii is unexpectedly closer to S.cerevisiae than to all other ascomycetes, whereas the distance between S.cerevisiae and P.wickerhamii lies in the same range as that between the two ascomycetes,S.cerevisiae and A.nidulans .
Two further introns were included in our comparisons: the second LSUrRNA intron from P.wickerhamii , which resembles Pw ri1 in sequence and secondary structure, and ri2 from Scenedesmus obliquus mitochondria, which is located at an identical position as ri2 from P.wickerhamii (21).
Focusing exclusively on the positions of P.wickerhamii ri1, ri2 and So ri2 in a phylogenetic tree, the distance between the two homologous introns So ri2 and Pw ri2 is shorter than that between ri1 and ri2 of P.wickerhamii (data not shown).
This suggests that ri2 originated from the transposition of ri1, but that this event dates back to a time before P.wickerhamii and S.obliquus diverged.
Conserved intron insertion positions in the coxI and LSUrRNA genes of P.wickerhamii 
The availability of sequence data from two mosaic genes of P.wickerhamii mitochondria allows for the first time a comparison of algal intron positions with those from fungi and liverwort.
The insertion sites from P.wickerhamii , ascomycetous fungi and Marchantia coxI introns are summarized in a coxI protein alignment (Fig. 2).
As already noted, introns tend to reside in regions corresponding to highly conserved protein segments (e.g., 40, 13; for a review, see 41).
The same  holds true for the three P.wickerhamii introns.
These are, however, even inserted at positions identical to those of corresponding fungal and liverwort intervening sequences.
All LSUrRNA introns of P.wickerhamii are located in domain V (Fig. 3) which also seems to be the  preferred target for introns in many other species.
As much as five mitochondrial introns are known today which are inserted at the same position as intron 1 in P.wickerhamii .
The sequence adjacent to the insertion site is very well conserved over large evolutionary distances such as between fungi, algae and bacteria.
Mitochondrial introns from Prototheca and fungi are highly similar in sequence and secondary structure
As mentioned above, the potential RNA folding of Pw ai2 extraordinarily resembles that of Pa ai8, both members of intron subgroup ID (7).
In fact, the structures of both introns are nearly superimposable.
At the nucleotide sequence level, the similarity exceeds the conserved P, Q, R, S (corresponding to P4, P7) motifs and includes the additional helical elements P1 to P9 (39).
A sequence identity of about 80 % has been found between both introns in the secondary structure core (Fig. 4a).
The comparison of the P.wickerhamii ri1 and ri2 with S.cerevisiae ri1 (42) which belong to group IA (Fig. 4b) reveal similar results.
Regions of sequence similarity exceed beyond the very conserved core into the helices P4, P6, P8 and P9.1 as well as into the loops of P7.1 and P9.2.
ORFs in P.wickerhamii introns resemble their counterparts in ascomycetous fungi and the liverwort Marchantia polymorpha
Group I intronic ORFs from different organisms usually display only limited similarities, which are mainly restricted to two conserved dodecapeptide motifs (37, 2, 1).
However, the intronic ORFs from Pw ai1, Mp ai4 and Sp ai1 on the one hand and those from Pw ai3, Mp ai7, Sc ai4 and Pa ai9 on the other hand, show significant sequence identities, despite the large evolutionary distance between fungal and algal mitochondria (Fig. 7a, b).
For example, Pw ai1 ORF shows a 28 % identity over a stretch of 229 amino acids with the Mp ai4 ORF.
Similarly, Pw ai3 ORF has an identity of 30 % over a stretch of 260 amino acids with Sc ai4 ORF.
Possible implications will be discussed below.
DISCUSSION
The phylogenetic analysis based on coxI sequences implies a close relationship between plant and P.wickerhamii mitochondria
At the level of nuclear sequences, the specific link between the higher plants and unicellular eukaryotes is well established.
Chlorophytes are the acknowledged progenitors of embryophytes (mosses, ferns, gymnosperms and angiosperms).
So far, however, this link does not seem to apply to the mitochondrial genome and available data do not suggest that green algal and plant mtDNAs share a common ancestor.
Phylogenetic trees based on mitochondrial SSUrRNA and LSUrRNA sequences including Chlamydomonas reinhardtii led to the assumption that the mitochondrial lineage of embryophytes and chlorophytes is incoherent (24, 23, 43).
Our phylogenetic analysis including P. wickerhamii shows that this green algal mtDNA does cluster with corresponding sequences from lower and higher plants.
It appears that P.wickerhamii has accumulated far less mutations in its mtDNA compared to higher plants than Chlamydomonas , thus providing us with a well suited model organism to study the plant-algal mitochondrial lineage for the first time.
Therefore we propose a recent common ancestor for mitochondria of P.wickerhamii and plants.
Were group I introns already present in the bacterial ancestor of mitochondria?
The phylogeny based on mitochondrial LSUrRNA introns inserted at an identical position as Pw ri1 coincides strikingly with trees based on nuclear sequences and with phylogenies using morphological data of the corresponding taxa.
The phylogenetic tree indicates that the taxa diverged at the same time as did the mitochondrial LSUrRNA introns (Fig. 6).
Therefore we assume that this particular intron is ancient and propagated via mendelian inheritance rather than via horizontal, interspecific gene transfer.
As a consequence it might have been present in the putative progenitors of mitochondria.
A more complete record of sequencing data specifically in the algal, protozoan and prokaryotic groups would be necessary to trace the evolutionary origin of this intron type back to the alpha-purple bacteria, the bona fide eubacterial ancestors of mitochondria and the suspected common origin of these introns.
Even if introns from different species are located at identical sites within genes, there may or may not be an intronic ORF present.
In cases where ORFs are present, their position in the RNA secondary structure may differ and the similarity of their deduced amino acid sequence is usually very low, i.e., restricted to  dodecapeptide motifs (44, 45).
Therefore it has been proposed that intronic ORFs may be capable of their own evolution, independent of the intervening sequence in which they reside (44, 46, 19).
However, this view is contradictory with the results described here.
For example, we noticed consistency for those four coxI introns, from fungi, algae and liverwort which are inserted at amino acid position 239 (referring to the  anumeration in P.wickerhamii , see fig. 2).
Not only are these introns inserted at identical positions of the coxI gene, but in addition their ORFs are quite similar (Fig. 7b).
Concerning Pw ai1 and its ORF a similar situation can be observed: the ORFs of the corresponding introns from M.polymorpha and S.pombe (Fig. 2) show significant similarities to the algal intronic ORF (Fig. 7a).
In both cases the intronic ORFs and their introns seem to be intimately linked and appear to be propagated together.
Why do plant mitochondria lack group I introns?
Group I introns reside in a large number of genomes from various sources such as phages T4 and SPO1 (47, 48, 49), cyanobacteria (50, 51), plastids (52, 53), mitochondria and nuclei (Tetrahymena (54);Physarum (55)).
In higher plant mitochondria, however, not a single group I intron has so far been detected.
Instead, a small number of group II introns, often involved in trans-splicing processes, are present in these organelles (10, 11, 56, 57).
A variable intron distribution was recently discussed for the coxII and the nad4 genes in plant mitochondria (58, 59).
Surprisingly, several group I as well as group II introns were found in the mtDNA of the liverwort Marchantia polymorpha , which are located in protein and RNA coding genes (12).
Intron loss was attributed to a reverse transcriptase activity potentially encoded in group II intronic ORFs and certain, freestanding genes present in higher plant mitochondria (60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 28).
It was proposed that, the putative reverse transcriptase (e.g. encoded by group II intronic ORFs) could produce a cDNA copy of an intron-less RNA, which, if followed by a homologous recombination event involving the cDNA and the genomic DNA, would promote intron loss (46).
This process was suggested to account for the unbalanced numbers of group I versus group II introns in mitochondria from various species (46).
In our view, however, this process would rather cause the  concomitant loss of group I and group II introns.
The unexpected finding of very few and exclusively group II introns in plant mitochondria may be explained by their requirement for trans-splicing.
All introns may have been eliminated in this organelle by the above mentioned mechanism, except those which are implicated in trans-splicing.
Trans-splicing introns are expected to be very resistant to intron-loss, because the correct replacement of genomic copies of trans-spliced genes cannot be achieved by simple homologous recombination and should therefore be extremely rare.
Whatever the mechanism of the assumed intron loss is in the chlorophyte mitochondrial lineage, that massive loss should have appeared after the bifurcation of lower and higher plants.
Figure 1.
Organization of the coxI and LSUrRNA gene region of Prototheca wickerhamii mitochondria.
Exons are indicated by black, introns by open bars.
The direction of transcription is shown by large arrows.
Abbreviations: ex, exon; i, intron; B,Bam HI; E,Eco RI; S,Sal I; coxI, subunit I of cytochrome c oxidase; LSUrRNA & SSUrRNA, large and small subunits of ribosomal RNA.
Figure 2.
Alignment of the coxI proteins from algae and fungi.
The amino acid sequences were deduced from the DNA sequences.
Intron insertion sites are indicated.
Abbreviations and references: Pw,Prototheca wickerhamii ; Mp,Marchantia polymorpha (12); Ta,Triticum aestivum (65); Sc,Saccharomyces cerevisiae (66); Cr,Chlamydomonas reinhardtii (67); Pa,Podospora anserina (7); An,Aspergillus nidulans (14); Sp,Schizosaccharomyces pombe (68, 13, 69).
Figure 3.
Secondary structure model of domain V of the LSUrRNA from P.wickerhamii , identical nucleotides compared to the corresponding sequence from E.coli (38) are printed in bold.
Several group I intron insertion sites are indicated.
The model was constructed according to(70) and the numbering of domains was performed following (71).
Abbreviations and references: Ce,Chlamydomonas eugametos (72); Cr,Chlamydomonas reinhardtii (73); Nc,Neurospora crassa (40); Pa,Podospora anserina (74); Pp,Physarum polycephalum (75, 76); Pw,Prototheca wickerhamii ; Sc,Saccharomyces cerevisiae (42); So,Scenedesmus obliquus (21); mt, mitochondrial; n, nuclear; pt, plastid.
Figure 4.
RNA secondary structure model of (a)Pw ai2 and (b)Pw ri1.
The helix anumeration and structure corresponds to the model and the helix anumeration proposed by Burke et al.(39) and Michel and Westhof (87).
Identical nucleotides to Pa ai8 (Fig. 4a)(7) and to Sc ri1 (Fig. 4b)(42) are printed in bold.
Exons are indicated in lower case letters, introns in capitals; arrows specify splice points.
Figure 5.
Phylogenetic tree based on the coxI protein from various eukaryotes.
The unrooted tree has been calculated with Felsenstein's ‘protdist’(unpublished) and neighbour joining programs (35).
Essentially the same result was obtained with the program of Hein (34).
The length of the horizontal branches represents the relative phylogenetic distance between the species.
Residue 4 to 463 of the coxI protein of P.wickerhamii (Fig. 2) and the corresponding stretches of the sequences from other species were used.
The species are Chlamydomonas ,C.reinhardtii (67);Neurospora ,N.crassa (8);Aspergillus ,A.nidulans (77, 14); yeast,Saccharomyces cerevisiae (66);Prototheca ,P.wickerhamii ;Marchantia ,M.polymorpha (12); wheat,Triticium aestivum (65); maize,Zea mays (78);Oenothera ,O.berteriana (79); soybean,Glycine max (80); pea,Pisum sativum (81);Drosophila ,D.melanogaster (82); chicken,Gallus gallus (83);Xenopus ,X.laevis (84); bovine,Bos tauris (85); human,Homo sapiens (86).
Figure 6.
Phylogenetic tree based on mitochondrial LSUrRNA introns (ri) from fungi and algae which correspond to Pw ri1.
The unrooted tree was calculated using the parsimony program of (36).
The length of the branches indicates the relative distance between the species.
Abbreviations see legend of Fig. 3.
Figure 7.
Alignment of homologous group I intronic open reading frames from (a)Mp ai4, Sp ai1 and Pw ai1 and (b)Mp ai7, Pw ai3, Pa ai9 and Sc ai4.
Conserved dodecapeptide regions are dotted, additional regions of similarity are indicated by boxes.
For abbreviations and references see legend of Fig. 2.
Nucleotide sequence of the cDNA encoding silk gland elongation factor 1α
Most of eukaryotic elongation factor 1 (EF-1) consists of four subunits, EF-1α, -β,- β',; and -γ, as shown in silk gland, wheat germ (1, 2),Artemia salina (3), and Xenopus laevis (4).
EF-1α catalyzes the binding of aminoacyl-tRNAs to ribosomes concomitant with the hydrolysis of GTP, while EF-1β β'; γ catalyzes the exchange of GTP for GDP bound to EF-1α subsequent to its release from the ribosome and stimulates the binding of aminoacyl-tRNA to ribosomes.
Recently, it was shown that two independent EF-1α genes in Drosophila melanogaster expressed individually during development (5).
In Xenopus laevis , two EF-1α genes encoding the somatic and the oocyte form were also reported (6).
In this report, we describe isolation of silk gland EF-1α cDNA clones and nucleotide sequence of a clone.
Poly(A) + RNA was isolated from the posterior silk gland of Bombyx mori at the 3rd day of the 5th instar and the cDNA was synthesized using the cDNA synthesis kit (Amersham Corp.).
The silk gland cDNA library was constructed in λgt11 according to the manufacturer's instructions (Amersham Corp.).
Several positive clones were obtained out of 1.0 10 4 recombinants by screening with human EF-1α cDNA as a probe (7).
DNA fragments from these clones were subcloned into the pUC19 vector and one clone named KA71 was sequenced using the Sequenase Version 2.0 Kit applied to double stranded DNA (USB Corp.)(8).
The cDNA insert of KA71 contains 1392 bp of coding region encoding 464 amino acids, 47 bp of 5' untranslated region, and 248 bp of 3' untranslated region.
The amino acids sequence had 94% similarity to Drosophila melanogaster EF-1α (5), 89% to Artemia salina EF-1α (9), 86% to human EF-1α (10), and 85% to Xenopus laevis EF-1α (11).
These results suggest that EF-1α genes are well conserved among these species.
The consensus sequences GHVDHGKT (18–25), DCPG (80–83), and NKCD (135–138) involved in three GDP binding domains of E.coli EF-Tu (12) are conserved in silk gland EF-1α at residues 14–22, 91–94, and 153–156, respectively (Figure 1).
Moreover, an ethanolamine-phosphoglycerol moiety is linked to the murine EF-1α via an amide bond to Glu-301 and Glu-374 (13) and Chinese hamster fibroblast EF-1α is modified by the covalent attachment of phosphatidylinositol at Asp-306 (14).
These amino acids residues are also conserved in silk gland EF-1α at the same sites.
Experiments are underway to isolate another clone of silk gland EF-1α.
Elongation factor 1 contains two homologous guanine-nucleotide exchange proteins as shown from the molecular cloning of beta and delta subunits
Elongation factor 1 mediates the elongation step of mRNA translation.
The transfer of aminoacyl-tRNA to ribosomes under hydrolysis of GTP is catalyzed by a GTP binding protein, EF1α.
A guanine-nucleotide exchange complex now referred as EF1βγδ replaces GDP by GTP on EF1α (1).
A complex, purified from Xenopus oocytes as a substrate for the meiotic and mitotic p34 cdc2 kinase, was shown to contain the guanine-nucleotide exchange activity (2).
The Xenopus complex is composed of three main proteins, p30, p36 and p47.
Surprisingly, microsequencing of two of its components, p36 and p30 suggested the presence of two related proteins (2).
We have previously cloned and sequenced the cDNA encoding for p47 or EF1γ (3) and p36 or EF1δ (4), we present here the molecular cloning of p30 or EF1β.
This result allows for the first time, sequence analysis of EF1β and δ proteins, both present in the same complex.
A λgt11 Xenopus ovarian library was screened with a polyclonal antibody raised against the EF1βγδ Xenopus complex.
A clone encoding for EF1β was isolated.
The insert (811 bp) was subcloned into pBluescript KS II phagemid and sequenced in both directions using standard techniques (5)(Figure 1A).
The encoded protein, of 227 amino acids length, was identified to EF1β by the presence in the cDNA-deduced sequence of all peptides found by the microsequencing of purified p30 protein (Figure 1B).
A putative phosphorylation site for casein kinase II was found at 108 Serine, matching the one identified in the corresponding protein of Artemia (6).
Interestingly, sequence identity was high between the C-terminal domain of the EF1β protein (100–227) and the C-terminal domain of EF-1δ protein (85%) i.e. in the domain containing the guanine-nucleotide exchange activity (7).
The 1–100 N terminal part of EF1β appears clearly unrelated (13% identity) to that of EF1δ.
The presence of two different guanine-nucleotide exchange proteins in the same complex questions their respective physiological roles, which could be related to their specific N-ter domains.
The human homolog of ribosomal protein S18
In order to identify new genes preferentially expressed in cytotrophoblasts of first trimester placenta, which display phenotypical characteristics similar to tumor cells, we have made a subtracted cDNA library.
The library represents early placental, cytotrophoblastic, endoplasmic reticular membrane-bound RNA in the 0.5–2 kb size range, from which common sequences with terminal placenta and IL-2 activated T lymphocytes have been removed.
Recombinant cDNA were analyzed by differential screening.
Clones displaying a preferential expression in early placenta after Southern blot analysis were selected and sequenced.
We have thus focused our study on five clones, the level of expression of which was analyzed by Northern blot in various tissues.
One of these, designated B9, was expressed sparsely in terminal placenta and with varying levels in most other tissues.
Detailed sequence analysis was performed, revealing 549 bp containing a polyadenylation signal and an open reading frame of 152 amino acids.
This ORF starts with an ATG codon, which occurs in the context CAGCCAT G T, differing in 3 positions from the optimal sequence CCACCAT G C (1).
TAA is used as stop codon.
Database search using the FASTA program (2), showed 90.7% nucleic acid and 100% amino acid homology with the mouse KE3 sequence as shown below.
The corresponding rat amino acid sequence as predicted from cDNA was also described to be 100% identical (3).
The predicted KE3 gene product, which remains putative until in vivo proof is obtained, has been described as the ribosomal protein S18 based on homology with bacterial ribosomal protein S13 and the electrophoretic properties of the in vitro translation product (4).
The sequence also shows a structural homology with fos-related molecules based on the heptad repeat of leucine residues (leucine zipper) preceded by a basic region shown below as asterisks (5).
PROSITE (A.Bairoch) analysis reveals six putative phosphorylation sites.
The KE3 gene belongs to a group of six genes (KE1-5 and SET), located in the H-2K region of the murine MHC (6).
A homolog of this region has also been localized in the human major histocompatibility complex (7).
Striking homology between mouse and human transcription enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1)
Transcription enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) has been shown to activate the enhancer components of several different viruses.
TEF-1 binds specifically to the GT-IIc element (5'-GTGGAATGT-3') found in enhancer sequences of SV40, human papillomavirus (HPV) -16, and some polyomavirus mutants that replicate in undifferentiated mouse embryonal carcinoma cells (1–3).
TEF-1 may also serve to activate tissue specific genes at critical stages during animal development; in fact, it may be one of the first enhancer activation proteins expressed during mammalian development.
TEF-1 is present in undifferentiated mouse embryonal carcinoma cells (3), and enhancers that rely on TEF-1 binding sites are active as early as the 2-cell stage in mouse development (4, 5).
TEF-1 activity is also found in some, but not all, differentiated cells.
TEF-1 activity is present in human keratinocytes and cervical carcinoma cells, but not in B-lymphocytes (1, 2).
Although the function of TEF-1 is not yet known, TEF-1 bears 68% homology to the neuronal specific Drosophila gene,scalloped (sd )(6), that affects wing morphology via its role in formation of sensory structures and neural development.
Earlier studies suggested that mouse and human TEF-1 genes may have a sequence diversion (1).
Therefore, isolation of the mouse homolog of TEF-1 should facilitate the analysis of its tissue specific functions and its possible role in development.
A human cDNA clone (hTEF1-38) encoding TEF-1 was isolated from a Hela cell cDNA library (Stratagene) by screening with a synthetic oligonucleotide encoding amino acids (aa) 110 to 127 (Figure 1) according to the published sequence (1).
An 0.5 kb DNA fragment encoding aa 44 to 216, corresponding to the N'-terminus of the human clone, was used as a probe to isolate three clones from a mouse cDNA library of PCC4 embryonal carcinoma cells (Lambda ZAPII, oligo(dT) and random primed cDNA library from Stratagene).
Nucleotide sequence analysis was performed using an automated DNA sequencer and the Taq DyeDeoxy termination kit (Applied Biosystems).
The first strand was sequenced with a set of deletion-clones prepared using an ‘Erase -a- Base’ kit (Promega).
The second strand was sequenced using appropriate synthetic oligonucleotides as primers.
The deduced amino acid sequence (Figure 1) is a combined sequence of two overlapping cDNA clones (mTEF1-13, mTEF1-20).
The mouse DNA sequence encoding TEF-1 was 92% homologous with the corresponding human sequence.
Moreover, there exists a striking 99% homology between the two deduced amino acid sequences (a difference of 3 out of 426 aa).
This degree of conservation indicates a critical structure-function relationship in the TEF-1 protein, conserved throughout evolution.
The mouse and human sequences differed at two restriction sites corresponding to amino acids 43 (HindIII) and 221 (EcoRI).
These differences distinguish the mouse from the human TEF-1 sequence.
DNA samples isolated from five different humans and from five different mouse strains were analyzed by Southern blot hybridization (data not shown).
All five human DNAs gave the human restriction pattern, and all five mouse DNAs gave the mouse restriction pattern.
A similar degree of sequence conservation between rodent and human genes also exists in at least three essential transcription factors, SP1 (97%, 7), TFIID (92%, 8) and the homeodomain in homeobox genes (95%, 9).
Sequences homologous to the mouse TEF-1 coding sequence are found in most vertebrates, including the distantly related chicken (Figure 2).
Although this probe did not detect TEF-1 sequences in Saccharomyces cerevisiae , the ABAA gene of Aspergillus abaA and the TEC-1 gene of yeast represent transcription factors whose DNA-binding domain bears significant homology with TEF-1 (65% for Aspergillus and 44% for Saccharomyces ).
This conserved domain (aa 30-97) has been referred to as the TEA domain (9).
Northern blot analysis using the mTEF1 DNA probe revealed an RNA transcript of about 10 kb in a wide range of mouse tissues.
mTEF-1 RNA was most abundant in lung, kidney and brain (Figure 3).
Figure 1.
Comparison of deduced amino acid sequences of the mouse and human TEF-1 proteins.
Figure 2.
Blotting-hybridization of a 0.5 kb mTEF-1 32 P-DNA probe against cellular DNA from a variety of organisms (Zoo-Blot, Clontech).
Ethidium bromide staining revealed that each lane contained a similar amount of DNA except for monkey DNA, which was under represented.
Figure 3.
Blotting-hybridization of a 0.5 kb mTEF-1 32 P-DNA probe and a human β-actin probe (Clonetech) against cellular polyA+ RNA from a variety of mouse tissues (Multiple Tissue Northern Blot, Clontech).
The primary structure of human ribosomal protein L12
The ribosome serves as the site of protein synthesis in all cells.
Biogenesis of the mammalian ribosome is a complex process involving the coordinated expression of four ribosomal RNA molecules and approximately 75 ribosomal proteins.
In order to understand the mechanisms governing ribosome biosynthesis, it is necessary to elucidate the structure and organization of its components.
A cDNA clone which encodes human ribosomal protein L12 has been isolated from a cDNA library constructed using poly (A+) RNA from human dermal microvascular endothelial cells.
The cDNA insert is 692 nucleotides long and consists of 68 nucleotides of 5' noncoding sequence, an open reading frame comprising 495 nucleotides, and 129 residues of the 3' untranslated region.
A poly (A) stretch of 80 residues is present 20 nucleotides downstream of the polyadenylation signal, AATAAA.
Nucleotide sequence comparison of the cDNA exhibits a 90% sequence homology to that of rat ribosomal protein L12 (1).
The amino acid sequence deduced from the open reading frame encodes a protein of 165 amino acid residues and exhibits 99.4% sequence identity with rat ribosomal protein L12.
The predicted human protein contains only one amino acid change at position 101, from Asn in rat to Ser in human.
The conservation of the primary structure of ribosomal proteins across species has been documented for many other ribosomal proteins (2).
Northern analysis revealed a single mRNA transcript of 800 bases.
Southern blot analysis of human genomic DNA reveals multiple bands, suggesting that human ribosomal protein L12 is a member of a multigene family.
Figure 1.
The nucleotide and deduced amino acid sequence of the human ribosomal protein L12 cDNA.
The presumed polyadenylation signal AATAAA is underlined.
The single amino acid change from the rat sequence is indicated in the parenthesis.
Reassessment of the murine c- fms proto-oncogene sequence
The c- fms gene encodes the receptor for the macrophage-colony stimulating factor (M-CSF) which promotes the proliferation and survival of cells of the monocytic lineage (1).
A cDNA library was constructed from a murine myeloblastic leukemic cell line, BMC-4, in which the c- fms gene was overexpressed (2).
Eleven independent full-length cDNAs were isolated after screening with a probe encompassing the c- fms first coding exon.
The coding region of two arbitrary chosen clones was sequenced on both strands by the Sanger method.
The sequence of the two clones was identical but different from the available murine c- fms sequence (3), by 24 differences at the nucleotide level which led to 12 amino acid changes.
Comparison with the rat, feline and human sequences (4, 5, 6) showed that 11 of these 12 changed amino acids were present in the rat or/and in the cat and human sequences.
Changes are listed in Table 1.
The M-CSF receptor is a transmembrane protein with intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity, shared by two catalytic domains (TK1 and TK2) separated by a kinase insert.
The tyrosine residues in the intracellular domain are the target of phosphorylation either by the receptor itself or by other cellular kinases.
Moreover, tyrosine phosphorylation modulates the binding of SH2 domain-containing proteins which regulate the signalling pathway (7).
It was therefore noticeable that instead of a tyrosine residue at codon 660 within the TK1 domain we found an isoleucine residue, and conversely, instead of an isoleucine at codon 829 in TK2 a tyrosine residue.
These differences were not due to a polymorphism between BALB/c mouse (3) and (C57B1/6xBALB/c) F1 mouse (our sequence), as confirmed by RT-PCR done with synthetic primers encompassing codons 660 and 829.
Localisation of DNA-protein contact points by DMS resistance of complexes resolved in gel retardation assays
Methylation protection by dimethyl sulfate (DMS) is a powerful and widely used chemical method to probe DNA-protein contacts.
In this method, the protein(s) and labelled DNA are incubated together, and the equilibrated reaction mixture is subjected to limited modification with DMS (1, 2).
DNA-protein complexes are subsequently separated from free DNA by the gel retardation assay (3, 4).
Comparison is made of DNA eluted from complex and free DNA bands, following cleavage of the DNA backbone by piperidine or NaOH and denaturing gel electrophoresis (1, 2, 5).
This allows determination of purines protected from methylation (and therefore underrepresented in the complexed fraction) and indicates a close proximity of proteins to the bound DNA in the near vicinity or even at the N-7 or the N-3 atoms of these guanine and adenine moieties.
The applicability of this method in analysing DNA-protein interactions is, however, hindered by several disadvantages.
Firstly, the amount of DMS required to achieve a suitable extent of methylation is a function of the concentration of DNA and protein present and may have to be substantially increased when probing complexes formed in the presence of large excesses of competitor DNA or protein.
This may either affect the integrity of the complexes (DMS also methylates proteins) or, depending crucially on the composition of the binding buffer, strongly decrease the solubility and/or diffusibility of DMS and thus interfere with the final yield of the modification reaction.
Secondly, the clarity of the results obtained is highly dependent on the extent of occupancy of the binding site(s), i.e. protection is observed only if all DNA molecules are involved in complexes.
Unfortunately, this is not always the situation, especially when the concentration and/or purity of the specific binding protein(s) are not satisfactory.
Moreover, particularly when a complex is relatively unstable, the bound protein can detach from the protected DNA fragment and reassociate to other DNA fragments that have already been modified by DMS.
In this case, the DNA-cleavage pattern derived from the complexed fraction will closely resemble that of the uncomplexed DNA.
To alleviate these frequently encountered problems I changed the topography of DMS treatment by exposing pre-equilibrated DNA-protein complexes to DMS subsequent to a gel retardation experiment [in situ (in gel ) treatment].
In addition to the fact that multiple complexes with defined stoichiometries can be mapped simultaneously, this in gel procedure circumvents the limitations imposed by the aforementioned factors, whereas its inherent advantages renders it ideal for methylation protection analysis of non-abundant and/or kinetically labile complexes.
At least two reasons account for the latter.
One is that the background cleavage is greatly reduced by the separation of unbound DNA from the DNA-protein complex pool prior to treatment The second is the so called‘caging effect’ occurring in the gel (4) which, by increasing the effective concentration of the interacting components, slows their electrophoretic escape after dissociation leading to oriented diffusional search and thus enhancement of the concentration-dependent reassociation reaction.
Consequently, protein-binding sites exposed during multiple dissociation events will most of the time escape the DMS attack and hence remain intact.
Importantly, I demonstrate that this procedure, can also directly identify the non-specific nature of some DNA-protein complexes which, due to unanticipated effects, may behave anomalously in binding competition analyses.
Finally, this approach can be used as an alternative to premethylation interference experiments whenever the strong positive charge introduced at the positions of methylation seems to influence DNA-protein interactions or binding equilibria.
Following assembly and electrophoresis of a ∼5-fold scaled-up binding reaction (employing a 40–150 bp asymmetrically labelled DNA fragment) under optimised conditions, the corresponding gel lane is separated from the rest of the matrix and transferred into a tray with 300 ml of 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0.
After equilibration for 10', the gel piece is carefully immersed (wearing gloves and working in a fume hood) into a scrupulously clean 20 cm 8 cm plastic tray containing 100 ml of freshly prepared 0.2% (v/v) DMS (reagent grade) solution in 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 (DMS is freely soluble at this concentration and buffer composition).
The in situ DNA methylation reaction is allowed to proceed without shaking of the tray, for a length of time sufficient to statistically obtain one methylation event per DNA strand, which is inversely proportional to the size of the DNA probe (the restricted translational and rotational freedom of the DNA molecules embedded in the gel pores increases the stringency of the latter consideration).
Under the experimental conditions tested (3-mm-thick, 5% polyacrylamide/38:1 cross-linked gel; 134-bp probe, 5' treatment) DMS, albeit lipophilic, appears to be readily diffusible within the gel matrix (the low water activity in polyacrylamide gels contributing to this) and to productively attack the target DNAs with the desired single-hit kinetics (Figure 1C, >70% of the input DNA is left intact).
Although the exposure time and DMS concentration [up to its solubility limit (∼2% v/v)]can be varied as long as the product of the two (and hence, the average number of methylations produced) remains constant, at higher levels DMS may preferably concentrate in ‘hydrophobic pockets’ of the DNA-protein interface and attack within the binding site thus obscuring the cleavage pattern of the bound-DNA fraction.
Furthermore, I have found that at concentrations >0.75% DMS is difficult to be inactivated during the subsequent purification steps, resulting in overcleaved DNA and a non-homogeneous ladder of bands in all fractions, which interfere with the final sequencing analysis.
At the end of the incubation period, the gel piece is transferred into a new plastic tray containing 300 ml of freshly made DMS-stop buffer (0.5 M β-mercaptoethanol, 150 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.3, 5 mM EDTA) and  shaken vigorously on a rocking platform for 10' at 37°C (at this temperature DMS is rapidly hydrolysed accelerating its inactivation).
The gel piece is removed from the stop solution, placed on a suitable backing material (i.e., overhead photocopy film), covered with plastic wrap, and subjected to autoradiography at 37°C to assess the position of the retarded and unretarded DNA species.
Regions corresponding to radioactive bands are then excised at minimal sizes using disposable razor blades and polyacrylamide slices are crashed by microcentrifugation through a small hole in the bottom of 0.5-ml tubes into silanized 1.5-ml Eppendorf tubes.
Each gel paste is resuspended in 0.6 ml of elution buffer (0.5 M ammonium acetate, pH 7.5, 0.1% SDS, 1 mM EDTA) including 0.1 M β-mercaptoethanol to ensure inhibition of residual DMS, and the DNA fragments are allowed to diffuse out by placing the tubes at 42°C overnight in a shaking air incubator.
Filtered (through 0.22 µm syringe filters) supernatants are subjected to two sequential organic extractions and DNAs are recovered by precipitation with ethanol in the presence of 10 µg carrier glycogen.
After a reprecipitation step, the pellets are rinsed twice with 80% ethanol to wash trapped traces of reagents, vacuum-dried, and subjected to standard cleavage reaction by heating in either piperidine (strand scission at the level of guanine residues) or NaOH (strand scission at the level of adenine and guanine residues)(1, 5).
Removal of chemicals is performed according to published protocols (1, 5), the DNAs are resuspended in formamide sample buffer, heat-denatured, and loaded on a sequencing gel for comparative electrophoretic analysis.
DMS in all buffers, trays, tips, and tubes used should be completely inactivated by immersion in 5 M NaOH before they are discarded.
A successful application of the described in situ methylation-protection assay is illustrated in Figure 1, where probing of the Jun-DNA interaction detected one strong and two weaker protection positions (in the core and the borders of the AP-1-binding site, respectively) whose methylation has been previously shown by interference analysis to be destructive to the same extent for complex formation (6).
In agreement with the strong protection observed at the central guanine residue, DNase I footprinting analysis of the same fragment reveals that digestion at the corresponding phosphodiester bond is severely impaired by the bound protein (Figure 1C, left panel).
On the other hand, the same in gel protection analysis performed on a putatively irrelevant, faster-migrating species [absence of additional protected zones in DNase I footprinting, not arising from Jun degradation (data not shown)]demonstrated its non-specific nature (low affinity, highly electrostatic interaction of abundant proteins that are present in excess to binding-site DNA) by displaying a cleavage pattern indistinguishable from that derived from the free probe.
The reliability of the developed approach was further confirmed by the fact that no protected bases were observed when an identical binding reaction was subjected to various DMS treatments in solution (prior to electrophoresis), presumably due to the kinetic instability of the Jun-AP-1-binding site complex (7) which DNase I being a bulky molecule is unable to sense.
Figure 1.
Schematic outline of the in gel methylation-protection assay.
(A ) 2 µg of a crude E.coli lysate containing expressed c-Jun protein (a member of the AP-1 family of transcription factors; represented by a shadowed circle and shown as a dimer) was incubated with 1.3 10 5 cpm (∼2.5 ng) of a 134-bp, uniquely 32 P end-labelled (at the 5' end of the coding strand, denoted by black-filled circles) DNA probe bearing a consensus AP-1-binding site under optimized binding conditions (8).
(B ) The free and complexed DNA fragment populations were separated by electrophoresis through a 5% native polyacrylamide gel (8); the gel was then immersed and equilibrated into a buffer-containing plastic tray, and the retarded (SC = specific complex, NSC = non-specific complex) and unretarded (F = free) DNA species were exposed in situ to mild modification with DMS (representative methylations are indicated by the black arrowheads).
Following quenching of the methylation reaction, the three DNA fractions were located by 3-h autoradiography of the wet gel, excised and eluted from the gel matrix, and recovered by sequential ethanol precipitations.
(C ) Samples were subjected to cleavage at the modified bases by heating in NaOH solution (5), and equal cpm from all fractions were electrophoresed on a DNA sequencing gel and autoradiographed.
At the right of the autoradiogram a schematic representation of the radioactively labelled DNA strand is given, the AP-1-binding site being indicated by its sequence.
Purines protected by Jun are denoted by asterisks whose size correlates with the degree of protection.
At the left of the autoradiogram DNase I footprinting reactions (9) of the same fragment (employing the same c-Jun preparation) and the corresponding Maxam and Gilbert G + A ladder are depicted, with the arrowhead pointing to the cutting position discussed in the text.
Direct quantification of specific mRNA using a selected biotinylated oligonucleotide by free solution capillary electrophoresis
We have developed a procedure for quantifying a specific mRNA purifying it with a selected biotinylated oligonucleotide (sbODN) and measuring its absorbance by free solution Capillary Electrophoresis (CE).
This method was applied to study the expression of Angiotensin II receptor gene.
Total RNA was isolated from 2 to 20 ml of whole blood and hybridised with a specific biotinylated oligonucleotide.
The hybrid was captured on streptavidin magnetic beads, then the specific mRNA eluted from the hybrid and quantified by either CE or RT-PCR.
Alternately, the same samples were purified by biotinylated Oligo d(T) and quantified by RT-PCR.
From 20 to 200 µg of total RNA was used.
The biotinylated oligonucleotide was complementary to Angiotensin II receptor (5'-GGCGGGACTTCATTGGGTGAACAATAGCCAGGTATCGATC-3')(1).
Constant concentrations of the specific biotinylated oligonucleotide (50 pmoles) and streptavidin beads (100 pmoles)(Dynal, Norway) were used.
Total RNA was heated in a 65°C water bath for 10 minutes.
The sbODN and 20 SSC (to a final concentration of 0.5) were added.
Incubation was performed at room temperature for 30 minutes.
Beads were washed three times with 0.5 SSC and added to total RNA.
After ten minutes at RT, beads were captured using a magnetic rack and five stringent washes with 0.1 SSC were done.
To elute the specific mRNA 50 µl of RNase-free water was added.
Samples were concentrated by using K Acetate (0.1 vol), Glycogen (0.02 vol) and 95% ethanol (2 volumes).
Pellets were redissolved in 5 µl of RNase-free water.
Free solution Capillary Electrophoresis (CE) with a UV detector (Prime Vision, system IV, Europhor, France) was developed using a 100 µm capillary, 60 cm in length (45 cm to the detector) and TBE buffer (89 mM Tris, 89 mM boric acid, 2 mM EDTA, pH 8.3).
Samples were introduced into the capillary by high vacuum for 0.5 seconds (2.7 nl).
Separation within the capillary was performed under constant voltage at 400 V/cm (Figure 1a).
The purified mRNA was amplified by RT-PCR using as upper primer 5'ATGATTCTCAACTCTTCTACTGAAGATGGT-3' and the capturing biotinylated primer as lower.
The amplification protocol was: 1 min 95°C, 1 min 54°C and 2 min 72°C, 40 cycles, then 7 min 72°C.
This gave a 413 bp product, as expected.
To study possible contamination we amplified the IL-1α and β-actin genes by RT-PCR in these samples but obtained no bands.
As an alternative quantitative method mRNA from the same samples was purified by a biotinylated Oligo d(T) (Promega, US) and quantitated by RT-PCR, using IL-1α as an internal control.
RT-PCR was carried out by a modified Wang method (2) measuring optical density using a Sun Spark Station (Visage software, Millipore, US)(data not shown).
The concentrations of specific mRNA obtained in both methods are shown in Figure 2.
Platelet mRNA was used as a negative control, since we did not find any expression of this gene by RT-PCR or CE.
In order to analyse possible variations in expression, we studied whole blood from a patient with pheochromocytoma, who was expected to have a high level of expression of this gene, obtaining a value four times higher than those from normal subjects (data submitted but not shown).
Results obtained by the direct detection of the mRNA concentration, quantified by spectrophotometric measuring in CE, correlated well with the values by quantitative RT-PCR of the same samples.
Using this procedure, a quantification of expression of low expressed genes is easy and fast, subject to two limiting factors; the specificity of the capturing oligonucleotide or probe selected and the amount of total RNA.
This procedure represents a practical alternative to other methods such as Northern blotting, RT-PCR or S1 Nuclease treatment and avoids isotopic handling.
It should be noted that although CE is not the optimal method to separate this kind of molecules, it shows enough resolution as to discriminate the specific RNA from the other molecules in the samples.
Figure 1.
a Electropherogram of mRNA eluted after capture by a specific complementary biotinylated angiotensin II receptor oligonucleotide on streptavidin beads.
b Electropherogram of biotinylated oligonucleotide.
These figures show the different elution times and different shapes of curves for specific mRNA and oligonucleotide.
Figure 2.
Values of specific mRNA obtained by CE and RT-PCR from the same samples.
Samples were taken from three different normal subjects in the same physiological conditions.
Each data represents the values of three different measures of each sample (expressed in pg of specific mRNA per µg of total RNA).
The standard deviations for CE and RT-PCR were 0.186 and 0.111 respectively.
The Linear Regression Coefficient was 0.84 The detection limit of the expression of AII receptor gene was 15 µg of total RNA by CE.