

Sex determination by low stringency PCR (LS-PCR)
There are many situations, such as the detection of an infectious agent or sex determination, when PCR is used to obtain an all or none response.
In these cases an internal control is required so if faced with a negative result, one can still be sure that the PCR conditions were perfect.
For instance when amplifying Y-chromosome derived sequences in humans, the control normally consists of simultaneous amplification of a locus on the X-chromosome (1) or on an autosome (2).
However, such multiplex amplifications have the inherent problem that each primer pair has its own specific conditions of hybridization and thus control is not perfect.
Indeed, occasionally one can, even in normal males, observe amplification of the control locus and not the Y-chromosome locus.
We wish to describe a simple solution to this problem, low-stringency PCR (LS-PCR).
The essence of LS-PCR is that amplification is performed using specific primers but under low  stringency conditions such as those routinely utilized when undertaking RAPD (Random Amplified Polymorphic DNA, 3).
We have found that despite the low stringency conditions, the specific PCR product is still readily detectable but that additional non-specific products are now also amplified that serve as a perfect internal control.
The approach is illustrated here with two situations, sex determination in man and in the parasitic trematode Schistosoma mansoni (Figure 1).
In the former case, the primers amplify the ZFY locus on the human Y-chromosome (1) resulting in a single 340 bp amplification product when male DNA is used and in the absence of detectable amplification products with female DNA when stringent amplification conditions are used (Lanes A and B).
When the amplification programme is altered to LS-PCR conditions, the same male specific band of amplification is apparent but is now set against a background of RAPD products (Lanes C to F).
Female DNA appears to direct the synthesis of all the amplification products except the ZFY locus.
To date we have not detected polymorphisms or other sex linked loci amongst the low stringency products which are thus identical in all samples.
The situation with schistosome sex determination is quite different in that it is the female that is heterogametic (ZW as opposed to the male ZZ) and the primers used amplify a highly reiterated set of tandem repeats on the W chromosome (4).
Specific amplification results in an intense band of 450 bp, when using female DNA, together with a series of higher molecular weight products that presumably result from degenerate regions in the repeats.
There are no detectable products when male DNA is used under high stringency conditions.
In this instance, alteration to LS-PCR conditions does not result in a significant alteration in the amplification pattern obtained with the female DNA.
We interpret this result as being due to the highly repetitive nature of the target sequence which effectively competes with other amplification products resulting in their subamplification and lack of detectability on the gel.
The male DNA, on the other hand, now produces a relatively complex pattern of amplification products which contrasts significantly with that obtained with female DNA.
Again we have not found significant polymorphism in this pattern which we take as a male specific pattern for the purposes of parasite sex determination in the laboratory.
We are now routinely using LS-PCR for sex determination and are exploring its application to other situations such as the diagnosis of infectious agents where it is useful to simultaneously amplify both specific and arbitrarily primed DNA fragments either for the purposes of generating a control or for extending the amount of information gained from the amplification.
Figure 1.
Human DNA from either normal males (B, D and F) or normal females (A, C and E) was amplified using the primers 5'-ATTTGTTCTAAGTCGCCATATTCTCT and 5'-CATACAGCTGAAGCTTGTAGACACACT, as previously described for the amplification of ZFY (1), in a reaction volume of 50 µl containing 50 ng of template, 5 mM MgCl 2 , 250 µM dNTPs, 50 mM KCl, 0.1% Triton X-100, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, 50 pmoles of each primer and 1 unit of Taq polymerase (Promega).
For specific amplification (A and B) the reaction mixture was submitted to 35 cycles of denaturation at 94°C for 45 secs, annealing at 63°C for 1 min and extension at 72°C for 30 secs.
Five µl of the final product was applied to the gel.
For low stringency PCR (C to F), the same reaction mixture was used in conjunction with the following temperature profile: an initial denaturation at 95°C for 5 min, two cycles of 30°C for 2 mins for annealing, 72°C for 1 min for extension and 30 secs at 95°C for denaturation followed by 33 cycles where the annealing step was altered to 40°C.
In the final cycle the extension step was for 5 mins.
In this case, 10 µl of the final reaction mixture was applied to the gel.
Schistosome DNA prepared from male (b, d and f) and female (a, c and e) cercariae shed from snails infected from single miracidia, and thus essentially cloned, was amplified using the primers 5'-GTGAAATTCTTCCTTCACAC and 5'-GACATTCAACTCAATGTTCG for the amplification of the repetitive female specific sequence W1 (3).
For specific amplification (a and b), a 10 µl reaction mixture consisting of 1.0 ng of template, 1.5 mM MgCl 2 , 200 µM of each dNTP, 50 mM KCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, 6.4 pmoles of each primer and 0.8 units of Taq DNA polymerase (Cenbiot RS, Brazil) was submitted to the following temperature profile: 95°C for 3 mins for denaturation followed by 25 cycles of 51°C for 1 min for annealing, 72°C for 3 mins for extension and 92°C for 1 min for denaturation.
In the final cycle, the extension was continued for 5 mins.
For low stringency PCR (c to f) the same reaction mix was used with the temperature profile detailed above for use with human DNA.
For analysis of the schistosome amplification products, 5 µl of the final reaction mix was applied to the gel.
Electrophoresis was undertaken using 7% polyacrylamide gels.
Following separation the gels were fixed with 10% ethanol/0.5% acetic acid for 20 mins and DNA bands revealed by staining with 0.2% silver nitrate for 30 mins and reduction with 0.75 M NaOH/0.1 M formaldehyde for 10 mins as previously described (2).
The molecular weight markers on the left apply to the amplifications of human DNA and those on the right to the amplifications of schistosome DNA.
Efficient DNA transfection of quiescent mammalian cells using poly-L-ornithine
The introduction of foreign DNA sequences into mammalian cells mediated by DNA transfection is a basic method in modern molecular biology.
Several different DNA transfection methods are currently used that have varying efficiencies dependent on the type of cell and its growth status.
However, none of the available approaches has been shown to lead to transfection of growth arrested cells in culture at an appreciable level.
In this report we show that poly-L-ornithine combined with a DMSO shock mediates efficient transfection of both growing and resting cells.
Polybrene (1), a polycation, allows transfection of Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells with either plasmid or genomic DNA at an efficiency about 10-fold greater than calcium phosphate mediated gene transfer (2).
Because of the relatively high transfection rate observed with polybrene, we examined the relative efficiencies of various other polycations for their ability to transfect CHO cells.
In stable transfections using pSV2neo and G418 selection (2) and a similar protocol to that described for polybrene (2), poly-L-ornithine produced the highest rate of transfection (7.0 ± 2.2 10 4 colonies/µg DNA/5 10 5 cells), significantly higher than poly-L-lysine (1.3 ± 0.6 10 4 colonies/µg DNA/5 10 5 cells) which gave comparable results to polybrene (1.2 ± 0.6 10 4 colonies/µg DNA/5 10 5 cells).
In transient transfections with pC110 (Pharmacia), a β-galactosidase reporter construct driven by the SV40 promoter, 25.6% of CHO cells were positive for β-galactosidase (3) after transfection mediated by poly-L-ornithine versus 5.0% positive cells with polybrene.
In similar transient experiments using a growth hormone gene driven by the mouse metallothionin-1 promoter (pXGH5; Nichols Institute Diagnostics) the amount of growth hormone secreted was 30ng/ml for DEAE-Dextran mediated gene transfer and >300ng/ml for poly-L-ornithine.
Thus, poly-L-ornithine is about 5–10 times more efficient for both transient and stable transfections of this cell type than other standard methods of gene transfer.
Based on these data, we investigated the usefulness of poly-L-ornithine for transient transfection of quiescent CHO cells in serum depleted media.
Quiescent cultures of CHO cells were prepared using a growth controlled flat revertant CHO cell line, LR-73, which was shown to arrest in G1 with the maintenance of a high viability for several weeks in medium containing 2% serum (4).
The plasmids used were either pH1°CAT, a construct in which the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) gene was driven by the mouse histone H1° promoter containing H1° 5' flanking sequences and 5' untranslated region from -2800 to +252, or pC110.
LR-73 cells were seeded at 2 10 5 cells per 100 mm plate in 10 ml αMEM plus 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS).
After overnight incubation, the medium was removed, and the plates were washed twice with αMEM containing 1% FBS, and incubated in αMEM plus 1% FBS for at least 5 days before transfection.
On the day of transfection, the medium was replaced with 3 ml αMEM plus 1% FBS containing 10 µg plasmid DNA and 10 µg/ml of poly-L-ornithine (Sigma, P3655), dispensed from a 10 mg/ml sterile water stock solution, and incubated at 37°C with gentle mixing every 1.5 hours.
After 6 hours, the medium was aspirated and replaced with 30% (v/v) DMSO in αMEM plus 1% FBS for exactly 4 minutes at room temperature.
The plates were then rapidly washed and 10 ml fresh αMEM with 1% FBS was added to each plate.
For transfecting growing cells, LR-73 cells were seeded at 5 10 5 per 100 mm plate in αMEM plus 10% FBS 16 hours prior to transfection.
The transfection was performed exactly as described for stationary cells except all procedures were carried out with medium containing 10% serum.
In both cases, after an additional 48 hours of culture, cells were either fixed and stained for β-galactosidase activity or harvested to prepare extracts for CAT assays (5, 6).
Comparison of the transfection efficiencies for both CAT and β-galactosidase constructs in quiescent and growing cells are summarized in Table 1.
The results indicated that the transient transfection efficiency with poly-L-ornithine was considerably higher (4–15 fold) for proliferating cells relative to resting cells.
This is unlikely to be due to changes in promoter activity since the H1° gene is not induced upon serum stimulation (7).
Despite this lower activity, expression of the transfected genes was readily detectable using both plasmid constructs in quiescent cells.
In the CAT assay nearly 60% of the chloramphenicol was converted by incubation with 50 µg protein of quiescent cell extracts for 15 min (Table 1).
In addition, the number of β-galactosidase staining positive cells was also consistently above a few per cent of cells for the serum starved cells.
In contrast, using standard protocols for transient expression it often requires 50–100 µg extract protein for 30–120 min. of incubation to reach a comparable level of CAT activity even for growing cells (5, 6).
In conclusion, poly-L-ornithine when combined with a DMSO shock mediates efficient transfection of CHO cells.
Importantly, we report for the first time the ability to directly and effectively transfect cells in a growth arrested state.
The method has also proven effective for other cells including rat embryo fibroblasts (REF) in both stable and transient transfections, and should provide a simple and inexpensive way to transfect many adherent cell types and to study regulation of exogenous gene expression during serum stimulation and the cell cycle.
Efficient cloning of fragments of the polymerase chain reaction directly into the single stranded bacteriophage M13mp18
Attempts to clone non-modified PCR-fragments into blunt-ended digested vectors have been inefficient, due to the template-independent terminal transferase activity of the Taq-polymerase which results in the addition of a single adenine nucleotide at the 3' end of the fragment (1, 2).
An alternative method has been described using a blunt-ended vector to which a single thymidine has been transferred by the terminal transferase activity of the Taq-polymerase (3).
However, the activity of the Taq-polymerase does not result in 100% overhanging 3' thymidines, and some of the vectors remain blunt-ended.
Ligation leads to a high percentage of insertless vectors.
A commercially available cloning system (TA Cloning TM System, Invitrogen, San Diego, USA) contains the vector PCR TM II which already has overhanging 3' thymidines.
However, the vector is described as being unstable in solution, resulting in less efficient cloning of the PCR-fragments when it has been dissolved for at least two months (instructions to the ‘TA Cloning TM System’, version 1.1).
In this case a high percentage of plasmids without insert is obtained and these can only be distinguished from the positive ones by restriction analyses.
Moreover, in cases where single stranded DNA is desired from PCR TM II, the host cells must be infected by a helper phage and the yield of a single stranded DNA preparation is much lower than that from filamentous bacteriophage vectors carrying the same segment of foreign DNA (4).
In addition, the best results in sequencing DNA with a high G+C content of about 70%, as in Azospirillum , were obtained with single stranded sequence templates.
A complete new method was constructed to stabilize PCR-fragments with their overhanging 3' adenosine residues directly in single stranded phage M13mp18, for use in deletions, site directed mutagenesis and for quick and efficient preparation of single stranded DNA e.g. for DNA sequencing.
Three oligonucleotides (Figure 1) and single stranded M13mp18 DNA were necessary for this method, synthesized by a Pharmacia LKB Gene Assembler Plus (Pharmacia LKB Biotechnology AB, Uppsala, Sweden) and purified by separation on a 1.5 ml NAP TM -10 column (Pharmacia LKB).
0.5–5 pmol of the first oligonucleotide (Figure 1) were annealed at the polylinker of single stranded M13mp18 (400 ng M13mp18 DNA, Gibco BRL, Life Technologies GmbH, Berlin, FRG) by an incubation of 2 min at 70°C in a total volume of 100 µl buffered with 1 REACT2 (Gibco BRL).
After slowly cooling down to 37°C a complete restriction was performed with Xba I (2 h, 5 U, Gibco BRL).
The reaction was stopped (70°C, 10 min), the enzyme removed by phenol/chloroform extraction, the DNA precipitated, dried and resuspended in sterilized water.
For the generation of a thymidine overhang at both ends of the restriction site, 5 pmol oligonucleotide 2 (Figure 1) and 5 pmol phosphorylated oligonucleotide 3 (Figure 1) were annealed (10 min, 70°C, slow cooling down to 37°C) to 50 ng of the Xba I digested single stranded M13mp18 in a final volume of 8 µl containing 1 µl 10 ligation buffer (Boehringer, Mannheim, FRG).
Subsequently, 1 µl of the PCR-assay with the amplified fragment (10 ng DNA of 0.5 to 1 kb size) and 2 U T4 DNA ligase (Boehringer, Mannheim) were added and ligation was performed at 12°C for 16 h.
The complete ligation mix was transformed into 100 µl of freshly prepared competent cells of E.coli TG1 (5) and incubated in LB topagar (4) containing 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-β-D-galactoside (X-Gal) and isopropylthio-β-D-galactoside (IPTG) at 37°C for 16 h.
Recircularization of the vector without insert was only possible in case of a T:T mismatch.
As the M13mp18 with the overhanging thymidine could easily be prepared freshly, the chance for loosing the overhang and blunt-end ligation was low.
In addition the losses could be screened as blue plaques on the X-Gal containing LB petri dishes.
Excess of oligonucleotide 1 led to recircularization of the original vector whereas insufficient quantities resulted in incomplete digestion.
The best results, of 30 to 40% insert carrying, β-galactosidase negative white plaques ( among the 50 to 100 plaques per petri dish), were obtained with 0.5 to 5 pmol oligonucleotide 1 per 400 ng of single stranded M13mp18 DNA.
Lower and higher concentrations finally led to increased numbers of blue insertless plaques on the selection plates.
This new method was exemplified to clone PCR-fragments obtained from a DNA-region about 8.4 kb upstream of the trpGDC -cluster of Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 leading to the identification of pyrG which encodes a CTP-synthase (6).
In this case, ten β-galactosidase negative plaques were selected after the ligation of the PCR-fragments (6) into M13mp18 and transformation into E.coli TG1.
The sizes of the inserts were determined by restriction analyses.
60 to 90% of the tested phages contained a fragment of the same size as the original PCR-fragment.
Sequencing of these inserts resulted in a recovery of the  oligonucleotides in the fragments in all cases (6).
The sequences at the ligation-sites between oligonucleotide 2 and the oligonucleotides used for the PCR-amplification were exactly as predicted.
This was also true for oligonucleotide 3.
Moreover, the method was successfully used to clone a PCR-fragment of the dissimilatory nitrite reductase gene of Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 (7).
After the synthesis of one set of the 3 oligonucleotides the described method allows an economically favourable cloning of PCR-fragments in some 10 000 different assays.
It was adopted and successfully applied to clone PCR-fragments into the polylinker of the phage M13mp18, but it can be extended to phagemids.
The same three oligonucleotides can be used for the phagemid pUC118 where single stranded DNA can be obtained by infecting the host cells with the helper virus M13KO7 (8).
For other phagemids like pBluescript (9) the use of analogous oligonucleotides would allow the generation of overhanging thymidines at an Xba I site.
Figure 1:Scheme of the cloning procedure.
1.
Annealing of oligonucleotide 1 and restriction by Xba I (A ).
2.
Detaching of digested oligonucleotide, annealing of oligonucleotide 2 and oligonucleotide 3 (B ).
3.
Ligation with PCR-fragment (C ).
4.
Transformation.
Silicone lubricant enhances recovery of nucleic acids after phenol-chloroform extraction
Phenol-chloroform extraction is a major step in the purification of nucleic acids.
Phenol, a strong deproteinizing agent, with chloroform removes most of the proteins from the nucleic acid.
Residual proteins are often removed by enzymatic digestion using sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) /proteinase K, but the physical separation of the proteins from the nucleic acids is accomplished by centrifugation of a mixture of the nucleic acid solution and phenol and chloroform.
During this process these organic compounds make complexes with the proteins; these complexes partition phenol-chloroform in the bottom and nucleic acids in aqueous phase on the top.
To avoid protein contamination, the supernatant on the top is carefully removed without disturbing the interface.
Total recovery of the aqueous phase is difficult to achieve, since some interphase proteins may be collected with the upper layer.
However, because only very small quantities are produced at a time, maximum sample recovery is of utmost importance.
Such extractions are often required in molecular biology work to inactivate and remove enzymes used in one step before proceeding to the next.
Isolation of RNA requires even more precautions since only a very minor contamination of the interface containing the RNase may degrade the RNA.
We found a simple and inexpensive method of improving the recovery of the nucleic acid after phenol-chloroform extraction.
Addition of a little silicone lubricant (vacuum grease, DOW Corning Corp., Midland, MI) to the phenol-chloroform extraction mixture resulted in a tight interface that facilitated total recovery of the aqueous phase without interfering with the lower protein and organic phases.
Silicone grease is insoluble in water and can be autoclaved.
It is nontoxic and does not interfere in the phenol-chloroform extraction procedure.
Moreover, the proteins remain below the silicone partition, leaving the clear aqueous phase on the top.
In our practice, we store autoclaved silicone lubricant in a 10 ml syringe.
During the extraction procedure we dispense approximately 30 to 50 µl of the lubricant into the tube containing the DNA/RNA solution by 18-gauge needle.
The phenol-chloroform extraction is performed by vortexing followed by centrifugation at 12,000 rpm for 15 minutes at either 4°C or room temperature.
The aqueous phase may then be recovered without any loss.
We have used this procedure successfully during extraction of small samples of RNA (by the guanidine isothiocyanate- phenol-chloroform method [Chomczynski and Sacchi, 1987]) and DNA.
When RNA was extracted from 10 5 human non-small-cell lung cancer cells, recovery of total RNA was higher in the presence of silicone lubricant (Figure 1A).
Total RNA was separated using 1.4% formaldehyde/MOPS agarose gel, and 28S rRNA was quantitated after ethidium bromide staining using a densitometer (Molecular Dynamics, CA).
Results showed about 20–30% increased yield of RNA with silicone lubricant extraction (Figure 1B).
Similarly, 14 kb plasmid DNA was isolated using alkaline lysis mini preparation method with or without silicone lubricant.
The total plasmid DNA was digested with Eco RI and run in 1% agarose gel (Figure 1C).
Quantitation of the ethidium bromide-stained band of linearized plasmid DNA showed more than 20% increased yield using silicone extraction (Figure 1D).
To determine the effect of adding silicone on further enzyme reactions, 4 µg of plasmid DNA extracted with or without grease was digested with Eco RI and Pst I together; after 3 hours of digestion at 37°C, DNA sampales were run on 1% agarose gel in TBE (Tris-boric acid-EDTA) buffer (Figure 1E).
DNA isolated using both extraction  procedures was digested completely, indicating that use of grease in the extraction method does not interfere with enzyme digestion.
Thus, this method is useful for isolating RNA from a minimal number of cells for making cDNA and PCR amplification.
Moreover, an increased recovery of the nucleic acids using phenol-chloroform silicone extraction would be widely useful, particularly while dealing with small samples.
Figure 1.
(A) RNA was extracted with (G+) or without (G-) silicone lubricant from 10 5 cells and electrophoresed in 1.4% gel.
(B)28S rRNA bands were quantitated and recovery of the samples were compared densitometrically.
(C)Total plasmid DNA was extracted and digested with Eco RI, DNA was separated in the gel.
(D)Band intensity was compared.
(E)Plasmid DNA extracted with or without silicone was double-digested with two different enzymes; silicone extraction did not interfere with enzyme digestion.
A ‘one tube reaction’ for synthesis and amplification of total cDNA from small numbers of cells
Comprehensive representation of mRNA populations by standard cDNA synthesis requires relatively large amounts of RNA.
Whilst the polymerase chain reaction now enables generation of large amounts of DNA, it has still been difficult to synthesize total cDNA from small numbers of cells in a form which can be amplified by PCR.
Several methods for synthesis of total cDNA from small amounts of starting material have been published (eg. 1, 2), but all involve many DNA precipitation steps to change reaction buffers or remove to molecules such as carrier nucleic acids which may interfere with subsequent reactions.
In our hands, these precipitations result in progressively diminished yields of potential template cDNA for amplification.
We have developed a new protocol which is based on the use of KGB buffer (3) for all enzymatic steps and which eliminates the need for precipitation steps.
Whilst originally described as a universal buffer for restriction enzymes, we have found that all modification enzymes required for cDNA synthesis have close to 100% activity in 0.5 KGB buffer.
Total RNA was prepared by a scaled down acid-phenol extraction described by Chomzcynski et al.
(4).
Cells were added to 100 µl of solution D (4) and all other reagents were scaled down proportionately.
If desired,E.coli 5S ribosomal RNA can be used as a carrier during the RNA isolation with only slight inhibition of the final amplification.
RNA was resuspended in 10 µl of 0.5 KGB buffer (3) plus 20 pmoles of oligodT, 0.5 mM dNTPs and 50 units of MMLV reverse transcriptase.
After incubation for 30 minutes at 42°C, the reaction was chilled to 4°C and 10 µl of 0.5 KGB buffer plus 10 units of E.coli DNA polymerase 1 and 0.4 units of RNaseH was added.
The second strand reaction was incubated at 12°C for 30 minutes, 22°C for 30 minutes and 70°C for 10 minutes.
Ends of double stranded DNA were polished by incubation with 1 unit of T4 DNA polymerase at 37°C for 15 minutes and 70°C for 15 minutes.
One µl (25 pmoles) of linkers were added to the double stranded cDNA together with 1 µl of 10 mM ATP and 1 Weiss unit of T4 DNA ligase.
The ligation reaction was incubated overnight at 14°C.
Linkers were constructed by annealing a 20mer and a 21mer.
This resulted in one flush and one staggered end, forcing the linkers to ligate to the cDNA in only one orientation.
To prevent self ligation, the linkers were not kinased.
Only one strand of the linkers ligated to the cDNA and the single strand gap was repaired with Taq polymerase prior to amplification.
Up to five µl of the final cDNA synthesis reaction could be added to a 100 µl PCR reaction without inhibiting amplification.
PCR was carried out in 67 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8, 16.6 mM (NH 4 )2 SO 4 , 0.45% Triton X-100, 200 µg/ml gelatin, 1.5 mM MgCl 2 , 200 µM dNTPs, 100 pmoles of the 21mer oligonucleotide and 2 units of Taq polymerase.
Prior to cycling, the reaction was incubated at 72°C for two minutes to repair the single stranded gap between linkers and cDNA.
Cycling times were denaturation at 94°C (1 min), annealing at 57°C (1 min) and extension at 72°C (2 min).
This protocol is ideal for amplification of cDNA for the subtractive hybridization strategy described by Wang and Brown (5).
Their procedure requires that the cDNA is digested with combinations of 4 base pair cutting restriction endonucleases to ensure a greater representation of cDNA species during amplification.
Several such enzymes including Alu I and Rsa I have close to 100% activity in 0.5 KGB.
Figure 1.
PCR amplification of cDNA.
In all lanes 2 µl of a cDNA synthesis was amplified and 10 µl of the PCR product was electrophoresed on a 1% agarose gel.
Lane 1, cDNA synthesis from 1 ng of globin mRNA; Lane 2, 100 pg of globin mRNA; Lane 3, 100 ng of total ES cell RNA; Lane 4, 100 ng of total ES RNA synthesized without oligodT.
Interactions between HIV-1 nucleocapsid protein and viral DNA may have important functions in the viral life cycle
ABSTRACT
In the virion core of retroviruses, the genomic RNA is tightly associated with nucleocapsid (NC) protein molecules, forming the nucleocapsid structure.
NC protein, a highly basic protein with two zinc fingers, is indispensable for RNA dimerization, encapsidation and the initiation of reverse transcription in avian, murine and human retroviruses.
Here we show that NC protein of HIV-1 (NCp7) and NCp7 mutants bind to DNA fragments representing proviral DNA sequences, forming stable complexes.
NCp7 and NCp7 mutants form high molecular weight complexes with large DNA fragments and show cooperativity in binding to the DNAs.
It appears that the conserved basic residues, and not the zinc fingers, are important for complex formation.
In addition, NCp7 and several NCp7 mutants protect DNAs from nuclease digestion while the DNA ends appear to be poorly protected.
NCp7 has been found to bind to strong stop cDNA, the initial product of reverse transcription, and to promote the annealing of this cDNA to HIV-1 RNA corresponding to the 3' end of the genome.
In addition, NCp7 slightly stimulates an in vitro IN cleavage assay.
These results indicate that the interactions between NCp7 and proviral DNA may be important during provirus synthesis and/or prior to integration.
INTRODUCTION
Retrovirus virions consist of a capsid surrounded by an outer envelope, and within the capsid lies the nucleocapsid.
In mature virions, the nucleocapsid structure contains the genomic 70S dimer and tRNA Lys, 3 primer in tight association with nucleocapsid protein (NC protein) molecules (1).
Reverse transcription, during which the genomic RNA is transcribed to produce the double-stranded proviral DNA, most probably occurs within the nucleocapsid structure.
NC protein is encoded by the 3' region of gag and is well conserved among retroviruses (2–3).
Both NCp15 and NCp7 proteins have been detected in HIV-1 virions (4) and the generation of mature NC protein appears to be necessary for virion formation and specific packaging (5).
NCp7, produced from in vivo processing of NCp15 (4), retains full nucleocapsid protein activity in vitro (6).
NCp7 is a highly basic protein which contains two zinc fingers of the form Cys-X 2 -Cys-X 4 -His-X 4 -Cys (CCHC) flanked by regions rich in basic residues (3–4).
The interactions of NC protein with genomic RNA and the tRNA Lys, 3 primer appear to be necessary for the production of infectious viral particles.
NC protein has been shown to be indispensable for RNA dimerization and encapsidation.
In addition, NC protein is responsible for the annealing of the primer tRNA to the PBS and is thus essential for the initiation of cDNA synthesis (7–13).
However, it is not yet known if NC protein has an additional role during reverse transcription and/or prior to proviral integration.
Nucleocapsid protein from MoMuLV, AMV and rous sarcoma virus have been shown to bind to DNA as well as to RNA and tRNA (12, 14–16).
However, NC protein does not appear to show high specificity for viral nucleic acid sequences in vitro .
Although the interactions between NC protein and RNA have been well studied, less attention has been paid to the possible in vivo roles for the interactions with DNA.
Here we show that NCp7 of HIV-1 interacts with strong stop cDNA, the initial product of reverse transcription.
As provirus synthesis most probably occurs within the capsid, these results indicate that the binding of NC protein to DNA may be relevant in vivo during provirus synthesis and/or prior to integration.
Therefore, we have undertaken a study of the interactions between NCp7 and DNA.
We have examined the binding of NCp7 to single and double stranded DNA and the ability of NCp7 to bind to and protect viral DNA fragments from endonuclease digestion and 5'-dephosphorylation.
NCp7 was found to bind tightly to DNA fragments, giving rise to high molecular weight NCp7:DNA complexes.
In these complexes, the DNA was protected from restriction enzyme digestion.
In contrast, NCp7 was found to poorly protect proviral DNA ends.
In order to search for a possible role for NCp7 during reverse transcription, we examined the ability of NCp7 to facilitate the annealing of complementary DNA and RNA strands.
We show here that NCp7 does indeed promote this annealing, indicating a possible role for NC protein in facilitating the 5'-3' jump which occurs during reverse transcription.
In addition, to investigate a possible involvement of NCp7 in provirus integration, we have studied the effect of NCp7 on the cleavage reaction catalyzed by integrase.
Formation of NCp7:DNA complexes did not inhibit the cleavage reaction, but, instead, slightly stimulated this reaction.
Finally, in order to determine which region(s) of the nucleocapsid protein are important for the interactions with DNA, NCp7 mutants lacking either one or both zinc fingers and/or one or two of the three regions of basic residues (6) were tested for their ability to bind to and protect DNAs from endonuclease digestion and dephosphorylation and their ability to stimulate cDNA synthesis.
It appears that the conserved basic residues, and not the zinc fingers, are important for NCp7:DNA complex formation, consistent with the results obtained for the interaction of NCp7 with RNA in vitro (6).
In general, NCp7 mutants, which have been shown to be active in stimulating RNA dimerization, annealing of the primer tRNA to the PBS and the initiation of cDNA synthesis (6), were found to interact with DNA and to protect DNA from endonuclease cleavage.
In contrast, NCp7 mutants which poorly stimulate RNA:RNA interactions bound to and protected DNA less efficiently.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Preparation of DNAs and RNAs
pHIVCG4 contains the 5' 4005 nt of the HIV-1 genome cloned into pSP64.
Transcription of Hae III digested pHIVCG4 DNA with T7 RNA polymerase yields an RNA of 415 nt (1, 11).
pHIVCG9.9 contains the 5' 990 nt of HIV-1 cloned into pSP64 and was obtained by inserting the Pst I fragment (HIV-1 1-990) of pHIVCG4 into pSP64.
Linear pHIVCG9.9 was obtained by digestion with Xba I. pHIVCG8.6 contains the last 627 nt from the 3' end of HIV-1 cloned into bluescript.
An HIV-1 3' 8600–9227 fragment with a 22 nt poly(A) tail was generated by PCR and inserted between the Kpn I and Xho I sites of bluescript. pHIVCG8.6 RNA was prepared by T3 RNA polymerase transcription of Xho I linearized DNA.
tRNA Lys, 3 and tRNA Pro were prepared by T7 RNA polymerase transcription of pTL9 (17) and ptRNABA-1 (18) DNA digested with Ban I or BstN I, respectively.
A double stranded DNA fragment of the HIV-1 LTR (ds LTR) was obtained by PCR using HIV-1 pmal (19) digested with EcoRI as the template and primers corresponding to the 5' end of the U3 (+) strand (5'-ACTGGAAGGGTTAGTTTG-3') and the 3' end of the U5 (-) strand (5'-ACTGCTAGAGATTTTTAC-3').
The oligonucleotide ML1 represents the first 48 nt of the coding strand of the 5' U3 region of HIV-1 with three nt altered (underlined) in order to introduce two restriction digestion sites such that the oligonucleotide contains an Hae III, an Ava II and an EcoRV site as indicated 
ML2 represents the complementary strand with the corresponding modified nt.
Oligonucleotides 76–90 and 176–196 are complementary to the 5' R and the PBS, respectively, of HIV-1 RNA.
All radiolabelled DNAs were prepared using T4 polynucleotide kinase and γ 32 P-ATP.
HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT p66/p51) was purified from E.coli (20) and was provided by S.Le Grice (U.S.A.).
Oligonucleotides were obtained from the Pasteur Institute (Paris, France), restriction enzymes were from Promega or New England Biolabs and all chemicals were of the highest grade available.
Preparation of NCp7 and NCp7 mutants
NCp7 (72 amino acids) and NCp7 mutants were prepared chemically by peptide synthesis as described previously (6, 21).
The NCp7 mutants used were: NCp7A (44 amino acids) which lacks the N-terminal 28 amino acids, NCp7B (47 amino acids) in which both zinc fingers have been removed and the peptide fragments connected by two glycine residues, NCp7C (35 amino acids) which lacks both the N-terminal 12 amino acids and the two zinc fingers and NCp7D (22 amino acids) which lacks the N-terminal 50 amino acids (6).
Relative affinity of NCp7 for viral RNA, DNA and tRNA
The affinity of NCp7 for viral RNA, double and single stranded DNAs and tRNAs was determined relative to its affinity for ds LTR basically as described previously (17).
Radiolabelled ds LTR and the competitor species (20- or 100-fold excess) were preincubated, NCp7 added to all except the control reaction and the samples resolved on a 1% agarose gel; ss LTR was obtained by denaturing ds LTR for 5 min at 95°C.
Interactions between NCp7 and DNA
Crosslinking analysis .
Radiolabelled DNA fragments were first preincubated for 5 min at 37°C in the presence or absence of NCp7 or one of the mutants in buffer containing 30 mM Tris-Cl (pH 7.5), 60 mM NaCl and 0.2 mM MgCl 2 .
Then, except for control reactions, the samples were exposed to 254 nm UV for 5 min, denatured and resolved by SDS-PAGE.
The gels were fixed, dried and the results visualized by autoradiography.
Gel retardation analysis .
NCp7 or NCp7 mutants were incubated with the indicated amount of DNA in a final volume of 10 µl in the buffer described above for 5 min at 37°C.
The samples were resolved on a 0.7% agarose gel migrated at 4°C at 40 volts.
The migration of the DNA was visualized by staining with 1 µg/ml ethidium bromide.
High molecular weight complex analysis .
pHIVCG9.9 HIV-1 plasmid DNA was incubated with NCp7 or NCp7 mutants in a final volume of 20 µl as described above and the reactions subsequently centrifuged at 12000 rpm for 30 min at 4°C.
The supernatant was separated from the pellet and the pellet resolubilized in 20 µl TE (10 mM Tris-Cl (pH 7.5), 0.1 mM EDTA).
SDS (to 0.5%) was added to both fractions, the DNA extracted with phenol and the aqueous layers resolved by 0.7% agarose gel chromatography in the presence of 5 mM B-mercaptoethanol.
The DNA was visualized by staining with ethidium bromide.
Restriction nuclease digestion of NCp7:DNA complexes
pHIVCG9.9 HIV-1 plasmid DNA was preincubated in the presence or absence of NC protein in buffer containing 24 mM Tris-Cl (pH 7.5), 48 mM NaCl and 0.16 mM MgCl 2 for 5 min at 37°C in 10 µl to promote complex formation.
The levels of NC protein used were chosen such that the higher level completely retarded DNA migration on an agarose gel while the lower level gave intermediate retardation.
The buffer conditions were then modified for enzymatic digestion, nuclease added to all reactions except the control, and the digestions allowed to proceed in a final volume of 25 µl.
The quantity of nuclease used and the incubation times were chosen such that most of the DNA was digested in the absence of NCp7.
The digestions were stopped by the addition of EDTA (10 mM) and SDS (0.1%) and the proteins removed by a phenol/chloroform extraction.
The DNA was resolved by agarose gel electrophoresis and the degree of protection afforded by the NC protein visualized after staining with ethidium bromide.
5' dephosphorylation of NCp7:DNA complexes
5' 32 -P labelled ML1:ML2 or ds LTR was preincubated in the presence or absence of NC protein for 5 min at 37°C in buffer containing 24 mM Tris-Cl (pH 7.5), 48 mM NaCl and 0.16 mM MgCl 2 to promote complex formation.
For ML1:ML2 studies, the levels of NCp7 and NCp7B used corresponded to 2, 5, 10, or 20 molecules of protein per molecule of DNA.
For ds LTR studies, the levels of NCp7 and NCp7B used corresponded to 5, 10, 25 or 50 molecules of protein per molecule of DNA.
The complexes, except for control reactions, were subsequently treated with 0.2 units alkaline phosphatase during 15 min at 37°C and the reactions stopped by the addition of EDTA to 10 mM.
The DNA was extracted with phenol, resolved by PAGE and visualized by autoradiography.
Exonuclease III digestion of NCp7:DNA complexes
Linear pHIVCG9.9 HIV-1 plasmid DNA (300 ng) was preincubated in the absence or presence of NCp7 for 10 min at 37°C in buffer containing 30 mM Tris-Cl (7.5), 60 mM NaCl and 0.2 mM MgCl 2 .
Subsequently, exonuclease III (0.8–1.6 units) was added to all reactions except the control and the reactions allowed to proceed for 30 min at 37°C.
The reactions were stopped by EDTA/SDS as described above and the DNA extracted and resolved on a 1.3% agarose gel.
The results were viewed after ethidium bromide staining.
Reverse transcription assay
HIV-1 RNA (1–415) template (∼0.2 µg) and an oligonucleotide (1–2 ng) complementary to either the region 76–90 or the 179–196 PBS of the template RNA were used to prepare cDNA in the absence or presence of NCp7 in a final volume of 15 µl basically as described previously (13).
Under these conditions, a radiolabelled cDNA of 90 or 196 nt, respectively, was produced.
Gel retardation analysis.
An aliquot of each reaction (5 µl) was resolved on a 1.3% agarose gel and the position of the cDNA visualized by autoradiography.
Crosslinking analysis .
An aliquot of each reaction (5 µl) was exposed to 254 nm UV for 8 min while a control aliquot was not.
The samples were then treated as described earlier.
Hybridization of strong stop cDNA and 3' HIV-1 RNA
Strong stop cDNA (196 nt) was prepared as described above and the reactions stopped by the addition of EDTA to 12 mM.
The RNA template was digested in the presence of 0.1 µg RNAse A during 30 min at 50°C and the cDNA extracted twice with phenol and then with chloroform.
The cDNA was separated from the free primer by G-75 sephadex chromatography.
The hybridization reactions were performed with 250 ng HIV-1 pHIVCG8.6 RNA (pos. 8600–9227 with a 22 nt poly(A) tail) in buffer containing 25 mM Tris-Cl (pH 7.0), 25 mM NaCl, 7 mM dithiothreitol, 100 mM MgCl 2 , 10 mM ZnCl 2 and 8 units of RNAsin in the absence or presence of NCp7 during 15 min at 37°C.
At the end of the incubation, SDS (1%) was added, NCp7 removed by phenol extraction and the nucleic acids resolved on a 1.3% agarose gel.
The gel was first stained with ethidium bromide to locate the position of the RNA then fixed, dried and the cDNA and cDNA:RNA complexes viewed by autoradiography.
Effect of NCp7 on the integrase cleavage reaction
Th IN cleavage reaction was performed basically as described previously (22).
Radiolabelled double-stranded 28-mers (0.02 pmol) representing the HIV-1 U5 end (22) were incubated in the absence or presence of HIV-2 IN (∼8 pmol) either without or with NCp7.
In the reactions with NCp7, the NCp7 was either preincubated or not preincubated with the oligonucleotide for 7 min at 37°C prior to addition of IN.
The cleavage reactions were left at 30°C for 2 hours, the reactions stopped by the addition of EDTA to 24 mM and the NC and IN proteins removed by extraction with phenol prior to resolution by urea/PAGE.
RESULTS
Nucleic acid binding affinity
Studies of the nucleic acid binding activities of retroviral MoMuLV NCp10 and avian pp12 indicate that NC protein has a higher affinity for single stranded DNA and RNA than for double stranded DNA (15, 23–24).
In order to determine the relative affinity of HIV-1 NCp7 for RNA, double and single stranded DNA and tRNA, competition assays were performed relative to its affinity for a DNA fragment corresponding to the LTR (ds LTR).
These assays were performed under association conditions where NCp7 was exposed to both the radiolabelled ds LTR and the competitor at the same time.
The competitor species used were 20- and 100-fold excesses of ds LTR, single stranded LTR, a short single (ML1) or double (ML1:ML2) stranded DNA of 49 bp, tRNA Pro , tRNA Lys and a 415 base HIV-1 RNA.
As seen in figure 1, all species competed with labelled ds LTR for binding to NCp7.
The viral RNA competed most efficiently (lanes 15–16), indicating that NCp7 binds RNA with a higher affinity than DNA.
The ds LTR (lanes 3–4) and the single stranded LTR (lanes 5–6) competed with equivalent efficiencies for NCp7.
Efficient, though not complete, competition was also seen with the shorter single (lanes 7–8) and double stranded (lanes 9–10) DNA fragments.
Again, little, if any, difference was seen between the affinity of NCp7 for the single or double stranded fragment.
As will be discussed below, NCp7 shows cooperativity in binding to DNA, which may explain why the shorter fragments competed less efficiently for NCp7 than the longer DNA fragments.
Finally, although both tRNA species competed with the ds LTR rather efficiently (lanes 11–14), NCp7 bound the tRNAs less strongly than either the RNA or the DNA species.
Interactions between NCp7 and DNA
In order to examine the interactions between HIV-1 NCp7 and DNA, the ability of NCp7 to interact with DNA fragments representing proviral DNA sequences was examined.
These studies were performed using four DNAs: a single stranded 14-mer corresponding to the sequence 386–400, a double stranded 49-mer corresponding to the 5' R region, the ds LTR and a linear or supercoiled plasmid containing the first 990 bp of HIV-1 (pHIVCG9.9).
The interactions between NCp7 and DNA fragments were first probed by UV crosslinking analysis.
A representative result is shown in figure 2A.
Under the conditions employed for crosslinking, covalent bonds will be formed if the protein and nucleic acid reactive groups are separated by no more than 0.1 nm (25).
The results from these studies indicate that the formation of stable NCp7:DNA complexes results from a tight interaction between the nucleocapsid protein and the DNA.
In the absence of NCp7, DNA (386–400) migrated at an apparent molecular weight of approximately 3 Kda (lane 1).
Crosslinking of this DNA fragment to NCp7 was readily obtained under the conditions used (lanes 2–3).
Doubling the amount of protein present did not result in a higher level of crosslinking in the presence of NCp7.
Since free NCp7 migrates at an apparent molecular weight of approximately 12 Kda due to its highly basic nature, there is probably one protein molecule bound per DNA molecule in the NCp7:DNA complex (16Kda).
The ability of NCp7 to bind stably to, and thus retard the migration of DNA in an agarose gel, was also examined.
A representative result with linear pHIVCG9.9 is shown in figure 2B.
In the absence of NCp7, this DNA migrated freely (lane 20).
However, in the presence of increasing levels of NCp7, its migration was retarded and levels of NCp7 which correspond to one molecule per 4–8 bp DNA gave rise to complexes which did not enter the gel (lanes 1–4).
In order to probe the regions of NCp7 important for its stable interaction with DNA, NCp7 mutants lacking either potentially important basic residues and/or the zinc fingers (see methods) were also tested for their ability to interact with DNA fragments representing proviral DNA.
Crosslinking of DNA (386–400) to NCp7 mutants (fig. 2A, lanes 5–16) was seen with all of the mutants used, although NCp7B (lanes 8–10) and NCp7C (lanes 11–13) were crosslinked more efficiently to the DNA than NCp7A (lanes 5–7) or NCp7D (lanes 14–16).
In general, twice as much crosslinking was seen when the amount of protein was doubled.
The apparent molecular weights of the NCp7 mutant:DNA (386–400) complexes are approximately 12.3, 13.2, 8.9 and 8 Kda for NCp7A, NCp7B, NCp7C and NCp7D, respectively.
As noted above for the NCp7:DNA complex, there is probably one molecule of NCp7 mutant bound per DNA oligonucleotide since the NCp7 mutants also migrate at apparent molecular weights higher than expected due to their high content of basic residues.
Gel retardation of linear pHIVCG9.9 HIV-1 plasmid DNA was also obtained with all of the NCp7 mutants except NCp7D (fig. 2B, lanes 5–19).
NCp7A, NCp7B and NCp7C were all able to completely retard the migration of this DNA at ratios of NC protein:DNA very similar to that obtained with NCp7.
In contrast, high levels of NCp7D did not even partially retard the migration of the HIV-1 plasmid DNA (lanes 17–19).
The fact that NCp7 mutants B and C which lack the zinc fingers crosslinked efficiently with and retarded the migration of the DNAs indicates that the zinc fingers are most probably not directly involved in NCp7 binding to DNA in vitro , in agreement with results obtained from studies of the binding of NCp7 to RNA (6).
NCp7D lacks two of the three regions of basic amino acids which are most likely involved in interacting with nucleic acids (6) and is thus unable to form a stable complex with the DNA.
NCp7 forms high molecular weight complexes with DNA
Further examination of the nature of the NCp7:DNA complexes indicated that complexes of high molecular weight are formed when NCp7 binds to DNA.
This was determined by preforming NCp7:DNA complexes, centrifuging the reactions and analyzing whether the complexes remained in solution (simple or low molecular weight complexes) or if they were present in a pellet (high molecular weight complexes).
These studies were performed using the linear and supercoiled pHIVCG9.9 DNAs (5' 990 nt of HIV-1).
In the absence of NCp7 all of the DNA was present in the supernatant after a 30 min centrifugation (table I).
In contrast, in the presence of levels of NCp7 which completely retard the gel migration of the HIV-1 plasmid DNA (see above), all of the DNA was found in the pellet.
In the presence of levels of NCp7 which partially retard the gel migration of the HIV-1 plasmid DNA, a fraction of the DNA was present in the pellet.
These studies were also performed using the NCp7 mutants (table I).
In the presence of levels of NCp7 mutants which form stable complexes with pHIVCG9.9, the majority, if not all, of both DNA plasmids was present in high molecular weight complexes.
The only exception was NCp7A which showed a reduced ability to form high molecular weight complexes.
With NCp7D, which does not form a stable complex with DNA, only a very minor fraction of the DNA was present in high molecular weight complexes, even in the presence of relatively high levels of protein.
It is interesting to note that, in general, NCp7 forms high molecular weight complexes more easily with linear HIV-1 plasmid DNA than with the supercoiled DNA.
Protection of DNA from restriction nuclease digestion
The affinity of NCp7 for DNAs representing proviral DNA sequences was examined by determining its ability to protect the DNA from restriction nuclease digestion.
In general, lower levels of NC protein were required to provide similar levels of protection for longer DNAs as compared to shorter DNA fragments, indicating that NCp7 binds  cooperatively to DNAs.
A representative study using linear pHIVCG9.9, which approximates the provirus, is shown in figure 3.
In the absence of NCp7, linear HIV-1 plasmid DNA was more than 95% digested by Dra I (lane 1).
However, linear HIV-1 plasmid DNA was completely protected in the presence of levels of NCp7 which correspond to 1 molecule of NCp7 per 4 bp DNA (lane 3).
Slightly lower levels of NCp7 (1 molecule of NCp7 per 8 bp DNA) also gave significant protection (lane 2).
The ability of NCp7 mutants to protect the DNAs from restriction nuclease digestion was also examined (fig. 3, lanes 4–9).
pHIVCG9.9 HIV-1 plasmid was significantly protected by several NCp7 mutants.
At levels of 1 molecule per 9 bp or 5 bp NCp7B gave very significant and almost complete protection, respectively, of the DNA (lanes 6–7) as did NCp7C (lanes 8–9).
Slightly higher levels of NCp7A (1 molecule per 5 or 3 bp) afforded less protection (lanes 4–5).
NCp7 and NCp7B were always found to provide the best protection against restriction enzyme digestion.
These results reiterate the above finding that the zinc fingers are not as important as the three regions of basic residues for binding to DNA.
NC protein does not bind efficiently to DNA ends
The protection of DNA from nuclease digestion experiments described above illustrate that NCp7 binds to most of the DNA molecule.
However, these studies do not examine the binding of NCp7 to the DNA ends.
Therefore, the ability of NCp7 to inhibit the dephosphorylation of 5' 32 -P labelled DNAs by alkaline phosphatase was examined.
These studies were performed using the oligonucleotide ML1:ML2 and the ds LTR.
As indicated in Table II, greater than 90% of the 5' phosphates was removed by the phosphatase in the absence of NCp7.
With ML1:ML2, the level of protection achieved by levels of NCp7 or NCp7B which corresponded to 1 molecule of NC protein per 2.5 bp DNA was approximately 20–25%.
Similar levels of protection of the 5' label of ds LTR were obtained in the presence of levels of NCp7 or NCp7B which corresponded to 1 molecule of NC protein per 13 bp DNA.
As the occluded site size of NC protein is approximately 5–8 bp (26), the DNAs were fairly well, if not completely, covered by the NCp7 under the conditions used.
Therefore, the results indicate that NCp7 does not efficiently, and certainly not selectively, protect the ends of HIV-1 DNA fragments.
The ability of NCp7 to protect HIV-1 plasmid DNA from exonuclease III digestion was also examined.
Only with levels of NCp7 which completely cover the DNA was the protein able to protect the DNA from digestion (data not shown).
Since exonuclease III requires a free 3' hydroxyl for the initiation of digestion, these results support the idea that the DNA extremities are not efficiently protected by NCp7.
Interaction of NCp7 with strong stop cDNA
In order to analyze possible in vivo interactions between NCp7 and DNA, the ability of NCp7 to bind to strong stop cDNA, the initial product of reverse transcription, was examined.
Using the conditions described in methods, strong stop cDNA was produced by a reverse transcription reaction containing an RNA template, an oligonucleotide primer and RT.
However, as seen previously, the efficiency of this reaction was greatly enhanced by the presence of NCp7 (13–14); an approximately 10-fold increase in cDNA synthesis was obtained if 200 ng (23.4 pmol) of NCp7 were present (fig. 4B, lanes 9–10, band below 71 Kda).
The ability of NCp7 to bind to the cDNA was examined by gel retardation and UV crosslinking analyses.
The NCp7:cDNA complex could be isolated by gel retardation, indicating that the complex is stable (fig. 4A).
A low level of cDNA was retarded by RT (lane 3).
However, significant retardation of the cDNA was obtained if NCp7 was present in the reaction (lanes 4–5).
The absence of a retarded signal in lane 2 confirms that it is the cDNA which is bound to the NCp7 in lanes 4–5.
Western blot analysis using a polyclonal antibody raised against NCp7 indicated that NCp7 comigrated with the retarded cDNA signal (data not shown).
The NCp7:cDNA complexes could also be crosslinked by UV at 254 nm, indicating that the protein and the DNA are in tight association (fig. 4B).
As shown in lanes 1–4, no cDNA was produced in the absence of RT.
As observed in lanes 5–6, a low level of cDNA, migrating at approximately 64 Kda, was produced in the presence of RT.
However, in the presence of NCp7 and RT, much higher levels of cDNA were produced (lanes 7–12) and 3–5 additional bands were seen when the products were exposed to UV.
The major band at an apparent molecular weight of 90 Kda represents the crosslinked NCp7:cDNA complex (lanes 8, 10 and 12).
The remaining minor bands are most likely complexes involving cDNA, NCp7 and RT.
Immunoprecipitation studies using a polyclonal antibody raised against NCp7 concurred that NCp7 was present in the bands which appear after UV irradiation of the NCp7:DNA complex (data not shown).
The NCp7 mutants were tested for their ability to stimulate the reverse transcription assay.
In the presence of 23.4 pmol of NCp7 mutants, only NCp7B was found to stimulate the reverse transcription assay; an approximately 5- to 10-fold increase in cDNA synthesis was observed.
Promotion of strong stop cDNA annealing to HIV-1 3' RNA
The ability of NCp7 to promote the annealing of strong stop cDNA to an HIV-1 3' RNA, which contains the R region complementary to that of the cDNA, was examined and the results shown in figure 5.
The strong stop cDNA and the 3' RNA were incubated in the absence (lane 3) or presence of 75, 150 or 300 ng NCp7 (lanes 4–6, respectively) for 15 min at 37°C.
Examination of the location of the cDNA by autoradiography illustrated that a difference in migration between uncomplexed cDNA (lane 2 as control) and the cDNA:RNA complex, which migrates at about the same rate as uncomplexed RNA, could be distinguished.
As indicated by the very low level of cDNA which hybridized to the 3' RNA in the absence of NCp7 (lane 3), the conditions employed did not promote the annealing of the complementary nucleic acids.
In contrast, NCp7 was found to expedite the hybridization of the cDNA to the RNA under these conditions.
In the presence of 75 ng of NCp7, about 10% of the cDNA was hybridized with the 3' RNA (lane 4).
This level was augmented in the presence of increased levels of NCp7 and approximately 90% of the cDNA was hybridized to the 3' RNA in the presence of 300 ng NCp7 (lane 6).
No hybridization of cDNA to HIV-1 3' RNA was obtained if an RNA which lacks the R sequence was used (data not shown).
In addition, preliminary results indicate that NCp7B, which lacks both zinc fingers, can also promote the hybridization of strong stop cDNA to the complementary HIV-1 3' RNA (data not shown).
Effect of NCp7 on the integrase cleavage reaction
HIV IN catalyzes the removal of two nt from both ends of proviral DNA, generating recessed 3' hydroxyl DNA ends which are subsequently joined to the host DNA during integration (22, 27–30).
The effect of NCp7 on an in vitro IN cleavage reaction was examined.
NCp7 was found to slightly, but reproducibly, stimulate the removal of two nt from the 3' strand of an oligonucleotide representing HIV-1 U5 (fig. 6).
In the absence of NCp7, IN cleaved about 40% of the DNA template (lane 1) while approximately 75% of the 28-mer was cleaved in the presence of 1.2 ng of NCp7 (lane 5).
At the highest level of NCp7 used, the protein slightly inhibited the cleavage by IN (lanes 6–7).
In addition, if the oligonucleotide substrate was preincubated with NCp7, the level of IN cleavage was slightly reduced (lanes 2, 4, 6 as compared to lanes 3, 5, 7, respectively).
Thus, although NCp7 forms a stable complex with the oligonucleotide, the ends of the DNA are still recognized and cleaved by IN.
No stimulation of the IN cleavage reaction was seen if heat denatured NCp7 was used (data not shown).
Incubation of NCp7 with immobilized IN did not result in the formation of NCp7:IN complexes (data not shown), indicating that NCp7 does not stimulate the function of IN through stable protein:protein interactions.
DISCUSSION
NC proteins of retroviruses are conserved, highly basic proteins which contain either one or two zinc fingers of the form Cys-X 2 -Cys-X 4 -His-X 4 -Cys (CCHC) flanked by regions containing basic residues.
NCp7 of HIV-1 contains 72 amino acids with two zinc fingers.
Due to its basic nature, it could be anticipated that NC protein would bind to nucleic acids, forming a ‘histone-like’ structure (31–32).
Indeed, the interaction of NC protein with RNA has been shown to be indispensable for the life cycle of the retrovirus, as NC protein promotes the dimerization of the genomic RNA and the hybridization of the tRNA primer to the PBS (8–13).
In addition, NCp12 of AMV and NCp10 of MoMuLV bind to both single and double stranded DNAs (14–15, 23–24, 33) and have been shown to enhance the annealing of complementary DNA oligonucleotides to viral RNA (12).
Recent results indicate that it is the basic domains of NC protein which are important for its nucleic acid annealing activities (6, De Rocquigny et al.and Housset et al., submitted).
Here we show that NCp7 from HIV-1 binds to DNAs representing proviral DNA.
The interactions between NCp7 and DNA are probably cooperative, since NCp7 was found to bind more efficiently to HIV-1 plasmid DNA than to smaller DNA fragments.
Furthermore, NCp7 was shown to form high molecular weight complexes with proviral DNA and to protect proviral DNA from endonuclease digestion at ratios of NCp7:DNA similar to those expected in vivo .
NC protein from MoMuLV has been shown to be present in the preintegration complex (J.-L.
Darlix, unpublished data).
Thus, NCp7 may be present in the HIV-1 preintegration complex and may bind to the newly made DNA, adopting a chromatin-like structure which could protect the provirus from cellular nucleases during its transport to the nucleus.
This possibility is presently under investigation.
Several NCp7 mutants were also found to bind effectively to DNA fragments representing HIV-1 proviral DNA.
NCp7B, which lacks both zinc fingers but retains the three regions of basic amino acids, was found to bind to and protect DNAs from nuclease digestion about as efficiently as NCp7 while NCp7C showed a slightly reduced ability to protect the DNAs.
In contrast, NCp7A was less active in binding to and protecting DNAs while NCp7D was found to interact poorly with the DNAs.
In general, the NCp7 mutants which were shown to be active in promoting NCp7:RNA interactions (6)(dimerization and annealing of the primer tRNA to the PBS) interacted effectively with HIV-1 DNA fragments, indicating that the same residues are involved.
Our results demonstrate that the clusters of basic amino acids are more important than the zinc fingers for the interactions of NC protein with DNA in vitro , although a role for the zinc fingers in specificity of interaction or in facilitating its many functions can not be excluded.
In addition, NCp7 was found to form a stable complex with strong stop cDNA, the first product of the reverse transcription reaction.
It is noteworthy that this complex was formed in the presence of template RNA, for which NCp7 has a high affinity, and free primer.
NC protein is present in the capsid during reverse transcription, as indicated by the fact that it promotes the positioning of the primer tRNA to the PBS for the initiation of reverse transcription.
Since NC protein interacts with DNA and has nucleic acid annealing activities, an additional role during reverse transcription could be envisioned.
After synthesis of the initial strong stop cDNA, a 5'-3' jump must occur in which base pairing between the R sequence at the 3' end of the cDNA and the complementary R sequence at the 3' end of the viral RNA occurs, and there is evidence that NC protein is required for this jump (34).
A second jump, during plus strand synthesis, in which the plus strand DNA must recognize the complementary minus strand cDNA could also potentially be facilitated by NC protein.
We demonstrate that NCp7 of HIV-1 promotes the hybridization of strong stop cDNA with a 3' HIV-1 RNA fragment containing the complementary R sequence, indicating that NC protein may be involved in promoting the 5'-3' jump necessary for the continuation of minus strand synthesis.
In addition, if both the 5' and 3' HIV-1 RNAs are present in the reverse transcription assay, reverse transcription can resume after the 5'-3' jump if NCp7 is also present.
Analysis of the resulting cDNAs indicates that reverse transcription resumes just after the R sequence of the 3' RNA (data to be published elsewhere).
Finally, it is interesting that reverse transcription is stimulated by NCp7 when this reaction is performed in a very small volume with isolated high molecular weight NCp7:template RNA:tRNA primer complexes and produces cDNAs in which a correct 5'-3' jump following strong stop cDNA synthesis has occurred.
It is possible that NCp7 functions by stimulating the unwinding of the RNA structure as when promoting the binding of the primer tRNA to the PBS (12).
If NC protein promotes the 5'-3' jump(s) in vivo , analysis of this reaction should also provide an excellent model for studying the mechanism of polymerase transfer from one strand to another (35).
Finally, it is possible that NCp7 plays an indirect role in provirus integration into host DNA by directing the integrase towards the provirus ends.
IN does not specifically recognize DNA ends but rather has been shown to bind DNA in a sequence independent manner (22, 29).
In addition, NCp7 was not found to bind very efficiently to DNA ends and the ability of IN to function in the presence of NCp7 at ratios of NCp7:DNA similar to those expected in vivo indicates that NCp7 does not bind to the terminal six residues (36).
Thus, although NCp7 can bind to and protect proviral DNA from nuclease digestion, it does not inhibit the IN cleavage reaction.
It is, therefore, possible that NCp7 facilitates IN recognition of the DNA ends by binding to the DNA but leaving the ends exposed for IN cleavage and integration.
This possibility is currently under investigation.
ABBREVIATIONS
NC, nucleocapsid; HIV-1, human immunodeficiency virus type 1; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; LTR, long terminal repeat; RT, reverse transcriptase; SDS, sodium dodecyl sulfate; PAGE, poly acrylamide gel electrophoresis; EDTA, ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid; IN, integrase; PBS, tRNA primer binding site; MoMuLV, Moloney murine leukemia virus; AMV, avian myeloblastosis virus; nt, nucleotide.
Figure 1.
Relative affinity of NCp7 for viral RNA, DNA and tRNA.
Radiolabelled ds LTR (25 ng) was incubated in the absence (lanes 1–2) or presence of ds LTR (lanes 3–4), ss LTR (lanes 5–6), ML1 (lanes 7–8), ML1:ML2 (lanes 9–10), tRNA Lys (lanes 11–12), tRNA Pro (lanes 13–14) or HIV-1 RNA (1–415)(lanes 15–16) in 20-fold (odd numbered lanes) or 100-fold (even numbered lanes) excess as described in methods.
To this was added buffer (lane 1) or 75 ng NCp7 (lanes 2–16) and the reactions processed as described.
(Ct — = control minus NCp7, minus competitor; Ct + = control plus NCp7, minus competitor).
Figure 2.
Analysis of NC protein:DNA Interactions.
A)UV crosslinking.
Radiolabelled 386–400 DNA (25 ng) was incubated in the absence (lane 1) or presence of 25 ng (lanes 2, 5, 8, 11, 14) or 50 ng (lanes 3–4, 6–7, 9–10, 12–13, 15–16) of NCp7 (lanes 2–4), NCp7A (lanes 5–7), NCp7B (lanes 8–10), NCp7C (lanes 11–13) or NCp7D (lanes 14–16) as described in methods.
Except for the control reactions (-UV), the samples were then exposed to 254 nm UV for 5 min and analyzed by 15% SDS-PAGE.
(Ct = control minus NCp7)(M = protein molecular weight markers in Kda).
B)Gel retardation.
Linear pHIVCG9.9 DNA (300 ng) was incubated in the absence (lane 20) or presence of 100, 300, 500 or 1000 ng of NCp7 (lanes 1–4) or NCp7A (lanes 5–8), 50, 150, 300 or 500 ng of NCp7B (lanes 9–12), 50, 100, 200 or 400 ng of NCp7C (lanes 13–16) or 100, 200 or 400 ng NCp7D (lanes 17–19) as described in methods and the samples resolved by agarose gel chromatography.
(Ct = control minus NCp7).
Figure 3.
Protection of DNA by NC protein from nuclease digestion.
Linear pHIVCG9.9 (300 ng) was preincubated in the absence (lane 1) or presence of 500 or 1000 ng of NCp7 (lanes 2–3) or NCp7A (lanes 4–5), 300 or 500 ng NCp7B (lanes 6–7) or 200 or 400 ng NCp7C (lanes 8–9) as described in methods.
Subsequently, 5 units of Dra I were added and the samples incubated for 10 min at 37°C.
The samples were resolved on a 0.7% agarose gel.
(Ct = control minus NCp7, plus Dra I; M = molecular weight markers in kilobasepairs).
Figure 4.
Interaction of NCp7 with strong stop cDNA.
A)Gel retardation.
The reverse transcription assay was as described in methods either in the absence (lanes 1–2) or presence of 750 ng RT p66/p51 without (lanes 2–3) or with 100 (lane 4), 200 (lane 5) or 400 ng (lane 1) NCp7.
Five µl aliquots were resolved on a 1.3% agarose gel.
B)UV crosslinking.
The reverse transcriptase assay was as described in methods either in the absence (lanes 1–4) or presence (5–12) of 750 ng RT p66/p51 without (lanes 3–6) or with 100 (lanes 7–8), 200 (lanes 9–10) or 400 ng (lanes 1–2, 11–12) NCp7.
Five µl aliquots were diluted 2-fold with the reaction buffer and either not exposed (UV-) or exposed (UV+) to UV (254 nm) for 8 min.
The proteins were denatured and the bands resolved by 7% SDS-PAGE.
(M = protein molecular weight markers)(lanes 1–2 = control minus RT plus NCp7; lanes 3–4 = control minus RT, minus NCp7; lanes 5–6 = control plus RT, minus NCp7).
Figure 5.
Hybridization of strong stop cDNA to HIV-1 3' RNA is promoted by NC protein.
Strong stop cDNA was prepared and isolated as described in methods.
The cDNA was incubated with HIV-1 3' RNA in the absence (lane 3) or presence of 75, 150 or 300 ng NCp7 (lanes 4–6) and processed as described in methods.
(Ct RNA = RNA control; Ct DNA = cDNA control; Ct RNA + DNA = hybridization assay control minus NCp7).
Figure 6.
Effect of NCp7 on the IN cleavage reaction.
Radiolabelled 28-mer (0.02 pmol) was incubated in the absence (lane 8) or presence (lanes 1–7) of HIV-2 IN (∼8 pmol) either without (lanes 1, 9) or with 0.6 ng (lanes 2–3), 1.2 ng (lanes 4–5) or 1.9 ng (lanes 6–7) of NCp7 as described in methods.
In reactions 2, 4 and 6, the NCp7 was preincubated with the 28-mer for 7 min at 37°C prior to addition of IN.
Five µl of this product were examined by urea/PAGE as described previously (18).
(Ct — IN = control minus IN, minus NCp7; Ct +IN = control plus IN, minus NCp7).
Identification of the nucleotide sequence recognized by the cAMP-CRP dependent CytR repressor protein in the deoP2 promoter in E.coli 
ABSTRACT
In E.coli repression of transcription initiation by the CytR protein relies on CytR-DNA interactions as well as on interactions between CytR and the cAMP-CRP activator complex.
To identify the nucleotide sequence recognized by CytR, mutants of the deoP2 promoter with a reduced regulatory response to CytR have been isolated.
Five single bp mutation derivatives of deoP2 with a 2–5-fold decrease in CytR regulation have been characterized.
In vitro , the only effect of the mutations was a decrease in the binding affinity of CytR, and a clear correlation was observed between the reduction in CytR regulation in vivo and the reduction in CytR binding in vitro .
The mutations all reside in a sequence element that contains an imperfect direct as well as an imperfect inverted repeat.
As the active form of CytR, most likely, is an oligomer with two-fold rotational symmetry, CytR probably interacts with the inverted repeat.
Degenerate versions of the inverted repeat are present in all CytR binding sites characterized so far, however, the distance between the half-sites varies.
INTRODUCTION
cAMP-CRP and CytR in combination regulate initiation of transcription from at least eight operons that code for proteins involved in nucleoside and deoxynucleoside catabolism and transport in E.coli (1).
cAMP-CRP activates transcription and CytR represses transcription, however, cAMP-CRP also plays a crucial role in the repression mechanism (2).
CytR repression is confined to cells containing the cAMP-CRP complex (3) and depends on proper DNA binding of cAMP-CRP (2–5).
Consistently,in vitro analyses of four cAMP-CRP/CytR regulated promoters,deoP2 ,cddP ,cytRP and tsxP2 , have shown that CytR alone only interacts weakly with its cognate promoters (6–9).
In presence of cAMP-CRP, however, the two proteins bind cooperatively to the DNA and the cooperative DNA binding is mediated by direct protein-protein interactions between the cAMP-CRP and CytR (6, 10).
Hence, repression by CytR relies on contacts to both the DNA and the cAMP-CRP complex, and cAMP-CRP may be regarded as an adaptor for CytR.
In this report, we have used the deoP2 promoter to investigate the importance of CytR-DNA interactions for repression and to identify the DNA sequence motif recognized by CytR.
This promoter contains two binding sites for cAMP-CRP, a low affinity site, CRP-1, centered at position -40 and a high affinity site, CRP-2, centered at -93 (11)(Fig. 1).
CytR binds to the region between the CRP sites (6).
Previously isolated deoP2 mutants with reduced CytR regulation all contain mutations in either of the CRP sites (3–5).
In vitro analyses have shown that the effect of these mutations on CytR repression is indirect and can be traced back to their inhibitory effect on DNA binding of cAMP-CRP (2).
Thus, despite a growing knowledge of the interaction of CytR with its cognate promoters, little is known about the specific CytR-DNA interactions.
Here, we have isolated deoP2 mutants containing mutations that directly interfere with CytR-DNA interactions in order to locate the positions important for sequence specific DNA binding of CytR more precisely.
On basis of the results we discuss how CytR may interact with the DNA.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
All enzymes used for DNA manipulations were purchased from Boehringer, Mannheim except exonuclease III, AMV reverse transcriptase and modified T7 polymerase (Sequenase) which were purchased from Amersham, Life Sciences Inc. and USB Corp., respectively.
32 P-labelled nucleotides were obtained from NEN.
Isolation of plasmid DNA, cloning, transformation of E.coli and gel analyses of recombinant plasmids were performed as described (13).
S1 nuclease mapping of start sites for transcription and purification and sequencing of 32 P-labelled fragments were performed as previously described (14).
Bacterial strains
All strains are E.coli K12 derivatives: SO928 (Δ deo , Δ lac ,cytR + ), SO929 (as SO928 but cytR )(15), SO2929 (as SO929 but Δ crp -96 zhd-732:: Tn10)(10), SO1316/F' lacI q  (araD 139,lac U169,cod ,thi ,rpsL ,cdd :: ΔMu:: λpl(209)/F' proA +  B +  ,lacI q  ,lacZ ΔM15:: Tn10)(4), TG1 (Δ (lac -pro ),supE ,thi ,hsdD5 /F' traD 36,proA +  proB +  ,lacI q  ,lacZ ΔM15 (obtained from Amersham).
Plasmid constructions
pJEL152 is a derivative of the low copy number R1 lacZ transcriptional fusion plasmid pJEL126 (3, 16).
pJEL152 contains deoP2 sequences from position -116 to +18 (Fig. 1) fused to lacZ and the deoP2 sequence is flanked on both sites by an Eco RI site.
pUC13 derivatives: The Eco RI fragments from the pJEL152 derivatives were cloned in the Eco RI site in pUC13 (17).
The orientation of the Eco RI fragments in all the constructs used in the titration analysis is so that the deoP2 promoter in the cloned fragment and the lac promoter in pUC13 transcribe convergently.
NaNO 2 mutagenesis
In order to create a region of single stranded deoP2 DNA, two pUC13 derivatives in which the Eco RI fragment containing deoP2 had been cloned in either orientation were digested with BamHI that cleaves pUC13 immediately downstream of the Eco RI site.
Next, the BamHI restricted DNA was subjected to exonuclease III digestion for 15 min under conditions at which exonuclease III removes 10 nucleotides per min.
Subsequently, the DNA was exposed to the mutagen NaNO 2 as described (18).
After removal of the mutagen, the double stranded DNA was extended with AMV reverse transcriptase.
Finally, the mutagenized plasmids were restricted with Eco RI and the Eco RI fragments with the mutagenized deoP2 promoters cloned in pJEL126.
Plasmid DNA was isolated from clones with reduced CytR regulation and the Eco RI fragments containing the putative mutations recloned in pJEL126.
Altogether, 7 clones exhibited reduced CytR regulation following the second cloning.
After cloning in mp19 (19) of the corresponding Eco RI fragments, the fragments were sequenced by the chain terminating method (20) with modified T7 polymerase as recommended by the supplier.
Site directed mutagenesis
The Eco RI fragment containing the entire deoP2 promoter was cloned in mp19 (19).
Selected mutations were introduced using an oligonucleotide-directed in vitro mutagenesis system purchased from Amersham (21).
Gel retardation analyses
The Mam I- Sfa NI,Mam I- Sau 3A and Xba I- Pvu II deoP2 fragments were purified by electrophoresis on polyacrylamide gels after labelling of the 5'-end of the Mam I site with polynucleotide kinase in the presence of γ- 32 P-ATP and the 3'-end of the Xba I site with Klenow fragment in the presence of α- 32 P-dCTP. 0.8 nM of the labelled fragments and various concentrations (indicated in the Legend in Fig. 3) of CytR or CRP were incubated in binding buffer (10 mM Tris HCl (pH 7.8), 50 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 µg/ml acetylated bovine serum albumine, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 0.05 % Nonidet-P40) containing 20 µg/ml competitor DNA (pGEM4 obtained from Promega) for 30 min. at 37°C in a total volume of 10 µl (6).
cAMP was included in the experiments with CRP at a final concentration of 10 µM.
Immediately before loading, 2 µl of loading buffer (binding buffer containing 50% glycerol and 0.1 mg/ml bromophenol blue) were added to the samples.
Samples were loaded with current on.
Electrophoresis was conducted at 100 V. 5 % acrylamide gels prepared from a 44:0.8 (acrylamide:N, N'-methylenbisacrylamide) stock were used throughout.
The electrophoresis buffer was 10 mM Tris HCl (pH 7.8), 1 mM EDTA containing 25 mM KCl in the experiments with CytR and 10 mM Tris HCl (pH 7.8), 1 mM EDTA containing 10 µM cAMP in the experiments with CRP.
Following electrophoresis, the gels were dried and autoradiographed.
CytR and CRP were purified as described (6, 22).
Hydroxyl radical footprinting
32 P-labelled fragments (final concentration 1 nM), proteins at the concentrations stated in the legend to Fig. 4 and competitor DNA were incubated as in the gel retardation experiments.
cAMP was added to a final concentration of 50 µM.
Otherwise the footprints were performed as described by Tullius and Dombroski (23) with the modifications developed by O'Halloran et al.
(24).
RESULTS
NaNO 2 mutagenesis of deoP2 
An Eco RI fragment containing deoP2 sequences from position -116 to position +18 with respect to the start site for transcription (+1) contains all the information required for cAMP-CRP and CytR regulation of deoP2 (3).
In order to isolate promoter mutants with decreased CytR regulation, this Eco RI fragment was subjected to NaNO 2 mutagenesis in vitro (See Materials and Methods) and subsequently cloned in the Eco RI site of the low copy number transcriptional fusion plasmid pJEL126 (16) to give the plasmid pJEL152.
The resulting plasmids were transformed to a Δ lac , Δ deo ,cytR + strain followed by a screening on indicator plates for colonies with an elevated lacZ expression.
Seven independent colonies were isolated and the mutations identified by sequencing (Materials and Methods)(Fig. 1).
Two promoters had obtained the same A  G (all mutations are indicated for the upper strand) substitution at position -65, two promoters had obtained an A  G substitution at -72, three promoters had obtained double mutations: A  G at -65 together with C  T at -1, A  G at -65 with C  T at +4 and A  G at -65 together with A  G at -33.
cAMP-CRP activation and CytR regulation of the five mutant promoters were assessed by monitoring activities of β-galactosidase in cytR + ,cytR and Δ crp strains.
As shown in Table 1, CytR regulation is reduced from approximately 10-fold in the wt-promoter to approximately 2- and 3-fold in the mutant promoters whereas cAMP-CRP activation remains unchanged.
Activation and CytR regulation in the three promoters containing double mutations were identical with that of the promoter only containing the -65 mutation (data not shown), hence, positions +4, -1 and -33 do not appear to be important for CytR regulation.
The mutations at -65 and -72 are positioned in the region of deoP2 protected by CytR in DNase I footprint experiments.
Thus, these two positions may be important for sequence specific DNA binding of CytR.
Site directed mutagenesis of the CytR binding site
As most protein binding sites on DNA consist of either inverted or direct repeats, we examined the CytR binding sequence in deoP2 for such structures.
Positions -65 and -72 are part of an inverted as well as a direct repeat (Fig. 1).
Three additional mutations were introduced in this region by site directed mutagenesis (See Materials and Methods)(T  A at -68, A  G at -73 and G  A at -75) in order to test in more details the importance of this DNA segment for CytR regulation.
Following cloning of the mutated promoters in pJEL126 the effect of the mutations was assessed by measuring the activity of β-galactosidase.
All three mutations result in decreased CytR regulation with the mutation at -72 exhibiting the largest effect and, once again, neither of the mutations had any effect on cAMP-CRP activation of deoP2 transcription (Table I).
In order to analyse the effect of the mutations on CytR interaction with deoP2 in an alternative approach, we performed in vivo titration experiments.
In this analysis, the different deoP2 promoters are cloned on a high copy number plasmid (pUC13) and then introduced into a CytR + strain that contains a gene fusion between the cAMP-CRP/CytR regulated cdd promoter and lacZ on the chromosome.
This strain, in addition, contains an F plasmid that encodes the lacI q  allele.
The presence of lacI q  ensures that the lac promoter on the pUC13 derivatives is repressed, otherwise transcription from lacP interferes with titration of CytR (4).
The ability of the different mutant promoters to titrate CytR and, thus, alleviate CytR regulation of the cdd -lacZ fusion was found to be reduced (See Table II).
Furthermore, the reduced titration of CytR parallels the decreased CytR regulation in the different promoter mutants (Compare Table I and II).
Finally, the start site for transcription in the mutant promoters was mapped in an S1-nuclease mapping analysis.
In all cases, transcription was found to initiate at position +1 (Fig. 2), ruling out the possibility that the decrease in CytR regulation is caused by the introduction of a new promoter.
The mutations between the CRP sites reduce the affinity of CytR for deoP2 in vitro The only way to directly assess the effect of the mutations on protein-DNA interactions is to analyse both CytR-DNA as well as cAMP-CRP-DNA interactions separately in vitro .
The in vitro binding of CytR to the mutated promoters was characterized in a gel retardation assay using purified CytR protein and purified 32 P-endlabelled DNA fragments carrying either the wt- or the mutated promoters.
It was previously observed that CytR has a strong tendency to bind non-specifically to the DNA in gel retardation assays that are carried out in low ionic strength electrophoresis buffer (6).
To increase the specificity of CytR binding in the gel retardation assay, 25 mM KCl was added to the starting low ionic strength electrophoresis buffer (6)(See Materials and Methods).
At this ionic strength, sequence specific binding of CytR is only weakly reduced whereas non-specific binding is strongly reduced (Søgaard-Andersen and Valentin-Hansen, unpubl.).
The region in deoP2 protected by CytR in DNase I footprinting experiments is contained on a 47 bp Mam I- Sfa NI fragment extending from position -41 to position -87 and on a 52 bp Mam I- Sau 3A fragment extending from -41 to -92.
By using such relatively small DNA fragments in the gel retardation assay in combination with the changed electrophoresis buffer, non-specific binding of CytR to the labelled fragment was practically abolished.
The 47 bp fragments were purified from the wt- and mutated promoters except for the promoter with the mutation at -75 which removes the Sfa NI site; for the latter promoter the 52 bp fragment was employed.
Binding of CytR to either of the two fragments result i the formation of only one retarded complex (Fig. 3 upper panels, lane 2–5 for the wt-promoter and lane 2–5 for the promoter with the mutation at -75)).
DNase I footprinting experiments performed in presence of saturating concentrations of CytR, show that the retarded complex consists of CytR bound to the sequence that has previously been identified as the CytR binding site on larger deoP2 fragments (6; data not shown).
Gel retardation experiments performed in presence of decreasing concentrations of CytR clearly show that all the mutations result in a decreased affinity of CytR for deoP2 (Fig. 3, upper panels).
The effect of the mutations on binding of CytR parallels the effect of the mutations in vivo , i.e. the -72 and -73 mutations which have the largest effect on regulation and titration in vivo also exhibit the largest effect on binding of CytR in vitro .
Moreover, a prominent feature in the gel retardation experiments is the presence of a smear between the two well-defined bands.
The smear is more pronounced in the experiments with the mutant promoters and it is, most likely, the result of dissociation of CytR-DNA complexes during electrophoresis.
In order to analyse the possibility that the effect of the mutations on CytR regulation was an indirect effect mediated by changed binding of cAMP-CRP, gel retardation experiments with 32 P-endlabelled DNA fragments containing both CRP sites in the context of the different mutations were also performed (Fig. 3. lower panels).
As previously shown, binding of cAMP-CRP to the wt-promoter resulted in the formation of two retarded complexes: The complex with the highest mobility contains cAMP-CRP bound at CRP-2 and the complex with the lowest mobility contains cAMP-CRP bound at both CRP-2 and CRP-1 (6).
The mutated promoters all bound cAMP-CRP with the same affinity as the wt-promoter and the mobilities of the two retarded complexes was identical to that observed for the wt-promoter.
Taken together, these data show that the effect of the mutations is a direct consequence of changed CytR-DNA interactions.
Mapping of the contact points between the deoxyriboses in the DNA backbone and cAMP-CRP and CytR
In order to characterize further the binding of CytR, the DNA backbone contacts of the proteins within the repression complex were determined in hydroxyl radical footprinting experiments.
A 250 bp 32 P-end-labelled DNA fragment containing deoP2 sequences from -116 to +18 was mixed with CRP and/or CytR, protein-DNA complexes allowed to form and then reacted with hydroxyl radicals.
In the absence of any added protein, strand breakage occurs at each position with approximately the same efficiency (Fig. 4, lanes 2 and 7).
When CRP is added, three protected patches each 3–4 nucleotides long and separated by 5–6 efficiently cleaved nucleotides are observed in both CRP sites (Fig. 4, lanes 3 and 8).
The protection patterns on the two strands are identical but offset from each other in the 3'-direction by 3 nucleotides.
CytR protects two regions on both strands (Fig. 4, lanes 5 and 10), and the protection pattern is also in this case offset from each other in the 3'-direction by 3 nucleotides.
In the presence of both proteins, a clearly defined set of regularly spaced, protected regions appear on both strands and the protection pattern is the sum of those obtained with the two regulators independently (Fig. 4, lanes 4 and 9).
DISCUSSION
Sequence specific recognition of DNA by gene regulatory proteins is fundamental to the control of initiation of transcription.
The identification of the nucleotide sequence recognized by a protein generally relies on the characterization of mutations that interfere with binding of the protein, analyses of protein-DNA complexes using various footprinting techniques and on a comparison of the sequences of different binding sites.
In this report, we have used these approaches to identify the nucleotide sequence recognized by CytR in the deoP2 promoter.
Previous attempts to determine the binding specificity of CytR to DNA sites have been complicated by the fact that repression by CytR relies on both CytR-DNA interactions as well as on direct interactions with cAMP-CRP (2, 10).
Hence, CytR regulation of deoP2 can be drastically reduced by mutations that interfere with binding of cAMP-CRP to the two CRP sites (3–5).
Here, we have approached this problem by using an efficient in vitro method for generating mutations at defined regions.
Five mutant deoP2 promoters were isolated that all specifically exhibit reduced CytR regulation and titration in vivo .
All mutant promoters contain single bp substitutions in the region between the two CRP sites that has previously been identified as the CytR binding site (6).
Furthermore,in vitro binding analyses demonstrated that the mutations interfered directly with CytR-DNA interactions whereas binding of cAMP-CRP remained unchanged.
The binding site for CytR was also narrowed down in DNA footprinting experiments with hydroxyl radicals.
This chemical attacks deoxyriboses in the DNA backbone and produces a high resolution map of protein-backbone interactions due to its small size (22).
Using protection data for cAMP-CRP and CytR alone and in combination, the contributions from each of the regulators in the repression complex was delineated (Fig. 4).
In full agreement with the crystal structure of the cAMP-CRP/DNA complex (27), cAMP-CRP yielded a tripartite footprint at both binding sites in which the centers of the protected regions were separated by approximately 10 bp.
CytR produced a bipartite footprint in which the protected regions were separated by approximately 10 bp and located between the regions protected by the two cAMP-CRP complexes.
Displaying the protein contacts to the backbone on a DNA helix with 10.5 bp per turn reveals that all contacts are positioned on the same side of the helix and span the minor groove (Fig. 5).
These results strongly indicate that the repression complex adapts a structure in which the regulatory region of deoP2 is wrapped around a complex of two cAMP-CRP complexes and one CytR molecule.
This picture also highlights that the mutations that directly affect CytR binding to deoP2 are positioned adjacent to and partially overlapping the regions protected from attack by hydroxyl radicals by CytR.
The assessment of the CytR-DNA backbone contacts, together with the genetically defined binding sequence, therefore, suggests that CytR lies across two adjacent minor grooves and recognizes its binding site by contacting bases in two neighbouring major grooves.
The DNA segment in which the five mutations that interfere with CytR-DNA interactions map may be viewed as an imperfect inverted repeat containing the sequence 5'TGCAA on the top strand and 5'TACAA on the bottom strand (Fig. 1).
However, two five bp boxes (5'TGCAA and 5'TGTAA on the top strand) oriented in a directly repeated configuration are also contained in this DNA segment (Fig. 1).
At present it is not possible to draw any definite conclusions about the binding mode of CytR.
However, several lines of evidence implicates that CytR is an oligomer with rotational symmetry that contacts the DNA via an α-helix-turn-α-helix motif.
CytR has extensive homology with well-characterized DNA binding proteins like LacI and GalR that contact palindromic sites via two identical subunits (28–31), and specifically CytR contains a region exhibiting a high level of homology with the α-helix-turn-α-helix motif found in the DNA binding domain of several well-characterized DNA binding proteins (32).
Amino acid changes in this region of CytR abolish its repressor function and the mutant proteins are trans -dominant (33; Søgaard-Andersen et al.,
unpubl.).
Furthermore, CytR exists as an oligomer in solution (33).
Finally, CytR would be expected to make identical contacts to the two cAMP-CRP complexes in deoP2 .
As the arrangement of the repeats in a protein binding site is thought to reflect the structure of the active form of the protein, the most likely binding model is that CytR interacts with an inverted repeat.
Comparison of the CytR recognition motif in deoP2 with known CytR binding sites reveals that the pentamer motif 5'TGCAA or degenerate versions of this sequence are conserved among all sites (Fig. 6).
However, in order to obtain maximal homology with the inverted repeat in deoP2 , the spacer region between the half-sites must be allowed to vary between 2 bp (in deoP2 and tsxP2 ) and 3 bp (in cddP and cytRP )(Fig. 6).
There are precedents for such moderate variations in spacer length differences between operator half-sites.
The natural lac operator is apparently flawed by an incorrect spacing between the operator half-sites with respect to maximal repressor binding (34, 35), also spacer length differences have been suggested between the half-sites in CRP binding sites (36, 37).
Finally, two additional lines of evidence strongly emphasize the importance of the inverted repeat for sequence specific binding of CytR.
First, mutations in the 5'TGCAA motif in cddP reduces binding of CytR (7)(Fig. 6); and, second, the CytR-DNA backbone contacts in cytRP are arranged around the inverted repeat in this promoter as they are in deoP2 (8).
Based on the above considerations, a consensus CytR recognition sequence might be proposed (denoted ‘simple consensus’ in Fig. 6).
This consensus may be refined by imposing a symmetry constraint to give the ‘symmetry consensus’(Fig. 6).
From the alignment in Fig. 6 it also  appears that the CytR recognition sequence is positioned asymmetrically with respect to the two CRP sites in deoP2 and cddP .
Furthermore, the CytR recognition sequence is located 2 bp closer to the nearest CRP site in cddP and cytRP than in deoP2 .
It is still too early to evaluate the importance of these variations, however, they may indicate that CytR is a flexible protein.
A simple model based on the homology of CytR with the LacI protein might be that CytR contains an NH 2 -terminal DNA binding domain (equivalent to the LacI headpiece (38)) that is connected with the dimerization domain of the protein through a flexible hinge region as was recently described for the α2 protein in yeast (39, 40).
Hence, the two parts of the protein could move independently with respect to each other providing CytR with the possibility to interact with binding sites with different structures and cAMP-CRP complexes at varying distances.
Figure 1.
A. Schematic representation of deoP2 .
Coordinates are in bp, +1 refers to the start site for transcription as indicated by the arrow.
The open boxes indicate the two cAMP-CRP binding sites, CRP-1 and CRP-2, and the hatched bar indicate the CytR binding site.
B .
Nucleotide sequence of the upper strand of deoP2 .
The boxed sequences indicate the two CRP sites and the arrows below the boxes indicate the sequences sharing homology with the consensus CRP site (12).
In the CytR binding site, the substitutions in the five mutant promoters are indicated, the inverted arrows indicate the inverted repeat in the CytR binding site and the tandem arrows indicate the direct repeat.
Figure 2.
S1-nuclease mapping analysis of the start site of transcription in the deoP2 mutants.
The probe is a 350 bp Rsa I- Cla I fragment comprising the entire deoP2 ,32 P-end-labelled at the 5'-end of the Cla I site with polynucleotide kinase and isolated from pJEL152.
Lane 1 is the A+G sequence of the hybridization probe.
Lane 2: RNA isolated from SO929 harbouring pJEL152-wt, lane 3: pJEL152-65, lane 4: pJEL152-68, lane 5: pJEL152-72, lane 6: pJEL152-73, and lane 7: pJEL152-75.
Figure 3.
Gel retardation analysis of the binding of CytR and cAMP-CRP to wt- and mutant deoP2 promoters.
In the upper panels, the 32 P-end-labelled fragments used were the 47 bp Mam I- Sfa NI fragment for the wt-, -65, -68, -72 and -73 mutant promoters and the 52 bp Mam I- Sau 3A fragment for the -75 mutant promoter.
CytR binds with the same affinity to the two probes (data not shown).
The promoter from which the fragment was isolated is indicated above each panel.
The final concentration of the fragments was 0.8 nM.
In all the upper panels, CytR was added to the following final concentrations: Lane 1: 0 ng/µl, lane 2: 33.3 ng/µl, lane 3: 11.1 ng/µl, lane 4: 3.7 ng/µl, lane 5: 1.2 ng/µl.
The composition of the different bands is indicated.
In the lower panels, the 32 P-end-labelled fragments used were 250 bp Xba I- Pvu II fragments isolated from the p13-152 derivatives as indicated above each panel.
The final concentration of the fragments was 0.8 nM.
In all the lower panels, CRP was added to the following final concentrations: Lane 1: 0 ng/µl, lane 2: 2 ng/µl, lane 3: 0.2 ng/µl, lane 4: 0.02 ng/µl. cAMP was added to a final concentration of 10 µM in both the binding reactions and in the electrophoresis buffer.
KCl was not included in the electrophoresis buffer in the gel retardation experiments with CRP.
The composition of each band is indicated.
Figure 4.
Hydroxyl radical footprints of cAMP-CRP and CytR bound to deoP2 .
The fragment used is a 250 bp Xba I- Pvu II fragment encoding deoP2 sequences from -118 to +16.
Both strands were labelled in the Xba I site, the lower strand (lanes 1–5) was 3' labelled with Klenow in the presence of α- 32 P dCTP and the upper strand (lanes 6–10) was labelled with polynucleotide kinase in the presence of γ- 32 P ATP.
CRP was added to a final concentration of 0.6 ng/µl, cAMP to a final concentration of 50 µM, CytR was added to a final concentration of 3.3 ng/µl in the reactions in lanes 4 and 9, and a final concentration of 44 ng/µl in the reactions in lanes 5 and 10.
The regions protected by cAMP-CRP and CytR in DNase I footprints are indicated to the left.
The large arrows indicate the positions protected by cAMP-CRP from attack by the hydroxyl radicals and the small arrows the positions protected by CytR.
Lanes 1 and 6 are the A+G sequences of the probes.
The sequence is numbered with respect to the start site of transcription (+1).
Figure 5.
A helical representations of the positions protected by cAMP-CRP (filled circles) and CytR (filled triangles) from attack by hydroxyl radicals.
The helix is drawn with 10.5 bp/turn and each vertical line represents a bp.
The extent of the regions protected by cAMP-CRP and CytR in DNase I footprints is indicated above the helix.
The nucleotide sequence is that of the upper strand numbered with respect to the start site of transcription (+1), each nucleotide is written above its corresponding bp.
The arrows below the sequence indicate the parts of the CRP sites that share homology with the consensus CRP site and the boxed sequences indicate the CytR recognition sequence.
Figure 6.
Comparison of the nucleotide sequences of four CytR binding sites in deoP2 ,cddP ,cytRP and tsxP2 .
The arrows indicate the sequences in the CRP sites that share homology with the consensus CRP site, the boxes indicate the sequences sharing homology with the inverted repeat in the CytR recognition sequence in deoP2 , the numbers indicate coordinates with respect to the start site for transcription (+1).
For cddP the sequence of the lower strand is displayed in order to more clearly visualize the homology with deoP2 and cytRP .
In deoP2 , the substitutions interfering with binding of CytR are indicated.
In cddP , cAMP-CRP binds to CRP-1 and CRP-3 in presence of CytR, and CytR binds between these two sites, the mutations that interfere with binding of CytR are indicated (7).
In cytRP , cAMP-CRP binds to only one CRP site (CRP) and CytR binds immediately downstream from the CRP site (8).
In tsxP2 , cAMP-CRP binds to two sites CRP-1 and CRP-2 in absence of CytR, and CytR binds to a site that overlaps extensively with CRP-1 in absence of cAMP-CRP; the structure of the combined complex is not known in details (9).
Below a simple consensus based on the number of occurrences of each base at each position is presented, the suffix indicates the number of occurrences of the most frequent base.
In the symmetry consensus, the simple consensus is converted to a palindrome based on the most frequent base at each symmetrical position, i.e. in the right half site, the base at the first position is not conserved, however, an A is found at the symmetrical position in the left half-site in all four sites, hence, the first position in the right half site is a T in the symmetry consensus.
The M· Alu I DNA- (cytosine C5 ) -methyltransferase has an unusually large, partially dispensable, variable region
ABSTRACT
The DNA methyltransferase of the Alu I restriction-modification system, from Arthrobacter luteus,converts cytosine to 5 -methylcytosine in the sequence AGCT.
The gene for this methyltransferase,aluIM,was cloned into Escherichia coli and sequenced.
A 525-codon open reading frame was found, consistent with deletion evidence, and the deduced amino acid sequence revealed all ten conserved regions common to 5-methylcytosine methyltransferases.
The aluIM sequence predicts a protein of M r 59.0k, in agreement with the observed M r , making M· Alu I the largest known methyltransferase from a type II restriction-modification system.
M· Alu I also contains the largest known variable 
Basal level transcription of the histone H10 gene is mediated by a 80 bp promoter fragment
ABSTRACT
The replacement histone H1 of the H1 group, known to interact with general transcription factors, has been found associated with transcriptionally repressed chromatin.
Transcription of the gene in F9 stem cells is low but can be stimulated by treating the cells with retinoic acid.
Using mutant deletions, we now demonstrate that basal level transcription in F9 cells is mediated by an 80 bp DNA fragment, located 430 bp upstream of the TATA box, which does not include the retinoic acid responsive element (RARE) known to bind retinoic acid receptors and stimulate transcription from an heterologous promoter after retinoic acid treatment.
By footprinting, DMS interference, site-directed mutagenesis and UV-cross linking techniques we demonstrate that at least two nuclear factors, with MW of 90,000 and 30,000, bind to the 80 bp fragment and that this binding is necessary for transcription.
Furthermore, positioning of this fragment upstream of the HSV-tk gene promoter stimulates transcription 2–3 times over control values, far less than the activity observed for this fragment in the homologous promoter, indicating that full activity of this fragment requires sequences located in the proximal part of the promoter.
INTRODUCTION
In vivo transcription occurs in the context of chromatin, the structural organization of nucleic acids and proteins.
Core histones are considered to be the proteins forming the backbone on which the genomic DNA finds a support generating the nucleosome, which is considered to be the structural chromatin unit (1).
The nucleosomes are composed of two molecules each of H2A, H2B, H3 and H4, whereas H1 and its variants do not form part of the nucleosome probably being localized at the internucleosomal level (2).
Although it seems probable that H1 histones are involved in the formation of supranucleosomal structures, the significance of this group of histones has not yet been fully elucidated.
Non-histone proteins, probably comprising a large proportion of transcription factors, bind to the nucleosomal complex and form the final network in which context replication and transcription takes place (3).
Histones in general and the H1 group in particular have been associated with the repressed state of transcription (4,5).
Experimental evidence has been published suggesting that the amount of histone H1 is decreased in transcriptionally active chromatin and that the binding properties of H1 to the core nucleosomes are different in active and inactive chromatin fractions (6,7).
In in vitro experiments it has been shown that H1 is able to bind general transcription factors and specifically repress transcription (8,9).
In chromatin fractions separated according to their transcriptional activity, the H1 variant H1 has been found associated with repressed genes (4,5).
Furthermore, this histone accumulates in differentiating cells and its amount, compared to other H1 variants, is greatly increased in terminally differentiated tissues.
This suggests that H1 0 may be involved in the fixation of the new differentiated phenotype (10,11,12).
It has been discussed whether this increase may also be related to the proliferative capacity of the cells and results have been presented suggesting that H5, the avian counterpart of H1, may indeed play some role in proliferation (13,14).
On the other hand, there is experimental evidence showing that in differentiating cells the content of H1 is increased and that this increase is not associated with a decrease in cell proliferation.
Retinoic acid-treated F9 cells increase the steady-state level of H1 mRNA several times and this increase is at least partially due to an increased transcriptional activity of the gene (12).
All this points to the H1 protein as a key factor in the control of gene expression in developing and differentiating eucaryotic systems.
Therefore, a thorough analysis of the regulation of H1 transcription, both at the basal level and at the enhanced stage, would be of major interest for the understanding of the control mechanisms of gene expression at the transcriptional level.
Knowledge about control of this replacement histone would facilitate the understanding of the mechanisms responsible for the repression observed in systems committed to differentiate, thereby reorganizing their chromatin structure as well as their transcriptional activity.
We have already shown that the elements responsible for basal level and enhanced transcriptional activity in retinoic acid-treated F9 cells are located in the proximal 700 bp of the promoter region and that the enhanced transcription is mediated by a RARE located at position -540 (15, manuscript in preparation).
In this report, we show that the basal level transcription of the histone H1 gene in F9 cells is mediated by an 80 bp DNA sequence situated 450 nucleotides upstream of the transcriptional start point, that does not enclose the RARE sequence, and that binds at least two specific trans-acting factors.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Construction of recombinants and transfection assays
Clone H1 42 contains the 700 bp upstream from the transcription start point, cloned into the plasmid Bluescript (15).
Deletion mutants were created by opening the sequence at its 5'end followed by Bal31 treatment.
Deletions were characterized by sequencing and cloned into the HindIII-BamHI site of plasmid pBLcat3 (16).
Recombinants AvaII /s and AvaII /as were created by using the 117 bp AvaII fragment of clone H1 42 (nucleotides -529 to -412) in plasmid pBLcat2 either in sense (s) or in antisense (as) orientation.
Recombinants ‘oligo I’ and ‘oligo III’were produced by cloning the sequence CTGGGGAGGCGACCCCTCCCCCCTTGTCCCGACT (nts -527 to -494) and its complementary or the oligonucleotide TCGCCCAGCTCAGGGCCGCGTGTGTTAGTT (nts -479 to -450) and its complementary at the HindIII site of plasmid pBLcat2 (16).
Transfection was performed by electroporating 20 µg of the corresponding DNA together with 2 µg of plasmid CMV-β-Gal DNA into 10 7 F9 cells at 120V and 960 µF.
Two days after electroporation, cells were collected, extract was prepared and CAT activity was determined as described (15).
Differences in transfection efficiency were normalized taking the β-gal values as control.
Mutant recombinants were constructed by site directed mutagenesis of the G-residues found to be methylated in the DMS-interference analysis.
To facilitate identification of mutated recombinants, either an EcoRI or an EcoRV recognition site was introduced at the mutated site (see the  corresponding figure legends).
Band-shifting, footprinting and DMS-methylation interference
For band shifting, the corresponding oligonucleotide was labelled by using T4 polynucleotide kinase and γ- 32 P-ATP and annealed with the complementary chain.
The double-stranded oligonucleotide was then purified by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.
Reactions were set up using 8 to 40 µg of F9 extract prepared as described (17).
Complexes were separated by non-denaturing agarose gel electrophoresis, dried and autoradiographed.
For DNaseI footprinting, the BglI-NaeI fragment (nucleotides -594 to -291) was end-labelled, complexed with proteins and treated with increasing concentrations of DNaseI.
Digested DNAs were precipitated and separated on sequencing polyacrylamide gels.
For dimethyl sulfate (DMS) interference, the corresponding oligonucleotides were radioactively labelled, treated for 1 minute with 1% DMS, the DNA was precipitated and complexed with F9 nuclear extract.
The complexes were separated by agarose gel electrophoresis, the position of the complexes was identified by autoradiography, cut out, treated with piperidine and separated by acrylamide gel electrophoresis as described (18).
UV-cross linking experiments
Radioactively labelled oligonucleotides were complexed with nuclear proteins and irradiated on ice for 5 minutes with an UV-lamp (253 nm) at a distance of 3,5 cm.
Complexes were separated by agarose gel electrophoresis.
Retarded complexes were cut out of the gel, incubated with PAGE-running buffer for 3 minutes at 60 C and separated on 10% polyacrylamide gels (18).
RESULTS
Deletion mapping analysis of the H1 distal promoter region
It has been shown that a 573 bp fragment of the histone H1 proximal promoter region is sufficient to drive efficient transcription of a reporter gene in F9 cells (15).
This fragment also contains all signals necessary to ensure an enhanced transcription of the gene after treatment of the cells with retinoic acid.
Furthermore, it was also shown that a further deletion of 260 bp almost completely abolishes both basal level transcription and inducibility by retinoic acid (15).
Hence, the trans-acting factors controlling basal level expression must bind sequences enclosed in the -573 to -314 nt promoter region.
For this reason, we have analysed the BglI-NaeI fragment (-549 to -291), encompassing the afore-mentioned region, by deletion mapping, DNaseI footprinting and dimethyl interference techniques.
A series of deletion mutants, encompassing a few bases of the distal promoter region, was produced and cloned into the vector pBLcat3 (see Materials and Methods).
DNAs from the deletion mutants were transfected into F9 cells and the CAT-reporter activity was measured and compared with that of the wild type.
Fig. 1 shows the results of these experiments.
We observed that deletions up to nt -531 did not impair transcriptional activity, although this region comprises the RARE sequence known to be  responsible for the retinoic acid-mediated transcriptional enhancement.
This RARE is composed of two GGTGACC motifs separated by seven nucleotides, each motif being the sequence recognized by the restriction enzyme BstEII (manuscript in preparation).
Nevertheless, a further deletion up to nt -488 lowers the CAT activity to 40% of the control values and shortening the promoter up to nt -451 reduces transcriptional activity to about 2% of the controls.
Further deletions up to nucleotide -114 did not have any further influence on activity.
Thus, the activity of the H1 gene promoter decreases abruptly after deletion of the 80 nucleotides lying between nucleotides -531 and -451 of the distal region.
Footprinting analysis of the H1 distal promoter region
The results shown in Fig. 1 suggest that several transcription factors could bind to the -594 to -314 promoter fragment and that these factors are probably responsible for the observed transcription pattern.
We therefore decided to analyse the protein-DNA interactions of this fragment via in vitro DNaseI footprinting analysis.
An  asymmetrically labelled BglI-NaeI fragment (see Fig. 1) was complexed with nuclear proteins from F9 cells and digested with increasing concentrations of DNaseI.
As shown in Fig. 2A, two footprints were observed either with the lower or the upper strand labelled.
In the upper strand, the first footprint comprises nts -340 to -381 (footprint II), localized therefore outside of the fragment known from the deletion experiments to be responsible for maintaining transcriptional strength (see Fig. 1 and sequence in Fig. 2B).
A second footprint (footprint I) was observed between deletions Δ71 and Δ72 (nucleotides -495 to -527), in the region known to be necessary for maintaining transcriptional strength.
Interestingly, no clear footprint was observed at the RARE sequence found immediately upstream of footprint I (shown in italics in Fig. 2B) despite the fact that this sequence is able to bind retinoic acid receptors efficiently in vitro and that undifferentiated F9 cells contain retinoic acid receptors.
Furthermore, only an extremely faint footprint was observed in the sequence between nucleotides -488 and -451, encompassing deletions Δ72 to Δ73 and known from the transfection experiments to be indispensable for maintaining transcriptional strength (see Fig.1 and small capitals in Fig. 2B).
Finally, the position of the retinoic acid receptor element, the limits of footprints I and II as well as of oligonucleotide region III in the BglI-NaeI sequence is depicted in figure 2B.
Oligonucleotides I and III bind F9 proteins specifically
To further demonstrate that the sequences encompassing the 80 bp fragment are able to bind proteins in a sequence-specific manner, we synthesized oligonucleotides corresponding to footprint I plus 5 bp flanking regions on each side (see materials and methods) as well as another oligonucleotide (oligo III) corresponding to the sequence distance between Δ72 and Δ73, which deletion decreases transcription sharply (see figures 1 and 2B).
Oligonucleotides were  radioactively labelled, complexed with F9 nuclear proteins and separated by agarose gel electrophoresis.
As shown in Fig. 3, both oligonucleotides were able to bind F9 proteins and to produce retarded complexes.
Furthermore, complexes formed by oligonucleotide I cannot be competed with oligonucleotide III and vice versa oligonucleotide III complexes cannot be competed with oligonucleotide I (Fig. 3, lanes 1–4).
Both types of complexes, nevertheless, are efficiently competed by addition of the same unlabelled sequence respectively (Fig. 3, lanes 5–8).
Hence, both sequences specifically bind nuclear factors and cannot be competed by cross-competition experiments, suggesting that the binding factors are different from each other.
The band-shifting results obtained with oligonucleotide III demonstrate that this sequence is able to bind specifically trans-acting factors.
This binding was reflected in the DNaseI footprinting experiments only by a very faint footprint, even in the presence of large amounts of F9 nuclear proteins.
The reason for this divergence is not known, but it may well be that the conditions used for DNaseI treatment do not allow the formation of stable complexes  resistant to the action of the enzyme.
We are at present analysing this point by means of in vivo DNaseI footprinting.
Dimethylsulfate interference experiments
The results shown above demonstrate that nuclear factors are able to complex with oligonucleotide sequences  corresponding to footprint I and the difference between deletions Δ72 and Δ73 (oligo III, see figure 2B), both enclosed in the promoter fragment, known to be indispensable for  maintaining transcriptional strength.
We decided therefore to further characterize the DNA-protein contacts between the oligonucleotides and F9 nuclear proteins using dimethylsulfate interference analysis.
Oligos I and III were methylated, incubated with nuclear proteins and used for band-shifting experiments.
The specific complexes were excised from the gel, the DNA was treated with piperidine and separated by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.
Figure 4A shows the results of this experiment.
Depicted is the sequence of both  oligonucleotides with the methylated  residues printed in bold letters.
Both upper and lower chains contain a series of methylated guanines being the length of the modified sequence smaller than the footprint obtained with DNaseI, known already to overestimate the length of the binding sequence.
Methylated Gs are involved in the specific protein-oligonucleotide binding
The specificity of the binding between the proteins and oligonucleotides I and III can be assessed by mutating the G residues found to interfere complex formation and using the mutated oligonucleotides for band-shifting experiments.
If the methylated residues were involved in protein binding, mutated oligonucleotides should be unable to form retarded complexes as observed with wild type sequences.
Consequently, oligonucleotides in which contacting Gs were mutated (mutant oligos I and III in Fig. 4A) were synthesized and used for band-shifting experiments.
The results of these experiments are shown in Fig. 4B.
Whereas the wild type oligonucleotides showed the retarded complexes observed earlier (see Fig. 3) no such complexes could be detected using the mutated sequences, demonstrating that the binding of the proteins to the oligonucleotide sequences is mediated by the methylated bases shown in Fig. 4A.
This accounts for both oligo I and III.
In the case of mutant oligo III, two new retarded complexes appeared (black triangles in Fig. 4B) whereas the specific complex disappeared almost completely.
Furthermore, the mutated oligonucleotides were unable to compete out the complexes formed by the wild type sequences, even when a 500 molar excess of competitor was used (data not shown), reinforcing the conclusion that the protein-DNA complexes were mediated by the mutated guanine residues.
Binding of the proteins to the  oligonucleotides is necessary for transcriptional activity
The results presented above demonstrate that the specificity of the oligonucleotide-protein complexes is mediated by several guanines which methylation inhibits complex formation (Fig. 4A).
We reasoned that, if these complexes were involved in modulating transcriptional activity, mutation of these guanines in the wild type promoter (see Fig. 1), and therefore inhibition of the formation of the protein-DNA complexes, should decrease transcriptional activity in transfection experiments.
To prove this, we produced two series of recombinants in which the mutations depicted in Fig. 4A were introduced by site directed mutagenesis into recombinant Δ1 (Fig. 1), containing 741 bases of the promoter region.
In one series, only nucleotides corresponding to the footprint I region were mutated whereas in the second series, only nucleotides corresponding to the (for simplicity called) region III were changed.
DNA was prepared, transfected into undifferentiated F9 cells and the CAT reporter activities were calculated, taking the wild type values as 100%.
Figure 4C shows the results of these experiments as an histogram.
Both mutants decrease transcription of the reporter gene to approximately 50% of the non-mutated, wild type DNA values.
We therefore conclude, that binding of the protein(s) to footprint I and region III is necessary to modulate transcriptional activity in vivo , and that these proteins function as transcription factors.
Oligonucleotides I and III drive transcription in heterologous promoters
Our results demonstrate that the DNA promoter fragment comprising footprint I and region III is responsible for establishing transcriptional strength (Fig. 1).
To answer the question, whether this fragment is also able to enhance transcriptional activity when ligated to a heterologous promoter, we cloned the 117 bp AvaII fragment (nucleotides -529 to -412) comprising footprint I and region III (see Fig. 1) in sense or antisense orientation into plasmid pBLcat2, which contains the HSV-tk promoter (16).
Furthermore, we produced recombinants carrying a copy either of oligo III or oligo I at the same position in plasmid pBLcat2.
The corresponding recombinant DNAs were transfected into F9 cells and the CAT activity was calculated.
As shown in Fig. 5A the AvaII DNA fragment in each orientation as well as both oligos stimulate the CAT activity found for the parental pBLcat2 plasmid by two- to threefold.
This stimulation is nevertheless much lower than the 50 fold activity observed in the deletion analyses shown in figure 1.
These results therefore suggest that the 117 bp fragment develops only full activity in the context of the entire H1 promoter.
To analyse whether this transcriptional stimulation was also mediated by the binding of specific trans-acting factors to the cloned oligonucleotides, we cloned the mutated sequences I or III (see Figs. 4A and B) in front of the HSV-tk promoter in plasmid pBLcat2 as described before, prepared DNA and transfected it into F9 cells.
The CAT reporter activity was calculated and referred to that of the wild type constructions.
As shown in Fig. 5B for the oligo I, no enhancement of transcription was observed with the constructions containing the mutant oligos referred to the parental plasmid, indicating that binding of the trans-acting factors (see Fig. 3) to the oligonucleotide sequences is also necessary to modulate transcription in the heterologous promoter.
Cross-linking experiments
The results presented above show that the 80 bp promoter fragment binds at least two different factors and that it is able to modulate transcription in both homologous and heterologous constructions.
We have characterized these factors more accurately using UV-cross linking experiments.
Oligos I and III were complexed with F9 nuclear proteins, irradiated with UV-light to cross-link proteins to DNA and the cross-linked complexes were then separated by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.
Fig. 6 shows the results of these experiments.
When oligo I was used, two close migrating bands were identified, with MW of 90,000 and 93,000 after deducing the MW of the labelled oligonucleotide.
Curiously, a similar picture was evident when oligonucleotide III was used.
Two close-migrating bands were observed, with MW of 30,000 and 32,000.
That this is not an artificial result was shown by the fact that, when oligo II (see figure 2B) was used for cross-linking, only one band of a MW of 110,000 approximately appeared.
To further substantiate these results, we pre-incubated the nuclear extract with a 500 molar excess of wild type or mutated oligonucleotides.
Reactions were separated in agarose gels and the region of the gel corresponding to the position of the retarded complexes was cut out, cross-linked and separated in polyacrylamide gels.
We never observed any labelled protein when wild type oligonucleotides were used for competition.
Furthermore, no alteration of the protein pattern in the electrophoresis was observed when the competitions were carried out with the mutated oligonucleotides (results not shown), demonstrating that the binding of the proteins to the oligonucleotide was specific.
DISCUSSION
The deletion analyses presented in this report demonstrate that an 80 bp fragment of the histone H1 distal promoter region is necessary for maintaining transcriptional strength in undifferentiated F9 cells.
The sequence between this 80 bp fragment and the transcription initiation point (450 nucleotides) contains a series of protein-binding motifs, in which context the 80 bp fragment  develops full activity.
This structure differs from that found for the related H5 histone genes, where less than 150 bp of the proximal promoter region seems to be sufficient to ensure basal level transcription (19).
A functionally similar sequence has been described in the distal part of the H1t histone gene, which shows a twofold increase in transcription when sequences extending up to position -693 are present (20).
In contrast to H1, transcription of the H1t gene, like the H1, is not S-phase-dependent.
Another sequence with enhancer-like character has been described in the S-phase regulated histone H4, although located at a very distal position with respect to the transcription start point (21).
Interestingly, the RARE found immediately upstream of the 80 bp fragment does not seems to play an important role in maintaining basal level transcription, since their deletion does not affect transcriptional strength.
Whether this situation also holds true for other RA-regulated genes is not known so far (for a review see 22).
By DNaseI footprinting, we could demonstrate that the 303 bp BglI-NaeI segment (see Fig. 1), including the RARE and the 80 bp fragment, is able to bind at least two different factors, but only one, the so called footprint I, is localized in the 80 bp region, known to be necessary for full transcriptional activity.
Nevertheless, the deletion analysis pattern, shown in figure 1, suggests that at least one further element located between nucleotides -451 to -488, is necessary to maintain basal level transcription.
By band-shifting experiments, specific and non-specific competition and DMS interference analysis we demonstrated that, in fact, factor(s) are able to bind in a specific manner to this element (named here region III).
Furthermore, CAT analyses with promoter sequences in which the protein-contacting guanines of each footprint were mutated, resulted in a clear impairment in transcription, demonstrating, that binding of the factor(s) to footprint I and region III is necessary for modulation of transcription.
This statement is based on the fact that the mutated oligonucleotides were neither able to produce specific retarded complexes nor to specifically compete out the complexes formed by the wild type sequences (see Fig. 4).
The way in which the 80 bp fragment stimulates transcription suggests that the proteins binding to this fragment work like activators (see 23).
These activators are only fully active in the context of other general transcription factors localized in the proximal region of the promoter.
Indeed, in the H1 proximal promoter region canonical sequences for the binding of SP1, H1-box, oct-1, HNF-4, TATA-box-factor and other not yet characterized transcription factors are found.
The cooperation between the factors binding to the 80 bp fragment and these general transcription factors is demonstrated in experiments showing that point mutations in the afore mentioned elements resulted in a strong impairment of transcription (B.S., B.B. and A.A., in press).
In this context, the proteins binding to oligonucleotides I and III resemble in their effect yeast activators like GAL4 when  positioned distally to some mammalian promoters (24).
The transfection experiments using constructions encompassing oligonucleotides I or III and the HSV-tk promoter demonstrated a less pronounced increase in transcription (2 to 3 times) compared with the effect of the same sequences when located in the context of the entire promoter (quotient ΔX/Δ63 in Figure 1).
The same holds true when the AvaII fragment, containing both elements, was cloned in front of the tk-promoter.
This smaller activation probably reflects the absence of general transcription factors in the minimal promoter used.
Furthermore, the fact that constructions containing mutated oligonucleotides I or III failed to stimulate transcription to wild type values, argues in favour of a direct effect of the binding proteins on transcription, in a similar way as observed for the homologous constructions.
Taken together, our results indicate that the putative activator develops only full activity when located in the appropriate vicinity and bound to the corresponding trans-acting factors.
A computer comparison of oligonucleotide I with sequences corresponding to promoter regions of eukaryotic genes revealed a 10 bp GC-reach segment of identity with the sea urchin H4 histone gene (25,26).
This region has been found in the sea urchin gene to be necessary for maximal transcription in in vitro experiments, a similar function to that found in vivo for oligo I (26).
Furthermore, by UV-cross-linking experiments, a polypeptide of 85,000 daltons has been found to bind to this region, a molecular weight similar to that found in our experiments for the factor binding to oligonucleotide I (see Fig. 6).
This together with the fact that point mutations or deletions of this element in the sea urchin H4 gene strongly impair transcription, suggests that the 90,000 dalton factor found in our study is similar to the 85,000 dalton UHF-1 factor described for the sea urchin (26).
This is strengthened by the fact that the methylation patterns of the UHF-1 and oligo I sequences were relatively similar, although not identical.
Curiously, another element found in the proximal promoter region of the human histone H4, the H4TF-2 motif, is also found at a similar position in the H1 promoter (27,28).
A similar computer search for oligo III showed a 90% identity in a 12 bp overlap with the U1 snRNA promoter (29).
Whether this homology results in a functional similarity cannot at present be decided but is rather improbable, since the homologous element in the snRNA gene is located  immediately upstream of the transcription initiation point, an atypical position for a snRNA activator (see 30).
No similarities with other DNA elements were found, suggesting that the motif described in this report represents an up to date non-described element.
Whether the 30,000 dalton binding factor is unique for this motif is at present unknown.
The UV cross-linking experiments demonstrated that at least two factors are able to bind to the 80 bp fragment with molecular weights of approximately 90,000 and 30,000 daltons.
Remarkably, both factors appeared as a double band in the acrylamide gels, suggesting some kind of post-translational modification, although the existence of two different factors binding to the same sequence cannot be excluded.
Whether these two factors together with the RARE-binding proteins are involved in determining the expression level in retinoic acid-treated cells is unknown.
The finding that in differentiated F9 cells the proportion of both factors changes substantially compared to their undifferentiated counterparts argues in favour of such a possibility (our unpublished results).
Experiments are now in progress to isolate the trans-acting factors described in this report and to further analyse the nature of its interactions with the upstream RARE-binding factors.
Figure 1.
Deletion mapping of the H1 promoter.
Deletions were cloned as described in Materials and Methods and transfected into F9 cells by electroporation.
The activity of the wild type recombinant, containing 3,200 bp of the upstream promoter region, was taken as 100%; CAT activities were compared to the wild type.
Numbers in parentheses give the times every transfection was repeated.
The ratio ΔX/Δ63 shows the activity of the corresponding deletion compared to deletion Δ63.
Further deletions of the promoter up to position +2 are not shown in the figure because no further change in CAT activity was observed.
Values in the third column (up to deletion Δ72) give standard deviations.
Figure 2.
DNase I footprinting analysis of the BglI-NaeI fragment.
A).
The BglI-NaeI fragment was labelled  asymmetrically and incubated with no, 50 µg or 70 µg (lanes 1–3, respectively) of F9 nuclear proteins.
The complexes were treated with DNaseI and the digested DNA was separated by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.
I and II refer to footprints I and II as described in the text.
B).
The BglI-NaeI sequence is shown.
Stars and numbers indicate the 5'-end of the corresponding deletions.
The retinoic acid receptor element (RARE) is depicted in italics.
The fragment comprising the 80 bp fragment analysed in our study is written in small capitals.
The double underlined sequence represents oligonucleotide III.
Lines up- and underlying DNA sequences delimit the footprints described in the text.
The upperline represents the upper chain, the underline represents the lower chain.
Figure 3.
Oligos I and III bind proteins in a specific manner.
Labelled oligonucleotides were incubated with F9 nuclear proteins in the presence or absence of cold competitors.
Oligo I was unspecifically competed with no (-), 10, 50 and 500 molar excess of oligo III (lanes 1 to 4, respectively) or specifically with the same amounts of unlabelled oligo I (lanes 5 to 8).
Oligo III was competed unspecifically with oligo I (lanes 1 to 4, respectively) or specifically with cold oligo III (lanes 5 to 8) using the same molar amounts as for oligo I.
Figure 4.
A).
 Methylation patterns of oligonucleotides I and III.
The double-stranded sequence of oligonucleotides I and III and the corresponding mutants is shown.
Sequences read 5'to 3'.
Bold Gs show the guanines found to be methylated in the methylation interference analysis.
The mutant sequences (mutated nucleotides are depicted in bold letters) show the oligonucleotides used for band-shifting and site-directed mutagenesis as described in the text.
An EcoRI (oligo I) or an EcoRV (oligo III) recognition site has been incorporated into the mutants.
B).
Protein-DNA binding is mediated by the methylated guanines.
Mutated (m) or wild type oligonucleotides (w) were radioactively labelled, complexed with F9 proteins and separated on agarose gels.
Left, oligonucleotide I; right, oligonucleotide III.
The white triangle show the position of the specific complex.
Black triangles show two new bands appearing with the mutated oligonucleotide III.
C).
Point mutations in footprints I or III decrease transcription of the wild type promoter in transfected F9 cells.
Recombinant Δ1, containing 741 nucleotides of the promoter region (see Fig.1), was mutated by site-directed mutagenesis either in footprint I or in region III following the mutation scheme depicted in panel A. Mutated DNAs were transfected into F9 cells and the relative CAT reporter activity was calculated taking recombinant Δ1 wild type as 100%.
The histogram shows the values for both mutant construction.
Each transfection was repeated at least four times with two different plasmid DNA preparations.
Figure 5.
Oligos I and III drive transcription poorly in heterologous promoters.
A).
Oligos I, III or the AvaII fragment (AvaII fr.) containing both sequences were cloned (in sense or antisense position with respect to the CAT coding sequence) into plasmid pBLcat2 and 20 µg of the corresponding DNA was electroporated into F9 cells.
24 hours later extracts were prepared and the acetylated forms of chloramphenicol separated by thin layer chromatography.
Control cells were transfected with the same amount of Bluescribe DNA.
Relative activity indicates the values compared to plasmid pBLcat2 taken as 100%.
Each transfection was repeated at least three times.
B).
Mutated oligo I (see Fig. 4A) was cloned into plasmid pBLcat2 and transfected into undifferentiated F9 cells.
pBLcat2 and wild type oligo I constructs from the same experiments are shown for direct comparison.
Figure 6.
UV-cross-linking experiments.
Radioactively labelled oligonucleotides I, II and III were incubated with F9 nuclear proteins and irradiated with an UV-lamp (253 nm) for 5 minutes on ice.
The complexes were separated in non-denaturing agarose gels, cut out, incubated at 60 C with running buffer and separated by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (18).
The gels were dried and exposed to X-ray films.
I, II and III give the labelled oligonucleotide used.
Arrows denote the positions of the close migrating bands.
The main early and late promoters of Bacillus subtilis phage φ29 form unstable open complexes with σ A -RNA polymerase that are stabilized by DNA supercoiling
ABSTRACT
Most Escherichia coli promoters studied so far form stable open complexes with σ 70 -RNA polymerase which have relatively long half-lives and, therefore, are resistant to a competitor challenge.
A few exceptions are nevertheless known.
The analysis of a number of promoters in Bacillus subtilis has suggested that the instability of open complexes formed by the vegetative σ A -RNA polymerase may be a more general phenomenon than in Escherichia coli .
We show that the main early and late promoters from the Bacillus subtilis phage φ29 form unstable open complexes that are stabilized either by the formation of the first phosphodiester bond between the initiating nucleoside triphosphates or by DNA supercoiling.
The functional characteristics of these two strong promoters suggest that they are not optimized for a tight and stable RNA polymerase binding.
Their high activity is probably the consequence of the efficiency of further steps leading to the formation of an elongation complex.
INTRODUCTION
The transcription initiation process in prokaryotes can be formally divided into four major steps:(a) binding of the RNA polymerase to the promoter to form a ‘closed complex’,(b) isomerization of the closed complex into a structure in which the DNA is melted in the initiation region, forming an ‘open complex’,(c) incorporation of the first nucleoside triphosphates (NTPs) to produce an initiated complex and,(d) transition into an elongation complex that leaves the promoter (1,2).
A particularly relevant additional intermediate between the open and elongation complexes has been proposed, named the stressed intermediate, in which the RNA polymerase has started to produce short transcripts but still has not been able to clear the promoter (3).
The overall strength and functional characteristics of a promoter will depend on the efficiency of the steps leading to the formation of each of these complexes, all of which can in principle act as a bottle-neck.
It is now clear that not all strong promoters are optimized in the same way.
Strong promoters that are negatively regulated by repression factors tend to bind RNA polymerase far below maximal rates, the subsequent steps leading to the formation of an elongation complex being highly efficient.
Other strong promoters are optimized for a tight RNA polymerase binding, the following steps leading to promoter clearance being less efficient (4–6).
Most promoters analyzed in detail, which correspond to Escherichia coli,form open complexes with RNA polymerase that are essentially irreversible in vitro , in the sense that they have relatively long half-lives (in the range of several minutes to hours, refs. 3, 4, 6, 7), and are therefore resistant to the challenge of competitors such as heparin or heterologous DNA.
There are however exceptions, of which the best known are the P 1 promoters of the E.coli rrnB and rrnD operons for rRNA.
These promoters give rise to unstable open complexes that are sensitive to a short heparin challenge, and are stabilized either by the addition of the first two initiating NTPs (leading to the formation of an initiated complex), or by DNA supercoiling (8–10).
Similarly, the study of some strong Bacillus subtilis promoters in linear templates has recently shown that many of them, though not all, form unstable open complexes with σ A -RNA polymerase, being likely that this type of promoters is more frequent in B.subtilis than in E.coli (11).
In line with this finding, we describe in this work that open complexes formed by σ A -RNA polymerase at the main promoter for B.subtilis phage φ29 early genes, named P A2b , and at the late P A3 promoter responsible for the expression of all the viral late genes (12, 13), are unstable, being sensitive to heparin challenge.
Both are strong and regulated promoters; the viral early protein p4 represses the early P A2b promoter at late times of the infection (14) and simultaneously activates the late P A3 promoter (14, 15; see Figure 1).
The heparin sensitivity of these two promoters led us to study their functional characteristics in comparison with other promoters known to form unstable open complexes.
METHODS
Template DNAs
The source of DNA was plasmid pFRC64 (14), which contains a 198 bp long AccI-HindIII DNA fragment from phage φ29 genome, containing both P A2b and P A3 promoters, cloned at the SmaI site of pUC19Ο, so that transcription from P A2b promoter faces the unique EcoRI site from the pUC polylinker sequence.
In vitro transcription assays
Transcription reactions contained, in a final volume of 25 µl, 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 10 mM MgCl 2 , 20 mM NaCl, 4% glycerol, ammonium sulphate up to 48 mM (for P A2b except in Figure 7, see legend) or 92 mM (for P A3 ), and σ A -RNA polymerase (35 nM final concentration except in Figure 5, see legend).
1 µg of the regulatory protein p4 was also added when assaying P A3 activity or when analyzing its repression effect on P A2b .
The DNA templates used were either supercoiled pFRC64 plasmid (2 nM) or a 340 bp PvuI-BamHI fragment (2 nM), obtained from plasmid pFRC64, which gives rise to run-off transcripts 143 nt long from P A2b and 79 nt long from P A3 .
The initiating NTPs (GTP and UTP), the  dinucleotide GpU, or GpU plus ATP, were also added when indicated at final concentrations of 40 µM.
Reaction mixtures were incubated for 10 min at 37°C to allow RNA polymerase to form the corresponding complexes with the promoters.
Transcription was then started by the addition of 3 µl of a preheated solution containing heparin and the four NTPs.
The final concentration of heparin was 10 µg/ml, and that of the NTPs, 200 µM.
Incubation was continued for 10 min, after which the reaction was stopped by the addition of 1 µl of 0.5 M EDTA, 1 µg of carrier tRNA, 3 µl of 3 M potassium acetate and 70 µl of ethanol.
RNAs were precipitated and analyzed by primer extension as indicated below.
Primer extension of RNAs
The RNA was resuspended in a solution containing 40 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 20 mM MgCl 2 , 50 mM NaCl, 10 units of RNasin ribonuclease inhibitor and 2–4 pmoles (a large excess) of oligonucleotides designed to hybridize 67 nt (for P A3 ) or 98 nt (for P A2b ) downstream from the transcription start sites described in this work (see text and Figure 2).
The mixture was heated for 5 min at 70°C and then allowed to cool slowly to 20°C.
The solutions were then put on ice for 10 min and the RNA was precipitated by the addition of 4 µl of 3 M potassium acetate and 3 volumes of ethanol.
The RNA was resuspended in 5 µl of water and the primer was extended in a solution containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 40 mM KCl, 7 mM MgAc 2 , 2 mM DTT, 200 µM each dNTP (except dATP which was 100 µM), 2 µCi of α (32 P) dATP (400 Ci/mmol), 10 units of RNasin and 5 units of AMV-reverse transcriptase, in a total volume of 10 µl.
The reaction mixture was incubated at 42°C for 60 min, and then stopped by the addition of 0.5 µl of 0.5 M EDTA and 30 µl of 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 1 mM EDTA.
The sample was filtered through a 1 ml Sephadex G-50 spun-column to eliminate the non-incorporated labelled nucleotide, and the eluted cDNA precipitated by the addition of 4 µl of 3 M potassium acetate and 200 µl of ethanol.
The cDNA was analyzed by electrophoresis in 6% urea-polyacrylamide gels.
KMnO 4 footprinting
An end labelled DNA fragment containing P A2b and P A3 promoters was incubated at 37°C for 20 min in a solution containing 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 10 mM MgCl 2 , 2 µg of poly(dI-dC), 0.5 µg of σ A -RNA polymerase (except in the control sample), in the absence (P A2b ) or presence (P A3 ) of protein p4 (1 µg), and with or without the initiating NTPs (GTP and UTP, 40 µM each), in a total volume of 25 µl.
KMnO 4 was then added up to 4 mM and incubation continued for 30 seconds at 37°C.
The reaction was stopped by the addition of 5 µl of a solution containing 1 M β-mercaptoethanol and 1.5 M sodium acetate.
The DNA was precipitated, cleaved with piperidine as described (Maxam and Gilbert, 1980) and analyzed by electrophoresis in 6% urea-polyacrylamide gels.
Preparation of plasmids with different superhelical densities
Plasmid pFRC64 was relaxed with topoisomerase I in the presence of ethidium bromide concentrations ranging from 0 to 20 µM, essentially as described (18).
The superhelical densities of the samples obtained were calculated as described (19), from the linking number difference between the centre of the topoisomer distribution of a given sample and the centre of the topoisomer distribution corresponding to relaxed DNA.
It is known that changes in temperature or ionic strength alter the average rotation angle between adjacent base pairs in the DNA helix which, in a closed-circular DNA, leads to a change in the superhelical density (20).
Therefore, a DNA relaxed under the conditions optimum for topoisomerase I acquires certain superhelical density at the ionic conditions used in the transcription assays, which are higher.
We have observed that plasmid pFRC64, relaxed at 100 mM KCl (optimum for topoisomerase I), acquires a superhelical density of -0.006 at the ionic conditions used in the transcription assays (not shown).
We therefore took this data into consideration when calculating the superhelical densities of the different plasmid preparations.
To obtain a relaxed template, we incubated the supercoiled plasmid with topoisomerase I under the same ionic strength conditions used in the transcription assays.
RESULTS
Determination of the precise start sites of the P A2b and P A3 promoters
The transcription start sites for the P A2b and P A3 promoters analyzed by S1 mapping (13) indicated three contiguous possible start sites for each promoter that did not allow to determine which was the first nucleotide incorporated by the RNA polymerase, a problem frequently found with S1 mapping analysis.
In an attempt to define the start site more precisely, a primer extension analysis of the transcripts produced in vitro from these promoters was carried out.
Single transcription start sites were found very close to the previously described ones (Figure 2).
RNAs produced in vivo in φ29 infected cells gave the same results (not shown).
A systematic search for the pair of NTPs that led to the formation of stable initiated complexes (to be shown and discussed below) indicated that only the simultaneous presence of GTP and UTP could give rise to stable complexes, indicating that these were the first two NTPs incorporated at both promoters.
The start sites predicted by the primer extension analysis for both promoters agreed with GTP and UTP being the first NTPs incorporated (see Figure 2).
Therefore, positions previously considered as +1 on the basis of S1 mapping assays, correspond indeed to -3 for P A2b and -2 for P A3 .
Similar discrepancies between the start sites predicted by S1 mapping and other methods have been noticed in other cases (see for example reference 21).
Stability of P A2b and P A3 open and initiated complexes in linear templates
The addition of heparin to preformed σ A -RNA polymerase-promoter complexes at 37°C in linear DNA fragments containing phage φ29 P A2b and P A3 promoters led to a drastic inhibition of the transcription reaction (not shown).
Since most promoters can form stable open complexes under the conditions used, the heparin inhibition was interpreted to indicate that the two promoters were forming unstable complexes (presumably open complexes, since the incubation temperature was 37°C).
To find conditions leading to the formation of stable complexes we investigated whether the addition in the incubation mixture of the first two initiating NTPs relieved the heparin sensitivity, as it had been described for other promoters with similar characteristics (8).
It is known that the regulatory protein p4 efficiently displaces σ A -RNA polymerase bound at P A2b and directs it to the adjacent but divergently transcribed P A3 promoter (14), transcription from P A3 being negligible in the absence of p4 under the ionic conditions used (22).
Therefore, protein p4 was always present when analyzing the P A3 promoter, while it was not added in the case of P A2b .
To analyze the stability of open complexes formed at these two promoters, a 339 bp DNA fragment containing both P A2b and P A3 was incubated with σ A -RNA polymerase at 37°C, with or without protein p4, and in the absence or presence of either the initiating NTPs GTP and UTP, the dinucleotide GpU, or GpU plus ATP.
After 10 minutes incubation, heparin and the four NTPs were added and the transcripts produced analyzed by primer extension.
Figure 3 shows that, using a linear template, a very reduced amount of transcripts was obtained when the initiating NTPs were omitted, whereas their addition led to the formation of initiated complexes that were resistant to the heparin challenge.
Addition of combinations of two NTPs other than GTP plus UTP did not lead to complex-stabilization (not shown), corroborating that these were the two initiating NTPs for both promoters.
The dinucleotide GpU could not stabilize the RNA polymerase-promoter complex formed at P A2b , but produced a partial protection from heparin challenge in the case of P A3 .
It is worth noting that in the presence of GpU+ATP, about 10% of the transcripts produced from P A3 started at position -3 instead of +1 (see Figures 2 and 3).
The poor or null stabilizing effect of GpU indicated that, as it had been shown for the E.coli rrnB P 1 promoter (8), the appearance of a complex stable to heparin challenge requires the formation of at least the first phosphodiester bond.
These results suggested that open complexes formed at the φ29 P A2b and P A3 promoters are unstable, and that initiated complexes are stable enough to resist the heparin challenge and give rise to elongation complexes.
To confirm this idea, we analyzed by KMnO 4 footprinting the complexes formed.
The KMnO 4 reagent cleaves the DNA preferentially at those positions in which the double helix is melted, single stranded thymines being particularly sensitive.
Therefore, this method allows to detect the presence of open or initiated complexes, which appear as ssDNA regions, sensitive to KMnO 4 , located around the +1 area of the promoter.
n the absence of the initiating NTPs, open complexes were detectable at the P A3 promoter, but not at the P A2b promoter (Figure 4).
Under these conditions, however, the open complexes formed at P A3 were not resistant to a short heparin challenge.
In the presence of the initiating NTPs, initiated complexes were detectable by KMnO 4 footprinting at both P A3 and P A2b promoters, and were resistant (P A2b ) or partially resistant (P A3 ) to a short heparin challenge.
To get a rough idea of the half-life of the initiated complexes the heparin challenge was allowed to proceed for either 15 seconds or for 10 minutes before the addition of KMnO 4 (simultaneous addition of KMnO 4 and heparin was not possible since the chemical reagent oxidizes the heparin).
The results suggested that the half-life of these complexes was short, in the range of a few minutes for P A2b and of 10–20 seconds for P A3 , since the DNA-strand opening was undetectable at both promoters after a 10 minutes challenge and, in the case of P A3 , considerably reduced after a 15 seconds challenge (Figure 4).
DNA supercoiling stabilizes open complexes formed at P A2b and P A3 promoters
DNA supercoiling has been shown to stabilize open complexes formed at several bacterial promoters (9, 23–27), and is known to influence either positively or negatively the activity of many other promoters (Pruss and Drlica, 1989).
We therefore analyzed its influence on P A2b and P A3 promoters.
By transcription assays in which the heparin challenge was omitted and the transcripts produced were detected by primer extension, it was shown that p4 is active on supercoiled DNA (Figure 5), being able to activate P A3 and to repress P A2b .
The p4 dependence of P A3 expression diminished as the concentration of RNA polymerase increased, consistent with the results obtained in linear templates showing that the effect of p4 is to favour the binding of RNA polymerase to the promoter (28).
Interestingly, RNA polymerase-promoter complexes formed at these promoters in the absence of the initiating NTPs on supercoiled templates were resistant to heparin challenge (Figure 3), indicating that DNA supercoiling could stabilize open complexes at both P A2b and P A3 promoters.
These assays were performed with fully supercoiled plasmid DNA, purified from cells grown to stationary phase.
It is known that,in vivo , half of the superhelical density is restrained by DNA-binding proteins, so that the free superhelical density has a value close to -0.025 (29, 30).
Phage φ29 has a linear genome whose degree of supercoiling in the cell is not known, but it is probably lower than that of a plasmid.
We therefore analyzed if the stabilizing effect on P A2b and P A3 open complexes was maintained also at low superhelical densities.
For this purpose, a plasmid containing both promoters was relaxed with topoisomerase I in the presence of increasing amounts of ethidium bromide, so obtaining a number of plasmid preparations with a superhelical density ranging from 0 (relaxed plasmid) to -0.071 (fully supercoiled, see methods).
Open complexes formed at P A2b were resistant to an heparin challenge at superhelical densities ranging from -0.071 to -0.016 (Figure 6), but became sensitive at lower superhelical densities (-0.006 or 0).
Open complexes formed at P A3 were resistant to the heparin challenge at superhelical densities as low as -0.006, although became sensitive when the plasmid was either relaxed by topoisomerase I or nicked by a mild treatment with DNase I (Figure 6).
Effect of ionic strength on the stability of open complexes formed at P A2b promoter
If unstable complexes are in a rapid equilibrium with unbound RNA polymerase, as it has been suggested for the E.coli rrnD P 1 and for the B.subtilis citB promoters (10, 11), an increase in the ionic strength should impair promoter efficiency.
Indeed, the E.coli rrnB and rrnD P 1 promoters for rRNAs are known to be salt-sensitive, being necessary not only the initiating NTPs but also low salt concentrations to obtain a stable complex in linear templates (8).
The salt sensitivity of P A2b was assayed in linear and supercoiled templates, and in the former case, both in the absence and presence of the initiating NTPs (Figure 7).
Open complexes formed at P A2b on linear templates were very sensitive to the salt concentration.
Initiated complexes were significantly more stable, although the total amount of transcripts obtained decreased notably when the ionic strength was increased.
Interestingly, open complexes formed on supercoiled templates in the absence of the initiating NTPs were considerably less salt-sensitive than initiated complexes formed on linear templates.
The activity obtained at an intermediate ionic strength (70 mM ammonium sulphate) was about 80% of that observed at the lowest concentration used (20 mM), a situation in which the activity of P A2b in linear templates was of about 10% if the initiating NTPs were present or even lower in their absence.
Assuming that salt is acting as a competitor for the binding of the RNA polymerase to the promoter, these results suggest that open complexes formed at P A2b on supercoiled templates are more stable than initiated complexes found on linear templates, open complexes formed on linear templates being the less stable ones.
The salt sensitivity assays were not performed with the P A3 promoter, since the regulatory protein p4 is known to stabilize RNA polymerase binding to the promoter at high salt concentrations (28).
DISCUSSION
The study of a number of promoters in E.coli , both natural and synthetic, has indicated that there are several ways in which a promoter can be optimized to be highly efficient (3, 6, 10, 31).
If the promoter is optimized for RNA polymerase binding, the steps leading to promoter clearance are likely to be slow; on the other hand, a rapid formation of elongation complexes should be facilitated if RNA polymerase is not tightly bound to the promoter.
Tight binding of E.coli RNA polymerase to the lac promoter was found to be correlated with its poor ability to escape from abortive cycling (32).
The E.coli rrnB and rrnD P 1 promoters for rRNAs appear to be adapted to high productivity by having a rapid promoter clearance, something that is probably related to the characteristic instability of their open complexes (10).
Our analysis of the main early and late promoters (P A2b and P A3 , respectively) of B.subtilis phage φ29 has indicated that they share many of the functional characteristics of the E.coli rrnB and rrnD P 1 promoters.
Namely, they form unstable open complexes with the vegetative RNA polymerase that are stabilized either by the first NTPs, that allow the formation of an initiated complex, or by DNA supercoiling.
Open complexes formed at the E.coli rrnB and rrnD P 1 promoters decay within seconds in the presence of heparin (9,10), indicating that the complexes are unstable and equilibrate rapidly either with free enzyme (10) or with a closed complex that is sensitive to competitor challenge (33).
The formation of a phosphodiester bond between the first two initiating NTPs gives rise to an initiated complex that is considerably more stable.
Interestingly, an initiating dinucleotide does not have the same effect, suggesting that phosphodiester bond formation may be an important requirement in the process (8).
The E.coli rRNA promoters are also salt sensitive (8), something that is also probably related with the instability of the open complexes and that is also characteristic of φ29 P A2b promoter.
Despite the similarities of the two φ29 promoters analyzed, there are certain differences between them.
In the case of P A2b , we were unable to detect DNA-strand opening (open complexes) in linear templates if the initiating NTPs were omitted, while for P A3 DNA melting was clearly detectable in the absence of GTP and UTP.
A behaviour similar to that of P A2b has been described for the rrnB P1 promoter on linear templates (33).
The RNA polymerase has been shown to bend and untwist the DNA upon promoter recognition at several promoters (34–36), and this is likely to be a general phenomenon required for the formation of transcription complexes.
It has been proposed that DNA supercoiling would act to change the DNA structure at the promoter facilitating or inhibiting the formation of a stable RNA polymerase-promoter complex, in which the initiation region is melted, and that can proceed to the promoter clearance step (25).
The stabilizing effect of DNA supercoiling on open complex formation is probably reflecting that the torsional stress is favouring the opening of the DNA strands driving the RNA polymerase-promoter complex into a configuration with an increased half-life.
This is in agreement with the idea, proposed for E.coli rrn promoters (10) and for the B.subtilis tms and citB promoters (11), suggesting that heparin sensitivity occurs because the open complexes in these promoters are unstable and equilibrate rapidly with free enzyme, which is then irreversively bound by heparin.
An alternative explanation has recently been proposed for the E.coli rrnB P 1 promoter (33), stating that DNA supercoiling would allow the RNA polymerase to establish more extended contacts with the DNA in the +1 region of the promoter, and that heparin would remove from DNA RNA polymerase molecules that are stably but not tightly bound to the promoter as closed complexes.
Stabilization of open complexes by DNA supercoiling has been observed in other promoters (23–26).
Nevertheless, it is important to distinguish between those promoters for which DNA supercoiling is essential for heparin resistance (e.g. E.coli rrnB P1, ref. 9), from those in which the supercoiling stimulates the formation of a complex that is nevertheless considerably resistant to heparin challenge in linear templates (e.g. the E.coli lac promoter, ref. 25).
It is interesting to note that the genome of phage φ29 is linear, and its superhelicity is likely to arise mainly as a consequence of the proteins acting on the DNA, such as RNA polymerase (37) or the viral protein p6 (38).
Protein p6 is known to participate in the replication of the φ29 genome and to generate, at least at both ends of the genome, a nucleoprotein complex in which the DNA adopts a right handed superhelical structure (38).
The degree of supercoiling imposed on the viral genome in vivo is not known, but our experiments show that a moderate superhelical density can exert an stabilizing effect on the open complexes formed at the P A2b and P A3 promoters, which should be important in facilitating the transition into elongation complexes.
It is reasonable to assume that a lytic phage as φ29 should have its main promoters optimized for high productivity.
Instability of open complexes appears to be a frequent property of Bacillus promoters recognized by σ A -RNA polymerase.
Indeed, this behaviour has been described for the B.subtilis tms and citB promoters (11), for the E.coli lac UV5 promoter when recognized by B.subtilis σ A -RNA polymerase (11), and for the phage φ29 C1 promoter (also named A2 in ref. 39).
In view of our results, φ29 promoters A2b and A3 should be also included into this category.
At least two B.subtilis promoters, however, have been shown to form stable open complexes with σ A -RNA polymerase, namely the φ29 C2 promoter (named G2 in ref. 39), and the veg promoter (11).
The presence of the first two initiating NTPs could stabilize, at least to a partial extent, open complexes formed at the φ29 A2b and A3 promoters (this work) and at the φ29 C1 promoter (39).
In the case of the tms and citB promoters, however, stable complexes were not detected until the nascent RNA had a few more nucleotides (11).
Although the experimental approach used in each case was different, it is likely that the precise stage at which σ A -RNA polymerase forms a stable complex is different in each promoter.
Considering that σ A -RNA polymerase can also form stable open complexes at some promoters, it seems that no general rule can be easily established, and that the characteristics of the different complexes should be expected to be a particular feature of each promoter.
DNA supercoiling has been shown to stabilize the open complexes formed at the E.coli rrnB P1 promoter (9) and at the B.subtilis phage φ29 P A2b and P A3 promoters (this work).
Supercoiling also stimulates the formation of open complexes at several promoters in which these complexes have relatively long half-lives (24, 25).
It would be interesting to see if DNA supercoiling can stabilize the open complexes formed at other B.subtilis promoters known to form unstable complexes, such as the tms and citB promoters.
Figure 1.
Arrangement of the main early (P A2b ) and late (P A3 ) promoters of phage φ29.
Shadowed boxes indicate the -10 and -35 regions and open boxes the binding sequences for the regulatory protein p4 (15, 16).
Arrows indicate both the length and the orientation of the promoters.
Figure 2.
Transcription start sites for P A2b and P A3 promoters.
The horizontal arrows indicate the transcription start sites as deduced from a primer extension analysis of the corresponding transcripts.
The asterisks show the start sites found by S1 mapping (13).
The vertical arrows show the positions previously considered as +1 which, taking into account the start sites indicated by the primer extension analysis, correspond to -3 for P A2b and -2 for P A3 .
Figure 3.
Sensitivity to heparin challenge of open or initiated complexes formed at the φ29 P A2b and P A3 promoters.
A linear or supercoiled DNA containing P A2b and P A3 promoters was incubated at 37°C with σ A -RNA polymerase, in the absence (P A2b ) or presence (P A3 ) of protein p4, and with the NTP combinations indicated in each lane.
After 10 min, a preheated mixture of heparin and the four NTPs was added and transcription allowed to proceed for 10 min at the same temperature.
The reaction was then stopped, and the transcripts produced analyzed by primer extension and detected by polyacrylamide-urea gel electrophoresis and autoradiography.
The transcription products were quantitated by densitometry; values obtained are indicated below each band relative to those obtained in the presence of the initiating NTPs, GTP and UTP, considered as 100%.
Figure 4.
Analysis of open or initiated complexes by KMnO 4 footprinting.
An end-labelled linear DNA fragment containing both P A2b and P A3 promoters was incubated at 37°C with σ A -RNA polymerase, in the absence (P A2b ) or presence (P A3 ) of protein p4, with or without the initiating NTPs (GTP and UTP), and in the presence of an excess of non-specific DNA (see Methods, section for KMnO 4 footprinting).
After 10 min, heparin was added up to 10 µg/ml and incubation continued for either 15 seconds or 10 min (indicated in the figure as +h and +H, respectively).
Open or initiated complexes were then probed by KMnO 4 footprinting, a reagent that cleaves the DNA preferentially in those positions in which the double helix is melted, single stranded thymine nucleotides being particularly sensitive.
Arrows show nucleotides hyperreactive to the modifying agent in the template strand (P A2b ) or in the non-template strand (P A3 ).
Figure 5.
Activity of protein p4 on supercoiled DNA.
The ability of protein p4 to activate P A3 and repress P A2b on supercoiled templates was analyzed by in vitro transcription reactions performed as follows: a supercoiled DNA containing P A2b and P A3 promoters was incubated at 37°C with σ A -RNA polymerase, in the absence (P A2b ) or presence (P A3 ) of protein p4, and with the four NTPs.
The reaction was started by the addition of RNA polymerase (from 8.7 to 176 nM, final concentration); no heparin was added.
After 10 minutes, the reactions were stopped and the transcripts produced analyzed by primer extension, polyacrylamide-urea gel electrophoresis and autoradiography.
The activity is shown as x-fold activation on P A3 or x-fold repression on P A2b .
Figure 6.
Effect of DNA supercoiling on the stability of open complexes formed at the φ29 P A2b and P A3 promoters.
The stability of open complexes formed at P A2b and P A3 promoters on plasmids with different superhelical densities (from σ = 0 to σ = -0.071) was analyzed as follows: supercoiled DNA containing P A2b and P A3 promoters was incubated at 37°C with σ A -RNA polymerase, in the absence (P A2b ) or presence (P A3 ) of protein p4, and the absence of the initiating NTPs.
After 10 min, a preheated mixture of heparin and the four NTPs was added and transcription allowed to proceed for 10 min at the same temperature.
The reaction was then stopped, and the transcripts produced analyzed by primer extension and detected by polyacrylamide-urea gel electrophoresis and autoradiography.
The superhelical densities indicated correspond to those observed under the ionic strength conditions used in the transcription assays (see Methods, section for preparation of plasmids with different superhelical densities).
(*) nicked DNA, assayed only for P A3 .
Figure 7.
Effect of the ionic strength on the stability of open or initiated complexes formed at the P A2b promoter.
Linear or supercoiled DNAs containing P A2b and P A3 promoters were incubated at 37°C with σ A -RNA polymerase, in the absence of protein p4, and at ammonium sulphate concentrations ranging from 20 to 112 mM.
When analysing the stability of initiated complexes, the initiating NTPs were also included.
After 10 min, a preheated mixture of heparin and the four NTPs was added and transcription allowed to proceed for 10 min at the same temperature.
The reaction was then stopped, and the transcripts produced analyzed by primer extension and detected by polyacrylamide-urea gel electrophoresis and autoradiography.
The transcription products were quantitated by densitometry; P A2b activity is expressed in each case relative to that observed with supercoiled DNA at the lowest ionic strength assayed, which is considered as 100%.
When linear DNA fragments were used, the stability of both open (filled circles) and initiated (triangles) complexes was analyzed.
In the case of supercoiled templates (rectangles), only the stability of open complexes was studied (no initiating NTPs added).
Transcription factor IIA stimulates the expression of classical polIII-genes
ABSTRACT
Protein fractions containing TFIIA, a transcription factor known to be involved in transcription initiation by RNA polymerase II and 5'-regulated polymerase III genes (e.g. U6), were tested for their role in in vitro transcription of classical pol III genes.
These fractions were shown to stimulate a basal transcription system, reconstituted from highly purified fractions hTFIIIB and hTFIIIC.
We demonstrate that this stimulating activity isolated from HeLa cells coelutes over at least six chromatographic steps with hTFIIA.
Moreover the native molecular mass and the stability of this activity against heat treatment are comparable to those of hTFIIA.
Finally we show that recombinant TFIIA from Saccharomyces cerevisiae can substitute for the human factor in pol III transcription in vitro which proves that TFIIA is also involved in the efficient expression of classical pol III genes.
INTRODUCTION
The correct transcription initiation from promoters by purified eukaryotic RNA polymerases requires auxiliary protein components called transcription factors (TF).
In the case of RNA polymerase III from mammalian cells three protein fractions were separated by chromatography on phosphocellulose and termed TFIIIA, B and C according to their consecutive elution points from this ion exchanger (1).
The classical target genes for pol III are controlled by different intragenic, discontinuous promoter sequences which can be divided in two subclasses, the AC-type (5S-rRNA) and the AB-type [t-RNA, VA-RNA's, 7SL-RNA, EBER;(2)]which differ in their factor requirement.
While the genes of the AB-type promoters were transcribed in vitro by the TFIIIB and IIIC fractions, 5S-RNA genes additionally required the TFIIIA fraction (1, 2).
Human TFIIIA purified from HeLa cells specifically binds to the ICR of 5S-RNA genes in a primary fashion, while hTFIIIC is able to bind to AB- and AC-type ICR promoters (3).
In yeast cells TFIIIA and TFIIIC are considered to represent assembly factors whereas TFIIIB, subsequently incorporated into the preinitiation complex, is thought to be the initiation factor proper for all known pol III genes (4, 5).
Our attempts to reconstitute in vitro transcription from highly purified factors have proven to be inefficient, indicating that additional components, present in less pure fractions were required to facilitate efficient in vitro transcription.
Although classical pol III genes lack a TATA-motif in their promoters, recently published results demonstrate that TBP, a component of TFIID is nevertheless involved in the transcription of t-, VA- and 5S-genes (6).
In contrast to the aforementioned pol III genes, U6 snRNA genes from vertebrates, although transcribed by RNA polymerase III, are controlled by promoter elements resembling those of typical pol II genes.
These genes require four different trans-acting protein components in addition to RNA polymerase III for efficient in vitro transcription.
Besides the general pol III transcription factor TFIIIB (5, 7), the PSE-binding protein PBP (5, 8), and TFIID (5, 9, 10, 11) an additional activity is involved in the expression of the U6-gene (5).
Very recently we could demonstrate, that this latter activity is related to pol II transcription factor TFIIA (12).
In agreement with its previously described function on TATA-containing polII-promoters (13), TFIIA presumably facilitates the interaction of TBP with the U6 TATA-box (12).
TFIIA from HeLa cells has been purified by affinity chromatography and was identified as a 38 kDa polypeptide (14).
Very recently it has been shown that TFIIA is also able to dissociate negative components from TBP, thereby possibly acting as an anti-inhibitor (15, 16).
The genes encoding TFIIA from yeast cells could recently be cloned. yTFIIA consists of two subunits termed TOA I and TOA II with a molecular mass of 32.2 and 13.5 kDa, respectively (17).
The addition of recombinant TOA I and TOA II to yeast and mammalian cell extracts, which had been selectively depleted from TFIIA activity, could faithfully restore cell free transcription of pol II genes (17).
Here we demonstrate for the first time that TFIIA is also involved in the expression of classical pol III genes (t-RNA, VAI-RNA and 5S-RNA).
These results were obtained with hTFIIA purified from HeLa cells as well as with recombinant yTFIIA.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Plasmids
The plasmids pUVAI, pUht met , pUh5S containing single copies of the genes coding for VAI-RNA, human t-RNA met i and human 5S-RNA were described previously (3, 18).
The plasmid pUmU6 0.34 containing the mouse U6-gene from bp -150 to +190, was described before (5).
Buffers
buffer 1: 20 mM Hepes (pH 7.9), 20% (v/v) glycerol, 3 mM DTT, 0.2 mM PMSF.
buffer 2: 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.9), 10% (v/v) glycerol, 3 mM DTT, 60 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl 2 , 0.2 mM PMSF.
buffer 3: 20 mM Hepes (pH 7.9), 20% (v/v) glycerol, 5 mM MgCl 2 , 3 mM DTT, 0.2 mM PMSF.
In vitro transcription
The in vitro transcription reactions were performed as described previously for classical pol III genes (19) and for the U6-RNA gene (5).
Preparation of cell free extracts
Cytoplasmic cell extract (S100) was prepared as described previously (7).
Isolation of employed transcription factors
To prepare human transcription factors, S100 from HeLa cells was fractionated by phosphocellulose chromatography essentially as described (1).
The breakthrough (PC A) was collected and after washing the column with buffer 1 plus 0.1 M KCl, bound proteins were eluted with two consecutive steps of buffer 1 containing 0.35 M KCl (PC B) and 0.6 M KCl (PC C) respectively.
Further purification procedures of transcription factors were performed as follows:
hTFIIIA.
To obtain highly purified hTFIIIA, the ionic strength of fraction PC A was raised to 0.6 M KCl and it was rechromatographed on a second column of phosphocellulose.
Washing with buffer 1 plus 0.6 M KCl (PC AA) was followed by elution with buffer 1 containing 1.0 M KCl (PC AD) as previously described by our group (18).
hTFIIIB.
Phosphocellulose fraction B, containing hTFIIIB, was diluted to 175 mM KCl and loaded onto a Heparin-Sepharose column at 5 mg protein/ml bed volume.
To remove possible contamination by TFIIA, which does not bind to Heparin-Sepharose (12), the column was extensively washed with buffer 1 plus 175 mM KCl.
It was then eluted with buffer 1 + 0.4 M KCl to yield fraction HS 0.4 (1 mg protein/ml) which was finally dialysed against buffer 2.
hTFIIIC.
Phosphocellulose fraction C was dialysed against buffer 3 containing 50 mM (NH 4 )2 SO 4 and applied to a DEAE Sephadex A25 column at a rate of 5mg protein/ml bed volume.
After extensively washing with the same buffer, the column was eluted with buffer 3 plus 0.15 M (NH 4 )2 SO 4 .
The resulting fraction DS 0.15 (0.5mg protein/ml) containing IIIC, TBP and pol III was dialysed against buffer 2.
hTFIIA.
Purification of hTFIIA was carried out as published previously by Waldschmidt and Seifart (12).
Phosphocellulose fraction AA (see above) was applied to a Heparin-Sepharose column and eluted with buffer 3 plus 0.1 M KCl yielding fraction HS 0.1 , which was subsequently applied to a DEAE-Sephacel column.
After washing with the same buffer, bound protein was eluted with two consecutive steps of buffer 3 containing 0.2 and 0.3 M KCl yielding fractions DSC 0.2 and DSC 0.3 , respectively.
Fraction DSC 0.3 containing the bulk of TFIIA activity was further purified by chromatography over a Mono Q FPLC column.
After extensive washing with buffer 3 plus 0.1 M KCl (MQ 0.1 ), bound protein was eluted with buffer 3 containing 0.2, 0.3 and 0.4 M KCl, yielding fractions MQ 0.2 , MQ 0.3 and MQ 0.4 , respectively.
Fraction MQ 0.4 was subsequently applied to an affinity column with immobilized recombinant hTFIID (see below).
TFIIA was eluted with buffer 2 plus 1 M KCl (IID-Affi 1.0 ) as described previously (14, 20).
recombinant hTBP.
Human TBP, used for affinity-chromatography, was expressed in E.coli and purified as described (12).
recombinant yTFIIA.
Clones encoding recombinant yeast TFIIA subunits TOA I and TOA II were kindly provided by Drs J.A.Ranish and S.Hahn and expressed in E.coli cells.
After denaturation of the recombinant proteins in the presence of 7M urea and renaturation by extensive dialysis against buffer 2, the extract was purified by chromatography on Q-Sepharose as described (17) and the resulting TFIIA fraction was assayed for its function in transcription assays.
SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.
Proteins were electrophoresed on denaturating SDS/polyacrylamide gels containing 17.5% acrylamide/bisacrylamide and visualized by Coomassie brilliant blue R250 staining as previously described (7).
RESULTS
Additional components beside fractions TFIIIB and TFIIIC are needed for efficient pol III transcription
Although RNA polymerase III and its assumed transcription factors could recently be purified (21), total reconstitution from highly purified components was hitherto inefficient and we observed that additional components contained in crude hTFIIIB and hTFIIIC fractions were necessary for efficient in vitro transcription.
Fig.1 shows, that crude fractions productively support the in vitro transcription of the VAI gene (lane 2), while the potential of individual factors to reconstitute polIII transcription decreased with progressing purification.
This was especially observed for hTFIIIB (lanes 4 and 5).
We would exclude the possibility of a loss of RNA polymerase III as an explanation for the observed phenomenon, since supplementation with purified enzyme did not result in stimulation of in vitro transcription under these conditions (data not shown).
TFIIA is involved in the transcription of classical polIII genes
In order to identify the component(s) presumably removed from TFIIIB by progressing chromatography, we analysed the possible involvement of pol II factors TFIIA and TBP in pol III transcription.
White et al.
(6) showed that, beside TFIIIB and TFIIIC, TBP is required for in vitro transcription of classical polIII genes, as had already been described for yeast and vertebrate U6 snRNA transcription by RNA polymerase III (5, 9, 10, 11).
However, TBP was not a likely candidate to explain the phenomenon observed here because TBP cofractionates with TFIIIB as evidenced by immunoblotting against α-TBP antibodies (our unpublished data and 22).
Moreover, addition of recombinant hTBP alone to these purified fractions did not augment transcription (data not shown).
Guided by our previous observation that hTFIIA is required for efficient expression of U6 RNA by RNA polymerase III in vitro (12), we investigated the possible role of this protein during transcription of classical pol III genes.
As shown in Fig.2 the efficiency of VAI-transcription in vitro , catalyzed by highly purified hTFIIIB and hTFIIIC fractions (lane 1; fractions HS 0.4 and DS 0.15 respectively) is strongly stimulated by increasing amounts of TFIIA-containing fraction MQ 0.4 (lanes 2–5).
This same fraction was previously documented by our group to be required for the efficient expression of the U6-gene (12).
An analogous effect of this fraction was also observed with respect to tRNA- (lanes 6–10) and 5S-RNA synthesis (lanes 11–15).
The chromatographic behaviour of the stimulating activity described here (Fig.3) strictly correlates with that of hTFIIA as outlined by Waldschmidt and Seifart (12).
Basal activity of VAI-gene transcription was stimulated by the addition of phosphocellulose (PC A, lane 2; PC AA, lane 3), Heparin-Sepharose (HS 0.1 , lane 5) breakthrough fractions, the DEAE-sephacel 0.2 and 0.3 M KCl fractions (DSC 0.2 , lane 7; DSC 0.3 , lane 8) and the Mono Q 0.4 M KCl eluate (MQ 0.4 lane 12).
Finally, the stimulatory activity in fraction MQ 0.4 was further purified by affinity chromatography on columns containing covalently linked TBP, a method by which TFIIA can specifically be enriched (14, 20).
The stimulating activity was found in the 1.0 M KCl fraction of the latter column (lane 14), thereby copurifying with TFIIA over at least five different chromatographic resins.
In addition, the characteristic heat stability of the hTFIIA protein was used to characterize the stimulating component.
The stimulatory activity was found to be stable up to 60°C for 10 minutes.
Since these data are identical to those observed for hTFIIA previously (12, 23), they have not been shown here.
From these results we exclude the possibility that stimulation by the MQ 0.4 fraction is caused by cross-contamination with hTFIIIB, TBP or pol III, because these proteins are much more susceptible to elevated temperatures (cited in 12).
Furthermore, the molecular mass of the stimulatory activity contained in the fraction MQ 0.4 was analysed by glycerol gradient centrifugation.
The activity sediments with a native molecular mass of 38 +/- 10 kDa (data not shown), which is in good agreement with the values previously reported for TFIIA (12, 14, 23).
The chromatographic behaviour, the heat sensitivity and the native molecular mass of the stimulating activity strongly suggest the involvement of the RNA polymerase II transcription factor IIA in the expression of classical pol III genes.
Yeast TFIIA can substitute for the human factor in pol III transcription in vitro 
Final identification of the stimulating activity as TFIIA was achieved with the recombinant transcription factor from yeast.
Since cloned human TFIIA is not yet available, we used the yeast analogue, which can functionally substitute for the human factor in pol II transcription in vitro (17, 24).
For this purpose the two subunits (TOA I: 32.2 kDa; TOA II: 13.5 kDa) of the protein were separately expressed in E.coli and purified by chromatography on Q Sepharose as described (17).
Fig.4 shows the SDS-PAGE analysis of TOA I (lane 2), TOA II (lane 3) and the renatured yTFIIA before (lane 4) and after purification (lane 5).
TOA I reveals an apparent molecular mass of 43 kDa as previously described (24).
The presence of small amounts of the expressed polypeptide in the E.coli lysate prior to the induction indicates that the expression already occurs to a very low extent in the absence of IPTG, as previously observed in other cases (25).
In analogy to the results found for HeLa hTFIIA fractions (Fig.2), a basal transcription system with highly purified hTFIIIB (HS 0.4 ) and hTFIIIC (DS 0.15 ) was clearly stimulated by the addition of recombinant yTFIIA (Fig.5).
This was observed for VAI- (lanes 1–5), t- (lanes 6–10), h5S- (lanes 11–15) and U6-RNA synthesis (lanes 16–20).
The latter  result confirms our previous finding (12) that TFIIA is required for efficient expression of U6-RNA and it shows that its function can be substituted in a HeLa transcription system by the recombinant yeast protein.
Collectively, these results clearly demonstrate that TFIIA is not only involved in efficient expression of many pol II genes (26) but also plays a role in pol III transcription.
DISCUSSION
The protein components required for the basal expression of classical pol III genes were previously identified as TFIIIB and TFIIIC for the AB-type promoters, with TFIIIA being additionally required for transcription of the gene for ribosomal 5S RNA (AC-type).
Although these results were obtained with highly purified fractions of TFIIIB (7) and TFIIIC (3, 27), they do not exclude the participation of other contaminating or comigrating proteins.
It has recently been shown (6) that the TATA-box binding component of TFIID (TBP), previously identified to be required for the transcription of U6 RNA by RNA polymerase III (5, 9, 10, 11), is also involved in the expression of classical pol III as well as pol I genes (6, 28, 29, 30).
Moreover, attempts to fully reconstitute pol III transcription with highly purified components (TFIIIB, IIIC, TBP + pol III) turned out to be inefficient.
We have consistently observed that rigorous purification, especially of TFIIIB from mammalian cells, is accompanied by a considerable loss of activity.
These results, which are also born out in Fig.1, suggest the involvement of (an) additional factor(s) beside IIIB and IIIC —and IIIA in the case of 5S rRNA.
This effect cannot merely be explained by a conceivable depletion of TBP, because transcription of the classical pol III genes requires only a very low amount of TBP (6; and our own unpublished results), the presence of which could be verified by western-blot analysis of hTFIIIB and hTFIIIC containing fractions used for the assay (our unpublished results).
Moreover, addition of the recombinant human TBP protein alone did not stimulate transcription activity.
This could indicate that distinct TBP-associated factors (TAFs) exist in a complex specifically directing polIII transcription as was very recently reported by Taggart et al(31).
Our attempts to characterize additional components involved in the expression of classical pol III genes led to the detection of an activity in the flowthrough fraction of phosphocellulose, which significantly stimulated the expression of t-RNA, VA-RNA, 5S-RNA and U6-RNA and which was finally identified as TFIIA on the basis of the following experimental evidence:
Purification of this activity from HeLa cells over at least four additional chromatographic steps revealed co-purification with mammalian TFIIA (12, 14, 23, 32).
Secondly, the stability of the protein up to 60°C (data not shown) agrees with values reported for hTFIIA (12, 23).
This observation also excludes cross contamination of the hTFIIA fractions with TBP, TFIIIB and/or TFIIIC, which are inactivated at this temperature (5, 23, 33).
Finally, the stimulating activity has a native molecular mass of approximately 38 +/- 10 kDa which is in agreement with the value reported in the literature (12, 14, 23).
Definitive proof that the activity in question is related to TFIIA was obtained from experiments with recombinant yeast TFIIA expressed in E.coli .
The functional activity of this protein from yeast in mammalian and other vertebrate cell free transcription systems for pol II genes has previously been demonstrated (17, 20).
The fact that in vitro transcription reactions, reconstituted with purified human TFIIIB, IIIC, TBP (and IIIA in the case of 5S-rRNA) and pol III could be significantly stimulated by the addition of recombinant yeast TFIIA shows that this transcription factor is also involved in the expression of classical pol III genes (Fig.5).
Moreover, the results obtained with yTFIIA confirm our recently published report concerning the requirement of TFIIA for the efficient transcription of the mammalian U6 gene (12).
The mechanism by which TFIIA influences  initiation on TATA-less pol III genes is unclear at present.
From our unpublished data we conclude that TBP does not directly bind to internal pol III promoters (or to cryptic TATA-sequences in the plasmid-vector).
Hence the stabilization of TBP-binding to the U6-TATA box, previously suggested as a possible function of TFIIA (12), cannot explain the role of TFIIA reported here.
It should also be pointed out that the transcription reactions of ribosomal 5S RNA were performed with a synthetic 5S gene (34) lacking external control regions.
Therefore the action of TFIIA during 5S RNA transcription does not depend on presumptive 5'-regulating sequences.
It has recently been shown that the TATA-binding protein TBP stabilizes a transcription complex on the VAI gene (35) and participates in assembling the yeast multisubunit transcription factor IIIB on tRNA genes (36, 37) presumably by locking the TFIIIB-TBP-TFIIIC-DNA-complex (36).
It is likewise conceivable that TFIIA is incorporated into the transcription complex by protein-protein interactions involving TBP and/or the established pol III transcription factors IIIA, IIIB and IIIC.
This is presently being investigated and will be published elsewhere.
It should be kept in mind that TFIIA could also act as an anti-inhibitor either by inducing a conformational change of TBP (16) or by competing with negative components binding to TBP (15).
To answer the question whether TFIIA is essentially required or merely involved in potentiating transcription initiation on classical pol III promoters it will be necessary to selectively deplete TFIIA from these fractions by specific antibodies against hTFIIA, the generation of which must, however, await the future cloning and expression of the gene for human TFIIA.
In spite of this limitation, the results presented here show that TFIIA is the second pol II transcription factor involved in the expression of classical pol III genes.
Figure 1.
Reconstitution of VAI-transcription with highly purified hTFIIIB and hTFIIIC.
In vitro transcription assays were performed as described in Materials and Methods.
1 µg pUVAI template DNA was transcribed either by S100 (3 µl; lane 1), PC B and PC C (15 µl each; lane 2), PC B and DS 0.15 (15 µl each; lane 3), HS 0.4 and PC C (15 µl each; lane 4), or HS 0.4 and DS 0.15 (15 µl each; lane 5).
Figure 2.
Stimulation of pol III transcription by hTFIIA.
In vitro transcription reactions were performed as described in Materials and Methods.
1 µg pUVAI (lanes 1–5), pUhtmet (lanes 6–10), pUh5S (lanes 11–15) respectively, were transcribed by reconstitution of TFIIIB containing fraction HS 0.4 , TFIIIC containing fraction DS 0.15 (15 µl each) and, in the case of h5S-RNA synthesis, TFIIIA containing PC AD (25 µl; lanes 11–15).
Stimulation of the basal in vitro transcription was obtained by addition of increasing amounts of hTFIIA (MQ 0.4 ; 1, 2, 4, 10 µl) as appropriately indicated in the lanes 2–5, 7–10, 12–15.
Figure 3.
Analysis of protein fractions for TFIIA activity by assaying the stimulation of VAI-RNA transcription in vitro .
Lanes 1–14: The template pUVAI was transcribed by fractions HS 0.4 and DS 0.15 alone (15 µl each; lane 1) or supplemented with PC A (lane 2), PC AA (lane 3), PC AD (lane 4), HS 0.1 (lane 5), DSC 0.1 , DSC 0.2 , DSC 0.3 (lanes 6–8), MQ 0.1 , MQ 0.2 , MQ 0.3 , MQ 0.4 (lanes 9–12), IID-Affi 0.35 (lane 13) and IID-Affi 1.0 (lane 14; 20 µl each).
The employed protein fractions were prepared as described in Materials and Methods.
Figure 4.
Expression and purification of recombinant yTFIIA.
The expression and purification of the two subunits of yTFIIA was carried out as described (17) and they were assayed by 17.5% SDS-PAGE and subsequent staining with coomassie blue.
Lane 1: 50 µl lysate of E.coli strain BL21 before induction of TOA I expression with 0.4 mM IPTG; Lane 2: 65 µl TOA I; Lane 3: 10 µl TOA II; Lane 4: 7 µl recombinant yTFIIA (after combination of TOA I and TOA II).
Lanes 1–4: samples after precipitation with ammonium sulfate.
Lane 5: 8 µl recombinant yTFIIA after chromatography on Q Sepharose.
M: molecular weight markers.
L: Lactalbumin as molecular weight standard (14 kDa).
The expressed polypeptides TOA I and TOA II are appropriately indicated.
Figure 5.
Stimulation of polIII in vitro transcription by recombinant TFIIA from Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Reconstituted in vitro transcription assays on the VAI (lanes 1–5), htmet (lanes 6–10), h5S (lanes 11–15) and U6 RNA gene (3µg pUmU6 0.34 DNA lanes 16–20) were analogously performed as described in Fig.1 with the modification that increasing amounts of recombinant yTFIIA (0.1, 0.5, 1, 5 µl; lanes 2–5, 7–10, 12–15, 17–20) were added.
To detect the transcribed U6-RNA (lanes 16–20) this part was exposed twice as long (48h) as the part shown in lanes 1–15.
The octamer binding site in the HPV16 regulatory region produces opposite effects on gene expression in cervical and non-cervical cells
ABSTRACT
The upstream regulatory region (URR) of the tumorigenic human papillomaviruses HPV 16 and 18 contains an octamer binding site which is located adjacent to a binding site for the ubiquitous transcription factor NFI.
The octamer site binds both the constitutively expressed transcription factor Oct-1 and a novel cervical octamer binding protein.
In contrast the URR of the non-tumorigenic viruses HPV6 and HPV11 lacks the octamer binding site although the adjacent NFI site is conserved.
Inactivation of the octamer binding site results in a higher level of gene expression in cells which contain only Oct-1 and a lower level in cells containing the cervical octamer binding protein indicating that whilst Oct-1 binding reduces promoter activity, the cervical protein increases it.
In agreement with this, over-expression of Oct-1 reduces the level of gene activity directed by this region of the HPV 16/18 URR and inhibits its activation by NFI whilst having no effect on the corresponding region of the HPV 6/11 URR.
The significance of these effects is discussed in terms of the cervical-specific activity of the HPV16/18 URR and its role in HPV-mediated transformation.
INTRODUCTION
The human papillomaviruses (HPV) types 16 and 18 which are believed to play a central role in the development of cervical carcinoma exhibit a strict epithelial tropism infecting only the genital mucosa and perigenital epidermis (for reviews see 1, 2).
This epithelial tropism is likely to be dependent upon the viral upstream regulatory region (URR) which drives the expression of the genes encoding the E6 and E7 transforming proteins and which is preferentially active in cells of epidermal origin (3, 4).
In turn this epithelial specificity of the URR appears to be dependent upon the interplay of several different cellular transcription factors which bind to regulatory sites within the URR (5, 6).
 Paradoxically however, the great majority of the cellular factors which have been shown to bind to the URR such as NFI (6) API (7) and the glucocorticoid receptor (5) are expressed in all cell types raising the question of how the epithelial-specificity of the URR is produced.
Interestingly, one of the five NFI sites in the URR of HPV 16 and HPV 18 is located adjacent to a sequence (bases 7731 to 7738 in the HPV 16 URR) with a seven out of eight base match to the consensus binding site for cellular octamer binding transcription factors (see Figure 1; for review see 8).
The existence of a large family of octamer binding proteins many of which are expressed specifically in different cell types such as B cells (9), embryonal carcinoma cells (10) and the testis (11) suggested the possibility that this site might play a role in the epithelial specificity of the URR by binding an epithelial-specific octamer binding protein.
In agreement with this idea several groups have recently shown that this site does indeed represent a functional binding site for octamer binding proteins (12–14) and we have demonstrated that it can bind both the constitutively expressed octamer binding protein Oct-1 and a novel octamer binding protein expressed in cervical cells (15).
Although this octamer binding site is perfectly conserved in the URR of the tumorigenic viruses HPV 16 and HPV 18, inspection of the equivalent region in the URR of HPV 6 and HPV 11, which cause only benign condylomatous warts, revealed a much reduced homology to the octamer motif, although the NFI site remained intact (see Figure 1).
We have therefore tested the effect of these changes on the ability of the HPV6/11 sequence to bind Oct-1 and the cervical protein.
In addition we have also investigated the ability of the HPV16/18 and HPV6/11 sequences to drive gene expression in both cervical and non-cervical cell types as well as to respond to the over-expression of Oct-1.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Oligonucleotides and plasmids
Complementary pairs of oligonucleotides with the sequences indicated in Figure 1 were synthesized on an Applied Biosystems model 381A oligonucleotide synthesizer.
In addition to the sequences shown in the Figure, each oligonucleotide contained the additional sequence GATC at its 5' end.
Following annealing, this sequence remains single stranded allowing the annealed oligonucleotide to be cloned into the Bam HI site in the vector pBL 2 CAT (16).
This vector contains the herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase promoter from -105 to +51 driving the chloramphenicol acetyl transferase gene followed by the small T intron and polyadenylation signals from SV40.
The effect of a specific sequence on gene expression was therefore assessed by cloning it into the Bam HI site at -105 in this promoter.
DNA mobility shift assays
Oligonucleotides for use in mobility shift assays were labelled following annealing by phosphorylation with gamma 32P ATP and T4 polynucleotide kinase.
Nuclear extracts from BHK-21 or HeLa cells were made from about 5 10 7 cells as described by Dignam et al.,(17).
Binding assays were carried out as previously described (18).
Competitions were performed by the addition of a 100-fold excess of unlabelled duplex oligonucleotide to binding reactions.
DNA transfection
Transfection of plasmid DNA was carried out according to the method of Gorman (19).
Standard transfections were carried out using 10 µg of DNA per 2 10 6 cells on a 90 mm plate.
In experiments where the effect of Oct-1 on gene expression was being assessed, 10 µg of the reporter plasmid was co-transfected with the indicated amounts of the Oct-1 expression vector with the amount of transfected DNA in each sample being equalized with the parental plasmid.
Twenty four hours after transfection cells were harvested for CAT assays.
Transfections included a control plasmid in which the MPSV promoter drives expression of the β-galactosidase gene to control for any effects of the experimental plasmids on transfection efficiency or on gene expression driven by an irrelevant promoter.
CAT assays
Assays of CAT activity were carried out as described by Gorman (19) with extracts which were equalised for protein content, as determined by the method of Bradford (20).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
To investigate whether the changes in the octamer motif in HPV6/11 prevented the binding of Oct-1 and the cervical-octamer binding protein we had previously defined (15), nuclear extracts were prepared from a variety of cell types and used in DNA mobility shift assays.
The labelled probe used in these assays was a sequence derived from the herpes simplex virus immediate-early 1 gene which we have previously shown to be a high affinity binding site for octamer binding proteins (18).
When extracts from the fibroblast cell line BHK-21 were used in the band shift assay, a single complex formed on this probe representing binding of the constitutively expressed octamer binding protein Oct-1 (Figure 2a).
As expected Oct-1 could be specifically removed from the labelled probe by competition with excess unlabelled octamer binding sites including both the octamer binding site from HPV 16/18 as well as the homologous HSV octamer but not by the binding sites for other transcription factors such as Sp1 and NF1.
Most interestingly however, the equivalent region of the HPV 6/11 URR was unable to compete for Oct-1 binding in these experiments, even at four hundred fold excess indicating that it does not represent a functional binding site for Oct-1.
When extracts from the HeLa cervical epithelial cell line were used in this assay we observed two complexes as in our previous experiments (Figure 2b).
Although both the homologous HSV octamer and that derived from HPV 16/18 readily competed for binding of both the complexes, the sequence from the HPV 6/11 URR was unable to do so.
As expected formation of the low mobility complex was inhibited by the addition of antibody to Oct-1 confirming that it contains Oct-1 whereas the antibody had no effect on the formation of the high mobility complex indicating that it is formed by binding of a cervical protein distinct from Oct-1 (Figure 3).
Similar results were also obtained in a variety of other cells of cervical origin including cell lines such as SiHa and CaSki as well as cells of limited life span derived from normal cervical epithelium and with no detectable HPV DNA (21).
In order to confirm these results we used the HPV16 sequence as a probe in a DNA mobility shift assay with HeLa cell extract.
As in our previous experiments this sequence bound predominantly the cervical protein (Figure 4).
However, whilst both the HPV16 sequence and the HSV octamer could readily compete for binding of this protein, the HPV6 sequence could not do so confirming that it does not bind the cervical protein with high affinity (Figure 4).
Hence the two base changes in the octamer-like sequence in HPV 6/11 compared to HPV 16/18 render it non-functional as a binding site both for the constitutively expressed octamer binding protein Oct-1 and the cervical octamer binding protein.
In order to investigate the effect of octamer binding proteins upon the level of gene expression driven by the URR we compared the level of gene expression driven by the functional octamer motif with its adjacent NF1 site in the HPV 16/18 URR with that driven by the equivalent region of the HPV 6/11 URR where the octamer motif is non functional.
To do this oligonucleotides containing the sequences in this region (as in Figure 1) were cloned upstream of the HSV tK promoter in the BamHI site of the vector pBL 2 CAT (16).
The effect of these motifs on promoter activity was then determined by measuring the chloramphenicol acetyl transferase activity obtained following transfection of different cell types.
Following transfection of BHK-21 cells which contain only Oct-1, the HPV 16 motif directed only a relatively weak level of gene activity whereas the HPV 6 motif was considerably more active (Figure 5).
This suggests that the ability of the HPV 16 motif to bind Oct-1 which is a relatively weak transactivator (22) inhibits gene expression in non-cervical cells possibly by preventing the binding of the much stronger activator NF1 to its adjacent site.
In contrast the HPV 6 motif lacks the octamer binding site and hence directs a higher level of gene expression.
A similar effect of Oct-1 in inhibiting binding to an adjacent sph site and thereby preventing gene activation has recently been documented in the SV40 enhancer (22).
In contrast in HeLa cells which contain both Oct-1 and the cervical specific protein, the HPV 16 motif directed a higher level of gene expression than that produced by the HPV 6 motif (Figure 5).
This finding is an agreement with that of Chong et al.,(12) who observed a decreased level of gene expression in HeLa cells when the octamer binding site within the HPV-16 URR was deleted.
Hence in cells such as HeLa cells which contain the cervical protein, the octamer motif acts as a positive element both in the context of the HPV-16 URR and in a heterologous promoter, resulting in a higher level of gene expression when it is functional.
In these cells the cervical protein which has a higher affinity than Oct-1 for the URR (15) will bind to the octamer motif.
High level gene expression may then result from this protein being a stronger trans-activator than NF1 allowing it to direct a higher level of gene activation even following displacement of NF1.
Alternatively the higher mobility of the shift produced by this protein (Figure 2b) suggests that it may be smaller in size than Oct-1 allowing it to bind adjacent to bound NF1 and activate gene expression synergistically.
In order to confirm the inhibitory effect of Oct-1 on the HPV 16 motif, we constructed an Oct-1 expression vector by cloning a human Oct-1 cDNA clone (23) under the control of the strong cytomegalovirus immediate-early promoter in the vector pJ7 (24).
The HPV 16 and HPV 6 motifs cloned into pBL 2 CAT were then co-transfected into BHK cells with this construct or with pJ7 vector alone.
Over-expression of Oct-1 decreased the level of expression driven by the HPV 16 motif whilst having no effect on the much higher level of expression driven by the HPV 6 motif and the extent of repression observed was dependent upon the degree of over-expression of Oct-1 (Figure 6).
A similar effect of Oct-1 on the HPV 16 motif was also observed in HeLa cell transfections although to a lesser extent indicating that at higher levels Oct-1 can compete with the cervical protein for binding to the octamer motif (Figure 6).
These data indicate therefore that the octamer motif in HPV 16/18 can act as a target for repression by Oct-1.
In order to elucidate the manner in which Oct-1 acts, we co-transfected the HPV 16 octamer and adjacent NF1 site cloned in pBL 2 CAT into BHK cells with expression vectors containing different forms of NFI either alone or in combination with the Oct-1 expression vector.
As shown in Figure 7, the expression vectors NF4 and NF21 (which contain cDNAs for two distinct NFI proteins under the control of the RSV promoter: —a kind gift of Dr A.Nicosia) were both able to activate the HPV 16 construct.
However, such activation was dramatically reduced in the presence of the Oct-1 expression vector.
Hence Oct-1 is likely to act by inhibiting the stimulatory effect of endogenous NFI on the HPV 16 motif, presumably by inhibiting NFI binding to its overlapping site.
The octamer motif in HP 16/18 is therefore able to mediate the inhibition of gene expression by Oct-1 and can confer a tissue specific pattern of activity on a heterologous promoter with neither of these effects being observed with the corresponding motif in HPV 6/11.
When taken together with the data of Chong et al(12) who observed a decrease in the activity of the HPV-16 URR in HeLa cells when this motif was deleted, this indicates that this motif may play a role in the level of gene expression driven by the URR and in its epithelial specificity.
Thus this motif acts to enhance gene activity in the presence of the cervical protein and to minimize gene activation by NF1, in the presence of Oct-1 alone.
In contrast the non  tumorigenic viruses HPV 6/11 would not be subject to such cell type-specific modulation in activity via this region since they do not contain this functional octamer binding site.
Interestingly the effect of Oct-1 on the octamer motif at 7731 to 7738 in HPV 16/18 which we have documented here may be only one of multiple effects of Oct-1 on the HPV URR.
Thus Mack and Laimins (25) have shown that another site distinct from the one characterized here and located at nucleotides 7641–7675 in the HPV 18 URR also binds both Oct-1 and a keratinocyte-specific protein although this site is not conserved in the HPV 16 URR.
Moreover his site is contained within a short region of the HPV 18 URR whose activity has been shown to be inhibited by Oct-1 in co-transfection assays and which does not contain the Oct-1 target site we have characterized here (13).
Hence Oct-1 represents a prime candidate for the intra-cellular surveillance factor proposed by zur Hausen (26, 27) which inhibits HPV gene expression in non transformed cells.
Interestingly however, the data presented here suggest that activation of HPV gene expression may not be dependent on decreased expression of Oct-1, which in any case is known to be expressed at enhanced levels in rapidly proliferating transformed cells (28, 29).
Rather it is likely to depend on the expression by cervical cells of a novel octamer binding protein which displaces Oct-1 from its binding site in the URR and activates gene expression.
Figure 1.
Relationship of the consensus octamer sequence and the octamer like sequences in the HPV enhancers.
The adjacent binding site for nuclear factor 1 (NF1) is indicated.
In order to conform to the conventional direction of the papillomavirus genome the octamer sequence has been written as ATTTGCAT rather than the complementary sequence ATGCAAAT which is more often presented.
Figure 2.
DNA mobility shift assay using a consensus octamer oligonucleotide and extracts from BHK-21 cells (panel a ) or HeLa cells (panel b ).
The assay was carried out with labelled probe alone (track 1) or in the presence of a one hundred fold excess of unlabelled oligonucleotide containing either the homologous consensus octamer motif (track 2), the HPV 16 octamer-like sequence either alone (track 3) or with the adjacent NF1 site (track 4), the equivalent region of HPV 6 containing the NF1 site and adjacent region (track 5) and a consensus binding site for the unrelated transcription factor Sp1 (track 6).
The arrows indicate the positions of Oct-1 (01) and the cervical octamer binding protein (CS).
Figure 3.
DNA mobility shift assay using the consensus octamer oligonucleotide and extract from HeLa cells.
The assay was carried out in the presence of 1 µl of pre-immune rabbit serum (track 1) or 0.5 µl (track 2) or 1 µl (track 3) of polyclonal rabbit antibody to Oct-1.
The arrows indicate the positions of Oct-1 (01) and the cervical octamer binding protein (CS).
Figure 4.
DNA mobility shift assay using the HPV 16 octamer and HeLa cell extract.
The assay was carried out with labelled probe alone (track 1) or in the presence of a one hundred fold excess of unlabelled oligonucleotide containing either the homologous HPV 16 sequence (track 2), the consensus octamer motif (track 3) or the equivalent HPV 6 sequence (track 4).
The arrow indicates the position of the cervical octamer binding protein (CS).
Figure 5.
Upper panel: Percentage of chloramphenicol acetylated following transfection of BHK-21 cells or HeLa cells with pBL 2 CAT vector (V) or the same vector with a single copy of the HPV 16 octamer and adjacent NF1 site (16) or the equivalent region of HPV6 (6).
Figures are the average of three experiments whose range is shown by the bars.
The lower panel shows the result of one of these experiments using either pBL 2 CAT vector alone (track 1) or vector with a single copy of the HPV 16 octamer/NFI sequence (track 2) or with the equivalent region of HPV 6 track 3).
Figure 6.
Effect of co-transfecting the pBL 2 CAT constructs containing the HPV 16 octamer/NF1 motif (closed circles) or the corresponding HPV 6 motif (open circles) with the indicated amounts (in micro-grams) of pJ7 plasmid vector or the pJ7 vector expressing Oct-1.
Values indicate the CAT activity obtained as a percentage of control and are the average of three experiments whose range is shown by the bars.
Figure 7.
CAT assay of extracts prepared by the transfection of BHK-21 cells with pBL 2 CAT  containing the HPV 16 octamer/NFI motif in the presence of 10 µg of plasmid vector alone (track 1), 10 µg of the RSV-NF4 expression vector (track 2), 10 µg of the RSV-NF21 expression vector (track 3), 5 µg of the RSV-NF4 expression vector with 5 µg of the Oct-1 expression vector (track 4) and 5 µg of the RSV-NF21 expression vector with 5 µg of the Oct-1 expression vector (track 5).
Evidence for opposite groove-directed curvature of GGGCCC and AAAAA sequence elements
ABSTRACT
The repetitive sequence (AGGGCCCTAGAGGGGCCCTAG) n was previously shown to be curved by gel mobility assays.
Here we show, using hydroxy radical/ DNase I digestion and differential helical phasing experiments that the curvature is directed towards the major groove and is located in the GGGCCC, but not the CTAGAG segments.
The effect of the GC step in the context of the GGGCCC motif is apparently about as large as that of AA/TT, i.e. enough to cancel the macroscopic curvature of helically phased A-tracts.
These data are in an agreement with positive roll-like curvature of the GCC/GGC motif, predicted from nucleosome packing data and the 3D structure of the GGGGCCCC octamer, but they are not in agreement with the dinucleotide-based roll angle values predicted for AG/CT, TA, GG/CC and GC steps.
Our results thus indicate the importance of interactions beyond the dinucleotide steps in predictive models of DNA curvature.
INTRODUCTION
Intrinsic DNA curvature was generally thought to originate from periodically repeating AnTm tracts (n+m≥ 3), with a period close to the helical repeat length.
It was recently experimentally shown that curvature is possible without AnTm tracts, provided that a certain combination of dinucleotide steps occur (1–4).
Several models were suggested (1,5,6,7) to quantitatively describe the DNA curvature as determined by gel-mobility experiments.
There is increasing evidence that wedge-like features of a number of dinucleotides are not adequately described by these simple models (3,8,9,15,29).
One of the main reasons for this disagreement could be the dynamic character of DNA curvature, caused by differential sequence-dependent DNA flexibility (8,9) and the existence of context-dependent interactions which could influence the wedge-like features of dinucleotide steps, as in the case of AnTm tracts (5,9,26).
In a previous paper we reported that the repeating sequence 5'AGGGCCCTAGAGGGGCCCTAG3' displays an anomalous gel mobility, characteristic for curved DNA, even in the absence of AnTm tracts (4).
In view of the published data on roll angle values, it was suggested that the major groove-directed curvature is present in the CTAGAG, but not GGGCCC motifs (4).
In this paper we determine the sequence elements underlying the curvature, as well as the groove orientation relative to the center of curvature.
We used two independent approaches: i) analysis of digestion patterns obtained by DNase I and hydroxy radicals, and ii) varying the distance between centers of curvature and monitoring the effect on gel mobility data (22).
DNase I cleavage patterns mainly reflect the global changes in the geometry of the grooves, although there are some local structural features that also may influence the frequency of cutting to a lesser extent (2,13–20).
DNase I and hydroxy radical cleavage rates are usually higher in ‘convex’ regions where the minor groove is oriented 180 degrees away from the local center of curvature, i.e. points outwards, then in ‘concave’regions, where the minor groove is oriented toward the local center of curvature (13,15,17,20).
In terms of the wedge model, groove-directed curvature is a result of roll angle contributions of dinucleotide steps (1,6,21).
In differential helical phasing experiments, synthetic  oligonucleotides are prepared in which the distance of specific structural elements is systematically varied.
Gel mobility anomaly is detected only in cases where the distance of the two elements is in an appropriate helical phase.
Using an element of known direction of curvature one can thus conveniently determine the direction of curvature of another element.
Our data suggest that the major groove-directed curvature of (AGGGCCCTAGAGGGGCCCTAG) n DNA is caused in fact by the GGGCCC, but not the CTAGAG motif.
This result points to the influence of non AA/TT containing DNA motifs in DNA curvature.
The effect of the GC step in the context of GGGCCC motif is apparently about as large as that of AA/TT, i.e. it seems to be enough to cancel the macroscopic curvature of helically phased A-tracts.
These results indicate that interactions beyond the dinucleotide level can be important for the prediction of wedge angles and DNA curvature.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
For DNase I and hydroxy radical digestion experiments the 55-mer 5'CGGAGGGGCCCTAGAGGGCCCTAGAGGGCCCCCCAAAAACCCCCAAAAACCCCCC3' (Watson strand) and its complementary strand were synthesized using an Applied Biosystems 381A oligonucleotide synthesizer and purified by 8% denaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.
The purified oligonucleotides (0.6 µg) were labelled separately in a total volume of 20 µl (70mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.6), 10 mM MgCl 2 and 5 mM dithiothreitol) with 10 µCi of (gamma 32 P) ATP (SA>3000 Ci/mmol) and 6 units of T4 polynucleotide kinase, at 37°C for 30 minutes.
The labelled Watson and unlabelled complementary strand were mixed in a concentration ratio of 1:2, respectively.
The mixture was heated to 90°C and cooled down slowly to form the hybrids.
DNA was cleaved by hydroxy radical (13,14) and DNase I (16,20) under conditions that leave more than 85% of uncleaved material.
These conditions produce an average of 0.16 cuts per molecule (23), and the obtained cleavage intensities therefore reflect the affinity of the cleavage agent for different parts of the DNA.
The fragments resulting from DNA cleavage and Maxam-Gilbert G-reaction (24) were separated on 8% polyacrylamide denaturing gels containing 8M urea.
The cleavage patterns were recorded using autoradiography, quantitative evaluation was carried out by scanning image plates of a Molecular Dynamics Phosphor Imager system.
The relative frequencies of cutting for each bond were calculated, including the correction for the cuts that have  occurred between a cut and the radioactive label (16).
Five double stranded DNA fragments with four base long 5'-protruding ends were designed in which the GGGCCC and the AAAAA motifs were separated by varying number of nucleotides (Fig. 5).
The ten resulting 42-mers were synthesized, purified, kinased and the hybrids prepared as described above.
Two µl of the mixture (corresponding to 0.6 µg of oligo) were used in ligation reaction with 1 unit of T4 DNA ligase in a total volume of 10 µl (70 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.6), 10 mM MgCl 2 and 5 mM  dithiothreitol ), plus 2.3 nM cold ATP.
The ligation reaction was allowed to proceed about 4 hours at room temperature.
Ligated products were run on 8% polyacrylamide gels (mono:bis acrylamide ratio = 29:1; 90 mM Tris-borate, 10 mM EDTA, pH 8.3).
The applied voltage was 5 V/cm and electrophoresis was carried at 22°C.
Gels were dried and autoradiographed with an intensifying screen.
Mobility measurements were made relatively to the migration of pBR322 fragments cut by Hae III and Hinf I.
RESULTS
The 55-mer was designed to contain an ‘atypically’ curved 5'GAGGGGCCCTAGAGGGCCCTAGAGGGCCC3' region at the 5'-end and a ‘typically’curved A-tract containing segment 5'C 6 A 5 C 5 A 5 C 6 3' at the 3'-end of the Watson strand (Figure 1).
This design allows the comparison of the behaviour of the two regions under identical experimental conditions.
Cleavage of this molecule either with DNase I, or with hydroxy radicals, gave a sinusoidal pattern in both regions of the molecule, as shown by autoradiography (Figure 2) and densitometry (Figure 3).
The curved, A-tracts containing segment shows the typical phasing of minima with the A-tracts (13–16) reflecting sequence-dependent curvature towards the minor groove (1,7–9,13–15, 21,25,26).
In the segment not containing A-tracts,(Figure 3 and Figure 4) the relative cutting activity was maximal in the C-rich part of the 5'GGGCCC3' motif, while the minimal cutting rate was detected in the 3' region of the 5'CTAGAG3' motif.
The stagger in the 3' direction between cutting patterns of the complementary strands (Figure 4) is characteristic for minor groove recognition (13,16).
The above results illustrate that the segments with and without A-tracts behave essentially in a similar way in hydroxy radical and DNase I digestion experiments, suggesting that a similar, groove-directed curvature may be present in both types of curved DNA.
The regions of the wider minor groove are located in the GGGCCC motifs of the non AA/TT containing DNA fragment.
The five oligonucleotides shown in Fig. 5 were designed in such a way that the two motifs GGGCCC and AAAAA are differentially separated.
After annealing, inter-motif distances deviate from a multiplication of the full helical turn by 0, 2, 4, 6 and 8 base pairs, respectively.
The value of deviation was termed &.
Two motifs of opposite direction but equal magnitude of curvature will show mobility anomaly if spaced by odd multiples of half a helical turn( δ=; 5).
In the case δ=; 0, i.e. with the motifs separated by multiples of a full helical turn, the curvatures will cancel each others and no mobility anomaly will be found.
As generally accepted, AAAAA is a structural element causing minor groove-directed curvature (1–3, 6, 7–9, 13, 21, 22); so it was chosen as a reference in our experiments.
Figure 7 shows the relative mobility of the ligated 42-mers plotted as a function of ×.
As can be seen, the maximal gel mobility anomaly was detected around ×= 5 and no anomaly was obtained at ×= 0.
In light of the above discussion this indicates that GGGCCC is curved in a direction opposite to the curvature of AAAAA.
DISCUSSION
The curvature of (AGGGCCCTAGAGGGGCCCTAG) n DNA was previously reported (4), but the sequence elements responsible for the curvature and the direction of their curvature were not experimentally established.
Considering the published data of AG/CT, TA, GG/CC and GC wedge-roll values (1,6), the preferential curvature of PyPu (TA), compared to PuPy (GC) steps (12) and crystallographic data (10,11), we expected that the region with the major groove-directed curvature is located in the CTAGAG, and not in the GGGCCC part of the curved (AGGGCCCTAGAGGGGCCCTAG) n DNA (4).
However, the results of DNase I/hydroxy radical digestion experiments and gel mobility assays show, on the contrary, that the GGGCCC, and not the CTAGAG element has the inherent major groove directed curvature.
Furthermore the experiments show that the curvature of the GGGCCC and AAAAA motifs is of opposite sign.
The effect of the GC step in the context of GGGCCC motif seems to be about as large as that of AA/TT, i.e. it is apparently enough to cancel the macroscopic curvature of helically phased A-tracts.The origin of the macroscopic curvature for the (AGGGCCCTAGAGGGGCCCTAG) n DNA can be explained by an overall roll angle difference between the GGGCCC and CTAGAG sequence elements, which will add up if the two motifs are separated by a distance close to the helical repeat length.
This explanation does not include the wedge-tilt component which can also contribute, although to a lesser extent, to DNA curvature (1,6, 7, 12,21).
It was reported that the dinucleotide-based roll angle value of GC step is one of the smallest found in all dinucleotides (1,6).
Our results, on the other hand, suggest that in the context of our oligonucleotide the GC step has in fact a high positive roll angle value.
This bimodal, context-dependent behaviour of GC step was originally suggested by Calladine and Drew (21).
They reported that the nearest neighbour interactions within the GGGCCC motif could produce a widening of the minor groove and an increase of the overall roll.
Nucleosome packing data (27), X-ray analysis of an 5'GGGGCCCC3' octamer (28) and the effect of sequence context on base pair stacking geometries (29) also support this view, indicating that the context-dependent influence on DNA curvature may be difficult to explain in the terms of dinucleotide-based models.
The fact that the oligonucleotides with &=; 0 show no mobility anomaly is noteworthy since they contain an A-tract repeated in phase with the helical turn.
The A n T m tracts are known to strongly contribute to gel mobility anomaly and so to DNA curvature (1,3,4,9,26).
Also, since A n T m tracts are by far the most frequent examples of curved structures, the quantitative models describing sequence-dependent DNA curvature assign a relatively stronger influence to the AA/TT step (1,6,7).
Our data for the first demonstrate that A-tracts repeated at helical turn periods can display no mobility anomaly if they are appropriately phased with GGGCCC motifs.
On the other hand, GGGCCC motifs without AnTm tracts do not drastically effect gel mobility (2,3,4).
This phenomenon could be explained simply by the fact that the stiffness of A-tracts and not just curvature influences the electrophoretic behaviour as was previously suggested (8,9).
Summarizing, we can conclude that the GGGCCC motif seems to adopt a strongly curved conformation with a direction of curvature opposite to and the magnitude similar to the A-tracts.
The presently available data point towards the general conclusion that conformational interactions beyond the dinucleotide steps have an impact on DNA curvature.
Figure 1.
Sequence of 55-mer used for digestion experiments.
The 5'-half of the upper (Watson) strand contains two copies of the motif 5'CTAGAG3' and three copies of the motif 5'GGGCCC3', but no AA/TT steps, while the 3'-half contains two A-tracts.
The center of the 5'GGGCCC3' and 5'CTAGAG3' motifs, as well as the A-tracts, are separated by 10.5 base pairs, i.e. they are in phase with the helical repeat.
Figure 2.
Cleavage patterns of DNase I (lane DN) and hydroxy radical (lane OH) of Watson (W) and Crick (C) strands of 55-mer.
Lane G represents positions of guanines in the sequence, cut by dimethyl-sulfate-piperidine.
Numbers refer to the numbering scheme of the sequence shown in Figure 1.
Figure 3.
Phosphor imaging scan of DNase I and hydroxy radical cleavage patterns of the 55-mer (Watson strand).
Figure 4.
Plots of 3-bond averaged relative frequencies of cleavage obtained by A)hydroxy radical and B)DNase I digestion, for both strands in the non AA/TT containing part of the molecule.
Figure 5.
Sequences of the 5 42-mers with differential deviation (&) from the full helical turn distance between GGGCCC and AAAAA motifs.
It is important to note that the 10.5 bp periodicity between the same type of motifs is preserved, while the phasing between AA/TT and non AA/TT centers of curvature is varied.
Figure 6.
Autoradiogram of mobility of 5 ligated 42-mers with differential deviation & from the full helical turn distance between the GGGCCC and AAAAA motifs( &=; 0, 2, 4, 6 and 8 bp) on a 8% nondenaturing polyacrylamide gel.
Lane M1: pBR 322 cut by Hae III; M2: pBR 322 cut by Hinf I. The size (in bp) of various DNA fragments is indicated.
Figure 7.
Plot of relative mobility of 5 ligated 42-mers, versus deviation & from the helical turn distance between the GGGCCC and AAAAA motifs.
The multimers with the same actual size (L) are connected into a curve.
The data point for multimers with the same actual size L are connected.
The mobility anomaly is the largest for ×=  5, corresponding to a separation of motifs by odd multiples of half a helical turn.
In the case ×=  0, i.e. with the motifs separated by multiples of a full helical turn, the curvatures are cancelling each others and no mobility anomaly is found.