

The North: From the Aare to the Rhine Falls
Olten
Towns which stand at crossroads can be at a disadvantage.
Everybody passes through en route to somewhere else, and not many stay.
Olten is rather like that.
Regular visitors to Switzerland will almost inevitably have changed trains there at some time or another.
Olten is where the line from Zurich to Bern and on to the resorts of Lac Leman and to Geneva crosses that from Basle to Lucerne, the famous, is St Gotthard Pass, the Italianate Ticino, thence to Milan and Italy itself.
A busy place at which most tourists cast no more than a cursory glance and pass on.
Olten deserves better.
It has several features which make it a useful starting point for a tour across north Switzerland, a kind of advance taster of the delights to come.
It nestles cosily around the Aare, which is crossed by an old wooden bridge that immediately reminds you of its bigger brother in Lucerne.
Walk over it, and you are in the old town, all peace and quiet.
The focal point is the Rathaus (town hall), with a fine sixteenth-century tower that dominates the many charming houses in the vicinity, and one of its most striking houses offers a reminder that the Swiss have been at the business of looking after travellers for a long time.
The Herberg zum Goldenen Luwen is on the site of an inn which was active five hundred years ago.
The present guest house was erected in the eighteenth century.
With only 20,000 inhabitants, Olten is a lively and flourishing town.
Because of its pattern of communications, they will tell you it is an ideal place for a rendezvous.
Two thirds of the Swiss population can reach it in less than an hour by road or rail.
The manufacturing industries on which the town's importance has been built include iron, wire, linen, cotton and shoes, and it is a major centre for the Swiss book publishing trade.
But Olten, in common with so many small Swiss towns, has been careful not to buy prosperity at the  expense of damage to its character.
That remains.
Before heading north, you might care to spend a day discovering the Oberaargau (Upper Aargau).
Ignore the motorway, and take the road south for Langenthal (route 13).
This is the capital of the region, with gentle sloping hills, beech forests and wooded ridges in the background.
Stop at Wynau to see the rapids, and make a detour to the left, north of Langenthal, to see the former monastery of St Urban, which has a famous baroque church.
Back at Olten, follow route 5 north-east to Aarau.
There is a pamphlet which tells the reader how to see Aarau in 45 minutes.
But who would want to?
You need time to savour all it has to offer, time to absorb the atmosphere of a town so steeped in history, where the past has been jealously guarded in the very shadow of a brisk commercial development.
Aarau
There is the Aarau around the Bahnhofstrasse, a powerful thoroughfare which cries success and prosperity aloud, wide as a Parisian boulevard, fringed with banks, commercial buildings, department stores, and all the paraphernalia of a sophisticated modern city, though, even with its developing environs, it accommodates not much more than 50,000 people.
But turn a corner, walk a few yards, and suddenly you have stepped back centuries, to the old town, a place where it is sleepy quiet and easy to believe all they say about Aarau's eventful past.
As you stroll through the narrow streets, be sure to look upwards at regular intervals, and you will discover why they call Aarau the town of the beautiful gables.
It has several surprises.
The first is to The North: From the Aare to the Rhine Falls  discover that it has two gates, and to find out why, it is necessary to learn a little about the town's origins and early history.
The date generally reckoned for the birth of Aarau is 1240.
In or about that year Count Hartmann of Kyburg built the town on a rock that was surrounded on three sides by the river Aare.
The plan was so concise and symmetrical that its lines can still be traced today, especially if you look down on Aarau from a height.
The count built a wall around the town and reckoned he was secure.
No doubt he was safe from  enemies, but not from fate.
Within three decades, the house of the Kyburgs had died out, and in marched the Habsburgs.
Aarau became absorbed in their empire, which eventually sprawled across a large area of Europe, imposing both its rule and culture on a curiously assorted collection of peoples and languages.
The town received its charter in 1283 from Rudolf himself, who, more than any other ruler of the line, was responsible for building the Habsburg power.
(The charter still exists and the seal can be seen in the town museum, which more than repays a visit.)
But what was good enough for the Kybergs was hardly likely to be good enough for the Habsburgs, so they built a second wall, only a few yards away.
Which is why you can pass through two town gates within a minute.
Brief though their influence may have been, the Kyburgs are still commemorated by a statue to Count Hartmann between the two  gates.
However, it is the watch tower beside them that commands the attention.
It dominates the town from any direction, looking across the river and seeming to peer cautiously at the last limb of the Jura mountains in the distance, a reminder of the days when an enemy might appear in the valley below.
Beside the arms of Aarau, it also bears those of Bern.
The Habsburgs, though they kept a tight hold on much of Europe, were not the longest serving overlords of Aarau.
The Swiss yearning for independence was soon aflame throughout the cantons, and led to the famous Confederation.
Gradually, the hold of the Habsburgs weakened.
The Swiss proved to be ferocious fighters, and in 1415 the Habsburgs were driven out of the Aargau, but although Aarau was allowed to keep the rights granted by the Habsburgs, it was soon clear to the Argovians that Swiss victory merely meant they had exchanged one landlord for another.
For four hundred years the town was subject to Bern, and had no real influence on Swiss politics until 1798.
Though the Argovians shared in the Swiss military triumphs of the Middle Ages, and always under their own flag, they did so under the strict command of Bern.
So the arms of Bern are there to this day.
Before passing on to the maze of closely clustered streets of the old town, spare another glance at the tower.
The clock that adorns it is four hundred years old, still keeps perfect time, and chimes its reminders every quarter of an hour.
No excuse for turning up late for an appointment in Aarau.
It is a municipal duty for someone to climb up to wind it every day.
A sundial tells us that time was important even before the Swiss started making clocks and watches.
But this one is a curiosity, decorated with fantastic figures depicting the dance of death.
These, however, are not part of Aarau's medieval history, but were painted in the 1950s by Felix Hoffmann, a local artist.
A walk around Aarau brings one face to face with two architectural styles that are clearly defined, quite different, but which make a genial harmony.
One is Gothic, the other baroque.
This too is a reflection of Aarau history.
Despite the control of Bern, trade and industry grew and, as they did, many imposing structures appeared in the sixteenth to eighteenth centuries.
The fine town church, the Rathaus (town hall), confident-looking houses with well proportioned facades and artistically modelled gables all date from this period and proclaim that money was not too much of a problem to the burghers, who were steadily becoming more wealthy.
The town brook, now covered over, became a source of energy for saw mills and other trades.
Even into the nineteenth century there were thirty  water wheels turning along it.
Factories appeared outside the town, as did the spacious new houses of the merchants.
The move to the country outside had begun, and so had Aarau's export trade, at that time mostly textiles.
Inevitably, the control of Bern was no longer tolerable.
Eventually, a distinction came Aarau's way which resulted in one of its most striking thoroughfares.
After a walk through the old town, the visitor will turn into the Laurenzenvorstadt, and note at once its noble sweep, with its avenue of classic design and proportions.
It is the record of a glory that was short lived, but makes an illustrious event in Aarau's history.
The domination of Bern was thrown off without much trouble, a tree of liberty was planted in the Graben (Square) in the first flush of freedom, and in 1798, Aarau became not only the capital of the canton of Aargau, but the seat of the newly proclaimed Helvetian republic.
The politicians, army officers, civil servants and government officials all descended and Aarau, of course, was too small to accommodate them in the style to which they were accustomed.
So almost overnight, Aarau decided on a major expansion scheme, and work began on the Laurenzenvorstadt.
All very enterprising, but within six months, with the builders not far advanced into the job, the Helvetian government decided to move to Lucerne.
Undismayed, Aarau carried on with the building of the Laurenzenvorstadt to house its responsibilities as the capital of the canton.
And that is how the town collected that surprising classical street which stands apart from all the rest.
Among the artisans who contributed to Aarau's fame in medieval times were the gunsmiths, swordsmiths, cutlers and bell-founders.
And in recent years, the bell-founders, still active, have forged an important link of friendship with the people of the United States.
A much-remembered day is 16 April 1976, when representatives of America and Switzerland met there to celebrate the handing over of the bell cast in Aarau for the United Methodist church of Washington, DC.
Aarau is sometimes called the garden town because there is so much green and such easy access to the open countryside through which the Aare curves.
The canton of Aargau itself earned the title of "the culture state" as early as the mid-nineteenth century, through its wise development of education (including one of the first teacher training colleges) and the arts, a tradition which has obviously continued, judging by the numerous advertisements for concerts, and particularly the Fine Arts Museum in the Rathausplatz.
A walk The North: From the Aare to the Rhine Falls  across the wooden bridge into the Schlossi in the heart of the town leads to another museum with a fascinating record of how Aarau life has developed.
Aarau is a kind town of warm-hearted, helpful people.
You meet every consideration in the shops, and there is a most efficient tourist office where the staff give every assistance and, if asked, will produce an English speaking guide to show you round.
But it deserves much more than 45 minutes.
And before you leave, try the local chocolates.
They're superb.
After Aarau, it really is a question of how far, how soon.
Brugg, on a direct road to the north-east should be visited, and so should Baden, just off the motorway in roughly the same direction.
So it may be best to stay off the motorway and see Brugg first, continuing on route 5 and following the Aare.
The road from Aarau to Brugg passes through Bad Schinznach, a health resort with one of the richest sulphur springs in Europe.
Brugg itself is an attractive town, situated at the meeting place of three rivers, the Aare, the Reuss and the Limmat.
Its situation has made it an important centre for both trade and tourism.
The town has some fascinating historical buildings, among which must be mentioned the old Town Hall with its Black Tower, the Latin school with its allegorical front, the salt house with its striking black and white shutters, the house where Pestalozzi, the Swiss educational reformer, died in 1827, a parish church dating from 1480, and a cluster of houses in a happy jumble of styles around the Heimatsmuseum.
There are stylish fountains, too.
The Romans had a settlement near here at Virden sas, and Brugg's Vindonissa Museum has many relics of their occupation.
Brugg
Brugg is a convenient place from which to explore an interesting and unspoiled area around.
There are over a hundred miles of signposted walks, including those in the quaint Schenkenberger valley with its vineyard villages and farmers' inns.
The Bozberg plateau has fine views of the Alps.
Favourite excursions are to the Habsburg castle, the very cradle of the Habsburg dynasty, perched on a hillock among green woods; to several other castles in the area; and to the many attractions of the countryside on the doorstep of Windisch.
This is a small town of 7,000 people through which the motorist passes on the way to Baden, itself only a short distance from Brugg on a direct road to the east.
But don't pass too quickly.
There is plenty to see around here.
Windisch gets its name from Vindonissa, where in the first century AD, the Romans built a military camp to protect the strategically vital crossing of the Rhine.
They stayed for four hundred years, and left plenty to record their occupation.
The most notable evidence is the amphitheatre.
The grassed oval arena, with its high embankment against a background of slender trees, should be visited.
There are remains of gates and watch towers, and a Roman water pipeline is still in use.
The monastery of Konigsfelden today houses a psychiatric clinic.
The Habsburgs laid the foundation on the site where King Albrecht was killed in 1308.
The monastery church is one of the treasures of north Switzerland, and its eleven colourful fourteenth-century choir windows, with their deep reds and blues catching the morning light, have few equals for their richly contrasted beauty.
Famed throughout the land, they merit a detour.
Yet for most visitors from overseas, Windisch with its treasure is definitely off the beaten track.
Anyone approaching Baden with the built-in idea that all spa towns are alike is in for a surprise.
Baden is different.
Baden
There are really two Badens.
One is the elegant collection of hotels where, as the town's name suggests, you can bathe for your health just as the Romans did 2,000 years ago, but in much greater comfort and with considerably more expert supervision.
But there is that other Baden, just a short walk away (or an even shorter bus ride) with a quaint medieval quarter where you can wander amid graceful patrician houses, delightfully styled and decorated, and admire the care with which they have been preserved.
Since those warm springs were the principal reason for the existence of Baden in the earliest days, perhaps they should be dealt with first.
They are the most mineral-rich springs in Switzerland.
The Romans put great value on the sulphur baths which they knew as Aquae Helvetiae.
But they could never have imagined the extent to which their fame would spread, so much so that today, at certain times of the year, visitors to the spa almost double Baden's population.
Stroll around a spa (and the atmosphere of relaxation hardly invites you to go any faster) and you become lulled into a state in which you would hardly be surprised to see a monarch emerge from the portals of an hotel.
Baden is not so different in that respect.
There is still something of the well fed confidence of the years before World War I about it, and not a little of the self-deluding establishment  complacence of the years before World War II.
Holidays in medicinal spas were then the privilege of the wealthy.
But that is no longer the case.
With characteristic business acumen, the Swiss spas saw the renaissance of the classical water therapy on the way, beckoning all sections of society, and they have turned it to good account.
Baden has been in the vanguard.
The crowned heads and aristocrats may be in short supply today, but Baden is busier than ever.
There are all sorts of package spa breaks on offer.
They say it takes about three weeks for a cure to work, and most Baden packages are based on this, although some are streamlined to 14 days.
All-in  arrangements include air fare, full board, initial medical consultation, thermal baths, mud-packs, massages, passes for various institutions and facilities in the town, and vouchers for the Baden bus shuttle which links the spa with the old quarter and the shops.
There is also a beauty package based on a 7-days treatment.
It is a special feature of Baden that the hot springs belong to the hotels.
Originally, they were the property of the crown, but in time they passed to the local aristocrats.
They leased them to the spa innkeepers, who eventually became rich enough to purchase them.
So every hotel has its own spring and therapeutic installations which are, however, available to the general public at certain times of the day.
Full details of all the package offers and general spa facilities can be obtained from the Baden Tourist Office.
But you can have a fascinating time in Baden without paying too much attention to the spa.
For Baden is one of the"Ten Typical Swiss Towns' and that in itself is a guarantee of something individual.
In 1978, it was decided to select ten small towns which, because of their beautifully preserved old quarters, ambience of arts and crafts, and situation away from the routine tourist tracks, would be a family unto themselves through their subtle relationship of styles, and give a cross-section of Swiss life of today and yesterday.
Baden is one, and it is easy to see why it was chosen.
The old quarter is indeed a concentration of Swiss life as it once was.
Baden has taken care of its past, rescuing old houses from decay, restoring where necessary and always taking care that new colours blend.
As old houses are repaired, many new or forgotten treasures have come to light, such as old frescoes which were once thoughtlessly painted over.
Here the visitor can wander around without hindrance, as most of the antique area is now a pedestrian zone.
The town had Switzerland's first railway tunnel, driven deep under the ridge beneath the Stein ruins (a considerable engineering feat in those days) and this has been widened to take the road as well, so that Baden is virtually free of through traffic.
An abiding memory of Baden is the harmony of the old town.
The lovely oriel windows, the shapely gables, the cobbled streets, the carved doorways, the murals and frescoes, all add up to an artistic totality.
And as you would expect in a town of enterprise, some of these buildings have been sensibly adapted to modern use.
For example, the Kornhaus, a former granary in Kronengasse, which is now principally a young people's centre.
On the top floor there is an art gallery where the young artists can exhibit and sell their work, in the cellar an experimental theatre where anything goes.
The Gothic room in the old town hall should be visited.
It has an important place in European history for it was here that the peace treaty was signed that finally brought an end to the War of the Spanish Succession.
The peace of Utrecht ended the war proper in 1713, but desultory skirmishes carried on until 1714.
In that year, Prince Eugene of Savoy (representing the emperor) and Marshal de  Villars (representing Louis XIV) met in the Gothic room, and signed the final peace document.
The room has some striking windows bearing the stained glass coats of arms of the Swiss cantons, and can be visited when the district court, which has been meeting there since 1876, is not in session.
There is a notable sculpture on the north front of the town church representing the Mount of Olives.
It is by Bartholomaus Cades, a Wurttemberg sculptor who worked in Baden, and was given by a town councillor of the Dorer family in 1630.
His coat of arms appears there and can also be seen decorating the Hotel Baren.
The shutters protecting the sculpture are opened only during Holy Week.
The river Limmat flows through Baden and is crossed by an old wooden bridge.
Next to it stands the former bailiff's castle which is now a historical museum housing several treasures, one of which has a link with America.
This is the ornate Lion Bowl, designed in 1688 by the Rapperswil goldsmith Heinrich Dumeisen (1653–1723).
This remarkable piece has historic as well as artistic interest, for the intricately worked base is the only contemporaneous illustration of the town's fortifications as they were after their re-building in 1675–88.
Bernhart Silberysen was the mayor in charge of the restoration, and the town council presented him with this bowl in thanks.
But the fortifications were demolished again in 1712, before any other record had been made.
Later, the bowl was sold by the Silberysen family, and was next heard of when it was acquired by the American financier J. Pierpont Morgan.
On his death it went to the Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford.
In 1978, it was returned to the Baden museum on loan.
Baden's railway station is the oldest in Switzerland, and owes its existence partly to the Swiss love of hot rolls for breakfast.
The line from Zurich became known as the Spanischbrotlibahn ( "Spanish roll line" ).
These rolls were a speciality of Baden, and the people of Zurich liked them so much that a special train used to leave Baden early every morning so that they were in Zurich fresh and in time for breakfast.
There are a number of industries around Baden, all sited with typical Swiss discretion so as not to bruise the town's charm.
As it happens, Baden has more than commercial prosperity for which to thank its industries.
One of the most important is Brown Bovary engineering, and Charles Brown, a descendant of one of the founders, has recently bequeathed his superb private art collection to the town.
This is undoubtedly going to make Baden one of the most important arts centres in Switzerland (and there are many distinguished <pb n=23 ones) for the collection is known to include works by Renoir, Monet, Cezanne, Corot, Degas, the Venetians, a priceless array of Asiatic porcelain, Greek ceramics, carpets and marble.
The next destination is Schaffhausen, famous for picturesque buildings, its excellent connections which make it so convenient a place from which to start an exploration of the Bodensee (Lake Constance) or trips into Germany, the warmth of its people, and of course, the Rhine Falls, among Switzerland's most spectacular sights.
From Baden, those in a hurry might take the motorway east to the outskirts of Zurich, then pick up the northbound motorway, carrying on through Jestetten.
Those who are not may choose the more attractive route, going north to Koblenz, turning right to follow the Rhine, turning left about 8km (5 miles) after Kaiserstuhl to pick up the same road through Jestetten.
Either route will bring you close to the falls at Neuhausen.
There are not many more spectacular sights in Switzerland than the Rhine Falls of Schaffhausen.
At a point where the Rhine is 180yd wide, it suddenly plunges 80ft in three steps, like a giant clumsily walking down uneven stairs.
On each level there is an enormous splash, then the biggest of them all as the falls collapse into the basin below, there to boil and fume furiously, and send a cloud of white spray floating across the countryside.
Quite apart from the deafening thunder of the falls, and the awe-inspiring sight of their dramatic descent, the effect can be sheer magic on a fine day; as the sunlight catches the spray in flight, and transforms it into an elusive pattern of shapes and colours that suggest in painting the Impressionism of Manet or the mists of Corot, or in music, the evocative nuances of Debussy.
Statistics declare that 1,200 tons of water every second feed that tempestuous wrath beneath.
But even that pales beside the truth that must be excited in every onlooker, the realisation of man's transitory insufficiency compared with the enduring might of nature.
Schaffhausen
There are several good vantage places from which to see the falls.
One is from the gardens of Schloss Laufen, and there are others, including a convenient platform.
But no matter how optimistic the weather forecast, keep a raincoat handy if you intend taking a closeup.
The falls create their own showers if the wind is in the wrong direction.
The falls are at Neuhausen, an extension of Schaffhausen to the south, rather than a suburb of it.
If you are not travelling by car, then  regular buses from the town centre have you there in 15 minutes, stopping at the end of a lane which leads to a good viewpoint.
The Rhine rises in the Swiss Grisons, forces its way north-west, forming for part of its course the border between Switzerland, Liechtenstein and Austria, enters the Bodensee (Lake Constance) in the south-east, flows through part of the lake, then out into the Untersee, over the falls to Basle, then north up through Germany on its long journey to Holland and out into the North Sea.
Of its 850 miles, 437 are in Germany, and it passes through many beautiful old towns.
But surely none more picturesque than Schaffhausen.
More than once it has been labelled the oriel town of the upper Rhine, and certainly the multiplicity of those beautifully shaped projecting windows, so delicately ornamented, are a significant factor in preserving the essentially medieval atmosphere of the place.
So are the many coloured statues that rise either arrogantly, gracefully, or humorously above the fountains that are discovered in quiet corners and sleepy squares.
Schaffhausen received its charter in 1045.
A free city for almost four centuries, it entered into alliance with eight Swiss cantons in the  fifteenth century, sealing its permanent union with the Swiss Confederation in 1501.
Thereafter, its story of growing commercial  importance and wisely harboured prosperity is much the same as other Swiss communities.
Except that in the case of Schaffhausen, there was a rather different reason, at least at first.
In the Middle Ages, the town was a point of transfer for river cargoes.
Then, as now, the Rhine was an important trade artery.
Coming from the lake, or down from the north, all the goods had to be unloaded because of the impassable barrier of the Rhine Falls, then taken to the waiting vessels on the other side.
So, just as the falls are important to Schaffhausen's expanding tourist industry, so energetically fostered by a lively local tourist office, so they helped lay the first foundations of prosperity hundreds of years ago.
The magnificence of the houses the merchants built for themselves show that they had an eye for artistic effect as well as financial security.
Zum Ritter is among Switzerland's most lovely buildings, set among several beautifully designed guild houses in the Vordergasse.
The frescoes by Tobias Stimmer date from the sixteenth century, and it all adds up to a quite wonderful example of late German Renaissance.
A walk down the Munstergasse to the flomanesque cathedral consecrated in 1103 takes you past a treasury of old houses, their oriels jealously preserved, and brings you to the shapely cloister archways of the former zu Allerheigen (All Saints) monastery, now transformed into a museum which is one of the most important in north Switzerland.
Take a deep breath before you go in.
The monks of old began a tradition of growing aromatic herbs which still survives.
Schaffhausen is dominated by the sixteenth-century Munol fortress, perched on top of a hillock and towering over half-timbered houses sleeping by the water.
Like so many Swiss towns which arc left with a legacy of the past, so that many of its buildings arc protected by law, Schaffhausen has quietly converted them to modern use while preserving the exterior.
For example, if you take advantage of one of the tourist office's all-in weekends, you might find yourself staying at the Alte Rheinmuhle.
Built in 1674, this timbered building, renovated in good taste, has become a country inn of considerable charm.
On the ground floor, where the lard wheel of the former mill was driven by the waters of the Rhine, there is a restaurant famous for its cuisine, with a wooden ceiling an arched windows giving a scenic view of the Rhine.
Nearby is wildfowl sanctuary.
These all-in weekends are typical of the imagination with which the tourist industry has been developed here.
For details, write dire to the tourist office or, alternatively, contact the nearest branch of the  Swiss National Tourist Office in the country of your departure.
Once arrived, they have made it easy to explore the best of Schaffhausen.
On Mondays to Fridays from early April until the end of October (Good Friday, Easter Monday and Whit Monday excepted) there are guided walks with expert English-speaking commentators, starting from outside the tourist office at 3pm.
The tour takes 90 minutes.
Groups of ten or more should make advance reservations.
You can also hire personal guides if you wish.
From Schaffhausen, it is natural to turn east and make for Konstanz and the broad waters of the Bodensee.
This can be done by direct road, passing through a number of attractive little towns on the way.
But while in Schaffhausen, the visitor should really take a trip on the Untersee, the inner lake connecting Schaffhausen with the Bodensee.
In either case, a prolonged stop should be made at Steinam-Rhein, for this is something special.
Stein-am-Rhein is in some ways a reproduction of all that is wonderful about Schaffhausen, but with enough added subtleties to give it an identity of its own.
On no account should it be regarded as something through which the traveller passes quickly while hurrying on to the next destination.
The Rhine passes through Stein-am-Rhein, crossed by an elegant arched bridge, and you could almost imagine it slowing down to take a good look at this delectable little town.
Stein-am-Rhein is an architectural gem.
Stein-am-Rhein
Cars are banned from its cobbled streets, which are flanked by a positively intoxicating profusion of old buildings.
It is cosily concentrated, with the guild-houses seeming to nudge each other affectionately, and in every narrow street and old square there is something to invite the wanderer to stand and stare.
Colourful houses are on every side, with frescoes celebrating heroes of long ago and episodes that are remembered from centuries back in Swiss history.
Before settling down to a tour of the old quarter (and Stein is almost entirely an old quarter), it is a good idea to face the climb to the Burg Hohenklingen, from the battlements of which there is a breathtaking view of the Rhine winding its way through flat green pastures and dense woodland, and of the closely clustered pointed roofs of Stein itself.
There is no point in suggesting an itinerary in a small town like Stein.
You simply roam around, safe in the knowledge that round each corner there will be something to please.
The oriel windows, particularly in the Rathausplatz have a delicate beauty and a rich  variety of expression that somehow blends into a happy harmony.
The timbered Untertor, crowned by its clock within a triangular roof, stands at the end of a narrow street.
The Rheingasse gives a foretaste of the glories of the Rathaus (town hall).
Turn down it, pass into the Rathausplatz itself, and the promise is confirmed.
The hall was built in 1539, and its facade is a marvel of elaborate murals topped by a richly carved half-timbered gallery.
This, more than any other single building, proclaims the character of the town.
Coats of arms of the merchants who built the houses four hundred years ago catch the eye, as do those of the guilds and craftsmen who flourished in old Stein.
Everything conspires to whisk you back into the past, including the statue of a fierce bearded mercenary leaning on his shield and grasping his pike firmly as though challenging you to try to take it from him.
He reminds the visitor that so famed were Swiss soldiers for their heroism that monarchs vied with each other to hire them, and that the Swiss guards of Louis XVI died to a man in his defence when the mob stormed the Royal Palace in August 1792.
Without bruising the town's unique flavour, Stein has found its old buildings a creative role in a modern world.
A half-timbered  house here has become a library.
Cross the threshhold of a building elaborately decorated with murals and you are inside a bank.
The sixteenth-century merchant who was so proud of his oriel windows would be astonished if he came back today to find that behind them management was managing and typists typing.
But outside he would have known where he was.
Nothing much has changed for hundreds of years.
The former Benedictine monastery of St George has found a new life as a museum and is well worth visiting.
The most startling illustration of how things can stay the same while they change is found in one of Stein-am-Rhein's many excellent restaurants.
The sign on the door tells the visitor he can have a tooth extracted for a trifling sum.
Another says that if the diner happens to put an elbow out, it can be put back at once.
Neither seems to say much for the tenderness of the steaks.
Then there is a notice advising that blood-letting sessions can be arranged.
And another recommends the visitor to take a bath.
Three hundred years ago the place was a badstube, where you tethered your horse outside (the posts are still there) and took advantage of all these services which were available.
Today it is a restaurant specialising in several different ways of cooking fish fresh from the lake.
In Steinam-Rhein, the past is always looking over the shoulder of the present.
Schaffhausen makes a good base for an exploration of this part of Switzerland.
Quite apart from the time demanded by the town itself, a visit to the Rhine Falls and another to Stein-am-Rhein, you should reserve a day for a trip by steamer down the Rhine, and on to the Untersee and Konstanz and back.
There are usually three boats a day, sometimes more in high season.
It takes 4 hours in each direction, and there is plenty to see as you drift through a landscape where woodlands slope down to the waters edge, medieval towns seem to be snoozing, vineyards look sweet with promise, and heights are crowned mysteriously with fine old castles and monasteries.
The Rhine and the Untersee
There is history as well as scenic beauty all the way.
Armies chose these banks as suitable places for crossing the Rhine, and a particularly eventful time was around the end of the eighteenth century and the start of the next.
Going about their daily tasks, the people of these villages must have grown tired of the tramp of marching feet.
Before Diessenhofen (on the right as you travel) is the spot where the Archduke Charles, full of misplaced confidence, crossed with the Austrian army in 1799.
A little further on is where the distinguished General Moreau led the French troops across the Rhine a year later  on their way to the battle of Hohenlinden, the most important of his many successes against the Austrians.
Diessenhofen (the Romans called it Gunodorum) has a fine old clock tower, under which the road from Schaffhausen to Konstanz passes, then Stein-am-Rhein comes into view on the left bank.
In midstream is the island of Werd.
But look to the right, where the walls of Schloss Freudenfels (1359) are white against the green of the descending woods.
Mammern, hugging the right-hand shore and set amid fruit orchards, is a stopping place for the boats.
It was first mentioned in 909 as Manburon, but the remains of defensive works and lake pile-dwellings indicate that it was inhabited in prehistoric times.
The Seerucken hills rise at the back, and on them the forts of Neuberg (1270, now a ruin) and Liebenfels (1254) bear witness to wars and feuds now forgotten.
Klingenzell priory, between the castles Liebenfels and Freudenfels, was founded in 1333 and became a place of pilgrimage.
Now the Rhine widens into the Untersee, an offshoot of the Bodensee.
Steckborn, on the right, is the next stop, and if you have time, deserves a brief visit for its superb Turmhof Castle (1320), with its copper bulb-shaped roof, and for its Rathaus (1669), with its half-timbered facade, and stepped tower.
The emperor Henry VII granted Steckborn its charter in 1313, and you can still see the remains of the old town walls.
In Berlingen, flanked by vineyards a little further on, fishing and farming still survive as major occupations.
The evangelical church is said to be Switzerland's first New Gothic building.
The painter Adolf Dietrich (1877–1957) worked in Berlingen, and his former studio is open to the public.
The island of Reichenau is German.
Opposite is the village of Ermatingen, and above it, Schloss Arenenberg, where Hortense de Beauharnais, former wife of Louis Bonaparte, king of Holland, lived from 1818 with her son, the future Napoleon III of France.
It contains many replicas of France's second empire.
Gottlieben is the last stop before Konstanz.
Its Dominican monastery is where the Czech protestant reformer John Huss was imprisoned in 1415, despite having been given a safe conduct to appear before the Council of Konstanz.
Refusing to recant his doctrines as heretical, he was condemned to be burnt at the stake at Konstanz.
The same journey can be done by car, as the road follows the river and lake all the way.
But a leisurely trip by boat is recommended.
del   
The North: Around the Bodensee
Along the Lakeshore
Strictly speaking, Konstanz, is not Swiss at all.
It is an important piece of Germany on the Swiss shore of the Bodensee, overlooking the point where the Untersee joins it, but since it will inevitably be in the path of the traveller following those lakes, it had better be mentioned.
But remember to have your passport with you.
The odds are that you will not need it, but you never know.
So why is Konstanz German?
Originally a Celtic settlement and later a Roman one, it has had a stormy history.
It became a free city in 1192.
The Council of Konstanz met here in 1414–18, sometimes in the cathedral, sometimes in the Kaufhaus, and here the Czech reformers John Huss and Jerome of Prague were burnt at the stake.
Huss is remembered by a street named after him (the Hussenstrasse) and by his effigy on the house where he lived in the same street.
The town was occupied by the Austrians in 1548, and besieged by the Swedes in 1633 during the Thirty Years War.
In 1805 it was ceded to Baden in Germany under the Treaty of Pressburg (now Bratislava) and German it has remained.
Its bishopric was suppressed in 1821.
The Romanesque cathedral was begun in 1052, considerably rebuilt four hundred years later, and the Gothic tower was added as recently as 1850.
Inside, you can see the actual spot on which Huss stood so bravely to hear his sentence.
Another building to note is the Renaissance Rathaus (town hall) with its frescoes commemorating historical events, and the old house where Frederick Barbarossa (o Redbeard) signed a peace treaty with the Lombards in 1183.
Mori recent history is commemorated by the town's most prominent statue.
It is of Count Ferdinand von Zeppelin (1838–1917), pioneer of the airship, who was born here.
His dirigible balloons were built a Friedrichshafen, on the German shore of the lake, reached by direct  boat from Romanshorn, which will be visited later.
Kreuzlingen is the smaller and adjoining Swiss cousin of Konstanz.
There are many fine old houses and other links with the past.
From here, you can make boat trips to many spots on the Bodensee, including the German flower island of Mainau.
Once the home of the Grand Duke of Baden, Mainau's gardens, with their sub-tropical vegetation and lush colours in high summer, are reminiscent of the Isola Madre on Italy's Lake Maggiore, a little piece of Germany which is almost Italian.
Kreuzlingen's Augustinian priory, founded in the tenth century, was a victim of that siege during the Thirty Years War, and the present building, erected soon after, now houses a college.
Before leaving Konstanz and Kreuzlingen, a drive through the Thurgau is recommended.
This is a happily unspoiled expanse of green countryside to the south of the Untersee, through which the Thur meanders on its way to join hands with the Rhine.
Romantic villages nestle in the woods, fierce castles rise on the crags, and the further you penetrate, more tempting are the vistas of distant mountains.
You can explore part of the Thurgau in a round trip starting and finishing at Kreuzlingen.
A direct road will bring you to Weinfelden, a town of about 9,000 inhabitants lying at the foot of the Ottenburg.
There are many imposing old buildings and elegant fountains, and the castle has been renovated.
The people of Weinfelden seem to have a flair for putting window boxes of scarlet and pink flowers in places where they blend with the half-timbered fronts.
Winding paths lead into the surrounding woods, which in autumn are a riot of russet and gold.
This is a colourful town at any time of the year, and one which has moved purposefully into the twentieth century.
Small it may be, but as the centre of an area of prosperous little villages, it has become a thriving business centre, and is equipped with a wide range of sports facilities, while the admirably designed, flag-bedecked Thurgauerhof is a thriving centre for concerts, exhibitions and other events.
FrauenfeId is the capital of the canton of Thurgau, and you reach it by a road to the west, passing through Marstetten and Mulheim.
The town was founded by the counts of Kyburg, whose name thrusts itself into so much history in north Switzerland, and their shadow lives on.
The great white-fronted, red-roofed castle they built to defend their lands is mostly preserved.
The tower was erected in 1227, and the town itself evolved around it in a triangular pattern from 1244 onwards.
Up to as late as 1798, the district governors lived  in the castle.
From the top of the tower, there is a fine view of the Thurgau countryside.
There are, however, not so many medieval houses as you might expect to find.
Frauenfeld was unlucky in the eighteenth century when two disastrous fires wiped out most of the town.
Nevertheless, neighbouring cantons came to the rescue, mounted are-building act, and the result is a mixture of Bernese, Lucernese and Zurich baroque frontages.
The imposing white-faced Rathaus was built in 1790, and has recently been extensively restored, forming a harmonious group with the restored houses Sonne and Gambrinus.
Outside the town, the St Laurentius church at Oberkirch is renowned for its medieval glass paintings, while the half-timbered house Guggenhurli, perched above its vineyard, is an attractive landmark.
Back in the town, a visit should be paid to the popular Natural History Museum.
Frauenfeld is an excellent centre for a leisurely break.
There are well signposted walks, some of them offering views of the snow-topped Alps.
The Ittingen monastery, less than 4 miles distant, has a number of art exhibits.
Return to Kreuzlingen either by the same route, or extend your run to Wil, then turn north for Weinfelden and Kreuzlingen.
For scenery, these are the recommended routes.
But if time presses, you can take a direct road from Frauenfeld.
All the way from Kreuzlingen to Rorschach the road follows the lake almost as though they were happy partners in some holiday excursion.
This is a different Switzerland, an area where places to play and places to relax somehow live side by side with that never-to-be-suppressed Swiss past, which looks down on it all, smiling benevolently but quietly insisting that the twentieth century must keep its place and show respect.
So elegant chateaux, some of them pressed into contemporary usefulness without loss of character, exist beside new swimming pools.
Camp sites there are in plenty, but they are discreetly sited.
Flower-fringed lakeside boulevards, places to stroll in the lake air, or sit quietly on a sunlit Bodensee afternoon, plentiful water sports, all proclaim modern resorts; half-timbered houses proclaim the past.
Alleys lead from sophisticated yachting harbours or strands where near-naked bodies soak up the sun, to carefully preserved old quarters where the houses have medieval frescoes, a sudden adventure in baroque here, a touch of Renaissance there, an unexpected quiet square with a decorated fountain somewhere else.
All the small towns and villages on the edge of the lake seem to have solved the problem of living in two ages at once.
There are excellent restaurants and hotels, many of them specialising in their own way of serving    fresh fish from the lake.
The first place of any size en route is Bottighofen.
It is making the most of its favoured situation and gaining an increasing reputation as a bathing place and holiday centre.
It has recently acquired a fine new harbour, and for those who prefer the delights of the countryside to those of the waterfront, several footpaths lead iii to the adjacent meadows and woodlands.
Scherzingefl, which also attracts its share of holiday-makers, has retained its village atmosphere, and has a baroque church as well as a former Benedictine monastery.
A peninsula reaching into the lake gives the first sight of Roman-shorn, which today has spilled into the landscape behind, and along the gentle curve of a bay.
From here, you can take the car ferry across the water to Friedrichshafen (take the passports).
Roiaanshorn has some industry, but it is unobtrusive.
It is noted for its healthy lake air and well organised holiday facilities.
The climate is generous, and swimming, water-skiing, sailing and tennis are all available.
The people of Romanshorn are proud of their park, and so they should be.
Skilfully planned for most of the year it is full of colour.
Like Romanshorn, Arbon, on another headland, seems to be sitting beside the lake with its big toe dipped cautiously into the water.
It is perhaps the best example on the Bodensee of the successful marriage between the demands of a growing holiday trade and a carefully guarded past.
Indeed, it is the historic old houses you are likely to recall long after the memory of the well kept gardens, water sports, smart promenades and bathing pools have faded.
Spare time for a walk round Arbon's streets.
The castle is said to symbolise Arbon.
If so, the town must have known turbulent times in the past.
It stands gaunt and grey, but today has found a peaceful role in the new Arbon, housing a museum which illustrates life in the area right back to the time of the Roman and beyond.
In fact, the Romans were not the first here.
The Celts has been established for centuries before the Romans came in 60BC an built a military camp.
There are Celtic remains in the museum a well.
The castle may cast its shadow, but the character of Arbon formed equally by the half-timbered houses.
One of the most striking of these is the Rathaus in the Promenadenstrasse, built in 1791 are renovated this century.
Another is the Untertor, which is also decorated with several picturesque murals illustrating old country crafts and customs.
And there are many others at which to point camera.
St Martin's church, with its Gothic tower rising behind pink-walled vicarage, has its own collection of local relics.
The St  Gallus church, wedged between tall trees, has something vaguely Scandinavian about its outline, and has notable stained glass windows.
Arbon's surrounding countryside is attractive at all times, and at its best in spring when the orchards on the town's doorstep are heavy with blossom.
Five minutes driving brings the traveller to Horn, an ancient fishing village lying in a slight recession in the coast, and then the road continues to Rorschach.
This well established town is a fitting climax to the lakeside journey.
Its proximity to Austria, just a few miles away, and to Lindau, the old German city on the opposite shore reached in a short journey by direct lake steamer, has cast its influence and given it a faintly cosmopolitan atmosphere.
It is Switzerland's largest port on the Bodensee, and lies in a bay beneath the pine forests of the 3,000ft-high Rorschacherberg.
The reason for its traditional importance as a  trading centre is obvious from a glance at the map.
Its position stands astride an international route, and traders were meeting here 1,000 years ago.
They came by road, they came by water, and the arrival of the railway much later added to Rorschach's significance.
Today, evidence of its past prosperity mingles with that of today, a prosperity to which the expansion of tourism has added its quota.
In 936, King Otto I (Otto the Great) was crowned King of the Germans at Aachen.
He established a considerable empire through central Europe, in the course of which he conferred on the Abbot of St Gall the right of market holding, coinage and excise.
From this the importance of Rorschach grew in the Middle Ages, a story told by the town's many handsome old houses, with their enchantingly carved oriels.
Later, in 1746, the Kornhaus was built, now a well stocked museum of local history.
The former Mariaberg cloister has also been faithfully restored.
With its numerous holiday facilities, coupled with history and glamorous country, Rorschach invites a stay.
There are footpaths wandering away into the countryside, where wonderful views of the mountains of three countries (Austria, Germany and Switzerland) can be enjoyed.
And it is a convenient starting point for several excursions.
You should certainly cross the border (remember the passports) for a taste of the Vorarlberg, and particularly of Bregenz, squeezed into that tiny corner of Austria which intrudes on to the Bodensee between Switzerland and Germany.
It is a beautiful and lively little Austrian town with a fine waterfront, and the Vorarlberg at its back is an area of delightfully unspoiled woods, picturesque villages, clearly marked footpaths and gushing rivers and waterfalls.
It is easily reached by car, train or boat.
Bregenz has another claim to fame: during July and August it is the home of the celebrated Bregenz Festival, where opera becomes aquatic.
The performances are given on a floating stage in the lake, and the audience is accommodated in an open-air auditorium on the shore.
International singers take part, and the orchestra is usually the Vienna Symphony.
There are also concerts and recitals in the town's municipal theatre and halls.
The Flying Dutchman is an obvious choice for water-borne opera, and at Bregenz it can become very realistic indeed.
But many other operas seem to take naturally to water.
Unique spectacle means a lot at this festival, but is hardly ever at the expense of artistic quality.
If you stay in Rorschach, a visit across the lake to Lindau is also recommended.
This fascinating German town has an abbey founded in the ninth century, several other medieval churches, well preserved guild-houses, and a fifteenth-century town hall.
In the Middle Ages, Lindau was an essential link in the commerce between the German states and Italy.
Goods would be unloaded at Lindau, taken across the Bodensee to Rorschach, and from there go on through the passes to the south, to Milan or on to Venice for further shipment.
Swiss money is acceptable in Bregenz and Lindau, and prices in Swiss francs are usually quoted in restaurants and shops.
No visitor can claim to have had a totally Swiss experience until he or she has travelled on one of the many cogwheel railways that whisk the traveller from ground level to the heights.
As they rumble up the steep slopes, they unfold a gradually widening panorama of countryside, mountain and forest.
So though it is perfectly practicable to take a trip to Heiden by car (a direct road leads from Rorschach) you would do much better to leave the car behind, go along to the station of the Rorschach-Heiden mountain railway near the harbour, take a cogwheel train, sit back in one of the red coaches and enjoy the gradually changing view.
As the train ascends, the port gradually recedes, the wide expanse of the Bodensee comes into view, dotted with white sails and the frothy wakes of the steamers, and the length of the German shore is revealed.
You pass through orchards, over farms where the people wave greetings, catch glimpses of castles that were there centuries before the railway was built and of huddled villages, then go higher through woodlands where the trees brush the carriages, and on to views of snow clad peaks shimmering on the horizon.
Heiden is one of those places which, though famous and well developed, can still claim to be off the beaten track.
It is blessed with a sunny position high above the Bodensee, and some of its fame is owed to its standing as a health resort, offering electrotherapy and treatments designed for those recovering from heart attacks, nervous disorders, stress and circulation problems.
With its splendid climate and stimulating air, it is also ideal for holiday-makers who like a generous ration of open-air activity combined with relaxation.
It also has prestige as the place where Henri Dunant (1828–1910), the Swiss philanthropist and founder of the Red Cross, did important work.
He was so moved by the sufferings of the wounded at the battle of Solferino (the Lombard village where the French and Sardinians defeated the Austrians in June 1859) that he published a book urging the formation of permanent voluntary aid societies to succour  the wounded in time of war, and this so caught international imagination that in 1863, sixteen European nations met at a conference in Geneva to launch the plan.
The Red Cross was born, its flag a red cross on a white background, reversing Switzerland's national flag.
There is a museum devoted to Dunant's work at Heiden.
It seems happily appropriate that the contemporary role of this charming village should still involve healing.
Return to Rorschach, and from there the tour continues to St Gallen.
From Rorschach a direct road to the south-west brings the traveller quickly to St Gallen, the largest city in north-east Switzerland, the capital of the canton which bears its name, and a place whose prestige rests securely on a joint foundation of industry, its role in Switzerland's cultural life, scholarship, expanding tourism, its success in preserving an inherited past, and its development as a congress centre.
It is dealt with in detail here because visitors in search of out of the way spots are almost certain to pass through it on their way to Appenzell, or even to break their journey here.
St Gallen
The city's origins have distant links with the British Isles.
In the seventh century, the Irish monk Gallus left his cell, and travelling by way of Scotland, arrived in what was described as "the green wilderness between the Lake of Constance and Santis" .
There, in 612, he established his hermitage, which was soon a place of pilgrimage.
By the following century, it had become the nucleus of a Benedictine abbey which grew to become one of the leading centres of learning in central Europe.
Around it grew the Villa Sancti Galli, a settlement of craftsmen and small farmers which developed steadily into the St Gallen of trade and commercial importance.
In 1212 it received the charter of a free imperial city.
Allegiance to the abbot was ended when St Gallen joined the Swiss Confederation in 1454.
In the next century Vadin brought religious freedom (his memorial stands in a corner of the Marktgasse).
St Gallen's standing as a centre of commerce gradually became more dominant, particularly in the growth of a healthy textile industry.
The end of the eighteenth century and the first years of the nineteenth brought a time of confusion and revised Swiss administration in the wake of the Napoleonic wars, and in 1803, St Gallen's monastery was secularised along with others in Switzerland, the new canton of St Gallen was formed, and the city became its capital.
The traditional association with textiles is preserved.
Even today, a third of the population of the city is employed in industry, many of them in the one in which their families have worked for generations.
The Textile Museum in the Vadianstrasse has on show a remarkable range of products made in St Gallen from the sixteenth century to the nineteenth.
It should certainly be visited.
And in the summer, there are processions involving thousands of children in costumes made in the city down the ages.
The old town is the very heart of St Gallen, concentrated in an oval formed roughly by the Moosbruggstrasse, Oberergraben, Marktplatz and an extension of the Torstrasse from the Bruhl Tor to the Spiser Tor.
Within this area, there are many gems.
Approach the old quarter from any direction, and the twin towers of the baroque cathedral dominate.
The best route is through the Marktgasse, from which the full effect of the cathedral's symmetry can be felt.
As cathedrals go, it is hardly one of Switzerland's oldest, but it is very beautiful.
Cheerful, too, as a place of worship ought to be.
On a sunny day, the interior, tastefully restored and maintained, glitters with light.
Another church to visit is near at hand.
St Laurence is on the  corner of the Zeughausgasse immediately facing the cathedral precincts.
St Mangen, at the end of the Goliathgasse (which leads off the Marktplatz, near the Unterergraben), is another.
The streets around are for wandering slowly.
Many of the older houses have been affectionately restored in the Riegel style peculiar to north Switzerland and south Germany.
Conical turrets, oriel windows and frescoes make a picturesque decoration to the winding alleys, many of them now reserved exclusively for pedestrians.
But the most remarkable antiquity in St Gallen is surely the Stiftsbibliothek, the library of the former abbey, situated at the rear of the cathedral.
Here there are 100,000 old books and illuminated manuscripts, some dating back to the tenth century.
Another essential for visitors to St Gallen.
In fact, for a city of its size, St Gallen is particularly rich in museums and you need never fear a wet day.
There is much to see and admire indoors.
It is a lively place in the evening too.
Opera and ballet, operetta and musicals, plays and cabaret, discos and night clubs all play a part in a varied programme of entertainment.
St Gallen's opera has always been recognised as one of Switzerland's best, and performs in the imposing Stadttheater in the Museumstrasse.
The municipal orchestra gives regular concerts in the  Tonhalle opposite.
There are puppet shows, too, in the Puppentheater in the Lammlisbrunnenstrasse.
St Gallen has several parks and gardens, notably the Stadtpark situated off the Museumstrasse.
Take the children to the Peter and Paul Wildlife Park off the Dufourstrasse where there are wild boar, deer and chamois.
The city is lucky in its proximity to unspoiled woodlands, some of them not much more than ten minutes walking from the centre.
A variety of cuisine is offered in the city's numerous restaurants.
Some are situated in the old quarter, which is just as colourful by night as it is by day, and have a characteristic local atmosphere.
Dishes special to the canton are a feature, but many have an international menu, in which French and Italian cuisine are both prominent.
It is also noted as a shopping centre, and here again the old town is Tile  a rewarding area, with its many boutiques and busy market stalls, and pavement cafes where you can break your journey.
St Gallen has become expert at the organisation of congresses and trade fairs, for which the Schutzengarten Congress Centre in the St Jakobstrasse has been specially designed.
Olma, the Swiss Agriculture and Dairy Fair brings around half a million visitors to St Gallen each year.
Quite an influx for a city whose own population is around 75,000.
From many vantage points near the city, exciting views of the Austrian Vorarlberg and the Santis can be had.
The city is well placed for many excursions to well known Swiss beauty spots and cities because of its excellent road and rail communications.
Nearer at hand, a pleasant short run from St Gallen is to Trogen by road to the east.
The journey is scenically attractive, and Trogen is a neat village where white-fronted, red-roofed villas spread up the green slopes of the Gibris.
It has some elegant buildings, and is the centre of the Pestalozzi Children's Village, named after Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi (1746–1827), the Swiss educational pioneer and reformer, which was founded in 1946 for war refugee children of several nationalities.
In 1956, refugees from the tragic Hungarian revolution were accepted there.
The groups are educated by teachers from their own countries.
Another attractive trip is to Herisau, a picturesque village easily reached by road from St Gallen, yet off the beaten track.
It has many red-roofed old houses, is the centre of colourful processions, has facilities for children in the Kinderparadies, a nature reserve, peaceful walks by the Gubensee and fine views of the Santis range.
Return to St Gallen, and from there leave for Appenzell.
It may come as a surprise to learn that in the last years of the twentieth century there is still a part of one of Europe's most enlightened democracies where women cannot vote.
in their local elections.
But then, the region of Appenzell is different in many respects from other parts of Switzerland.
Appenzell
Down on the lakeside at Rorschach, or wandering in the fields around St Gallen, the highlands to the south-east look sometimes invitingly mysterious, sometimes defiantly forbidding according to the weather.
Peaks that on one day will glitter like jewels against the sky, on others appear like a strange mirage, then vanish at the whim of scudding clouds.
This is the remote area of Appenzell, known to many for the unique flavour of its celebrated cheese, but for many  tourists, not much more than that.
Appenzell really is off the beaten track.
You can reach it from St Gallen by road, climbing steadily to Teufen, then ascending through a valley on up to Gais.
Turn right here, and the road gradually descends to the little town of Appenzell.
But you are brought closer to the real nature of Appenzell and its people if you catch a train on the narrow gauge railway from St Gallen.
It winds its slow way ever higher through first one valley then another, rumbling past waterfalls, passing over bubbling streams, stopping at mountain villages to pick up farmers with weather-beaten faces.
Suddenly, you feel part of a special community.
This sense of belonging is even stronger in Appenzell itself.
One never feels like a stranger or some visiting curiosity.
It is a welcoming little town, but it also has a sturdy independence.
This is an area where old customs die hard.
It keeps rather apart from the conventional order of things.
Swiss women got the vote on the federal level in 1971, rather late, you might think, considering the record of humanitarianism and tolerance in Swiss affairs.
It was left to the cantons to decide whether to follow suit on the local level.
Most did.
But not the region of Appenzell, which is divided into two cantons.
Women were still excluded, and there's no sign of a revolution yet.
There's nothing very secret about the elections.
They are conducted in public, by a show of hands.
Nobody bothers to count the votes.
The conducting officer just looks around and assesses the result.
The high attendance at the annual Landesgerniende, as it is called, certainly makes it look as though there's a healthy interest in public affairs generally and these annual meetings in particular.
Probably there is.
But actually, every enfranchised citizen under 60 is expected to turn up, and there is a fine waiting for anyone who fails to attend without good reason.
Appenzell is different in many other ways.
The region where  women can't vote in the local elections, and seats on the council depend on how a show of hands looks to the official in charge, is also the region where men were wearing a ring in the right ear long before it became a youth fashion elsewhere.
Usually, it is of silver and gilt with a rural motif.
It is also the area where you will often see the men  smoking the handsome lendauerli, the pipe whose wooden stem is engraved with white metal figures, with the bowl similarly decorated, and an ornate lid.
The pipe is filled in the usual way.
Then the top is sealed, and it is smoked upside down.
This is a district where old crafts are handed down from father to son.
You may meet a saddler who is the sixth generation of his family to carry on making bell harnesses.
It is a region where handweavers still exist, where the women preserve their own style of embroidery, and where milk churns are still decorated by craftsmen.
Here they have their own special cakes, chausebickli, honey cakes baked in October with scenes painted on the surface illustrating peasant life.
They are on sale from All Saints Day until Christmas.
They also have their own folk music.
An Appenzell band consists of two violins, cello, double bass, and a Hackbrett, a kind of dulcimer special to the  area.
Most of their music is unattributed, passed down for centuries.
The bands come into their own on the Sunday nearest to the feast of St Jakob (25 July) when the holiday of the alpine herdsmen is celebrated, and again during the Alpstobete, a noisy celebration to close the summer grazing season.
The most colourful of Appenzell's many processions is the ascent  to the mountains, when the cattle are moved up to their summer quarters.
A goatherd leads the way, followed by his unique white Appenzell goats.
Next comes a cowherd in a bright yellow uniform, carrying a richly carved wooden milking pail, cows with their bells jangling, a group of lusty yodellers, then the farmer, leading his bull by the nose.
Strange figures haunt the streets on New Year's Eve and on 13 January, New Year's Eve in the old calendar, still respected in the Appenzell cantons.
These are the "handsome-ugly ones" , whose origins probably descend from ancient fertility rites.
The demonic figures wearing ugly masks and straw and brushwood clothes are intended to scare away evil spirits.
The beautiful ones wear ornate regional head-dresses, chime bells and yodel to welcome the New Year, while nature mummers appear in costumes of pine-cones, moss and snail shells.
The Appenzell countryside is a fairyland where the sun plays tricks with the tall firs and casts elusive shadows in a forest noon, where picturesque cottages straight out of story books have murals telling of local legends, where there are numerous footpaths through green meadows and around the fruit orchards, and the sound of tinkling cowbells drifts across the air.
It is flanked by a dramatic ridge of mountains to the south, white-clad needle points that are silhouetted against the blue sky.
The nearest to the town itself is Hoher Kasten (6,000ft) easily reached from the tiny holiday village of Brulisau.
At the summit there is a wonderful view of the mountains of four countries.
Santis is the dominating peak of the range.
While in Appenzell, a visit should be paid to Retonio's Mechanical Music and Magic Museum.
Retonio, a well known ventriloquist, has collected an assortment of music boxes, parlour organs, fair-ground organs, automatic violins and other mechanical instruments, the result of touring the fairgrounds of the world.
And, of course, there is Appenzell cheese, with a taste all its own.
To find out more about it, pay a visit to nearby Stein, situated on a sunny hill top with attractive views of pastures dotted with neat farms, and the far-spreading, softly undulating hills.
Here they have established the Appenzell Showcase Cheese Dairy.
From a spectator's gallery, visitors can watch the production of the famous cheese step by step, from the delivery of the milk right through to the ripening of whole cheeses in the cellar.
There are also sound-slide shows, and a restaurant decorated with old farm implements.
The cheesemakers are quite happy to share their secrets, so make sure you come away with a few useful recipes, such as those for making Appenzell cheese tarts, Appenzell Rosti, Appenzell cheese pillows, cheese souffle and Appenzellerei, a luscious blend of ham pork, onions, parsley and cheese.
Appenzell has a sixteenth-century town hall and a number of picturesque houses.
Several of the hotels and guest houses in the area have been owned and managed by the same families for generations, and a tradition of personal service has grown up.
And despite its comparative remoteness, the town is well connected to adjacent resorts and holiday spots by the faithful Swiss yellow postal coaches.
Add to old traditions a welcoming people, glorious mountains and soft fields, attractive houses and well run hotels and guest houses, a predominantly mild sub-alpine climate, a surprising wealth of holiday facilities, and mile upon mile of easy walking ir stimulating mountain air, the bonus of an efficient local tourist office and Appenzell is an ideal centre for a break that is as relaxing as it car be exciting.
The route now heads west in the direction of Zurich.
But this does no mean an end to sightseeing.
There are many delights on the way  nd And it will not be a straight run, as Switzerland has a habit of putting mountains in the way.
The reward is many a spectacular view, nature at its most proud and colourful.
From Appenzell to Zurich
From the town of Appenzell, follow the road to Urnasch and make a stop here.
there is an excellent museum which summarises all the characteristics of Appenzell's past and present.
After Urnasch, take the road to the south for Schwagalp.
Ahead, the mountains rise  more superb with every mile.
This is Swiss alpine scenery at its most glorious.
Stop again at Schwagalp and take the cablecar, which brings you close to the summit of Santis, the 8,000ft high monarch of the range.
From there the visitor has a thrilling view over the entire alpine range, taking in Germany's Zugspitze, Austria's Weisse Kugel, Italy's Monte Disgrazia and Switzerland's celebrated Jungfrau.
On particularly clear days (the locals will tell you that midwinter provides the best of them) the view reaches as far as the Vosges in France and Switzerland's Jura.
From near the peak, there are several safe and well maintained paths.
In winter, this is a popular skiing area with snow guaranteed until late spring.
Continuing the journey, the road follows the mountainside to Rietbad, a holiday village, thence to Neu St Johann, to enter the Toggenburg valley.
This is a popular skiing area in winter, and wonderful walking country in spring, summer and autumn.
Those to whom time is of no object (and given this countryside, it ought not to be) might take the road to the right on reaching Neu St Johann.
This goes to Alt St Johann, Unterwasser and Wildhaus, the birthplace of Ulrich Zwingli, the fierce preacher of the Reformation, whose house can be visited.
Each of these three places is a pleasantly sited holiday village, sharing between them nearly two hundred miles of sign-posted footpaths.
Some lead to sunny picnic spots, others to exciting vantage points, others to restful spots by the Thur, and another to the waterfall near Unterwasser.
There is more glamorous mountain scenery ahead, but this unfortunately is not the way to Zurich.
It would make a wonderful return journey if you could now turn south and pick up a return road by the dark green waters of the Walensee, an attractive unspoiled shore unaffected by its growing holiday business.
But nature has decreed otherwise.
The Churfirsten range, nearly 7,000ft at its highest point, bars the way.
Nothing for it but to go back the way you came, to Neu St Johann, thence down the Toggenburg valley through the resorts of Nesslau and Ebnat-Kappel to Wattwil.
From there a good road leads to Rapperswil and the northern shore of the Zurichsee.
A stop at Rapperswil is recommended if only to sample the restaurants serving fresh caught lake fish cooked in a variety of local recipes.
But there is much more to Rapperswil than fish.
The castle, silhouetted against the sky, was first built in the thirteenth century, but was destroyed in 1350 in one of the local quarrels of the period.
Earlier, the Habsburgs had sacked Zurich, and the people of Rapperswil had given them plenty of help in doing it.
So in revenge, Zurich sent their own army to Rapperswil and destroyed the castle.
Nothing daunted, the people of Rapperswil built the castle again within 4 years.
The town has much evidence of its Middle Ages importance, brought about by its strategic position at the end of the lake.
There are several well preserved medieval houses and a handsome town hall with carved Gothic portals.
The spire of a monastery rises high above the town.
From Rapperswil follow the lake to Zurich.
3.
Zurich
Zurich could hardly be described as remote, either in terms of situation or events.
There it is, standing astride an international crossroads, straddling routes through which the traffic of many nations must pass, and giving rapid access to all of the most famous places with which we associate the name of Switzerland.
The Bernese Oberland, Lake Lucerne, Lake Geneva, cities like Bern and Basle, the Jura mountains, the shores of the Bodensee, are all within easy reach by road or rail.
Of its relationship with the rest of Europe and with contemporary history, something similar could be written.
Zurich is always in the news, not merely on the map of world affairs, but usually right at the heart of it.
So what is it doing in a book devoted to places off the beaten track in Switzerland?
It is here for a number of reasons.
Zurich is an essential part of one of the regions inviting exploration, north Switzerland, which tourists are inclined to pass through with no more than an approving nod, rather than lingering to find out.
It is the most likely place of arrival and departure for most visitors from overseas.
And having arrived in Zurich, or having returned there at the end of a tour round north Switzerland, visitors will probably want to spend a little time in a city about which they have heard so much.
They are recommended to do so, for Zurich is hardly what one has been led to expect.
The first thing to get straight about Zurich is that it is not the capital of Switzerland, though there are times when one thinks it ought to be, and others when one gets the impression that it would not mind at all if it was.
But that distinction belongs to Bern.
The  second is that you must not expect a large metropolis.
By modern European standards, Zurich is not a big city, not yet 400,000 people at the time of writing, but it is still the largest in Switzerland.
A visitor arriving in Zurich for the first time will almost certainly do so with a preconceived idea of a feverishly busy city where austere-faced financiers wearing dark suits hurry past in search of the next billion dollars, where bankers huddle together in back rooms like a secret society, a place resembling a web from the centre of which threads reach out to manipulate the money markets of the world, and everything is subordinate to profit.
Judge, then, the surprise of the visitor who arrives on a fine spring day to find the scent of the linden trees on the Bahnhofstrasse filling the air.
The cafes have their pavement tables out, nobody seems to be in a hurry, and the atmosphere is that of a relaxed Mediterranean  city.
Somebody must be locked away somewhere totting up figures, or how would they make all that money?
But somehow, it's difficult to imagine.
There are other surprises too: swans in the city centre, for example, and leisurely, old-fashioned steamers.
For soon after descending from their international express at Zurich's main station, new arrivals may be standing on the bridge where Zurich's river, the Limmat, joins its lake, the Zurichsee, looking up at green fields and trees, at ancient towers, or perhaps down-lake to a wide expanse of blue water criss-crossed by the wakes of pleasure steamers, decorated by the white sails of holidaying yachtsmen.
The point is that years of hard work and steady application, the rocks on which Zurich's prosperity and influence have been built, have not spoiled the city or its people.
The Zurichers know how to work, but they also know how to play.
With growing success has also come a more informed understanding of the quality of life.
The city wears a smile, and the arts that endure are valued.
So is having a good time.
It is a very human place.
And though Zurich could never be described as off the beaten track of tourism, there are plenty of quiet corners close to the city centre which are off the beaten track of Zurich itself.
You come across them unexpectedly.
Zurich is a city of squares, in many of which time seems to have edged forward by only a few hours since the Middle Ages.
There are winding alleyways, old guildhouses clustered together, sleepy sidewalks, and steps.
Plenty of steps, most of them with a rich reward for the climber, such as those that lead to the Lindenhof.
Walk down the Bahnhofstrasse towards the lake, turn left when you come to the Rennweg, left again into the Fortunagasse, up the inevitable steps to the Lindenhof.
There are fine views of the old town from here, and the remains of the original Roman customs house are near at hand.
A fountain catches the eye.
Erected in 1912, it commemorates a strange event in Zurich history.
In 1292, the Habsburgs were making one of their periodic assaults on the turbulent Swiss.
Their forces encircled the city, and the Swiss were out-numbered.
But the women of Zurich donned armour, marched to the Lindenhof and manned the battlements.
The invaders thought it must be a reinforcing army, and decided to go home.
Zurich was saved by the inventiveness of its women.
This is the beginning of the classic route to follow on a walking tour of Zurich, starting from the main railway station through the sophisticated poise of the Bahnhofstrasse and branching off for the  Lindenhof.
But before going on, perhaps some time should be spent considering its history.
The Lindenhof, in fact, is not at all a bad place to do it, since this is where Zurich's recorded history begins.
In 15BC the Romans established a settlement on this very spot, no doubt with its commanding strategic position in mind, and called it Turicum.
In the third century AD Zurich collected its patron saints.
Roman power was declining generally, but it was still strong in Zurich, and the beheading of Felix and his sister Regula, two Christians, was ordered by the governor.
They were executed on a small island in the river.
That much is established fact.
The rest of the legend states that Felix and Regula picked up their heads, waded through the water, and walked up to the hill where the Grossmunster now stands, before expiring.
After the Romans were driven out by the Alemanni in the fifth century, the history of the area is misty until the ninth, when Zurich is mentioned as a town for the first time with the building of a palace there by Charlemagne.
But this was out of character with Zurich's later history.
It was never to become a place of palaces and princes.
Its strength was a nose for commerce which soon manifested itself, so that by the twelfth century, the authority of an effete aristocracy began to dwindle as the power of the merchants correspondingly grew.
Zurich became famous for its accumulating wealth and as a place where merchants flourished and silk, wool and leather industries were all securely established.
Zurich, in the Middle Ages, was Switzerland's most important city, and it was to stay that way.
The merchants had the cash, but the weakening aristocracy held on to the reins of government.
It was a situation which could not be tolerated, and in a revolution led by Rudolf Brun the nobles were overthrown, and Brun, as Zurich's first burgomaster, divided the power between the patricians and the craft guilds.
The town eventually joined the new Swiss Confederation and played its distinguished part in the final expulsion of the Habsburgs.
Hans Waldman, another great Zurich burgomaster, led the Swiss forces to victory at Morat during the Burgundian war in 1476, defeating the formerly all-conquering Charles the Bold.
Enter Ulrich Zwingli (1484–1531), one of the most zealously dedicated of all the religious reformers, a man whose opposition to traditional beliefs and practices was so extreme as to make Luther (with whom he quarrelled) look mild.
In 1519, Zwingli became preacher at the Grossmunster, and he used its pulpit to launch savage attacks on Catholic doctrines.
His teachings appealed to the Zurichers.
His quarrel with Luther meant that he had little influence in Germany, but there was something about his insistence on thrift, application, and hard work for its own sake that struck sympathetic chords in the Zurich temperament.
No doubt, too, the Zurichers, always a theatrically-minded people, were won by the threatening sense of drama with which his philosophy was delivered.
Long after his death, Zwingli's influence persisted, so that spirituality and commerce met conveniently on common ground.
Zurich's importance as a business centre grew, as did its reputation as a place of refuge, so that it rivalled even that of Geneva.
Huguenots brought their skills to augment those of Zurich's own craftsmen, and other refugees enriched its artistic life.
Wagner, in retreat from pursuing creditors and political enemies, was one.
By the end of the nineteenth century, Zurich had grasped the nettle of  industrial development to become a leader among the world's banking centres, thanks mainly to the foresight of Alfred Escher, and, at the centre of a skilfully developed network of communications and engineering feats, was ready to take full advantage of the transport explosion.
Although Switzerland had no part in them, the two World Wars left their mark, but when the conflicts were over, Zurich quickly resumed its place in the forefront of the world's business and cultural affairs.
Hand in hand went successful economic policies, wise cooperation between management and workers resulting in productive years of economic peace, and an enlightened appreciation of the arts, all making Zurich a rich city, not just in terms of finance, but in the variety of its life.
Time to recommence the walk.
Near the Lindenhof there is St Peter's church, which is said to have the largest clock face in Europe (nearly 29ft in diameter).
There was a church on this spot in the ninth century, and part of the existing building dates back to the thirteenth century (including the tower which houses the record-breaking clock).
Of more interest is the Fraumunster, which shares with St Peter's a ninth-century origin, and a thirteenth-century construction of the present edifice.
But the Fraumanster's appeal is more artistic than historic.
The choir has some superb stained glass windows by Marc Chagall, there is a notable painting by the Swiss artist Augusto Giacometti, and fine modern frescoes by Paul Bodmer.
In this part of Zurich, one is often reminded that the power of the guilds lasted until the end of the eighteenth century.
The Zunfthaus zur Waag, where the linen craftsmen used to meet, survives from the early seventeenth century, and the Zunfthaus zur Meise, built approximately a century later, was the meeting place of the wine merchants.
From here, it is a short walk to the river.
Go along the Stadhaus Quai to the right, to Quai bridge, and one of Zurich's most invigorating views awaits.
Cross over to the east bank, and on the way, look right.
There is a superb panorama of the lake and its traffic, with the peaks of distant mountains glistening in the background.
Look left, and there are the spires and clustered roofs of the old town.
When you reach the far bank, the renovated Opera House is away to the right.
For the Kunsthaus and its distinguished collection, cross Bellevue Platz, keep on up the Ramstrasse and the Kunsthaus is on your left.
But the collection here is best left for another day, as it merits a special visit.
Turn left and come to the Wasserkirche, the Water Church, as lovely a piece of late Gothic architecture as you could wish to see.
This, too, boasts a Giacometti stained glass window, and near here, Zurich's patron saints were martyred.
Turn right, and the Grossmunster is before you.
This is where Zwingli preached the message which swung the Zurichers to his line of thinking, and its grave facade seems to reflect the severity of his teaching.
So, for that matter, does the glum look on the face of Charlemagne, whose statue is on the south tower.
The architecture of the Grossmunster ranges from the eleventh to eighteenth centuries, and once more there is some Giacometti stained glass.
Go back to the river, turn right and some of Zurich's finest buildings can be seen.
There is the thirteenth-century Gesellschafsthaus zum Ruden, the Hall of the Noblemen, with its ancient wooden ceiling, and nearby stand the baroque Zunfthaus zur Zimmerleuten (Guildhouse of the Carpenters, 1708) and the Zunfthaus zur Saffran (Guildhouse of the Haberdashers, 1723).
It is as though the historic opponents of medieval times, the aristocrats and the guildsmen, had been brought together in harmony.
Both the guildhouses and the House of the Noblemen are now restaurants.
Near at hand is the seventeenth-century Rathaus, the Town Hall, imposing from the outside and positively beautiful inside, with its fine baroque Banqueting Hall.
Then wander through the maze of streets leading into the old town on your right, to enter a world as far from the busy twentieth century as it is possible to be.
There are drowsy old houses, sleepy alleys and squares, intimate cafes, and the air of medieval Switzerland envelopes you.
Next make for Rindermarkt, and stop at No 9.
Here lived Gottfried Keller (1819–90), the Swiss poet and novelist whose carefully crafted short stories embrace both humour and a touching romanticism, and make him one of the most important figures of Swiss literature.
The restaurant in which he used to take his lunch, Zur Opfelchammer, is still there.
The picturesque Neumarkt is worth a visit before heading back to the Limmatquai.
Cross the Bahnhof bridge, and you will have come full circle back to the starting point.
On route you will have found plenty of cosy little cafes for a mid-morning coffee, cheerful pubs, and in the Bahnhofstrasse, confectionery shops whose wares are displayed with such imagination that it seems a sin to pass them by.
To help visitors who are in Zurich for the first time, the tourist office has worked out four planned itineraries.
 "The Sights of Zurich" gives a good general idea of the city, and takes about 2 hours.
 "Zurich and Vicinity" includes an aerial cableway trip to Felsenegg.
This runs daily from May to October, and the tour lasts 2½ hours.
 "Gold timer" is a very special way of getting to know the city centre.
This is an  hour-long conducted tour in an old tram car, nostalgia every inch of the way.
This also runs from May to October, departing from Usteristrasse I Bahnhofstrasse.
 "Zurich by Night" is a daily tour of the city's night spots from folklore to strip-tease, and lasts about 3 ½hours.
A conducted "Stroll around the Town" starts from the tourist office every day, and takes 2½hours.
Or you can hire your own personal hostess, also from the tourist office.
Don't let the ultra-sophisticates put you off the guided city tour.
Regularly one hears a traveller say "I don't want to be herded around with a lot of tourists" .
Fair enough.
It's more fun finding out on your own, and the best experiences are usually those you seek out for  yourself.
But it's not at all a bad idea to have a quick guided tour on your first day to get an idea of the layout, saving a lot of time asking the way and taking the wrong turning.
Then go it alone on another day, taking as long as you like over whatever you like.
Every kind of entertainment thrives in Zurich after dark.
Its opera has an international reputation, both for its musical standards and its progressive attitude to production.
It is open for most of the year, but you need to book well in advance for any specific performance.
The Zurich Tonhalle is the city's principal symphony orchestra and one of Europe's oldest.
It numbers Brahms and Wagner among its past conductors, and is the centre of the city's musical life, with, long annual season of subscription concerts from September to th following summer.
Other Swiss and leading foreign symphony orchestras also appear regularly, while the world's best know, chamber ensembles and solo recitalists stop at Zurich on their travel as a matter of course.
The Zurich Festival in June has taken its place among the mos highly regarded events of its kind in Europe.
Opera, ballet, symphony concerts, chamber recitals, art exhibitions and plays all hav their part in this 4-week programme.
Here again, it is advisable to book well ahead.
The nearest branch of the Swiss National Tourist Office in your home country can help.
Traditional drama, contemporary theatre, experimental theatre farce, musical comedy, operetta, revue and poetry reading all have their places in the regular round.
So do rock concerts, folk, jazz (with a special-day jazz festival every October), discos, strip-tease show and late night cabaret.
Most Zurich cinemas show films in the original language, and these are very diverse, so there are always some showing English language films.
The Schauspielhaus is Zurich's most important theatre, and it has a legendary reputation.
During World War II it was the only German-speaking theatre where fre speech was possible.
Traditional classics and modern plays ar performed here, as well as experimental theatre, but performance are in German.
You could hardly leave Zurich without seeing one of the Swiss floor shows.
One of the best of these is at Baggli's Swiss Chalet at Marktgasse 14 (01/252 15 30) where you can eat Swiss cheese fondue and see an authentic Swiss folklore display, with dancing singing, alpine horn-blowing, zither music and yodelling.
For a complete up-to-date list of what's on in Zurich, pick up a copy of Zurich News which is published each week.
Most hotels will give you one on arrival, or it can be collected from the tourist office.
The view from the Quai bridge will have whetted your appetite for a trip on the lake, and a visit to Zurich is not complete without at least one water-borne day out.
The Zurichsee is the third largest lake which is entirely in Switzerland, covering an area of nearly 35sq miles, and measuring 25 miles from the Burkliplatz at the end of Zurich's Bahnhofstrasse to Schmerikon, where the lake tapers to its end.
Like most of the lakes of Switzerland it has its own character.
Look not for the romantic glamour of Lake Geneva, the dramatic backcloth of Lake Lucerne, or the fascinating cosmopolitanism of Lake Constance (the Bodensee).
Instead, the shores of Zurich's lake have a more intimate charm, comparing to those of Lucerne and Geneva as a well kept garden might to an alpine panorama or a royal park.
Not that Zurich's lake is without romance.
It intrudes when the distant views of the snow-clad Murtschenstock first become visible.
It does so when the eye catches the castle of Rapperswil towards the end of the lake on the eastern shore.
But Rapperswil is treated in more detail in the section on north Switzerland.
So take a boat trip.
There's no more relaxing way of travelling, and passenger ships leave the Burkliplatz daily from April to October.
The "Long Tour" goes all the way from Zurich to Rapperswil and back, which takes 5 hours.
The afternoon "Short Trip" last 1½hours, while the "Lunchtime Trip" , departing just after mid-day, is a 75 minute run.
Every day during the season there is also an "Evening Tour" with dancing on board(around 2½ hours) and a "Lake Fondue Party" (about 2½ hours in the evening).
For those interested in shopping, the best area is concentrated in a small part of the city centre.
Start at the Bahnhofstrasse, leading from the main railway station towards the Paradeplatz and the lake.
Zurich people will tell you that this is one of Europe's most elegant shopping streets, and they are probably right.
Here there are famous department stores, fashion shops, retail shops with high quality goods, confectioners and pavement cafes.
In the old town, streets such as Rennweg, Strehlgasse, Augustinergasse and St Peterhofstatt have enticing smaller boutiques and antique shops.
The Limmatquai, on the right-hand bank of the river, has old guildhouses overlooking the shops.
The Langstrasse is renowned for variety and competitive prices.
The Lowenstrasse area with the neighbouring Bahnhofpassage has become so popular with shoppers that now they call it "Shopville" .
Explore the medieval side streets where prices are often lower.
For all the elegance and elaborate facades, Zurich is a city where you can find value for money, so it pays to be patient and spend time comparing prices.
Articles for which Zurich is famous are antiques and objets d'art(Neumarkt area) and of course Swiss watches.
Its pastries and confectioneries are unsurpassable (Bahnhofstrasse, Rennweg, Bellevue).
Embroidery and lace products are of high quality, and Swiss chocolates need no recommendation.
Folk products, particularly wood carving, are delightful souvenirs to take home.
A particularly good buy is the Swiss army knife, able to open anything, and equipped with gadgets to deal with every domestic crisis.
Zurich is a book lover's paradise.
In the centre alone, there are thirty bookshops with an international reputation, including many second hand ones.
A shop specialising in children's books is on the Grossmunsterplatz.
It is natural that Zurich, as an international centre of finance, business and tourism, should be well equipped with numerous  hotels in all categories.
By the same token, it follows that these hotels are heavily booked.
So if Zurich is to be the centre of your Swiss exploration, be sure to book a hotel well in advance.
You get what you pay for.
Don't expect five-star facilities in a one-star hotel.
What is certain is that in each category the hotel will be excellent of its kind: the five-star hotel a very good five-star hotel, the one-star hotel a very  good one-star hotel.
The welcome will be warm, the service professional.
The people of Zurich have been playing host to the world for a long time, and you reap the benefit of matured experience.
In the smallest Swiss guest house, you may have a delightful and characteristic Swiss experience.
The city's restaurants and cuisine also cover a wide variety.
The visitor who seeks something elegant and sophisticated, or a discreet corner, or a lively atmosphere, will find it.
Cooking in the classical French style, something spiced with the flavour of the Orient, an evocation of the Arabian nights or India, national dishes from the Balkans, Greece or the Mediterranean, the Italian pizza, the Spanish paella, the Hungarian goulash or a genuine American hamburger, are always within easy reach.
Enjoy the traditional Swiss dishes: the Zurich way with chopped veal or fresh fish from the lake, and many others.
Zurich cooking is well flavoured but not over-spiced.
Swiss wines are consistent.
The best are excellent, and the most modest are never less than attractive.
And remember that the most characteristic meals are not necessarily found behind the most imposing facades, nor do they necessarily carry the highest price tags.
Remember, too, that there are literally scores of cafes in Zurich where you can have a quick and cheap snack.
Don't tip unless for some unusual or special service.
Gratuities are included in the bill.
Zurich has several exciting vantage points from which superb views of the city, the lake and the far-off mountains can be obtained.
All can be reached by public transport and offer quiet and relaxing woodland walks.
These include Dolder, Zurichberg, Rigiblick, Waidberg, and Kaferberg.
The tourist office can provide informative brochures.
For the more adventurous, an excursion to Uetliberg, the mountain on Zurich's doorstep, is recommended.
Foot travellers can take a tram from the main railway station to Albisguetli, then walk to Uetliberg-Kulm (2,756ft, 871m).
The walk takes a little over an hour.
Or take the Uetliberg railway from Selnau station to Uto-Kulm.
If you're lucky enough to have a clear day, the view of the distant Alps, the city and the lake beneath is quite unforgettable.
Winterthur is easily reached from Zurich, and it is a good idea to make it the destination of an excursion from there.
But you will probably need to spend more than a single day in Winterthur.
It would, for example, take more than that to see in detail its museums and art galleries, for Winterthur is world famous as an arts centre, a  town which has been lucky in its collectors and benefactors.
Then there is its well preserved old quarter, and on the doorstep a romantic, well wooded and castle-adorned countryside.
Excursion to Winterthur
Winterthur is one of the ten towns chosen as typically Swiss.
In the way in which, down the years, it has kept its responsibilities as a cultural centre sensibly in step with its growing commercial importance and prosperity, it is something of a model.
It is astonishing that it should have preserved its character so well when it is close to Zurich.
One might have expected it to be either suffocated or swallowed up.
But nothing of the kind has happened.
To get there, take one of the trains that run every hour from Zurich to St Gallen.
The journey takes only 20 minutes.
Allow just a little longer if you go by the motorway leading to the north from Zurich.
Winterthur is first mentioned during the history of the third century, though the present town was founded in 1180.
For two centuries it was under the Habsburgs, but in the fifteenth it passed to Zurich.
Despite this, it became a mecca for craftsmen and merchants, and by the early nineteenth century, the domination of Zurich had been thrown off.
From then onwards, Winterthur's development into the city of today was rapid.
An early regard for the quality of life was shown when the walls of the medieval town were pulled down in the early nineteenth century.
Many of Winterthur's wealthier citizens had already built their villas outside in the country, and it was assumed that the space cleared by destroying the walls would go the same way.
But the authorities had more far-seeing ideas.
Where the walls had stood, they ringed the town with schools and dignified public buildings, of which the neo-classical Town Hall is an imposing example.
Something similar happened in Vienna later, when the Emperor Franz Josef ordered the removal of the city's walls, and replaced them with the famous Ring, with its parks, university, public buildings and what is now the Vienna State Opera.
Winterthur's prosperity was built on business acumen and new industries.
Textiles was one, but more famous was engineering.
Locomotives for the railways of the world and huge engines for transatlantic liners carried the town's name everywhere.
Today, industry and commerce are still prominent.
Sulzer and Rieter are names known all over Europe, and so are Volkart and Winterthur Insurance.
And from the affluence they have brought has come Winterthur's other fame as a cultural centre.
When one considers the proximity of Zurich (so easy to go there for a show or a concert, have a meal, and arrive back home at a reasonable hour), the thriving variety of Winterthur's night life is surprising.
Opera and symphony concerts, cabaret and musicals, discos and night clubs, plays and experimental theatre all appear on the weekly list.
There is a new theatre of almost alarming contemporary design which shows that the town is prepared to take an adventurous chance with new ideas as well as preserving its inheritance.
And in the summer, the tree-fringed open-air theatre is a major attraction.
Winterthur's symphony orchestra has achieved a reputation outside Switzerland through its recordings.
It has one activity which  must make Winterthur the envy of other musical centres.
There is a distinguished series of subscription concerts from autumn to the succeeding summer (they still talk with pride of the day in 1934 when Richard Strauss came to conduct his Don Quixote and Alpine Symphony) but there are also free symphony concerts most weeks in the year, very popular particularly with Winterthur's younger generation.
But it is Winterthur's art collections that almost dwarf the rest of its cultural life.
The most proud possession among these is the collection of Oskar Reinhart (1885–1965) at the gallery Am Ro'merholz, a country house in what was once a vineyard on the edge of the town.
On a fine day, it is a pleasant walk from the centre of the town taking from 15 to 20 minutes.
Or take a taxi from outside the railway  station.
Oskar Reinhart's father Theodor was head of the international company Volkart Brothers.
This trading concern, based in Winterthur and Bombay was started in 1851 by Salomon Volkart (1816–1893) and was so successful that it was soon founding banks and insurance companies, and was one of the stalwarts of Switzerland's growing influence in world business affairs.
Theodor Reinhart was himself an art collector, and was undoubtedly a strong motivating influence on his son.
While still at grammar school, Oskar Reinhart suspected that art was where his future lay, rather than the commercial life for which he was intended.
Soon he was able to devote himself to it full time.
From 1924 on, his collection  became his life.
He had the shrewd selective instinct and the artistic taste.
And he had the money to exploit both.
Art treasures flowed steadily to Am Romerholz.
In the gallery today, the visitor is confronted with one of the most comprehensive collections of impressionist painting anywhere in the world.
Manet, Monet, Corot, Renoir, Delacroix, Van Gogh, Cezanne, Daumier, are just a few of the names.
But this is only half the story.
A second collection in the gallery includes work by Goya, Greco, Rubens, Rembrandt, Holbein, Bruegel and others.
When he died shortly after his eightieth birthday, Oskar Reinhart bequeathed the entire Am Romerholz treasury of painting to the people of Winterthur.
And even that does not complete the story of Winterthur's artistic debt to him.
In the city itself there is the Oskar Reinhart Foundation, which he set up for Winterthur in his lifetime, and which houses over six hundred works by Swiss, German and Austrian artists of the sixteenth, seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
There is also a fine collection of Swiss and German masterpieces in the municipal art gallery, much of which is owed to enlightened patronage by other leading local entrepreneurs down the years.
Winterthur is Switzerland's sixth largest town, but none surpasses it in artistic richness.
When you have had your fill of art galleries, there still remains the Konrad Kellenberger collection of clocks in the renovated Town Hall, and the Swiss Technorama, where contemporary technology is skilfully related to everyday life in a way the visitor can understand.
There is a chance to carry out your own experiments, a steam railway, and a special laboratory for young people.
The Swiss Technorama is some distance from the town centre, but regular buses take you there.
Winterthur is a green town, with plenty of parks and quick access to the unspoiled country around.
The old quarter is a delightful mixture, with charming Renaissance houses and quiet corners set amid the bustle of the narrow shopping streets, many of them reserved for pedestrians.
Sometimes, turning a corner from some leisurely alley, you feel you have been thrust into the coruscating life of a country fair.
On Tuesdays and Fridays, for example, the old quarter is busy with the fruit, flower and vegetable markets, and on the last Saturday of every month, it is enlivened by the traditional flea market.
On these occasions, it is hard to realise that not so very far away, industry and commerce are hard at work.
Hard to realise too that another contrasting world, that of a tranquil countryside is close at hand.
Here there are many fine castles.
Probably the most historic and also the most photogenic is that of the counts of Kyburg, perched high above woodlands and looking down fiercely on the river Toss.
The counts were considerable powers in north Switzerland, with widespread properties.
They held on to this fortress until 1264, when it passed to the Habsburgs, who in turn lost it to the canton of Zurich in 1452.
It is still theirs today, which is surprising when one considers how regularly the winds of change have blown across the cantons.
It has a Romanesque chapel and some medieval frescoes.
The most picturesque approach to Kyburg castle is through the Eschenberg forest, past the Bruderhaus deer park.
The castle looms on the other  side of the river.
Wuflingen castle is older.
Its history begins in the last years of the ninth century.
The Gerichtsstube, today a restaurant, was painted by Kuhn in 1767, and the most famous of its rooms is the upstairs Herrenstube, with its walnut panelling and rococo decorations.
The stoves, decorated with stories from history and the Bible, are masterpieces of tile craft work.
Hegi castle is a typical example of the moated castles of north Switzerland.
The tower dates from around 1200, and the manor house was probably added at the end of the fifteenth century.
The owner, Professor Friedrich Hegi of Zurich, carried out considerable renovations, and the town of Winterthur took possession of the castle in 1947.
The counts of Kyburg and the royal family of Habsburg figure prominently again in relation to Morsburg castle.
They owned it consecutively until, in 1598, Winterthur took it over.
It was renovated in 1931 and today has many relics of Winterthur's past.
Inquire locally at the tourist office of Winterthur for opening times of these castles, as they are likely to be subject to variation from time to time.
4 Central Switzerland
Lakeside
Central Switzerland is a name used regularly by the Swiss themselves for one of their country's major regions and it fairly well explains itself.
What sometimes causes a little confusion to strangers is the fact that virtually the same region often goes under other names.
The Swiss often define it with both geographical and historical precision as the region round the shores of the lake they call the Vierwaldstattersee Lake of the Four Forest Cantons.
The reference is to the three cantons (Uri, Schwyz and Unterwalden) which originally got together to form the Swiss Confederation, along with the fourth that soon joined them, Luzern.
To add further complication, English speakers rarely give that lake the name used by Swiss, French, Germans and Italians, calling it instead the Lake of Luzern, a name which the Swiss only apply to one arm (and almost the smallest at that) of this many-armed lake.
The lake's many arms, and its very irregular shape with constrictions here and twists of direction there, contribute greatly to its fascinating charm as they combine to provide a series of dramatic changes of vista and of interest.
The well known city of Luzern, possibly one of the country's greatest tourist attractions, lies at the head of the north-west arm, and the small town of Fluelen, gateway to the Gotthard Pass route, lies 38km (24 miles) away at the end of the long south-east arm which is called the Urner Lake after the name of the Uri canton in which it lies.
Although there are notable mountain peaks within sight of every arm of the lake, the western end the Luzern end has more gentle, more settled and more "tamed" scenery than the more awe-inspiring scenic grandeur that surrounds the Urner branch in the south-east.
Whatever the specialised interests of visitors to this region, they can gain a reasonable general orientation of it before starting their particular excursions, by taking the 3 hour boat trip from Luzern to  Fluelen or vice versa.
(This full-length trip is available from early April to mid-October.)
Shortly after leaving the Luzern steamer-quays, the lakeside lido can be seen on the northern shore, and just behind it the city's camp site.
Once clear of the Luzern lake-arm the ship enters an open stretch of water which is known locally as the "Cross Funnel" .
It lies in the centre of the cross formed by four branches of the lake meeting: the Luzerner See (the word See means lake) to the north-west, the Kussnachter See to the north-east, the main body of the lake due east, and the southern basin that leads to the Stansstad narrows and the Alpnacher See beyond.
(It is called a funnel because it is open to so many wind directions.)
From here two mountains, famous as viewpoints, are in sight.
The elephantine mass of the Rigi (1,800m, 5,904ft) fills the angle between the Kussnachter See and the main lake body; in the opposite direction, to the south-west, is the jagged outline of Pilatus (2,120m, 6,954ft), Luzern's "local" mountain, accessible by cogwheel railway from Alpnachstad.
Due south is the Burgenstock cliff, topped by Europe's highest outdoor elevator lift up to the Hammetschwand (1,128m, 3,700ft), a magnificent viewpoint over the lake.
Luzern to Fluelen, by Boat
The boat sails east past the Hertenstein peninsula to call at Weggis, the first of three resort villages that enjoy a mild climate under the shelter of the Rigi's bulwark on the north.
The second is the boat's next calling place, Vitznau, where, immediately behind the pier, is the bottom station of Europe's first-established cog-wheel railway which climbs via Rigi Kaltbad and Rigi Staffel stations to the summit, Rigi Kulm.
From here, instead of returning by the same route, it is possible to descend the mountain's opposite side by taking the other cog-wheel railway from the Rigi Kulm to Arth, the bottom station near the Arth-Goldau junction station on the Swiss Federal Railway main line from Luzern, Basel, Zurich and the Gotthard line.
From Vitznau the boat passes through a narrow channel formed between two promontories from the north and south shores, called the Upper and Lower Nose respectively.
Beyond this channel the great main expanse of the lake towards the east opens out.
The boat's course normally heads south into the Bay of Beckenried to make calls at Buochs and Beckenried.
The mountains immediately ahead are the Klewenalp (1,600m, 5,248ft) on the left and the Buochserhorn on the right.
At Beckenried is an aerial railway to the Klewenalp, a winter sports and summer resort on the high plateau.
The boat now heads back to the north shore to call at Gersau, the third of the lakeside resorts sheltered by the Rigi massif.
By a curious historical freak, this village was an independent republic for four centuries; it was only after the French Revolutionary Wars that it was incorporated into canton Schwyz.
After Gersau the boat crosses diagonally to call at Treib, a pier beside a picturesque timber boatman's cottage, adjacent to the bottom station of the funicular line that runs to the mountain terrace of Seelisberg.
This lies on top of a buttress cliff which forms the turning corner of the lake's south shore, which here swings into a long south-pointing branch, the Urner See.
On the north shore's corresponding corner lies Brunnen, situated on the alluvial valley-mouth of the Muota stream which here enters the lake.
Brunnen is a long-established resort and former fishing village.
It is well placed for excursions to the most spectacular part of the lake, and a region through its position at the corner, where the main lake turns south to face the high massif of the Gotthard and  the route which has always beckoned northern traders, adventurers, mercenary soldiers — and nowadays tourists towards the southern lands.
Here on the shores of the Urner See is the very heart of Switzerland.
For it was the people of the three original founding cantons, Uri, Schwyz and Unterwalden, who took the first steps to free themselves from external domination and start what was to become an independent confederation of communities, unified in a unique fashion, which in their early years were mostly called simply the Confederates but later became known as Schweizer after the name of one of the original component areas, Schwyz.
The Urner See is William Tell country.
Modern historians are quite uncertain whether an individual of that name existed here and carried out the exploits attributed to him; or whether he is a representative figure around  whom have accreted the age-old memories of a people's struggles to maintain inherited liberties in the face of alien subjection.
Possibly the question is unimportant.
The outcome of the struggles was definite enough.
The first two landing stages touched by the excursion ship after leaving Brunnen and heading south into the Urner See are part of the story.
After rounding the imposing sheer cliff face of Seelisberg, it is rather surprising when the boat draws inshore to moor at a little pier with no sign of village or community in sight.
The landing place is for a meadow lying on a shelf or terrace beneath the cliffs: the Rutli meadow where representatives of the three founding cantons met in 1307 to take a solemn oath confirming their Everlasting League to defend the liberties their valleys had inherited against tyrants.
The next landing stage, this one at a tree-covered spur projecting from the opposite shore of the lake, bears the sign "Tellsplatte" ; nearby is a memorial chapel to the folk hero who is reputed to have leapt ashore at this spot escaping from an Austrian-manned boat that was carrying him to prison.
The Tellsplatte lies at the base of the Axenberg mount, part of the precipitous east face of the Urner See.
More than a century ago tunnels and galleries were cut into the cliffs here by the engineers who constructed the Axenstrasse road which enabled vehicular traffic to pass along the lakeside towards the Gotthard and obviate  the need for lake transhipments.
Here the view down the Urner See, with its many cliff faces and behind them serried mountain peaks, some with perpetual snows and ice, is most dramatic.
At the head of the lake is Flitelen, on the delta of the river Reuss, which there enters the lake after flowing down from the Gotthard.
(The same river makes its exit from the lake some 30 miles away to flow through Luzern on its way north).
From northern Europe the routes into Central Switzerland, both road and rail, come via either Basel or Zurich and their first lakeside destinations are either in the neighbourhood of Luzern or in that of Brunnen.
Until comparatively recently the Axenstrasse traffic still passed through the streets of Brunnen.
Later a bypass was provided for the Gotthard traffic, and since the Swiss through-road from Basel to Chiasso (on the Italian frontier) was finally completed in 1986, fast through traffic using the road from Basel has no longer passed by way of canton Schwyz and Axenstrasse.
The N2 is routed to bypass west of Luzern, run along through canton Unterwalden on the south side of the lake, passing under the Seelisberg in a 9km (5½ mile) tunnel, and beyond Fluelen running parallel with the old Gotthard road (and rail) up the valley of the river Reuss.
Among other effects this has freed the old Gotthard road between Fluelen and the Gotthard Pass from most through traffic (as, indeed, it also freed the southern section of that road beyond the pass into the Ticino).
The Gotthard as North-South Corridor
Today a majority of those travelling south over the Gotthard are heading either for the popular lakeside resorts of the Ticino, or beyond that into Italy.
So although no route can more truly be called a "beaten track" than the one which heads for the Gotthard Pass, now that the old Gotthard road has been supplanted so far as through traffic is concerned by the Basel-Chiasso motor expressway (E9, N2), many towns and villages on the old road can be rated as "off the beaten track" .
In 1988 this was recognised by Swiss Federal Railways promotion of a stretch of former "Gotthard Road" between Fluelen and Goschenen as one suitably traffic-free for use by those who seek to combine touring and sightseeing with cycling, which in Switzerland has become popular as part of a current"fitness' movement.
The scheme is based on Goschenen and Fluelen railway stations.
At any time up to midday of the day before travel, phone Goschenen station and reserve a cycle for hire.
On the day agreed, travel from any station to Goschenen by rail on a special round-journey ticket, take over the reserved hire-cycle there, and set off on the journey of  exploration downhill on the old cantonal road, taking as much time, and with as many halts, as suits you.
At journey's end in Fluelen the cycle is returned to the SBB (Swiss Federal Rail) station and the round-ticket covers the return journey to the station you started from.
(A subsequent section will describe some of the places on the Uri section of the Gotthard road.)
In 1991 the 700th anniversary of the Swiss Confederation is celebrated.
To mark the occasion a "Swiss Trail" for walkers is being opened in the "Heartland" around the Uri Lake south of Brunnen.
A substantial part of the trail is already in use; two units of it are incorporated in two excursions (to Rutli and to Bauen) described in this section.
To keep route descriptions in this area reasonably compact and unambiguous, Brunnen, on the north-east corner of the lake, will be assumed as the starting-point, but visitors based on other centres between Luzern and Brunnen should be able to make necessary adjustments.
The "Heart" of Switzerland
As the earlier reference to the Rutli Meadow implied, the lake steamer service provides the simplest and most direct access to this property of the Swiss nation, which has its own jetty.
However it can also be the goal of a not very demanding walk, embodied in a short but rewarding circular excursion full of interest and variety.
Take the steamer, not to Rutli direct but to the calling place round the corner of the Seelisberg cliff face, Treib (which, by the way, is pronounced like the English word "tripe" ).
At Treib there is just a small harbour and a very picturesque house, to the right of which through the trees can be glimpsed the car of a funicular railway.
The little harbour of refuge has existed since at least the fourteenth century, and the house, first mentioned a century later, was a place of shelter for sailors caught by the sudden tempest so typical of the Fohn south wind in these parts, but in more recent times often called the ferry house.
In the period 1637–1767 it furnished accommodation for smaller diets of representatives of the Confederate Forest Cantons; its assembly room still boasts a handsome tiled heating stove of the period.
In recent time it has been thoroughly renovated with its style respected and conserved — and serves still as a place of shelter and of refreshment for travellers.
The Fohn is the name given to the south wind from the Mediterranean which, when it meets the Alps, precipitates much moisture on the southern aspects and brings dry warmth to areas immediately to the north of the Alps.
In the spring it has a near miraculous effect  on snow accumulations.
It is usually accompanied by a clarity of distant visibility which is almost eerie at times.
When the Folin is channelled through such a "funnel" as the south-north troughs of the Ticino and Reuss river valleys which form the "Gotthard Route" , it develops at times a violence that is awe-inspiring, and with such suddenness that alpine lakes such as this one have shore-based warning "flashers" at strategic points to let navigators know when a storm is imminent.
Because the Urner Lake's fjord-like outline continues the south-north "funnel" , this corner is notably vulnerable.
(The William Tell story's emphasis on the escape opportunity given to Tell and the disorder caused to the Austrian boat crew by the "sudden squall" has a ring of conviction hereabouts!)
Immediately behind the Treib-haus a good footpath leads up to the left, soon passing into an asphalted track which enters the TreibSeelisberg vehicle road.
This road is followed for a short distance to a hairpin bend, where there is a signpost which clearly points the direction of Rutli.
A gently ascending forest track leads up through woods and comes out into the open at the summit of the trail, to give a fine view of the whole length of the Urner See, framed by the Fronalpstock (1,922m, 6,304ft) and Rophaien (2,078m, 6,81 6ft) peaks towering over the bluffs of the opposite (east) shore.
The Rutli meadow is soon seen ahead.
The descent is easy and well shaded.
Rutli can be reached at leisurely pace in 1½ hours from the start of the walk.
Towards the back of the meadow stands the Rutli House, a traditional timber building characteristic of the region, where there is catering for visitors.
Switzerland's National Day, 1 August, is a great occasion at the Rutli.
The place seems to enshrine for the Swiss their national ideals from the earliest days of the Confederation onward, and there is an element of pilgrimage attendant on the crowds of citizens from all parts of the country, wearing many varieties of national costume, who come here, ferried across from Brunnen by relays of lake steamers, to join in the observations of the day, commemorating the solemn oath of 1307 which confirmed the earlier League Covenant of 1291 to defend inherited liberties.
An alternative way of reaching Rutli from Treib is to take the funicular car (a ride of 8 minutes) to Seelisberg on its high terrace at 801m (2,627ft) above sea level, and to walk through the straggling village past church and holiday hotels to the outlook point provided with benches where there is a panorama of the lake as well as a glimpse of Rutli far below.
This can be reached by a well maintained serpentine path down the steep slope.
In both cases return to Brunnen direct by boat from the Rutli landing stage (a special ticket can be taken out to allow an outward journey to Treib and return from Rutli).
On the journey to Brunnen as the boat passes near the sheer face of the Seelisberg cliff, look out for the Schillerstein: a 24m (80ft) high outrider crag, rising from the lake in obelisk shape, inscribed in letters of gold to the memory of Friedrich Schiller, author of the William Tell poetic drama.
Those who are travelling by private car might wish to drive to Seelisberg.
Assuming a starting point on the north shore, drive to Gersau (one of the resorts sheltered by the Rigi) from where a vehicular ferry operates across the lake to Beckenried approximately hourly from April to mid-October.
(At Beckenried is the  bottom station of the Klewenalp aerial railway.)
The modern BaselChiasso motorway N2 bypasses Beckenried: drive east from the ferry and shortly passing under the motorway, follow the winding road up and onto the terrace where Emmetten stands; the road continues to climb then dips to cross the Klon valley, and rising again passes a tunnel and descends to the neighbourhood of the mountain tarn of Seeli, south of Seelisberg, before ascending past the pilgrimage church of Maria Sonnenberg (dated 1666, with a baroque high altar) and on to the village of Seelisberg.
Rutli is reached on foot by the marked path from Seelisberg in half an hour; if for the return walk an easier ascent is preferred, take the gentle ascent-descent to Treib previously described in reverse direction; then back to Seelisberg by funicular.
From Seelisberg there is a longer walk which is particularly rewarding in the sustained panoramic views it offers.
Its destination is the lakeside village of Bauen (which has a lake steamer service from April to mid-October).
The excursion can start by arriving at Treib by boat (car drivers would reach Seelisberg via Beckenried).
Arriving at Treib those who wish to reach Seelisberg on foot rather than travel up by funicular will find the footpath to the village clearly marked and  well maintained.
It starts behind the Treib-haus and takes just under an hour for a climb of 370m (1,214ft) altitude difference.
There is a stroll up the long main street as far as the last houses of the village.
At the post office there is a clear indication for the turn off to the left, which very soon becomes a forest track that comes out on to a metalled road after 10 minutes walk.
The road is only used briefly before the footpath branches off and upwards to the right, breasting a slope which is the highest point of the walk.
The Urner See now comes into view, 400m (1,312ft) below, and it remains in view for the rest of the ramble.
The footpath passes (on the right) the Beroldingen castle which probably occupies the site of the earlier castle of 1530; attached is a chapel added to it in 1546 by Josua von Beroldingen when he was accepted into the Order of Knights of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem.
The footpath is now pointing due south and the panorama is magnificent, with rock faces rising almost vertically from the lake.
There is a view beyond the lake's end to the distant alluvial plain in which the course of the river Reuss glints like a silver bar.
As backdrop to the scene is the distant pyramid of the 3,072m (10,076ft) Bristen.
The descent of the footpath to Bauen starts in easy fashion but becomes quite steep.
However, solid timber steps help to cope with it (walking-time 1 ¾hours).
Treib-Seelisberg to Bauen
Bauen enjoys an unexpectedly mild climate thanks to a sunny situation and also to its openness to the Fohn wind which brings Mediterranean warmth down from the Gotthard in spring.
Magnolias and palm trees flourish here!
The village has some fine timber houses, among them an outstanding seventeenth-century one, the Obere Baumgarten (Upper Orchard).
Bauen was the birthplace of the composer of the Swiss national anthem to whose memory there stands a small monument in the village.
Until 1953 Bauen's only transport access was by the lake, and although today's motorway N2 Basel-Chiasso passes within 2km (just over a mile) of the village, it does so in a tunnel through the mountain rock.
Bauen's modern connection with the outer world is the 1953 lakeside road covering the 15km (9 miles) from Altdorf via lsleten, which is used by the postbus service (Table No 600.33 Altdorf 04422185).
For visitors interested in making the journey to Bauen by private transport the route could be combined with a trip from Brunnen along the Axenstrasse to Fluelen and Altdorf.
The excursion can also be carried out by public transport by taking an SBB train (a "regional" ie, stopping at all stations) from Brunnen to Altdorf (Official Timetable No 600) and a postbus to Bauen (Timetable No 600.33) from which a return by boat would add variety.
(Lake Navigation Timetable is No 2600.
It cannot be over-emphasised that the official timetable volumes take in railways, mountain railways, lake and riverboat services as well as bus services.)
From Brunnen landing quay go past the Casino on the road which soon joins the bypassing main road from Luzern.
This stretch on the Urner See to Fluelen is called the Axenstrasse, as it was blasted and tunnelled through the rock faces of the Axenberg.
It runs roughly parallel to the Gotthard railway line.
Between tunnels there is a view across the lake of Rutli and Seelisberg.
At the village of Sisikon (which has a camp and caravan site) the road crosses the cantonal boundary from Schwyz into Uri.
After further tunnels comes Tellsplatte, where parking is possible, and a path leads down to the Tell chapel, with its frescoes depicting the Tell story, near the lake steamer quay.
Brunnen to Altdorf
The small resort village of Fluelen at the end of the lake was for centuries an important lake port and customs station where goods were trans-shipped from the lake to mule transport for carriage over the Gotthard.
As a terminus nowadays of the lake excursion service during the season it is today a main stop for many international train services.
About 1km (half a mile) further on, the road has a righthand turn off for entry to the motorway N2 which has emerged from the Seelisberg 9km (5½mile) tunnel to run up the Reuss valley between railway and river for a considerable stretch.
Disregarding this turn, the road for Altdorf continues straight on for 2km (just over a mile).
Altdorf is capital of Uri, canton of mountains and glaciers.
Town and canton rose in importance after the early thirteenth century when the bridging of the Schollenen gorge opened up the Cotthard.
Of the old forest cantons, Uri was always the leader in policies of expansion over the Gotthard into the Ticino.
Nowadays it is the centre of the William Tell cult, the place where, according to tradition, the national hero shot the apple from his son's head.
A huge bronze statue commemorating him stands in the Town House Square in front of a thirteenth-century residential tower, renovated and given a dome roof in the early nineteenth century.
There is a Tell theatre too, where the Schiller play is performed during the season by local players.
The town has many picturesque corners and interesting buildings although it sustained much damage by fire in 1799 when the town was fought over by French, Austrian and Russian armies.
One of the sixteenth-century houses which survived the fire  is known as the Suworow House, as it served as the Russian general's quarters after he succeeded in getting his troops north through the notorious Schollenen gorge in the face of fierce French resistance.
The town's Capuchin friary was the first founded in Switzerland (1581) to strengthen the Counter Reformation movement which Uri strongly espoused; the church was rebuilt after the great fire.
A regional historical museum is housed in the Gotthardstrasse 18.
To reach Bauen take the road that crosses the Reuss valley to the far side of railway, motorway and river heading for Seedorf Near Seedorf on the valley plain stands a picturesque gabled eighteenthcentury castle called A Fro after the Ticinese knight who had it built; it is now used for occasions of state by the canton.
From Seedorf the road runs round the south-west corner of Lake Uri to Isleten, continuing from there along the shore to Bauen.
At Isleten a narrow mountain road (used by the postbus) also swings off to the left, running for 19km (12 miles) to the rocky and romantic Isenthal from which the ascent to the ice-capped Uri Rotstock is approached.
Altdorf to Bauen
From Brunnen it is only 5km (3 miles) distance to Schwyz the cantonal capital which gave its name to the whole country with only a slight change of vowel.
Its delightful situation in a wide fertile valley framed by the twin craggy peaks of the Mythen standing behind is particularly picturesque when the cherry orchards that surround it are smothered in spring blossom.
The old town well merits a day's visit, with its many handsome seventeenth-century patrician mansions and Town House facade, painted with frescoes of significant moments in Swiss history.
It is appropriate, too, that an attractive modern building here houses the country's Federal Archives containing among other items the solemn pact of 1291, the signing of which by representatives of Schwyz, Uri and Unterwllden was the decisive step in the evolution of Switzerland as we know it.
Also here is the earlier deed from the Holy Roman Emperor (1240) granting privileges and liberties to the people of Schwyz the document which was the constitutional basis of the stance taken by the people of Schwyz in refusing to accept subjection to the powerful Austrian Hapsburgs.
Recent scientific investigations have established that an old timber dwelling-house in Schwyz called Haus Bethlehem, previously thought to be sixteenth century, in fact was  constructed in the thirteenth century and is the oldest timber "chalet" in Switzerland.
It lies on an estate run by the Ital-Reding Foundation, and its main building is the Ital-Reding mansion, built in 1609, which combines features that are typical of local farmhouse architecture with baroque trends befitting the town houses of families of that era which had "done well" in mercenary service abroad.
The baroque St Martin's church is generally accounted the most beautiful parish church in Switzerland.
A change of scene both from lakeside and historic town is to be had by leaving Schwyz on the road which ascends southward into the valley of the Muota (the river which enters the lake just west of Brunnen).
Shortly after entering the mouth of the valley, at Schlattli, is the bottom station of a funicular which rises to Stoos, a settlement on an alpine terrace at upward of 1,300m (4,265ft).
Beyond the Lakeside
An Excursion into Canton Schwyz
Stoos provides a tempting side-trip.
The terrace lies on the east side of the Fronalpstock the bluff, stumpy mountain which forms the corner buttress where the main lake turns into the Urner See, its long south arm.
Stoos is an automobile-free summer and winter resort.
Modern skilifts run up from the alpine terrace to the Fronalpstock.
In summer the skilifts convert to chairlifts and, combining the use of two stages of chairlift with some walking it is possible to ascend to the 1,922m (6,304ft) summit with its commanding oversight of this corner of the cantons of Schwyz and Uri.
Stoos has a heated open-air swimming pool in summer, in alpine surroundings.
Before leaving the Schlattli neighbourhood, not far from the funicular station is an old wooden, roofed bridge across the Muota gorge.
It is known as the Suworow bridge.
The name of the Russian General Suworow keeps coming up in this region because of the marches made by the army he brought up from Italy into Switzerland in 1799 during the Napoleonic Wars, forcing the Gotthard Pass against bitter French resistance, but later driven to retreat back up the Muota valley when the French blocked his path at the passage of the Schlattli bridge.
The river exhibits some fine rapids and waterfalls as the road continues up the steep-sided valley to the hamlet of Ried and to the village which bears the valley's name, Muotathal, which boasts a late eighteenth-century parish church with a particularly striking rococo interior.
There is also the seventeenth-century Franciscan convent of St Joseph.
Further on by 2km (just over a mile) at the hamlet of Hinterthal, the road crosses the river and forks where the stream is joined by a tributary.
The main road, bearing right, continues into the  spectacular Bisis valley and comes to its end at the picturesquely situated hamlet of Sisisthal.
(This hamlet is the terminus of a bus route from Schwyz (Table 600.16).
After 2km (just over a mile) the left-hand branch of the road from Hinterthal reaches the entrance to the remarkable Holloch Caverns (the labyrinthine passages of which are calculated to extend some 93km (58 miles); 1km (half a mile) of the caves are open to visitors).
Shortly after this point the road becomes little more than a bridle path or cart track which, however, provides an intriguing pass-walk of about 4 hours duration over the Pragel Pass to Richisau's alpine pasture leading down to the beautiful Klontal valley in the canton of Glarus.
This was the route marched by Suworow's army, incidentally, when their Muota valley passage was blocked.
Nowadays the walk is a favourite with high-level hill walkers.
It can be organised by using the Muota valley bus from Schwyz to Hinterthal on the one side, and on the other the postbus mountain-postroad service Glarus-Klontal (Table 902. 20, 058/635230).
From Glarus a canton shut in by mountains on three sides a circular return to Schwyz by train is possible, or by postbus to Altdorf or Fluelen via the Klausen Pass, the reverse of the route next to be described.
Altdorf is sited on alluvial soil where the Schachen side valley enters the Reuss valley from the east.
An interesting excursion consists in the trip up this side valley and over the Klausen Pass road from Uri into the canton of Glarus.
Altdorf Into Canton Glarus
Leaving Altdorf by the Gotthard road to the south there is a turn off left almost immediately for road No 17, which, within 3km (2 miles) reaches the sizeable village of Burglen.
This is a very old settlement, as its two sentinel towers of medieval period suggest.
In AD857 King Ludwig the German placed the village under the protection of the Zurich Fraumunster abbey, and one of the towers, the Meierturm is thought to have been the seat of the abbey's bailiff in Burglen.
Nowadays the other medieval tower houses the William Tell Museum.
Tradition attributes to Burglen Tell's place of birth; and the Tell chapel, erected in 1582, is reputed to be on the site of Tell's house.
The fine early baroque church has substructures remaining of Romanesque date and style.
Beyond Burglen at Brugg is the bottom station of a cablecar which, in two stages, runs up to the Biel mountain inn below the Kinzig Pass which provides a track through to the Muota valley at Hinterthal.
This was the route taken by Suworow's army in 1799 when he discovered there was no road along the east shore of the Urner Lake (along the line of the present day Axenstrasse) from Altdorf.
The road ascends to Unterschachen (994m, 3,260ft), a climbing centre at the mouth of the Brunni valley gorge, giving a spectacular view of the towering Windgallen cliffs.
Now comes a swinging zigzag of a rise to Urigen (1,280m, 4,198ft).
The road passes through rock galleries, then there is a view of the 90m (295ft) Staubi waterfall.
Soon the Klausenpass hotel is reached and within another kilometre the pass summit of 1,948m (6,389ft), dominated by mountains on both sides.
It then descends in nearly a dozen zigzags, traverses a gorge and continues along the Urnerboden high valley of near-level alpine meadow, crossing the stream which is the cantonal boundary.
In further steep zigzags of descent, passing the Fatschbach falls, the road reaches Linthal, Glarus canton, 23km (14 miles) beyond the pass summit, and 65km (40 miles) from Altdorf.
Linthal takes its name from the river Linth which drains the beautiful transverse valley that largely makes up the canton of Glarus.
The Linth's tributary streams are fed from the slopes of the wall of mountains that form the Glarus Alps, Clariden (3,268m, 10,71 9ft), Todi (3,614m, 11,854ft) and Bifertenstock (3,425m, 11,234ft) which form the south-west boundary between this small canton and its neighbours Uri and Grisons.
There are splendid views of this great alpine barrier to the south from the twisting road between Urnerboclen and Linthal.
The canton of Glarus lies between this mountain barrier in the  south and, in the north, the Walensee (lake) and the Linth Canal which in the short northern plain links Walensee with the eastern extension of Lake Zurich which is known as the Obersee,(ie, Upper Lake) The canal also drains former marshland between these two lakes Glarus, though one of the smallest cantons, is often described as an epitomy of Switzerland as a whole in that it has three geographical sectors: a vast area of mountain country, a moderate stretch of rolling upland plateau capable of settlement what the Swiss call Mittel-land (literally, middle-land) and a small area of real lowland.
In Glarus the south is spectacularly alpine, and the canton is bounded by mountain ranges on three sides; only from the north is access easy as the line of the railway illustrates.
For centuries agriculture was the main economy of the Glarus.
Today it is, paradoxically, industry; for textile industries were early in being located here because of the ample availability of water power, and the Linth plain in the north has also attracted modern industries.
The Klausen Pass trip from Uri to Glarus can be made by a postbus service which operates July to September from Fluelen via Altdorf, the sector flurglen to Linthal being classed as a mountain postroad.
For details consult Official Timetable No 600.30.
At all times seat  reservation in advance is necessary.
From Linthal train services are available down the valley via Glarus, cantonal capital, to Ziegelbrucke (junction with the Chur-Zurich main line); most trains also continue beyond that junction to Rapperswil at the east end of Lake Zurich, from where in turn a train may be taken (via Pfaffikon on the south-east corner of Lake Zurich) to Arth-Goldau (for Schwyz, Brunnen, Luzern).
Motorists with private transport who have come over the Klausen Pass road may wish to return by the same route to see the opposite angles of view.
Others may be tempted to explore the Glarus canton (perhaps using this excursion as their exit route from the region of the Vierwaldstattersee for further explorations in north or north-east Switzerland, in cantons Zurich, St Gallen or Grisons).
Within 2 minutes of the SBB main station at Linthal is a funicular bottom station.
Its cars climb in 10 minutes to Braunwald (1,256m, 4,120ft), a traffic-free climatic resort, well equipped for both winter and summer sports, which lies on an extensive terrace-plateau beneath the slopes of the Eckstock and the Ortstock, facing south across the Linth valley to the Hausstock massif on the Grisons frontier.
This noise-free holiday and sports region is a great favourite with the Swiss themselves.
Linthal to Walensee
About 10km (6 miles) down the main valley road from Linthal is Schwanden, a small industrial town where the Sernf valley joins the Linth.
This is the starting point for excursions in the Karpf district, lying in the angle between these two valleys.
The Karpf is the oldest wildlife reserve in Switzerland, dating back to the sixteenth century, where chamois, ibex and marmots can be seen in the wild.
The Sernf valley, which curves round in the shape of a crook, is served by a postbus service (Timetable No 902.45) to anumber of village resorts, the terminal one being Elm (at 977m, 3,205ft) where springs the source of one of Switzerland's widely distributed natural mineral waters.
It is in a peaceful and idyllic countryside offering a great variety of walking paths.
Six kilometres (4 miles) on from Schwanden the main valley road reaches the cantonal capital, also named Glarus, set at the foot of 2,331m (7,646ft) high Glarnisch.
In 1861 the town was largely destroyed by fire (fanned by the F0lin wind) and was thereafter rebuilt.
It is a small town, with a textile industry, and on the first Sunday of May each year it is the scene of the meeting of the Landsgemeinde—the formal assembly of all vote holding citizens of the canton and its  law-giving governing body.
Voting is by show of hands and the agenda is circulated to householders one month ahead of the meeting.
Eight kilometres (5 miles) on from Glarus, near the mouth of the valley, is another little industrial town, Nafels.
Its name is associated with the site of the battle in 1388 when the men of Glarus defeated a greatly superior Austrian army and so regained their independent liberties.
There is a memorial chapel to this event.
The town also boasts, in its main street, a remarkable seventeenth-century mansion, the Freuler Mansion or Palace as it is locally known, built for a local man who acquired riches in the service of the French crown as a colonel of mercenaries (a not uncommon employment for the Swiss in those days).
The building, with magnificent Renaissance-style exterior and baroque interior furnishing and decoration, is now the cantonal museum and has, in particular, a unique collection of the printed textiles for which Glarus has long been famed.
To the east of Nafels is an entry/exit to the motorway N3 which, running west-east, links Zurich with the southern shores of the Walensee (flanking for part of the way the Linth canal referred to above) and on to Chur in the Grisons.
For motorists who intend to travel west by road on N3 to Zurich or beyond, a short side-trip is to -be recommended.
The famous Benedictine abbey of Einsiedeln Switzerland's greatest place of pilgrimage, set in the pre-Alp country of canton Schwyz cannot be described as "off the beaten track" but it would be unthinkable to omit the possibility of visiting it when in this neighbourhood.
Carry on along the N3 motorway west beyond the exit for Rapperswil and Pfaffikon to the exit indicated for Einsiedeln and Schwyz.
Turning south in some 6km (4 miles) the Biberbrugg crossroads are reached.
For Einsiedeln turn off left onto road No 8 for Schwyz, offering the possibility of completing a round trip from canton Schwyz via Altdorf, Klausen Pass and Glarus with return by the N3 and national road No 8 to Schwyz.
Schwanden, Glarus and Nafels all have stations on the Linthal-Ziegelbrucke railway.
The line from Rapperswil and Pfaffikon to Arth-Goldau also has a branch to Einsiedeln from the station at Biberbrugg.
There has been a monastic community at Einsiedeln for more than a thousand years, for most of that time a Benedictine monastery.
In its present form it was rebuilt in mid-eighteenth century and is one of Europe's greatest baroque buildings, with the monastery church embodied as centrepiece of the great facade.
Its Gnadenkapelle, Chapel of Grace, enshrines the Black Madonna venerated by pilgrims.
The Reuss valley floor is comparatively wide and level for a considerable stretch south of Altdorf (447m, 1,466ft above sea level) and only begins to narrow at Erstfeld (472m, 1,548ft), by which point the new motorway N2 has parted company with the old Gotthard road No 2 as well as the railway, having crossed to the west bank of the river.
For this stretch the pyramid of the Bristen (3,072m, 10,076ft) occupies the valley horizon.
Altdorf to Andermatt on the "Old Gotthard Road" 
Amsteg (7km, 4 miles on) lies at the entrance to the Maderaner valley, another beautiful transverse valley to the east, which the railway crosses on a 53m (175ft) high viaduct.
Amsteg's position makes it a well placed base for climbers and hill walkers.
There is a steep mountain road served by mountain postbus (route 600.38) from June to September leading to the village of Bristen (6km, 4 miles) and beyond it to the Golzern cablecar station (Timetable 1595) which gives an altitude start to climbers.
For high-pass walkers there is also from that road end a track up the spectacularly wild little valley of the Etzli which climbs up to the south.
This leads to the Kriizli Pass (2,347m, 7,698ft) which descends on the other side to Sedrun on the Vorderrhein (anterior Rhine) valley of canton Grisons about 10km (6 miles) from Disentis.
At Amsteg motorists who are in haste to reach a further destination have an opportunity to leave the old Gotthard road in favour of entry to the fast N2 motorway before the old road enters the steepest and most tortuous part of the route.
It is at this point that the old Gotthard road and the railway line both cross to the west side of the valley while the modern motorway in galleries and tunnels cuts through the steep rock-flank of the massive Bristen, which was seen on the horizon earlier in the route.
Remaining, however, with the old road makes possible a visit to Wiler, in the valley near Gurtnellen, where there is a seventeenth-century church of St Anna with a massive canopied porch (a snow shelter) through which the earlier historic Gotthard pack-trail actually passed.
As Wassen, the next village after Gurtnellen, is approached, it is possible to see from the road the manner in which the railway line (now running on the opposite side of the valley from both roads) climbs the steep "steps" in the valley floor which occasion waterfalls.
The line penetrates into the mountainside and tunnels a wide upward spiral in the heart of the mountain, to emerge again on the same mountain face at a level 35m (115ft) higher.
Opposite the village the Gotthard line executes two further tunnel-loops in succession almost carrying out a figure-of-eight while all the time gaining a  further height of 122m (400ft) inside the rock.
It is the unique experience of rail travellers on the Gotthard to glimpse the same, unmistakable baroque-domed village church three times in a few minutes as the train passes it at different levels above and below.
For the motorist on the "old road" now relieved of traffic frenzy, the village of Wassen repays a short visit.
The church mentioned above, which  is sited on top of a steep hill, was built in 1735 and has beautiful inlaid wooden alters of that era.
Waasen lies at the mouth of the Meien valley and for the motorist with a day in hand to spare it can be an ideal starting point for the famed Three Alpine Passes round trip.
That trip is by no means "off the beaten track" and will not be detailed here.
As it maybe a tempting detour, however, for any who have not previously toured the passes of the glacial Alps, an outline of the circuit is briefly summarised:
The Meien valley road climbs up west from Wassen through varied alpine landscape including tunnels, through one of which it traverses the Susten pass summit (2,224m, 7,295ft).
It descends into Bernese Oberland territory in sweeping bends that present a close view of the Stein glacier, then along the Gadmen valley to the gentler scenery of the valley of the Aare at Innertkirchen (near Meiringen).
Next turning south, it ascends the wooded approaches to the attractive Hasli valley which becomes barer and wilder in the ascent.
On thereafter toward the Grimsel Lake and then the summit of the Grimsel Pass (at 1,652m, 5,419ft).
Descending from the pass, sharp, steep bends afford good views of the Rhone glacier before reaching Gletsch to join the great upper Rhone valley road which links western Switzerland with Grisons and the east.
The road, now heading east once more, climbs onward to within a short walk's distance from that same awesome Rhone glacier before tackling the highest pass of the trip, the Furka (2,431m, 7,974ft), which forms the boundary between cantons Valais and Uri.
Splendid views here to east and west.
From the Furka summit the road is by way of Hospental and Andermatt and so back to the Gotthard road and to Wassen.
The Three Pass circuit is usually feasible from mid-June to mid October.
Having so many bends and so much climbing in the thin air however, it is quite demanding on vehicle and driver.
Depending on the driver's experience of mountain roads, anything from 7 to 9 hours' driving is involved.
From Wassen the "old Gotthard road" crosses and re-crosses th valley before reaching (in 5km, 3 miles) Goschenen in its impressive situation where the Reuss river is joined by a main tributary just a it has emerged from the Schollenen gorge.
If the Goschenen rail station appears disproportionately large for the size of the village, this is accountable to the control functions exercised here for the traffic through the 15km (9 mile) long Gotthard railway tunnel which begins here.
For very many years the loading of vehicles onto railway tracks here was the only means of overcoming the Gotthard barrier  when the pass road was closed by winter snows.
Nowadays the motorway tunnel, which also runs from Goschenen through the Gotthard massif into canton Ticino, is the route taken by the overwhelming majority of motorists in summer as well as in winter.
Goschenen then is the place of decisions: whether to take the tunnel through to Italian-speaking Ticino and southern climes, or to proceed to Andermatt on the old Gotthard road which now climbs sharply up to cross the Reuss tributary and after some hairpin bends enters the forbidding rock walls of the Schollenen gorge which took centuries for road builders to master, first by bridle paths on suspended plank bridges and in more modern days by tunnels and galleries as well as daring bridges Emerging from the gorge the road crosses the Reuss waterfall on the "Devil's bridge" and enters the wide Urseren valley in which Andermatt lies, occupying the strategic position at the "crossroads of Switzerland" or even of Europe — where the main west-east route carved out of the high alpine massif by the Rhine and Rhone rivers crosses the north-south route gouged out by rivers Reuss and Ticino.
Andermatt itself is an attractive town.
Many months of snow availability and a good sunshine record make it a favourite winter sports centre; and a multitude of varied excursion opportunities and walking trails attract summer visitors.
Andermatt too is a place for travellers' decisions: whether to return north back to Uri, or to choose one of the other three cardinal points of the compass for further travel.
5 Bernese Mittelland
The Bernese Oberland is perhaps the Swiss region best known to English speaking tourists because of the dramatic massif of mountains, high valleys and ridges that lies south-east of Lakes Brienz and Thun, and between these the popular centre of tourist traffic, Interlaken.
Yet the very large canton Bern consists of much more than its Oberland.
Only a fraction of those who know the Oberland are acquainted with the Bernest Mitteland—except perhaps for the capital city, Bern itself, which lies near the centre of it.
The concept of Mittelland is very important to the Swiss.
In Switzerland there are very few real plains, and the term Mittelland (in which Mittel means something like "betwixt and between" ) is applied to the great areas of pre-alpine hills and of rolling plateau country which over millenia have been settled and cultivated by the ancestors and predecessors of the Swiss, and on which have grown the great historic centres of agricultural civilisation as well as the civilisation of cities.
At the opposite end of the Lake of Thun (or Thunersee) from Interlaken lies Thun.
In terms of political and administrative boundaries, Thun is counted as part of the Oberland.
Indeed, long before the clusters of nineteenth-century hotels arose in Interlaken, Thun was the gateway to the Oberland for the earliest alpine travellers.
Yet in geographical and historical terms Thun could almost serve as the model of a Mittelland town.
It has a long history of urban culture as a market centre for a pastoral and agricultural hinterland, as a garrison town and a centre of services and administration, and it is equally placed as the gateway to the Mittelland.
Within minutes by car or bus, are characteristic Mittelland areas of great charm and interest that are not only off the beaten track but do not even receive passing mention in standard English-language guide books.
A striking example is the road into the heights of wooded, pastoral and agricultural countryside to the north of the town.
Note for walkers: The first section of the road is a fairly consistently steep uphill gradient for 6km (3 ½miles).
However, a bus service offers an alternative if the going proves too taxing.
The walk from Thun to Heiligenschwendi should require about 1 hour 40 minutes.
Thun to Goldiwil and Heiligenschwendi
Leave Thun by the Berngate, turning right into the Steffisburgstrasse and right again shortly on to the Goldiwilstrasse.
The steeply climbing road very soon affords views over Thun, dominated by the impressive, massive square keep with corner turrets of the castle built by the Zahringen Dukes from 1191, with the Stockhorn mountain (2,190m, 7,183ft) forming a backdrop across the wide valley.
Within 2.5km (1½ miles) the road forks and the right-hand branch dips across a hollow towards Schwendi; but continue forward, climbing on the left-hand (main) road which ascends towards Goldiwil at a higher level with even more rewarding views.
At 6km (3 ½miles) the straggling village of Goldiwil is reached at an altitude of 1,000m (3,280ft).
A hotel-restaurant with its terrace overhanging the slope gives splendid views over the Lake of Thun and the Stockhorn group.
This attractive hill village has in the past decade become favoured as a "dormitory suburb" for people employed in Thun.
As the road twists uphill, following a ridge with the ground falling away to the right, panoramic views are revealed through clearings of the  lake down below and the backdrop of the Oberland mountains behind.
The pre-alpine pastures in the immediate neighbourhood, dotted with mature cherry trees, make the foreground equally attractive, as does the sound of the cow-bells.
Immediately beyond the church and school the road has a less steep section, and soon passes a small cheese dairy where, depending on circumstances of the season, there may be an opportunity to see something of the work that is typical of this type of country.
In about a kilometre (just over half a mile) the road reaches a terrace plateau, well wooded in places, and curves slowly to the right giving every-changing angles of view until it reaches Heiligenschwendi, lying on a sun-terrace at 1,100m (3,608ft), sheltered from the north by wooded hillside.
More of the Oberland mountains including the Niesen and Blumlisalp have now come into the panoramic view, and can be seen from a number of vantage points in striking perspective across the Lake of Thun.
Continuing through the scattered little climatic resort the road leads to the Heiligenschwendi Klinik, a large hospital originally treating respiratory diseases but in more recent times catering for a wide variety of patients.
The Klinik is the terminus of the bus service referred to  (Official Timetable 310.55) which runs between here and the Station Square of Thun.
A less demanding way of doing this excursion on foot is, of course, to take the bus from Thun to Heiligenschwendi and do the walk downhill.
Walkers can also extend the excursion by continuing from Heiligenschwendi downhill in a southerly direction on the edge of the woods to Oberhofen on the lakeside (approximately 40 minutes).
On the way there are fine views of the pyramidal Niesen (2,360m, 7,741ft) which dominates the central section of the south shore of Lake Thun, separating the mouths of the Simme and Kander valleys which poke into the Oberland.
Although the bus route terminates at the Klinik, a road for motorists continues east from there, then swings south again, through wooded terrain with occasional clearings, via Ringoldswil to Sigriswil, a farming village and peaceful climatic resort on a sun terrace.
From here there are magnificent panoramas over the lake of the great mountain groups of the Oberland.
(Sigriswil has a charming church of St Gallus, rebuilt in the late seventeenth century with a baroque interior.)
From Sigriswil the road leads down to Gunten an attractive lakeside resort facing the Niesen across the lake, with very active sailing and windsurfing schools.
(Sigriswil, it should be added, can also be reached by a bus service from Gunten, Official Timetable 310.65, which in turn is served by a very frequent trolley-bus service (Official Timetable 310.60) along the north shore of the lake between Thun Station Square and Interlaken.)
The motorist, however, who has reached Gunten from Heiligenschwendi and Sigriswil will almost certainly be interested to continue along the lakeside to the next village to the east, Merligen, a former fishing village at a sheltered sun-trap situation on the lakeside where the Justis valley meets the lake at right angles.
Merligen was traditionally a stage on the pilgrimage route to the Beatus Caves (see Bernese Oberland chapter).
From Merligen (or from the Beatus Caves) an expeditious but interesting return to Thun can be made by car or by the bus service noted above.
The north shore road is an attractive one, passing through colourful lakeside villages with lush floral growth because of their favourably sheltered south-facing exposure.
Many houses have picturesquely sited balconies overhanging the lake, or terraces supported on lakeside boat houses.
One of the villages is Oberhofen, with its spectacular and colourful lakeside castle (see Bernese Oberland chapter).
A particularly fine view of the castle and indeed of most aspects of this shoreline can be obtained from the deck of the  lake steamers which in the season call frequently at all lakeside villages between Thun and lnterlaken.
Incidentally, the Oberhttfen  boat station is next to the castle.
The excursion as described from Thun via Heiligenschwendi to Merligen above is the most straightforward route for making acquaintance with a most attractive pre-alpine landscape with a very favoured southern exposure.
There exists however a very great number of variant routes on the numerous well defined walking paths that make this area a great favourite with Swiss visitors who enjoy walking holidays off the beaten track.
For tourists residing in the Oberland a favourite excursion is a visit to the capital of Central Switzerland, Luzern, by way of the dramatic Brunig Pass route.
The route is substantially the same whether carried out by road or by the narrow-gauge Brunig railway; it follows the shore of Lake Brienz before turning north to climb over the Brunig Pass and then descend by steps via the Lungern and Sarnen Lakes to the shores of the Vierwaldstattersee.
On the return journey to canton Bern some people may, for variety, choose to take by road or rail the faster route from Luzern to Bern (or Thun) by way of the Emmental.
And for many visitors to Switzerland the fast through journey via Langnau may be the only experience they have of the Fmmental (literally the valley of the river Emme), a district which illustrates the charm of the Berner Mittelland in high degree.
With the Swiss themselves it is a great favourite as one of the most varied and beautiful walking areas in the country; in addition when it comes to food, the country towns and inns of the Emmental enjoy an exceptional reputation even for Switzerland, a reputation that one tends to link with the Emmental farming communities' repute as the foremost pioneers of Swiss agriculture.
(It is said that distinguished foreign guests of the Swiss Confederation visiting Bern are invariably taken out to dine somewhere in the Emmental.)
A fair example of the region can be had from a round trip, carried out from Thun or from Bern, extending to about 130km (80 miles).
An Ernmental Circuit
From Bern take the NI road to the north, heading for Olten/ Basel—(Motorists starting from Thunby road can skirt Bern to join the N1).
Leave the N1 after 19km (12 miles) turning right (east) for Burgdorf.
This is a historic town, its nucleus occupying an imposing and consequently strategic position on an eminence commanding the river Emme.
It is still generally known as the gateway to the Emmental.
It has a long tradition of settlement, the hill having been a fortified place since the mid-tenth century.
The Zahringer Dukes extended the castle from 1127 onward, and it is one of Switzerland's earliest  brick buildings; the town alongside it on the ridge grew in proportion to its strategic importance and was in fact incorporated in the walled defences by the Kyburg dynasty which followed the Zahringers.
When the Kyburgers sold Burgdorf to Bern in 1384 the townsfolk had already acquired burgher rights.
From that date forward until the French Revolutionary wars (which had quite a momentous impact on Switzerland) the castle was occupied by a Bernese governor.
The triple-towered castle which is today still a prominent landmark now serves as a historical museum.
The late fifteenth-century parish church (Reformed) is a fine example of late Gothic and possesses a notable rood screen of 1512.
The residential part of the castle has a Romanesque hall and a chapel with fourteenth-century frescoes.
There is much of the old town that is well worth seeing, with its handsome merchant houses in the Hohengasse and Kronenplatz, of Gothic and baroque style.
From Burgdorf take the road south, along the west bank of the Emme.
Within 5km (3 miles) on the right hand side is the village of Hasle, a small junction station on the local railway system.
Just to the north of the village there is a bridge over the Emme that is a particularly interesting example of the characteristic rural Swiss timber-built covered bridge.
(The timber roofing is not merely picturesque  but intensely practical as it prevents heavy winter snowfalls from rendering passage over the bridge either impossible or very hazardous.)
The Hasle bridge is the longest of its type in Europe, with a timber-vault span of 58m (190ft).
It was designed in 1839.
Hasle's parish church is an example of the baroque hall-style of Reformed church, specifically designed to lay emphasis on the primacy of the preaching aspects of divine service.
Leaving Hasle behind, in about 2km (just over a mile) turn left to cross the river into Lutzelfluh near where the Langete tributary joins the Emme.
This little town is best known to the Swiss and to others acquainted with Swiss literature as the "Gotthelf-village" .
It was here that Jeremias Gotthelf (1797–1854), whose novels portrayed early nineteenth-century life in the Emmental, served as village pastor.
A Gottlif-stube in the village exhibits memorabilia of the author during the season (April to October).
The former grain mill of the village, one of the finest in the region built in 1821, serves nowadays as a community cultural centre and is known as the Kulturmuhle.
From Lutzelfluh the road heads north-east to reach Sumiswald (in 8km, 5 miles) on its broad sunny terrace.
This market town and centre of its district has been a notable village of craft workers since the eighteenth century.
Perhaps it owes that to influences from its earlier history.
Its church of St Maria was built in the early sixteenth century as a church of the military and religious Teutonic Order of knights, priests and serving brothers.
(The church has some super.
lative stained-glass windows from that period.)
The town has also ar institution called the Spittel, built from an endowment of 1225 which laid an obligation upon the Teutonic Order to maintain a hospice for tending the poor and providing hospitality to pilgrims.
In its present form it is substantially an early eighteenth-century building, and now serves as a local nursing home.
Sumiswald's hinterland of rolling hills and streams has around 75km (46 miles) of well defined walking trails.
Motorists travelling in this area at some leisure should feel en couraged to make detours and deviations from the minimal itineray here outlined to visit the beautiful hamlets and the large unitary farmsteads that are so characteristic of this area, with its long history — of settled agricultural civilisation.
In the Emmental region the loca customary laws of inheritance differed markedly from most of their neighbours.
Farm estates, on the death of the owner, were not here divided up among several offspring, but were passed on undivided to a sole heir.
This has had the effect that for centuries Emmental farmsteads and lands have had great historical continuity as units  accumulated agricultural wealth and skills; and they have given the landscape very impressive and characteristic features: the majestic farmsteads with enormous double-thatched roofs extending like half-folded wings nearly to ground level at the sides and encompassing under one giant roof not only living quarters but also stables, barns and other ancillary accommodation.
A sockli ancestor of the modern "grandmother's flat" was invariably part of the comple providing separate quarters for the older, retired generation of the family.
Traditionally pioneers in agriculture, these were the families which at the beginning of the nineteenth century concluded that the making of good cheese need not be confined to the high alpine dairies as was then generally accepted, but could be practised in the rich pasturelands of the Mittelland.
The outcome was that "Emmentaler" became a common European word for Swiss cheese.
The visitor here soon realises that the unit of community is less commonly a village composed of the homes of farm workers, small-holders and other craftsmen, than a large unitary farm-estate with its branches of workers accommodated.
It is well worth a deviation from the main road into part of the network of good minor roads that lead to these farm-estates.
One important by-product of this style of organisation is that cheese is still largely made in the farm villages, instead of in some more or less distant town cheese factory to which milk is conveyed by road.
From Sumiswald road No 23 leads to Huttwil, 15km (9 miles) distant to the north-east.
But on the way an opportunity arises after about 10km (6 miles) to make a detour to visit a community which exemplifies some splendid large-scale, almost manorial, farmsteadings, as well as two magnificent late baroque inns (Gasthofe) of the turn of eighteenth-nineteenth century, with the imposing hip-roofs of the best Emmental tradition.
The community is signposted "Durrenroth" at a side road that goes off to the right (and later rejoins the main road further on).
Huttwil is nowadays a small market and industrial town.
Originally a fortified town from the mid-thirteenth century, it was burned down in 1834 and, rebuilt in the neo-classicist town plan style of that era, presents a pleasing unified small town image.
About 4km (2½miles) further east of Huttwil on road 23 is the village of Huswil, where there is an eighteenth-century granary, typical of the region, but particularly renowned for its handsomely carved door.
Shortly beyond Huswil, at Gettnau (10km, 6 miles from Huttwil) road 23 continues straight ahead east to Sursee (on the Sempacher Lake), but take instead a branch that goes off to the right for Willisau, a thirteenth-century  foundation.
Parts of its medieval walls survive, including the 1551 Upper Gate at the west end of the Hauptgasse (Main Street).
A rebuilt Lower Gate matches it at the other end.
Just outside the Upper Gate is the attractive Heiligblut (Holy Blood) pilgrimage chapel of 1674–5, with a series of biblical scenes on its wooden ceiling which are of the period.
Inside the same city gate on a little hillock stands the neo-classical Catholic parish church, which was rebuilt in 1801 but retains its original thirteenth-century bell-tower (although now capped with a baroque dome!).
Shortly after leaving Huttwil, road 23 crossed the cantonal boundary from Bern to Luzem canton.
In so doing it also crossed what the Swiss recognise as an ancient cultural frontier which in this part of the country runs not as a straight line but in a curve in clockwise direction, through the Brunig Pass, the centre of the highland massif known as the Napf, and the river Reuss which flows out from the Vierwaldstattersee at Luzern.
(The Napf is in fact the mountain core of the region round which this excursion route executes a nearly circular path, and from which radiate the streams and glens which have intersected the route.)
The cultural frontier that here lies between canton Bern and the original Four Forest Cantons has been described thus: "though not a boundary between language groups, it does form a more significant division in everyday affairs, separating one set of customs and traditions from others." 
The road now continues to the industrial town of Wolhuser (10km, 6 miles) on the Little Emme river.
(It is rather confusing tha"in this area there exist two rivers Emme.
The Great Emme mostle called simply the Emme — rises away to the south on the Hohgan (2,197m, 7,206ft) north of Lake Brienz and flows north-west to join the Aare.
The Little Emme rises further east on the slopes of th Giswiler Stock (near the Lungern Lake) and flows roughly north an then east to join the Reuss.)
From Wolhusen the circular itinerary now continues south on road 10 which has come in on the left (ie east from Luzern.
However, before resuming the circular journey it worthwhile to take a short deviation along the Wolhusen-Luzern road for about 2km (just over a mile), following the river (as does also the Bern-Langnau-Luzern railway) to admire the strikingly beautiful site of the convent of Werthenstein, poised on a high bluff dom nating a bend of the river.
There is a lovely pilgrimage church of the early seventeenth century and a handsome cloister.
But above all the setting is lovely, and is a temptation to find a picnic place.
The road, resumed south from Wolhusen, leads in 8km (5 miles) to the pretty village of Entlebuch through what is called the Entlebuch  valley, although the river which actually traverses it is the Little Emme river referred to above.
The valley takes its name from the Entlen torrent, a tributary of the Little Emme, which races down to join it from the slopes of the Glaubenberg mount which separates this valley from the parallel valley in which lie the Lungern and Sarnen Lakes (and the road from Brunig Pass.)
The Glaubenberg Pass, at 1,543m (5,061 ft), is traversed by a mountain road which provides an interesting hill walk backed up by public transport to starting and finishing points.
Transport to Entlebuch railway station is by the line Bern-Langnau-Luzern (or Thun-Konolfingen-luzern) Then a postbus from Entlebuch (Official Timetable No 460.75) takes walkers well up the Entlen valley beyond Entlenmatt, leaving them with a 6km (3 ½miles) ascent to walk to the pass.
On the far side a mountain bus route (Timetable No 470.30) operates to Sarnen, which has a railway station on the Interlaken-Brunig-Luzern line.
From Entlebuch the main road (No 10) continues along the south bank of the Little Emme to reach in 7km (4 miles) the main place of  the Entlebuch valley, Schupfheim.
Here there is a local history museum, Entlebucher Heimatmuseum, dealing with the valley; its opening hours are irregular.
From Schupfheim a spectacular minor road runs south for 17km (10½ miles) following the Forest Emme (Waldemme) as this stretch of Little Emme is commonly called, through the hills along the Mariental valley to Fluhli and the little climatic resort of Sorenberg (1,159m, 3,802ft), near which is a cable railway to the summit of the Brienzer Rothorn which gives an unrivalled prospect of Lake Brienz and beyond it the whole massif of the Bernese Oberland peaks.
A postbus service operates on this route from Schupfheim (Timetable No 460.60) and continues beyond the Glaubenbuelen Pass (1,611m, 5,284ft), on a zigzag descent to Giswil, between the Lungern and Sarnen Lakes.
Road No 10 from Schupfheim leads to another attractive village, Escholzmatt, still in canton Luzern although hereabout is the watershed between the Englebuch valley and the Emmental proper.
In a further 3km (2 miles) the road reaches the hamlet of Wiggen.
At this  point motorists who wish to return to Bern at the end of this circular itinerary should continue forward on road No 10, reaching Trubschachen in 6km (4 miles), and Langnau-im-Emmental the chief town of the district in 6km (4 miles) more.
Travellers making Thun their destination at the end of this circuit have an interesting option available to them.
They too may choose to continue via Langnau.
But they also have the possibility of taking a spectacular minor road which branches off to the left, ie south, at Wiggen.
This road climbs moderately at first to Marbach, a well regarded unsophisticated winter sports resort with cablecar and skilifts to the Marbachegg sun-terrace (Timetable No 1500).
Thereafter there is a steeper ascent to Schangnau, 10km (6 miles) south of Wiggen, a farming village which also caters for winter sports.
From Wiggen there is a postbus service to Marbach and Schangnau (Official Timetable No 460. 50) and this also continues along the road which turns off sharply left at Schangnau, leading along the bank of the Emme to Bumbach and Kemmeriboden.
Between these two villages lies a favoured cross-country ski area.
But for Thun keep forward at Schangnau, dipping down to cross the Emme and tackling the ascent to the Schallenberg Pass (1,167m, 3,828ft).
From the serpentine turns of the road magnificent views are obtained of the long sierra ridge of the 2,199m (7,213ft) high Hohgant, pride of the Emmental region.
From the Schallenberg the road descends in the course of 1 5km (9 miles) via Oberei and Schwarzenegg to Steffisburg, which in modern times has become something of a dormitory suburb to 4km- (2½ miles-) distant Thun.
Steffisburg has in its historic centre some buildings of considerable character: a church, rebuilt in the late seventeenth century but with a Romanesque tower that has a wooden belfry and spire; and two adjacent buildings known as the Hochhuser, the larger of which is transitional between the Bernese farmhouse and the country mansion styles and has a hipped roof on a really magnificent scale.
Travelling on from Wiggen on road 10, Trubschachen is reached in 6km (4 miles).
The village has many imposing merchant residences; and in the district are many of the typical timber-built, roofed bridges.
Following now the Ilfis tributary of the Emme, the road arrives, 6km (4 miles) further on, at Langnau.
The principal market town of the Emmental has some handsome squares, one of which, the Hirschenplatz, is considered to be one of the finest and most unspoilt in the Bern region.
The church, a late seventeenth-century "preaching hall" in the Reformed style, is handsomely furnished with a richly carved baroque pulpit and font.
Attractive stone built houses  in the centre of the town have decorated timber surfaces under the gables and half-hipped roofs.
A sixteenth-century building with a high saddle-roof, the Chuechlihaus, houses the Heimatmuseum which has a collection of old Langnau pottery products; it also has exhibits to illustrate the products and tools of the several local timber trades and crafts, which is particularly appropriate in a district where forestry and timber trades are of such importance.
In the course of the itinerary outlined above, for instance, travellers would come across a fair number of the fifty or so Emmental saw-mills, and from their observation of farms and farmland would be able to appreciate the force of the Emmental saying "An Emmental farm without woodland is like a bed without a blanket" .
From Langnau, road No 10 climbs out of the Ilfis and Emme valleys and in 21km (13 miles) reaches Worb, a town of 11,000 inhabitants.
It has a baronial castle which was rebuilt in the early sixteenth century after fire destruction.
From Worb, Bern is reached in 10km (6 miles).
Although no public transport service precisely covers the above itinerary in that form, local public transport makes the main points accessible.
The main railway service on the Emmental route from Bern to Luzern, Timetable No 460 (or Thun via Konolfingen to Luzern) has stations at Langnau, Trubschachen, Wiggen, Escholzmatt, Schupfheim, Entlebuch, Wolhusen and Werthenstein.
From Wolhusen, a service links with Willisau, Huswil and Huttwil.
There is a broad swathe of Mittelland in the form of rolling plateau country which forms a wide corridor along which modern roads and railways find their fastest and easiest passage between the country's capital and the shores of Lake Geneva.
In the past that same tract was often the corridor along which migrating peoples or invading armies found their route.
So it is not surprising that the Mittelland overrides cantonal frontiers.
One of the most interesting small towns of the Mittelland illustrates this.
Murten does not lie in Bernese Mittelland today but in the neighbouring canton of Fribourg.
But it was once Bernese.
And for a period of centuries it was under the joint rule of Bern and Fribourg.
Murten
Murten is conveniently reached from Bern, whether by road or rail.
Although the rail journey involves a change of trains, the timetable of services is so well co-ordinated that the change is no great inconvenience.
The best route with a Bern-Murten rail ticket is to take, from Bern main station (Hauptbahnhof), a train on the frequent  Bern-Neuchatel service (Timetable No 220), alight at Kerzers and change platform for a train to Murten on the line to Payerne (Time table No 251).
By road take the motorway N1 heading west from Bern, taking care in 12km (7 ½miles) not to take the exit for Kerzers and Neuchatel but to continue on the motorway as it curves south and becomes an ordinary national road a short distance from Murten  Murten lies beside the lake which bears its name, close to the linguistic frontier between French and German speech.
(The French form of the name is Morat.)
The little town was founded in its present form in the second half of the twelfth century by the Dukes of Zahringen.
It has preserved to the present day its architectural setting and character, and its medieval town walls (twelfth and fifteenth century) are an exceptionally complete example of their period.
They are well preserved and maintained and the rampart walks are accessible, giving interesting views into the town and out over the surrounding countryside.
One of two original gates, the Berner Gate, survives in its eighteenth-century baroque form.
The wide main street, which the Berner Gate bounds and which forms a market place, has sixteenth-century arcaded sidewalks and houses, with seventeenth- and eighteenth-century facades.
It is a delightful place to stroll through, as it is sufficiently small (with a population of under 5,000) for a visitor readily to come to terms with its layout.
Murten has considerable significance in Swiss history, as it gave its name to a critical battle fought close by in 1476.
Just as the Central Swiss communities around the Vierwaldstattersee had to struggle for their independent rights against the Austrian Hapsburgs, their confederates to the west of Bern had to confront the might of the Burgundian realm.
At Murten in 1476 the Confederates won their first victory over Charles the Bold's Burgundian army.
In the summer season an interesting boat excursion (Timetable No 2212) can be made from Murten, on the Lake of Murten and the Lake of Neuchatel (to which it is linked by canal), to Neuchatel, capital of the canton of the same name further west.
But perhaps the most interesting extension that can be made to a Murten visit is to make the very short journey of only 8km (5 miles) either by road No 1, or by rail on the same line as from Kerzers to Murten The destination is the small town of Avenches, which stands on a hill just north of the bypassing main road No1 which runs across the Mittelland plateau from Bern to Lausanne.
Avenches illustrates the long history of settlement characteristic of Mittelland.
Its name was once Aventicum, when in the first and second centuries AD it was the large and prosperous capital of the Roman province (before which it had been the hill town tribal capital of the Helvetii).
It never quite recovered from its destruction by Germanic tribesmen in the third century AD and in the medieval period the extensive Roman town remains were used as a quarry-source of building material.
Even so, the existing remains are remarkable, and include one of the best preserved Roman amphitheatres (accommodating 12,000  spectators).
There are also remains of baths, a theatre and many parts of the Roman walls, with gates and towers preserved.
Next to the amphitheatre is an eleventh-century fortified tower, no doubt once part of the medieval town defences; well maintained, it now serves as a Roman Museum.
Apart from the Roman remains, Avenches preserves interesting buildings from the medieval period.
In the market place stands the chateau, formerly the bishop's residence, which was enlarged in Renaissance style in the sixteenth century by the governor who ruled the town after it had become subject to Bern in 1536.
In short, Avenches, lying aside a little from the bypassing main road from Bern to Lausanne, offers a new perspective on the Swiss Mittelland for the visitor who may only until then have known the ski or climatic resorts of the mountain regions.