

DEMENTIA — INTEGRATION OR SEGREGATION
BACKGROUND
At the SAD conference in Crieff in October 1986 on "Dementia: Planning Innovative Services in the Community" a debate developed between those who saw an overriding need to integrate dementia sufferers with the rest of their community, both at home and within the various services for elderly people and, on the other hand, those who saw a need to provide separate specialist services to cater for the special needs of dementia sufferers, which had been neglected in the past.
It was clear that this polarized debate could have arisen in relation to all situations in which dementing people may find themselves.
A sub-group of the Patterns of Service Committee of SAD was formed to explore these issues further.
We examined six different situations: 1 Special Needs Housing 2 Domiciliary Services 3 Day Care 4 Local Authority residential care 5 Non-statutory residential and nursing care 6 Hospital in-patient care For each of these categories we have briefly explored the policy background, any relevant literature and evidence of interesting or innovative practice.
We then discussed problems and options for the future in each situation.
At the basis of this debate we saw two differing philosophies.
The integrationist view, in parallel with views on the care of other disabled groups, holds that segregation brings the dangers of stigma and neglect, while integration respects the wishes of the dementing to be as normal as possible, brings the stimulus of "normal" company with consequent raising of standards, and enhances the status of sufferers.
It may also be seen as more economical.
The segregationist view is based on the belief that the multiple and complicated impairments and changes that affect the victim of dementia require specialist help, that the number of sufferers involved tends to swamp integrated services, so causing resentment and rejection by staff or by the non-demented, and that past neglect can be transformed into future enthusiastic, well resources specialism.
GENERAL CONCLUSIONS
The issues have been well summarized by Rabins (1985).
In his view the "pros" of segregation are: i Recruitment of interested specialist staff ii Specially designed environments iii Concentration of resources for dementia, avoiding diffusion of effort iv Special attention to relatives' needs and the greater acceptability to relatives of a "special unit" v Avoids fear, antagonism and rejection from the non-demented vi Special information, research and teaching are useful spin-offs The "cons" of segregation are: i It is usually a more expensive option ii Admission criteria are difficult to establish — what degree of dementia qualifies?
Should the entry qualification be to do with difficult behaviour rather than severity, or is required level of care the most important factor? iii Low expectations and reduced social stimulation from other residents may lead to impaired performance in dementia, hastening the decline iv Segregated units may become stigmatized, and be unattractive to prospective residents and relatives v Staff recruitment may be more difficult, and staff turnover may be higher vi A unit may find itself looking after an increasingly disabled group In response to the increasing numbers of dementia sufferers in every type of service for the elderly, we saw five different ways of dealing with the integration/segregation issue.
In many cases these responses had developed without clear policy decisions having been taken.
i Complete integration (though usually there is an assumption that severely disturbed dementing people will be excluded) ii Segregation "by stealth" .
Here dementia sufferers find themselves grouped together in one area away from the non-demented and may either get special attention or be specially ignored.
This may eventually lead to  iii Deliberate segregation within an integrated unit, where a policy decision is made to pay special attention to the needs of the dementing within a sub-unit iv Positive segregation.
Specialist, separate services for dementia sufferers v Negative segregation, that is, the refusal to accept dementing people into a service.
We concluded that it would be wrong to pick one model as universally applicable.
However we feel that it is important that each type of service debates the issues fully, in order to reach a realistic agreed policy, which also fits in with the policies of other local services.
In this debate the following questions may be helpful.
i Does the percentage of dementing people within a service affect its success or failure as an integrated service?
Is there a cut-off point beyond which some segregation is necessary?
Is there an ideal mix? ii Does the degree of dementia matter, or is it the presence of behaviour problems which makes a particular dementing person unacceptable to an integrated service? iii What efforts can be made to overcome the problems of integration and avoid "segregation by stealth" ?
For example, will specialist staff training on the problems of dementia help?
Can "well" people be asked and helped to befriend a dementia sufferer and so encourage better integration?
Does greater knowledge of an individual's background or clear understanding of their impairments help?
Should specialist services be brought in from outside for advice on specific problems and for continuing support? iv Can we reconcile hopes for continuity of care in a service with ideas of segregation?
People who develop dementia while in the care of a particular service pose a special problem.
v How does one service's policy on segregation or integration of dementia sufferers link with the policies of other local services?
Have the policies of all local agencies with regard to dementia been discussed and agreed?
These questions lead inevitably to consideration of segregation and integration of services as well as within an individual service.
This can be debated at all levels from ministerial to street level.
It is probably fair to say that communication has sometimes been more effective at very local level where local sharing of concerns over mutual clients has been possible  where inter-agency relationships are good.
The encouragement of joint planning at area/regional level has brought together inter-agency groups for the elderly, though only in some areas has this led on to the formation of specialist sub-groups to consider the needs of dementia sufferers.
At national level the Griffiths proposal of a Minister for community care brings the possibility of a crossing of traditional agency boundaries.
The questions which must be asked are: i Do specialist multi-agency dementia teams provide a model for the planning and provision of domiciliary day and respite care for all or for a proportion of the sufferers in a community?
Is that a model which should be applied universally or are there alternatives?
How far can dementia teams go in the planning of care, for example, in providing longer term care?
How can they ensure that they can be effective, that is, that they can actually provide services as well as providing assessments? ii If we go along the road of having dementia teams then what is the best management structure; for such a team?
Up till now most experiments in dementia teamwork have arisen at very local level.
Should there be specialist social workers in area teams with responsibility for developing dementia teamwork, or would this be more properly the function of the specialist social worker for the elderly? iii Would the care of dementia sufferers as well as that of other groups be enhanced is care of the elderly was integrated at local level, uniting the functions of the geriatric and psychiatric services, or uniting both with social services for the elderly? vi Alternatively would it be better to pursue the Griffiths proposal of Community care as an integrated organisation for the planning and delivery of care to a variety of disabled groups?
Griffiths includes all forms of domiciliary care and residential, but not hospital, care under the umbrella of "community care" v How much can be achieved, without any major reorganisation of services, by encouraging the integration of effort in planning and delivery of services by the joint planning machinery between health boards, social work departments, housing departments and voluntary agencies?
Should each area/region be encouraged to produce a joint "dementia plan" ?
Can the services help each other by the development of better liaison, sharing of concerns, mutual education, and when necessary transfer of clients, thus avoiding suspicions, excessive burden and displacement? vi What should be the proper role of specialist psychogeriatric services in relation to community care?
Up till now many new developments in the care of the dementing elderly have come from these services.
Should they be developing dementia registers in association with primary care teams or in some other way be trying to ensure that all dementia sufferers in a community have been properly assessed and offered appropriate services?
Should they be the main source of more specialist support and advice for community carers of all types?
Or should they concentrate their efforts on looking after those sufferers who require nursing care in day hospitals or wards?
Keeping these questions in mind we now briefly examine six different types of services where dementia sufferers may be found: a Policy No special needs housing agency in Scotland is known to have a formal written policy of dementia sufferers.
There is a range of views and practices, most of which tend to be responsive.
There is a tendency not to offer housing to dementia sufferers (especially where known behaviour problems exist), but on the other hand to try to help tenants who develop dementia as long as is reasonable.
At some stage it usually becomes necessary to move the dementing tenant to further care.
1 SPECIAL NEEDS HOUSING
b Literature The only relevant research in Scotland comprises studies conducted for Bield.
These are a tenant health survey (Farquhar and Williamson, 1988) and a survey of moves to further care (Altschul et al, 1988).
A warden survey of confusion in schemes has also been carried out.
These studies show that in Bield schemes 12.7% of tenants are dementia sufferers (10.4% mild; 2.3% moderate).
c Models Experience suggests that the principle of keeping sufferers as long as possible at home is interpreted in different ways by different agencies.
Within Bield one survey showed that half of those tenants who moved on to further care from sheltered housing did so wholly or primarily for mental health reasons.
The main reason for being moved on were: i Tenant no longer able to cope (dressing, nutrition, toileting, washing or supervision of drugs) ii Staff no longer able to cope with increasing dependence of tenant iii Unacceptable behaviour (particularly aggression towards other tenants).
d Options There are few options for housing agencies unless other agencies, particularly health and social work, can give more reality to the principles of "care in the community" .
At present many sheltered housing schemes are trying to cope with severe difficulties in relation to dementing tenants.
Some agencies prefer that provision should be made to make it easier for confused tenants to move on from sheltered housing.
Others, preferring continuity of care, would prefer to extend their care capacity, in partnership with social work and health, allowing dementing patients to continue to live in their own homes.
Options are: i Enhanced care for the tenant with extra outside practical help, supervision, advice and support ii Provision of separate areas or wings within schemes, to provide more appropriate care and supervision for the dementing tenant, ie positive segregation within an integrated unit These two options are not mutually exclusive.
a Policy Changing Patterns of Care (SHHD, 1980) suggests that the expansion of home helps' duties beyond straightforward domestic assistance into a more caring role will imply the provision of "specialist training" for a proportion of home helps and "suitable career gradings" .
It further suggests that frail and confused elderly people not seen by a District Nurse need "a Health Visitor's intervention and surveillance" .
2 DOMICILIARY SERVICES
The Timbury report (SHHD 1979) also recommends an expanding role for some home helps, because of the special needs of dementia sufferers.
The SHARPEN report (unpublished) suggests a wide range of ways in which the health services could concentrate increased resources on dementia sufferers at home as well as in hospitals.
They espouse the idea of dementia teams.
The Griffiths report (1988) encourages the idea of "community carers" who would cross the traditional boundaries between social work, health service, voluntary and private tasks in the domiciliary care of disabled people.
He suggests that the delivery of care should be individually planned by budget-holding "care managers" , presumably based on experience in Kent & Wales and other experimental schemes of"packages of care.
He emphasizes the need for proper training for people in both new types of job.
Apart from these comments there is a general assumption that domiciliary services should be non-specialised.
b Literature Apart from the literature on specialists dementia teams (Arrowsmith et al, 1985) and on packages of care for a variety of disabled or elderly client groups (Griffiths, 1988) no specific research literature was found.
Some segregated services were described in the SAD document on Innovative Services (1986) and in SWSDG (1984).
An intensive domiciliary care scheme, giving up to 15 hours per day home support to dementing patients is described in Liverpool (1983).
c Models Examples of segregated domiciliary services include: i The Renfrew and district Alzheimer's Scotland Home Visiting Scheme.
Linked with the day care centre this service provides specialist home support for carers and suffers.
ii Crossroads care Attendant Schemes.
Whilst these are providing an integrated service, some, eg NE Fife concentrate their efforts on dementia suffers, whilst specialist needs suffers, eg the Whitburn/Bathgate scheme which provides overnight care during holidays.
iii Edinburgh University Settlement Companion Scheme.
This scheme was set up to provide not only relief for carers but also stimulation and companionship for sufferers who live alone.
iv Kirkcaldy Alzheimer's Scotland project.
This is another successful specialist sitter/companion scheme.
v Night nursing services, Queen's Nursing Institute.
In several parts of the country small night nursing services specifically for dementia sufferers have been started using seed finance from the institute.
vi Dementia teams, Gilmerton and CAST, Corstorphine, Edinburgh.
These multi-agency teams have set themselves the task of identifying new cases, providing assessment by a member of the team and recommending suitable services.
They are still in the early stages of development.
d Options Integrated services have the attraction of simplicity.
A wider segregation, in the sense of having specialised workers for the elderly, as has been achieved in many local social work teams, is also attractive.
Both these options demand some specialised training in assessing and managing the problems of dementia suffers for workers who will also have other duties.
There is a danger that other "more attractive" areas of work take precedence, as has happened in the past, and that specialist training, which can be difficult to organise, does not occur.
The Griffiths proposal of generic community carers would avoid the problems of multiple agencies being involved in a single case because of multiple needs.
However, being apparently an integrationist solution, it might bring the danger that specialist training in dementia was neglected for these carers.
Working only with dementia sufferers in their own homes requires special skills, but also is taxing on patience and anxiety provoking.
Co-ordinating such services involves the provision of not only training but also extensive and continuing support and advice to the individual worker and group.
This is expensive of time and requires back-up from and good communication with other specialist services, eg the geriatric, psychiatric and primary care services.
The concept of key worker or care manager of the Griffiths report and the idea of individually planned packages of care for disabled people have great attractions for the carers of dementia sufferers.
These developments could avoid the present difficulties of having to go from one service to another in search for a solution to each of a multitude of problems.
It might also be hoped that a fairer distribution of resources would result but that might depend not only on the restraints of the individual care manager's budget but also on the priority given to dementia.
This is the key question.
In an integrated service will dementia sufferers be given sufficient priority, or can that only be achieved in a specialist service?
a Policy No policy statements were found to indicate the degree to which dementia sufferers and non-dementing people are expected to mix in day care, or in day hospitals.
The Timbury report (1979) envisaged specialist day facilities attached to the "continuing care homes" for old people with dementia.
3 DAY CARE
Dementia sufferers might be expected to gain by day attendance in the following ways: i diagnosis and assessment of problems ii management of particular problems iii reality orientation iv skill preservation v general stimulation, socialisation and recreation vi supervision vii respite for carers In practice it is often the last which predominates.
We can ask — what sort of day care will best provide for the individual needs of the sufferers?
Should this be organised by the NHS, social work departments, voluntary agencies or by  joint working?
Can dementia sufferers mix in day care with:a) healthy elderly people, b) other mentally ill people, c) physically ill people?
If mixing is seen as possible or even beneficial, then what is the best mix in each type of organisation?
If mixing causes difficulties, will the dementia sufferers gain from a segregated day centre or segregated days in a day centre or hospital, or will this merely put them at a disadvantage? b Literature Arie (1979) states that we need to know more of the pros and cons of integration in day hospitals.
Brocklehurst (1980) suggests that a unit might be "designed physically to separate then for most of the day" .
Specialist segregated"day centres have been described in SAD (1986).
MIND (1979) describes the special needs of dementia sufferers in day care.
c Models In social work day centres there is generally a policy of excluding behaviourally disturbed or severely disabled dementia sufferers, but of attempting complete integration of attenders.
In the voluntary sector, specialist day centres have been set up, for example at Paisley by Alzheimer's Scotland, using considerable volunteer help, with a strong emphasis on training and support for the voluntaries and good links with other relevant services, and at Craigshill, Livingston where good liaison with the local psychogeriatric service is seen as important.
Segregation within a generally integrated day centre is found at Dixon Halls in Glasgow.
A segregated unit within an existing day centre has just opened at Stockbridge House, Edinburgh.
Another suggested model is the "travelling" day centre, where a specialist service travels to a local centre to provide the day care for specialist groups.
In psychogeriatric day hospitals some segregation often occurs, either in the form of special group activities for the dementing, or special"organic days.
There is no doubt that some depressed patients find more disturbed demented patients distressing.
Geriatric day hospitals, despite having a considerable minority of dementia sufferers have not in general tackled the issue of integration.
Some mixed geriatric/psychogeriatric day hospitals exist (eg Queensberry House, Edinburgh) but again the most disturbed demented patients are excluded.
d Options It is likely that mildly demented people who are undisturbed will continue to attend "ordinary" day centres and geriatric day hospitals.
It is also likely that some very disturbed dementing patients will require specialised nursing care at a day hospital, which can also provide specialist assessment and treatment.
However the development, mainly in  the voluntary sector, of segregated dementia day centres offers the hope that the needs of the large intermediate group of sufferers and their carers can be looked after in small, local, enthusiastic units, taking pressure away from the"ordinary day centres and day hospitals and allowing them a better mix a Policy Part IV of the Social Work (Scotland) Act sets out the provisions for local authority residential care.
The underlying assumption appears to be one of integration.
Unlike the position in England, there has been no attempt to develop Elderly Mentally Infirm (EMI) Homes, though the concept was included in the Miller report (SHHD, 1970).
The failure to develop "Timbury Units" (SHHD, 1979) for fully segregated care of those with dementia has led to continuing reliance on care by the local authority and hospitals.
Most regional entry criteria to "Part IV" homes attempt to exclude those with severe dementia or behaviour disturbance.
4 LOCAL AUTHORITY RESIDENTIAL CARE
b Literature The occurrence of psychiatric illness in residential care has recently been described by Ames et al(1986) among many.
Integration/segregation issues have been well aired since teacher s study of the early EMI homes (1972), but much of the literature presents opposing views.
Wylie (1985) describes ways in which the difficulties can be overcome in relation to a particular home.
Hughes and Wilkin (1985) point out that the move towards integration in the community of mentally handicapped and mentally ill people has not been paralleled in relation to dementia.
They support bleacher, when he suggests that the dementing do best when living in as normal an environment as possible, and that segregation can cause stigma and poorly individualized care.
They conclude that integration is beneficial, but they advocate a maximum of 30%"moderately or severely demented residents, though without conclusive evidence.
In a study of consumer views, Wilkins and Hughes (1987) found considerable evidence of tolerance of "confusion" , but particular behaviour problems, such as shouting, offensive eating habits and aggression, rather than the presence of the confused person themself led to negative attitudes.
They remind us that these types of behaviour are not necessarily confined to those with dementia.
Norman (1982) points out that all homes have some dementing residents — it is how they are managed that is important.
She sees a danger if the rising numbers of sufferers lead to a majority of residents having dementia.
Whilst recognising that specialist homes may become "dumping grounds" she sees a positive role for such homes (Norman, 1987), which as centres of excellence, provide information and support as well as care.
Nevertheless, her descriptions of specialist homes show that  few are specially designed and few have the enhanced staffing levels that would be necessary for specialist care.
The successful place of local authority EMI homes in the care of dementing people in Newcastle is described by de Zoysa and Blessed (1984 c Models i Complete integration This is the position in many local authority homes, even though no positive decision may have been taken.
Integration is likely to continue.
For example, Highland Region's review suggests that residential homes will cope with "mildly and moderately mentally disabled residents" , with plans for only one specialised dementia unit in the whole region.
ii Segregation by stealth A separate lounge, wing or section of a room is seen as the territory of the "confused" in some homes.
Either staff or other residents may initiate this segregation, and it is usually based on behaviour that is seen as disruptive, so those who are segregated in this way are not necessarily all suffering from dementia.
iii Planned segregation in an integrated unit Borders regional council have a policy of designating one unit in their new group unit homes as being for people with mild to moderate dementia.
A similar policy has been pursued in Strathclyde.
iv Positive segregation — separate unit There is as yet no equivalent to Williamwood and the other Church of Scotland homes for the dementing elderly within the Part IV system, though, for example, Lothian Region and Health Board are planning to provide a jointly funded unit of this type.
v Negative segregation Although admission criteria vary, there is usually some attempt to exclude the "severely confused" .
Poor diagnosis of dementia means that there is great uncertainty about how many people with dementia are admitted to residential care (the probable figure is 40–50% of admissions); most of these will be "quietly dementing" .
So there is a negative segregation against difficult or disturbed sufferers, taking place at the time of the assessment.
d Options Any examination of the issues of integration and segregation in residential care demands clarification of the responsibilities of the local authorities and health boards, in relation to domiciliary care, assessment, rehabilitation and long term care.
If only the most dependent and disturbed patients are admitted to hospital care, then local authority care will need to provide for a wide range of elderly people including many with dementia, and some with milder behaviour problems.
Specialist local authority homes for dementia, to which new residents could be admitted, or to which residents of "ordinary" homes could be transferred at later stages, are a possibility, but are against strongly held principles of integration and continuity of care.
On the other hand the pressure of numbers, pushing the admission ratio of demented to non-demented and the ratio of demented to non-demented residents up beyond acceptable limits may force such developments.
Integration in ordinary Part IV homes, with some internal segregation (though this should never be achieved "by stealth" ) is inevitable.
To make integration tolerable to both residents and staff there are implications for the design, activities, staff training and support, staffing levels and a need for regular specialist input from community psychiatric nurses, psychologists and psychiatrists.
Another option is that Health boards provide "Timbury units" for considerable numbers of mildly and moderately demented patients, or that the private or voluntary sectors continue to increase their provision in this area.
On the one hand this might lessen the load of dementia on local authority care.
On the other hand there is the danger of negative attitudes developing about the segregated units after initial enthusiasm, or if they are not properly planned or provided with the resources to provide a truly specialist service.
a Policy No written policy statements were found.
It may be that the policy of differing rates of support for different categories of residential and nursing homes clients encourages some specialisation. b Literature A survey of registered nursing homes in Edinburgh showed that about 70% of residents suffered mild, moderate or severe dementia, but figures varied from home to home, indicating differing practices, not necessarily related to the declared policy of the homes (Primrose and Capewell, 1987).
c Models Three differing models exist.
i St Raphael's, Edinburgh Viewpoint Housing Association.
A policy of active integration is pursued.
ii In Williamwood House (Wylie, 1987; Norman, 1987) segregation follows a selective admission policy and  takes account of prevailing circumstances and the residents' changing needs.
Segregation is seen as a prelude to re-integration into the community, with an emphasis on rehabilitation.
iii In some private homes, eg Knowesouth, Borders, a strong emphasis on the special needs of dementia sufferers has led to a segregated approach.
d Options Managers in a variety"of facilities acknowledge that dementia sufferers have special needs, for which special measures are required.
In "integrated" homes some managers arrange separate sleeping accommodation, separate meal times, and special staffing, ie some internal segregation.
This segregation within an integrated unit is justified as protecting dementia sufferers from the intolerance of lucid fellow-residents and of ensuring that their special needs are met.
5 NON-STATUTORY RESIDENTIAL AND NURSING CARE
Factors which are deemed by managers to have a bearing on the integration of the demented include: i the proportion of the total who are dementing ii the physical layout of the home iii the level of skill among staff iv the attitudes of other residents v the attitudes of staff.
All these might be modified.
In conclusion, no common view prevails either on good practice "best mix" .
Variations in practice reflect the personal opinions of managers.
There is a severe lack of relevant information and research.
a Policy In general, psychogeriatric services aim to cater primarily for dementing patients who have behavioural or psychological problems; geriatric services for those who are physically frail, whether their frailty is due to dementia or not (Arie and Jolly, 1982,).
Most psychogeriatric services also cope with the "functionally" ill.
No area has a specific "dementia service" .
The Timbury Committee (SHHD, 1979) gave recommendations for bed numbers in Part IV homes and for geriatric and psychogeriatric services but appears to have assumed integration except in the case of their proposed "continuing care" homes.
These were to provide day, respite and residential care for dementia sufferers only, in parallel with the other services.
6 HOSPITAL IN-PATIENT CARE
b Literature A number of studies have enumerated dementia sufferers in differing types of care.
In the 1960s a series of  papers suggested that dementia sufferers who were "misplaced" in the wrong type of facility might have a poorer outcome.
The Manchester studies of Charlesworth and Wilkin (1982) showed that geriatric wards tended to have an even mix of the demented and the non-demented (about 15% and 30% moderately and severely confused respectively), and that psychogeriatric wards had a small minority of non-demented patients (about 14% were moderately confused and 80% were severely confused).
The concept of an "NHS nursing home" for elderly severely mentally ill people in Newcastle has been described by Fairbairn et al(1986), and a "hospice approach" to the treatment of "advanced dementia" within a general hospital in the USA has been described by Volicer et al (1986).
Ebmeier et al(1988) have given the first account of the setting up and running of a Timbury type unit serving a local area in Inverurie.
c Models i General Hospitals Theoretically, general hospital services are unsegregated, but there is often "segregation by stealth" in that dementing patients (often 10–20% of residents) are placed at one end of the ward, or in single rooms.
There are suggestions that dementing patients may get"second class treatment in this type of ward, eg they often have to wait longer for long term placement than the non-demented.
Staff may express a wish to have "negative segregation" , that is, that such patients should be excluded.
ii Geriatric services Although there are varying attitudes to dementia, all geriatric services deal with a significant number of dementia sufferers.
Wards are everywhere integrated, but, again, there may be "segregation by stealth" .
iii Psychogeriatric services Long stay wards tend to be effectively segregated with almost all patients demented.
The position of "functional" residents in these wards is difficult.
Assessment services are often segregated into "organic" and "functional" wards.
Day, outpatient and domiciliary services are usually unsegregated, but the "memory clinic" described by Philpott and Levy (1987) provides a new example of potentially useful segregation.
d Options In the past dementia wards in mental hospitals have been treated as second class by the institutions, and have had low financial input, poor staffing levels, poor training opportunities, acceptance of long waiting lists and consequent poor standards of care and low morale.
Emphasis on better design, better training, individualised care, more interest  relatives' needs, input from the rehabilitative professions, and the resiting of long stay care nearer to patients' homes could greatly enhance care and morale, allowing such wards to look after small numbers of severely disturbed residents extremely well.
Complete segregation of the less disturbed into specially designed or adapted "Timbury units" should help in all aspects of care and allow the hospital service proper to specialize in the care of the most disturbed and the terminally ill.
But complete segregation within the hospital service will be impossible and would be undesirable.
There will, in particular, continue to be a large number of dementia sufferers in the geriatric services.
Integrated services need specialist training of staff, help for other residents in learning to cope with dementing fellow residents, special attention to the special needs of the dementing and a fair division of time and resources between the two groups.
HOUSING ISSUES AND DEMENTIA
Introduction
Scottish Action on Dementia has calculated that at present there are likely to be at least 91,000 sufferers in Scotland of whom more than half have moderate or severe dementia.
The incidence increases with age so that in the age group 85 and over, more than 20% are likely to be affected.
The rapid growth in the number of people over 75 will bring a very significant increase in the total number of dementia sufferers in spite of the forecasted decline in the population aged 65 to 74.
This means that by 2001 there are likely to be 18,000 extra cases, all aged over 75.
(Data on Dementia, SAD 1986).
The main bulk of dementia sufferers now and in the future are elderly women, many of them living alone.
Residential homes and hospitals cater for only a minority of dementia sufferers and this situation is likely to continue for the foreseeable future.
The majority of sufferers live in their own homes or the homes of relatives, ie in ordinary housing.
A smaller proportion are in sheltered housing.
The evidence is that at the present time there is a serious lack of resources to care adequately for the number of sufferers living in ordinary housing, and that this mismatch between numbers and resources is likely to increase at least to the end of the century.
The purpose of this paper is to examine how conditions for both sufferers and their carers can be made as satisfactory as possible in "ordinary" and in sheltered housing, and to raise issues that need further examination.
The key principles for the care of dementia sufferers are set out in the SAD Report "Dementia in Scotland, Priorities for Care, Strategies for Change" as follows: People with dementia are entitled to: the same respect and regard for dignity and privacy as anyone else the same range and quality of services as other citizens opportunities to enhance their capabilities a range of services to support their declining abilities emotional and social care and support live as independently as possible and in familiar surroundings for as long as possible  actively participate as far as practicable in decisions affecting their daily lives and future care.
have access to independent safeguards against infringement of legal and civil rights services which recognise and provide for the support needs of their carers, whose goodwill must not be exploited.
2 Principles
In the context of this paper it is suggested that the following principles are added: dementia sufferers should be maintained in their own homes for as long as possible dementia sufferers should be maintained in their own community for as long as possible the number of moves should be kept to a minimum the independence, dignity and privacy of the sufferer must be respected the dementia sufferers must be involved as far as possible in discussions and decisions regarding their care and any possible move carers or potential carers should be involved in the decision-making process.
may be delayed when dementia sufferer lives alone, or is not well known in the community (eg crowded city areas; living in multi-storey blocks, or has recently moved to a new area).
may be particularly difficult in ethnic minorities.
may occur earlier when sufferer has regular contacts with family/friends; lives in a rural community or is in sheltered housing.
The advantages of early identification are that the patient can co-operate in decisions, and support services can be introduced at an early stage.
Efforts must also be made to remove the stigma of dementia so that relatives are not reluctant to accept the diagnosis, One issue is whether an early move to specialist housing enables the sufferer to cope longer.
The group is not aware of hard evidence to support this, but there is some anecdotal evidence.
3 Identification
3. identification
In some cases a move to sheltered or care housing is beneficial because of increased stimulation and (in the case of "care" housing) the provision of meals.
In addition the warden can alert the medical and social services to any signs of deterioration at this early stage, and appropriate action can be taken.
In this way people with mild or moderate dementia, who do not have behaviour problems, may be able to manage longer and even stay in such housing till they die.
include: memory changes behavioural changes incapacity to deal with financial matters pandering aggression paranoia damage to property (fire, flooding) lack of cleanliness or hygiene 3. identification may be made by: concerned family or friends caring or complaining neighbours housing officials (required to deal with "antisocial" behaviour or nonpayment of rent) police environmental health officers health professionals social worker lawyer creditors (eg private landlords) 3.4 There is a need to raise the general level of awareness of the general public and all professional groups about dementia.
Guidance needs to be given on the action to be taken once the possibility of dementia is suspected.
In the housing field there are areas where officials; may become aware of the existence of people with dementia because of nonpayment of rent, anti-social behaviour, poor standard of upkeep of the house.
Housing officers, private landlords, and environmental health officers may all be involved and information on dementia needs to be included in any training given to district council staff who work in these areas.
3.2 Problems which may lead to identification
When the diagnosis has been made, full assessment of the circumstances of the sufferer and the carer (if there is one) should be made.
Ideally this should be done by a community dementia team.
Reassessment at regular intervals, eg every 3–6 months is advised.
It should include: a review of the physical condition and general suitability of the house alterations, adaptations and aids home support services the advisability or otherwise of a move financial needs Major upgrading of a substandard house may exacerbate dementia; decisions need to be made in each case as to what improvements can be made with minimal disturbance to familiar surroundings.
Decisions regarding a move to other accommodation should, if possible, not be rushed, specially if the sufferer has recently been bereaved.
4 Assessment
This may be too large (or too small) inconveniently situated for transport, social support, shops etc or in an isolated locality in a confusing environment, eg in a multi-storey block or a large housing estate which can lead to difficulties in orientation liable to vandalism in poor repair be poorly insulated/difficult to heat have dangerous wiring Elderly owner-occupiers with few financial resources have particular problems; others may have resources but do not recognise the need for repairs.
Home Improvement Grants and "Care and Repair Schemes" may help.
Tenants may require assistance in negotiations with landlords or in approaches to housing officials.
4.1 Physical condition and suitability of house
Major upgrading may exacerbate dementia; decisions need to be made in each case as to what improvements can be made with minimal disturbance to the familiar surroundings of the sufferer.
The community occupational therapist (if available) could be helpful, or reference made to the list of useful safety devices in the SHEG Guide "Coping with Dementia — A Handbook for Carers" .
A telephone provides a ready means of checking on a sufferer living alone.
The emphasis is on reorganising to suit the sufferer's own pattern of activity rather than making a radical change in a familiar landscape.
Here are just a few examples: notices (pictorial or written) on doors and cupboards and the use of different colours aid recognition within the house reduction of clutter, removal of locks on cupboards and good lighting simplify movement within the house, and a child's safety gate on the stairs reduces the danger of wandering at night reminder notices eg "Don't forget your key" inside the front door or "Remember to turn off the gas" over the cooker communication between helpers may be assisted by a diary beside the telephone and a list of important numbers is useful if gas is used, the Gas Advisory Service (free to the elderly) will check all appliances and recommend safety measures alarm systems may not be very appropriate for dementia sufferers; they may be over- or under-used.
Regular calls from a carer or warden in sheltered housing may be helpful.
The pressure pad system (described in "A Place of my Own" by G Fennel) is used in some sheltered housing and can be fitted in ordinary housing 4.2.1 What support is necessary and available to enable the sufferer to remain at home?
Besides the normal services (home help, meals on wheels, relief services, incontinence etc) this should include financial needs such as housing benefit, attendance allowance, invalid care allowance.
In the case of discharge from hospital it is particularly important that full preparations are made for community care services so that no gap in continuity of services is permitted to occur.
4.2 Alterations, Adaptations and Aids
4.2.2 Is a move advisable now or reconsidered in the near future?
Decisions should not be rushed, specially if the sufferer has recently been bereaved.
4.2.3 [bat are the financial implications for the dementia sufferer and the carer?(see also section on Personal Finance) Any action plan arrived at should take into account not only the housing situation but also what effect the plan may have on the dementia sufferer.
Decisions regarding a move to other accommodation should, if possible, not be rushed, specially if the sufferer has been recently bereaved.
are a vital element in maintaining sufferers in ordinary or in  sheltered housing.
In the planning of support services there should be a close relationship between health and social work professionals, in the family and the sufferer (where appropriate).
In sheltered housing the warden has a very important part to play.
Because of her daily contact with the sufferer the warden will have a clearer idea of the degree of dementia than anyone, family or otherwise, whose contact is only occasional.
Once community dementia teams are established this process will become easier and it will be essential for the wardens contribution to be recognised.
4.3 Assessment and re-assessment of needs
One of the issues that has to be addressed in the assessment is what balance is appropriate between the freedom of the sufferer to pursue his or her own life in his or her own way, and the possible result of that freedom which may lead to damage to themselves or others.
too much care and control by others may lead to an earlier onset of dependency and deterioration and/or increasing frustration which might lead to difficult or aggressive behaviour.
for car drivers the danger to others is an important consideration and may need to take priority over the need for maintaining independence.
Incases where carers have participated in permitting freedom of action for the sufferer an and accident has followed the carer may need help in coming to terms with the feelings of guilt which may follow.
Problems mat arise in connection with the legal liability of care givers in the event of an accident or damage to property resulting from the sufferer's activities.
A neighbour, for instance, may experience considerable financial hardship if his property is flooded, and if this is repeated may be unable to obtain insurance cover.
These are difficult issues and cannot be dealt with fully here.
5 Rights and Risks
Many of the issues in rented housing may be related to tenure.
A major issue is how to balance the rights and needs of the dementia sufferer with the effect which they may have on other tenants.
6 Issues relating to different types of housing
6.1 Rented Housing
there is a danger with people with dementia being regarded as anti-social tenants.
Large housing estates or multi-storey blocks may pose problems of orientation for the people with dementia.
Dementia sufferers may be more likely to start fires thereby endangering other tenants in a block.
6.1.1 Council-rented housing
Security of tenure may be an issue here.
There is a possibility of eviction for non-payment of rent, or of harassment of a tenant whose behaviour is unacceptable.
Anti-harassment legislation exists but is not much used.
More information is needed about the rights of the tenant in privately rented property.
6.1.2 Private rented
A dementia sufferer may be living in substandard accommodation.
Common law legislation can be used here to force a landlord to make repairs.
The Housing (Scotland) Act, Section 8 sets a rent level up to which the Common Law Act is mandatory.
Under the new Housing (Scotland) Act secure tenancies will be replaced by assured tenancies which do not give security of tenure.
There is a danger that shrewd private landlords will go for short assured tenancies (4–5 years) which would give them the right to get rid of tenants (including those with dementia) when the lease runs out.
In the new Act the landlord can take the tenant to court for repossession for: 1 Non-payment of rent for 3 months 2 Persistently late payment of rent.
These are mandatory on the sheriff who has no option but to grant re-possession.
There are also discretionary grounds for re-possession: 1 Deterioration of house due to tenant's activities 2 Tenant is causing nuisance or annoyance to neighbours.
Formerly the tenant had "security of tenure" which meant that the sheriff had the option of calling for negotiation and involving a social worker.
It seems that the only recourse a sufferer now has is to appeal to the landlord.
The courts cannot assist.
Registration of rents is to be abolished (formerly rents were registered with the rent officer).
The landlord now has the right to reconsider the rent every 12 months instead of every 3 years.
If an assured tenancy is accepted a tenant has to abide by its terms  only the landlord has the right to reconsider the rent which he can raise annually — the tenant has to accept or leave.
A proportion of tenants already in sheltered housing will develop -dementia.
The issue is to decide the extent to which sufferers may be supported and maintained in sheltered housing.
Experience suggests that even a severely demented tenant may be accommodated, provided support services are adequate.
A warden can perhaps cope with one or two dementia sufferers.
The pressure on the warden and other residents has to be taken into account, and training and guidance for the warden is needed.
6.1.3 Sheltered Housing
The responsibilities and duties of the warden require to be clearly understood by all concerned including the sufferer (if that is possible) and the relatives.
The admission of a tenant already showing signs of dementia requires very careful consideration in the individual case.
One problem that has arisen is that a new tenant may not settle quickly and may wish to leave even though this may be unrealistic.
A recent survey,(Williamson and Farquhar, Bield Housing Association Occasional Paper No 1) has examined the prevalence of mental and physical disability in a sample of sheltered housing tenants.
These tenants included a higher proportion in the age-groups 74–79, 80–84 and 85 and over than occurred in the general population.
13% were found to be cognitively impaired.
Many of these require frequent supervision and add to the work load of the warden.
They had been accepted for admission before the onset of dementia (most sheltered housing associations would not accept a new tenant who was already showing evidence of dementia), but with increasing age in the sheltered housing population cases are likely to occur more frequently.
For those tenants who become so dependent as to require more intensive care than can be reasonably provided in sheltered housing the survey asks: "Are they to be" bolstered up "by extra warden support (and other sources of help) or are they to be transferred to more appropriate settings?" 
Another study (Altschul et al, Bield Housing Association Occasional paper No 2) investigated the factors underlying admissions of tenants from sheltered housing into long stay hospital, nursing or residential care.
Dementia and/or confusion was by far the most common condition requiring such a move (50%).
In half the cases the dementia or confusion was "just about manageable" , but the others exhibited behavioural difficulties which posed great problems for the other tenants.
Tenants in sheltered housing schemes are very concerned about any increase in services and therefore costs.
These are shared out equally between the tenants so that the "fit" may feel they are having to support the "unfit" .
The costs may be particularly worrying for dementia sufferers.
While the immediate solution to a dementia problem may seem to be increasing staffing, eg another warden part- or full-time, the effect on other tenants has to be taken into account.
The additional services needed therefore have to be financed from some other source.
The options are: Attendance Allowance.
If the tenants can get this it can be used to provide additional care.
However this may only be sufficient to provide 10 hours per week.
Group Use of Attendance Allowance.
Kirk Care uses this system to employ home carers 7 hours a day, 7 days a week for a group of tenants all receiving Attendance Allowance.
Tenants have a variety of problems, including dementia.
The organisation and administration are complex.
Currently the costs are borne by Kirk Care.
If a carer moves into a rented house to care for someone the right to succeed to the tenancy on the death of the tenant is lost (Schedule 6 para 3) unless the care has lasted at least 5 years (formerly 6 months was the qualifying period).
The carer, who may have given up her own home, is then homeless.
In addition succession rights can only be passed on once.
If the carer moves  in to look after a couple (eg elderly parents) on the death of one spouse the tenancy goes to the surviving spouse.
It cannot then go to the carer no matter how long the care has lasted.
The implications for community care are serious.
6.1.4 Rights of succession for carers in rented housing
Older people often find difficulty in maintaining their property.
Where the owner is also suffering from dementia this becomes' an even greater problem.
Deteriorating property may be a hazard to both owner and neighbours.
Dangerous wiring may lead to fires.
6.2 Owner occupied housing
The issue here is to persuade the owner that maintenance is essential and to assist in carrying it out.
Care and Repair projects may be beneficial in achieving this aim.
Retirement homes built by private developers are proliferating.
There is no planning policy to ensure that they are not concentrated in one area which may lead to enormous pressures on local support services.
In these developments, management services are concerned with the practical problems of repairs and maintenance rather than the kind of care that is provided by wardens in sheltered housing.
In some cases the management services are provided by a recognised housing association; in other cases this is not so and the purchaser may be misled by the amount of help that could be expected in an emergency.
There may only be 9–5 cover or even less.
Purchasers may not understand the extent of their liabilities and the true extent of the help they might receive in an emergency.
There appears to be no policy in relation to dementia either from the point of view of the sufferer or the problems that might follow for other owner-occupiers.
6.2.1 Retirement housing for sale
In recent years the provision of housing for people who need a degree of care and support has blurred the division between housing and residential care.
Housing developments are increasingly being registered by social work departments.
A further step in this process has been the acknowledgement of the part that housing has to play in the provision of long stay accommodation for people suffering from dementia.
6.3 Involvement of housing authorities in new initiatives
In Scotland a number of health boards and social work departments are having discussions with the housing associations with the intention of providing accommodation for dementia suffers where the building is provided by the housing association.
This enables housing associations to use their expertise in design as well as providing maintenance for the building.
Housing, health and social work each provide part of the finance and the management of the project may be by a committee representing all three authorities or may be taken on by one of the participating organisations or by a voluntary body which specialises in carrying for dementia sufferers.
Some proposals include provision of a day centre and respite care.
Similar projects have been started in England.
[An up-dated directory of innovative projects and design of units is being compiled by SAD and the Dementia Services Development Centre — to be released in November 1990].
7.1 Radical changes in the State Benefits system introduced through the Social Security Act 1986 have affected all claimants including dementia sufferers and those who care for them.
7 Personal Finances
The changes include: 7.1.1 The abolition of the additional requirements allowance and the substitution of premiums to the Income Support Scheme for elderly and disabled people.
7.1.2 The introduction of an Independent Living Fund administered by the Disablement Income Group as a substitute for the domestic help additional requirement.
7.1.3 Changes in the taper arrangements for housing benefit which mean that up to 85% of income above the Income Support Level will be set against Housing Benefit entitlement.
7.1.4 Changes in the criteria for measuring the eligibility of service charges for Housing Benefit.
7.1.5 The abolition of single payments and the substitution of a Grant and Loan scheme through a Social Fund with a restricted budget.
The net effect of all these changes is hard to estimate.
There are "transitional protection" arrangements for those who would otherwise be  net losers.
The effects of the benefits changes are being monitored by a wide variety of agencies but no research findings are yet available.
for more than 6 weeks now entails loss of pension and loss of Housing Benefit; formerly local authorities had discretion to continue entitlement to Housing Benefit for quite prolonged admissions.
The consequence could be a reluctance to enter or remain in hospital care or pressure to prematurely dispose of a home.
7.2.2 The criteria for the higher (night-time) rate of Attendance Allowance has been changed.
Formerly it was sufficient that attention might be required at night; now repeated attention is required involving a carer being awake for a prolonged period or at frequent intervals.
It is probable that the numbers qualifying for the higher rate will be significantly reduced.
7.3 One further issue concerning Personal Finances where changes seem desirable would help dementia sufferers to remain longer in their own homes in the community: 7.3.1 Invalid Care Allowance is taken fully into account in calculations for any other State Benefit such as income support so many claimants receiving ICA are not better off financially (though pension rights are better protected).
The Disablement Income Group, the Disability Alliance and the National Association of Carers are co-ordinating a campaign to make ICA a universal benefit additional to any other benefit (like Attendance Allowance or Mobility Allowance).
Clearly this would make life a lot easier for carers.
8.1 Elected members of public and voluntary bodies.
7.2 Two changes seem likely to have a specific impact on people with dementia:
7.2.1 Admission to hospital
8 Training Requirements
8.2 Officials, eg all grades of housing staff, environmental health officers, community charge staff, police.
All these are likely to encounter dementia in the course of their work.
For these the group suggests: A general leaflet on dementia, and guidance on procedure if it is suspected.
A training package which could be used by Local Authorities for in-house training sessions.
(It is suggested that this could be developed in association with COSLA).
Professional Institutes (eg the Institute of Housing).
Specialist day courses for staff actively involved in dealing with dementia problems.
8.3 Wardens of sheltered housing require training in dealing with the problem.
It is hoped that there will be a warden's certificate in the near future.
Employers should ensure that all wardens receive basic training in dealing with dementia.
8.4 All means possible should be used to raise the level of awareness in the general population by use of the media, providing publicity material for voluntary groups etc 8.5 The SHEG guide "Coping with Dementia — A Handbook for Carers" should be distributed as widely as possible to all carers.
8.6 Appropriate measures to reach ethnic minorities eg leaflets in different languages, involvement of community leaders.
9.2 Home ownership is increasing and is likely to continue to do so, though elderly women living on their own (the majority of dementia sufferers) will still be more likely to live in rented accommodation (public or private).
Private low-cost rented housing is often in poor condition.
The "right-to-buy" legislation which has increased home ownership has, at the same time, reduced the ability of housing departments to rehouse people according to their need.
The housing stock which remains with the local authority tends to be less attractive than what is sold off, and much of it is less suitable for elderly people whose needs are for low-cost, good quality housing with ground-floor access in a safe and secure neighbourhood and close to good social support networks.
Under the Housing (Scotland) Bill the SSHA and the Housing Corporation in Scotland will be replaced by a new agency — Scottish Homes (April 1989).
The private sector will be increasingly involved in new building.
9 Current Changes in Housing Legislation
payments is uncertain at .The level of rent to qualify for full Housing Benefit subsidy will be determined according to locally operating market forces.
Claimants will be discouraged from living in accommodation too large for their needs.
The "pick-a-landlord" scheme is likely to pose considerable problems for dementia sufferers and those advising them.
Prior to the new Scottish legislation, Housing Associations received funding for new developments (capital costs) from the Housing Corporation in Scotland.
The new agency — Scottish Homes — will depend to an increased degree on private funding.
The Department of the Environment has stated (Sept 1987): "The legislation will not of itself prescribe grant percentages, nor the detailed mechanics of the operation of the calculation and retention of rental surpluses, nor the detailed changes in accounting requirements which will be needed" .
9.2 The Funding of Housing Associations
The future therefore is extremely uncertain.
How far the private sector will be prepared to finance "special needs" housing where the return on capital is likely to be limited is doubtful, as also is the Government's commitment to make up any shortfall.
There has already been a switch of emphasis away from sheltered housing for the elderly to other groups in special need, and what money has been available has been targetted to those areas which have not been well served in the past (peripheral housing estates, remote areas and less attractive small towns), or to developments offering very special facilities (eg sheltered housing for the elderly deaf).
This uncertainty comes at a time when the housing needs of all elderly people are increasing and there is a clear need for more good low-cost rented accommodation.
One of the aims of the new housing legislation is to increase the amount of rented accommodation available, but as this is dependent on private sector financing it is feared that it will be of greater benefit to the better-off section of the community.
This paper has raised some of the issues involved in providing support and suitable living in their own homes, in the homes of friends or relatives or in sheltered housing.
Those working at the sharp end will be able to add from their own  experience.
Most would agree that there are no clear-cut answers and solutions have to be sought from what is available rather than from what is desirable.
Nevertheless the number and wide variety of innovative schemes described in another SAD publication are good omens for the future.
10 Conclusion
Attempts to solve some of the many problems which arise are not made easier by the many changes currently being made in Social Security, the introduction of the Community Charge and the new housing legislation.
All these require monitoring to see the effects on our client group.
This paper was prepared by members of the Scottish Action on Dementia Working Group on Housing Issues: Chairman: Dr Eileen Crofton Members: Mrs Isobel Duncan Mr Norman Dunhill Mrs Fiona Russell Mr Willem Willems Postscript The White Paper"Caring for People! has now appeared.
The role of Housing in Community Care is barely recognised although the implications are far reaching and will be the focus of much attention for some time to come.
LOCAL PLANNING AND PRIVATE DEVELOPMENT
Linda Headland
Can I just say, first of all, that I am the odd-speaker out in this gathering because virtually everyone else who has addressed you has done so from the point of view of their own particular expertise and occupation and those of you who know health councils will appreciate that they tend to take a pretty robust view of private care as it impinges on anything to do with health.
I am not actually here speaking with my occupational hat on, I'm not here speaking from the health council's point of view.
I'm here because I drew the short straw when Jan Killeen was dishing out people to chair particular interest groups in preparation for this work, and I drew the job of chairing the group on private care issues.
So I'm not therefore an expert on the issues that are raised by the private care question and I hope you'll be appropriately kind when it comes to the questioning.
However, what I can do is try to present to you some of the points of view we tried to draw together in that group because we did have someone who is a proprietor of a private home; we had people from health; we had people from social work; we had people from housing; we had people from different interest groups who approached the issue in different ways.
What I would like to do is to take you through some of the issues we tried to work through.
First we looked at basic rights of people with dementia and produced the following statement: "It should be the right of any confused or dementing elderly person requiring care as a consequence of their mental state to be provided with the form of care most appropriate to their needs.
An effective means of achieving this is by the use of an individual care assessment approach, the main elements of which include the following: 1 Medical, Nursing and Social assessment of the person's needs to determine the most appropriate form of care, eg domiciliary/residential/day care, taking into account availability in both the public and private sector.
2 Identification of achievable objectives to maintain/improve the physical and mental health of the person.
3 Production of treatment plans and programmes (Medical/Nursing/Social and other care) which are necessary to achieve the objectives.
4 Realistic target dates for repeat assessments of the person and regular evaluation of care plans and programmes and their effectiveness.
The involvement of family and other carers during each of the elements should be considered standard practice.
At present there is no standard assessment offered to anyone seeking or requiring care as a result of their mental condition and as a consequence placement can be decided on factors other than the medical and social needs of the sufferer.
A common assessment policy for all is required if misplacement is to be avoided."
Next we considered the definition of private care.
What does it cover?
We're not talking about local authority homes, we are not talking about the voluntary sector, we are talking about the private homes which are run by private companies, or individuals, not on a voluntary basis, but on a profit basis.
The next question that this prompts, is what response does this evoke in you?
When we discussed it, it became clear that there is a wide spectrum of response to the whole issue of private care, that the response from within the statutory services tends to be one of suspicion, tends to be one of sometimes a fairly moralistic approach and this is quite at odds with the response we are seeing from the government which tends to go to the other end of the spectrum and be promoting private care as the solution to many of the problems of service provision and volume that are being encountered at the moment.
We took as our starting point the fact that whether you like it or whether you don't like it, it is a fact of life.
It's with us, it will stay with us, it will grow with us and in order to help protect the interests of people who, I think most of the speakers to date have acknowledged the fact, it is a bit of a lottery where the care needs end up.
In order to protect the interests of all people with care needs, of all people with dementia, who might end up in a private home, might end up in a voluntary home, might end up in Part 4 or might end up in a health service bed, it is necessary to look across that range of services at the general issues raised and see what can be done constructively in the interests of that total group of people with defined needs.
And that we tried to do.
I think there are certain statements that we would have liked to make and that I will try to make on behalf of the group before we get into the sort of proposals we would like to see.
One is that the statutory services are not uniformly ideal and beyond reproach and those of us who have worked in and with them would acknowledge that.
The second is that the statutory services do not have the monopoly of altruism or the monopoly of occupying the high moral ground, and I think that those of you who saw the presentation given yesterday afternoon by Mike O'Reilly on the work that's being done at Knowesouth, the private home he and his wife run, would have to concede that that was an excellent example of the kind of not only interesting, but the kind of pushing forward the boundaries of what can be done in different kinds of settings for people with dementia.
And that is being done outside of the statutory services and outside of the voluntary sector.
I think that the other side of that is that not everyone in private provision is in it for the money.
And there's another side to that which is that some people in the statutory provision are in it for the money, for their careers, for empire building and so on.
These are all things that we have to bear in mind.
That the world is not divided into 2 classes of people — one who run private care for nasty reasons — and another group who work in the statutory service for all the good reasons, and that what we have to do is be prepared to step outside of those kinds of labelling and look at what we are seeing, look at the needs of the people we are trying to help make provision for and see what best can be done out of the resources available.
To get back to where we started from, whether you like it or you don't like it, it is there and it is growing.
It's awfully hard to get information about registered nursing homes.
Most of the information I've got is about residential homes and that is because Social Work Services Group is an awful lot better at pulling together statistics and putting them out again than the Scottish Home and Health Department.
The following table gives about as much as SHHD had in the way of detailed information about registered nursing homes.
Date Number of homes Number of beds 1987 169 5000 1988 200 7000 Approximately half of those homes say they offer some provision for the elderly with mental impairment.
Terminology is very careful in the way it is couched.
When you talk to SHHD they define it in terms of mental impairment.
The SWSG figures, when they try to break it down, they talk about people with confusion.
They're not actually prepared to go in to diagnosing dementia which I think is very wise of them but it means that you could then get into a very interesting discussion about whether we're talking about people with dementia or about people who are simply confused.
I think that's an important discussion to have elsewhere but the only figures that are available to us are using the labels that I've got.
If you look at one area — the Ayrshire and Arran health board-list of registered nursing homes, in July of this year (1988) there were 1093 beds, by October that had gone up to 1125 beds and their projection for next year is 1442 beds.
And that's for beds in registered nursing homes in one health board area where I think the total bed complement for the health board is something like 3000.
This is not catering for the indigenous population of Ayrshire and Arran.
This is part of Scotland's costa geriatrica.
If you go into the information about residential homes, Year Number of homes Number of places 1986 502 15977 1987 546 16740 That's an increase of 44 homes and 763 places.
What's interesting is that 40 of those 44 homes were private and 641 of the 763 new places were private.
That's where the growth is taking place in the residential homes.
And the other interesting point to note is that over a number of years — over 5 or 6 years — all categories are consistently running at 90% occupancy.
Sources of financial support for residents in private homes Date Private means Local authority Health board DHSS 1985 65.6% 9.1% 0.6% 26.8% 1987 50.7% 1.2% 0.0% 48.1% Increase in funding for people in private homes is coming from DHSS.
If you look at the incidence of mental confusion by status of the home for 1987 the estimate was that in the local authority homes, 24% were mentally confused, in the voluntary homes 19% were mentally confused and in the private homes 36% were mentally confused, so according to SWSG information, the percentage of people with mental confusion is highest in the private homes.
That's also the area which is growing fastest and it's also the area where increasingly it's DHSS funding that's making it all happen.
If you look at the trends in the incidence of mental confusion in residential homes (all categories, that's local authority, voluntary, private), it's gone from 15% in 1980 by small stages until it reaches 24% in 1987.
As I said, whether mental confusion equals dementia, what exact degree of dependency what degree of confusion, what degree of dementia, this doesn't tell you but what it does do is help to give us a picture of what is happening, not just in the local authority sector which we've heard from, not just in the voluntary sector, which we've heard from, but, if this is to be believed, by an even greater rate of increase in the private sector.
Part of the problem that we got back to when we looked over the issues is that what's happening in the private sector is not just that it's growing but that it's very much in an unplanned fashion.
It's growing out of sync with the rest of service provision and service development, and this has all sorts of  spin-offs.
In the short term, in the immediate term one category that see the big effects are the GPs.
Some GPs are getting quite despairing about their ability to cope with the unplanned influx of an elderly population.
This is particularly a problem in the rural areas, and it's particularly in the rural areas where this happens.
You have one practice.
The practice cannot therefor either share the load or hand it over.
They can't pass the buck.
They are the only GP practice.
I talked recently to one in the Highland area who reckons that something like 80% of the people on his list are now over retirement age.
And he attributes a great deal of that to the rapid growth of the development of private homes within his area.
His point is that he is in effect running the equivalent of a small assessment unit but he is not actually getting paid for running the equivalent of a small assessment unit.
He reckons that if he were getting paid on the same basis that he gets paid for GP beds, in a small GP unit, he could afford to employ the additional staff, and resources and back-up to help make it all happen.
But it is not working like that.
It is simply an added responsibility.
It is not being planned.
It is not being catered for within the health service.
Other people could probably tell their own tale about the impact it's having on the way in which they have to work and the ways in which they have to respond.
It's also the case and I'm not trying to malign any part of the private sector and I certainly don't want to be the subject of a libel action, but it is showing a tendency to grow in directions that are contrary to the hard won ideas of good practice in statutory provision.
The idea that you can accommodate people with these special needs in large units.
There was a case in Lothian last year where the health board objected to the conversion of somewhere into a 75 bed registered nursing home and they lost it on appeal.
There was a home opened in Tayside earlier this year — a 90 bed home — and this is flying in the face of what a lot of people have put in a lot of effort arguing with health service that you have to get away from the concept that 80, 90, 120 beds is a small unit.
It's been one of the success stories of the last few years, managing to get through the culture barrier where the local authority thought a small unit was 15 or 20 people working down and the health service thought a small unit was 120 and worked down with great reluctance.
But what is happening is that private care is beginning to recreate some of the practices that the statutory authorities have been working away from.
Size is one.
Isolation is another.
The sorts of premises that lend themselves to this kind of development tend to be your large country house type accommodation, miles from anywhere.
The 75-bed proposal was something like 15 or 16 miles away from the city.
We are also seeing the idea that you can mix geriatric, psychogeriatric and young chronic sick people in the one unit and successfully cater for the needs of all 3 groups.
Now there has been a discussion about integration and segregation but I don't think that when people talk about integration they mean geriatric, psychogeriatric and young chronic sick all under the one roof.
And yet these are the things that are  happening within the private sector with DHSS funding to a large extent and the present planning provision, the present registration and monitoring arrangements don't allow anyone to say "No, this isn't acceptable" 
The private sector is there.
It's growing it will continue to grow.
Michael Forsyth said on the news last night that public support for residential care will continue and I believe him.
The present arrangements for approving and monitoring private care don't address any of these issues.
There are good examples of what can be done in private care.
Private care can be flexible and innovative in a way that statutory services often find difficult.
Private care doesn't have to answer to all the pressures that are on the statutory services.
But on the other hand private care suffers from not being part of the mainstream thinking that has gone in to helping to move away from those bad practices and towards better practices in the statutory services and I think that these are the things that we really have to try and address.
I haven't seen the draft guidelines that came out yesterday for the registration of nursing homes but I understand that they don't actually address these issues.
The old chestnut of fire safety came up again and I understand that they do talk about treatment standards but I don't know what they say about them.
They do talk about staffing levels but I'm not sure what's in that.
It'll be necessary for all of us to go back and look at those very very carefully and to think to what extent they address the kinds of problems that we can actually see developing, the kinds of things which we are fighting our way away from in the statutory services and yet might find that they are growing in an uncontrolled way in the development of the private sector.
What the group's paper tried to suggest was that we don't simply endure the existence of the private sector.
We recognise the potential strengths in it and we try to get into a constructive relationship with it.
Now that will require all sorts of things.
It will require some things that are going to be necessary for the statutory and voluntary sectors in any case and it will mean drawing the private sector in, like a common assessment policy for all long term care.
This is something I think there will be agreement with across the board.
People have complained — is this a health service problem? is this a local authority problem? and that is an acknowledgement of the fact that you can match just about anyone you can find in one service's bed, with someone in someone else's service's bed.
Shuffling all those bodies about to get it all nice and tidy, I think would not only be an enormous exercise, it would be a waste of time, because people don't stay fixed in aspic once you've placed them in the right place; they change, they progress, they regress or whatever.
people have talked a lot about collaboration and the need for joint working and so on.
I think one of the things that has to be addressed is not "who does this belong to?" but "what is the basis for a common approach?" so that we can get a common assessment policy so that we can get reassessment whenever it's required, so that we can get packages of care devised that are appropriate to the  needs of people and so on.
And I think a common assessment policy if it is to come has to include the private sector at least in so far as the public sector is funded by private money.
I think also we have to look at how we share the progress that has been made in the statutory services with the people in private care.
Whether that is done on the basis of relying on the goodwill of the people in private care or whether it is done through regulation is something that 1) we have to decide our preference on and 2) we have to lobby government quite hard on.
I would suggest that initially one of the things we ought to be doing is making approaches to the private sector through their organisations where they exist and say, look we really have to begin to get into the kind of discussions that you have been talking about earlier between health and social work; health, social work and the voluntary side to talk about the issues of planning and the issues of quality and the issues of the form and shape of services and what sort of developments are acceptable in client-need terms and what are not acceptable.
And see whether or not there is basis for an agreement on that because if it is possible to get an agreement on that it is infinitely easier to persuade the government that regulations have to be written which cover all of these issues and cover all of the sectors and that therefore makes it easier to create a situation in which it is not possible for an independent company that wish to ignore the good practice guidelines to simply go ahead and do so.
At the moment we are in a situation where you can get an extremely good example like the O'Reillys and you can get an extremely bad example and there is no way of regulating which you end up with.
We tried to draw out the kind of changes that might help make the whole thing happen.
We suggested that you need to address the funding issues.
Agreeing a philosophy and getting agreement from the private sector on a philosophy is a matter of getting round the table with people and getting into those kind of discussions.
I think Scottish Action on Dementia has a role to play in that.
I think the statutory services which are the registering bodies also have a role to play in that.
I think that the departments have a role to play in that.
It's also suggested that we have to look at the funding issues.
It is not anyone's wish to reduce the overall level of money available to provide for the needs of people with dementia.
Whatever people might think about DHSS money, what it has meant in practice is that the global sum of money to help provide for the needs of people with dementia or other long-term needs is much greater than it would have been if they were not attracting DHSS supplementation.
Now you might agree with the audit commission, and I certainly do, that the way in which it is handled provides perverse incentive to community care.
You might agree that it's wasteful that it's not the best way of channelling the resources but the fact is that the global amount available because of it is much greater than it was and that will be our baseline to start from if they decide to reorganise the money in a different way.
It means we're starting from a better baseline than if we were simply dealing  with health services budget and social work's budget and what the voluntary sector has managed to pull together.
So I think we ought to be considering the entire sum of money but we ought also to be looking for ways in which we could be maximising the total impact.
I think also we have to acknowledge that whoever is providing a service, if they are trying to produce an enhanced level of service, it will cost more.
Sylvia Cox was talking yesterday about how they've had to double the staffing ratio in certain forms of accommodation — you can imagine what this does to costs.
If we are expecting a good level of practice from proprietors, whether private proprietors or statutory, then we have not to expect them to be out of pocket at the end of the day as a result.
I think we ought to be looking at ways of encouraging innovative developments in the range of services for those people who fall between long-stay in patient medical care and unsupported family care.
The private sector probably has even more flexibility to find imaginative ways of addressing those issues than the statutory services; I think we ought to be prepared to give backing.
One of the speakers was suggesting that a proposal should be judged on its merits when it comes forward for approval to the registering authority and that if it doesn't fit into the set pattern, that shouldn't necessarily debar it.
It should be whether or not it is addressing the defined needs of a group of people.
We should recognise that special care involves additional cost.
We should be trying to enhance cooperative arrangements of referral and support between health and social work departments and private homes, and Mike O'Reilly didn't actually say that they had that problem but he said that their clients had been referred by GPs or by the psychogeriatric service.
In other words, they actually arrange a medical assessment before someone is admitted and they then try to continue the kind of care that that has initiated.
We must try to seek ways of recognising the role of dedicated resident proprietors.
We tried to give examples of the ways we could try to direct finance to help these sort of things happen.
It would include things like a few national demonstration projects, encouragement of associations of private residential homes, encouragement of training programmes, there are one or two area in the country — eg Norfolk — where the health authority offers training to the private sector, on the grounds that if it can share its experience and expertise they can help boost the overall quality of care available within their area.
There are going to be implications for the private sector and for the statutory authorities and for SAD.
For private residential care, we were arguing that there should be regulation of the location, form and size of private care by means of planning permission and monitoring arrangements.
We should not be prepared to see developments that are much larger or more isolated than we would ever tolerate in the statutory services and doing things like "mixing up" clients that would statutorily no longer be tolerated.
Those involved in private care should arrange among themselves how they could be represented in the local planning process because if they are  going to be covered by the planning arrangements then natural justice suggests that they should have an input in to the planning process.
When public funds are required to support someone in private care the needs of that person should be assessed in the same way as for admission to statutory care and admission should depend on the results of that assessment.
This means that the registering and monitoring arrangements need to be changed and that the statutory authorities need to establish through the joint planning mechanisms a way of incorporating these changes, that health and local authorities need to create a place for the private sector in the planning progress and that the role of bodies like the Mental Welfare Commission, the Hospital Advisory Service, the health councils needs to be extended to encompass and specifically address the whole business of monitoring the provision in the private sector in so far as it's supported by public funds.
SAD should begin to seek a partnership between statutory and private care in order to begin to explore all of these issues.
It should begin to open up negotiations with the statutory services which come under the SAD umbrella to see what sort of progress should be made on this.
Initially what we should all do is go back and look at those draft guidelines for the registration of nursing homes and be prepared to pull them to pieces, not so much for what they are saying but for what they are not saying and ought to be saying in order to be relevant.
The chances are they are not going to be changed again in a hurry and to saddle ourselves with something that is going to allow the development and perpetuation of something which most of us hero would call bad and unacceptable practice in care of the elderly with dementia, would be a totally retrograde step.
Written by Linda Headland on the basis of work carried out by the Scottish Action on Dementia Working Group on Private Care.
Members of the Working Group: Mrs Linda Headland Chair Secretary, Association of Scottish Local Health Councils Miss Sommerville Chief Area Nursing Officer, Argyll & Clyde Health Board Mr Richard Parry Lecturer, Department of Social Policy and Social Work, University of Edinburgh Mr Mike O'Reilly Proprietor, Private Residential Home Mrs Chris Burns Assistant District Officer (Elderly), Strathclyde Regional Council 
WHAT PLACE FOR VOLUNTARY ORGANISATIONS IN LOCAL PLANNING AND SERVICE PROVISION?
EWAN DAVIDSON, DIRECTOR, ALZHEIMER'S SCOTLAND"These are boom times for voluntary Organisations.
We have never had it so good."
This was said to me, not by me, at a seminar on joint planning the other week and it was said over lunch by the director of another voluntary organisation which shall remain nameless.
He said it very quietly in case anybody from the health board or the social work department overheard us.
In the voluntary sector we are still, after all, supplicants; we still need to appear humble.
It had never really occurred to me to put things in those terms but I can see what he meant and to an extent he was partly right.
In the 70s, voluntary organisations seemed almost to be going out of existence.
They were playing an ever-diminishing part in service provision.
In the 80s, they seem to have made a recovery.
They are perhaps playing a more prominent part than they have done for a long time.
It is not hard to identify some voluntary organisations whose turnover is expanding dramatically, perhaps even doubling, year by year.
It's not hard to identify some voluntary organisations which were shoe string operations a few years ago but are now lumbering their employees in the hundreds.
A Darwinian process has weeded out some of the older voluntary organisations which have perhaps outlived their purpose.
New voluntary organisations have sprung up to replace them.
There seem to be more and more.
I tried to analyse, through studying a succession of reports in the last decade on community care in general and on services for people with dementia in particular, whether this sort of enhanced role for the voluntary sector had been charted or signalled in any way.
Reading through these lengthy reports and sifting out the very scattered references, sometimes token references, to the voluntary sector is hard work.
Way back in 1979 the Timbury Report on services for the elderly with mental disability in Scotland endorsed the concept of joint planning involving both voluntary and statutory organisations.
It failed really to come to grips with the contribution which voluntary organisations could make to a pattern of services.
Vague and slightly patronising references were made to volunteers providing the companionship and neighbourly services for which health and social service workers have neither the time nor the responsibility".
It was made clear that the responsibility for actually managing real services should rest with the statutory sector.
In 1985, belatedly — 2 years after England and Wales and with poorer conditions — we finally got a community care circular on support finance and joint planning.
This did recommend  involvement of the voluntary sector on joint liaison committees and for the first time give access for voluntary agencies to make direct application to health boards without having to seek prior sponsorship from the local authority.
By 1986 things were hotting up a bit.
The audit commission report highlighted blocks in funding, the perverse incentives for high cost forms of residential care which Linda Headland has highlighted, the lack of bridging finance from short term funding to permanent funding.
It went on to note that many of the most effective schemes had come about through the voluntary sector as a result of individual enterprise or a one person crusade — not as a logical outcome of a strategic planning process.
Here we have the concept of the maverick, the hero innovator, the streetwise entrepreneur, that several speakers have described.
It seems you need a person like that to actually change the existing order.
This year we have seen the Griffiths report.
Griffiths made it clear that care and support could be provided from a variety of sources.
Multiplicity of provision, he argued, benefits the consumer because choice, innovation and competition are stimulated.
He wanted to see a mixed economy of care and he considered it essential that the social services authorities should see themselves as the arrangers and purchasers of care services, not as monopolistic providers.
Finally, the SHARPEN report.
Quite apart from giving dementia the top priority SHARPEN argues that it is essential for voluntary organisations to be involved in and, if necessary, assisted to play a full part in planning and in the delivery of services.
It talks about the need.
for disciplinary integration, cutting across agency boundaries.
It stresses the need for one agency, voluntary or statutory, to be given a clear lead role for a particular service or project development.
Euphoria over SHARPEN priorities should perhaps be tempered.
After all, think of the category A priorities in SHAPE.
These included care of the mentally ill (which then also included the elderly with mental disability)— these categories which should have received a bigger slice of the cake, actually received a smaller percentage of health board funding during the funding period from 1981–82 to 1985–86.
So strategic priorities are not always adhered to when it comes to hard cash.
However, having studied all these reports, it does seem that voluntary organisation involvement is encouraged through national policy guidelines.
Public expectations and attitudes towards voluntary organisations are also being changed.
Over recent years we have been subtly conditioned into an expectation that charities and voluntary organisations should legitimately be used across an ever-increasing range of services.
Many things that a decade ago would have been regarded as the province exclusively of the statutory sector  now fall into the voluntary sector.
We expect to contribute now a proportion of our income through sponsorships, events and appeals of ever more exotic and imaginative kinds.
I find myself dipping into my pocket and giving to causes that a decade ago I would have refused to because I would have seen it as the responsibility of the statutory sector.
There are special forms of tax relief for charitable giving and these are being made more attractive every year.
The various Telethon type appeals have raised more than 50 million pounds in the past year and charitable giving has become big business and highly organised.
Major industrial companies are contributing more and more funds to charity — some now belongs to the 1% Club and try to reserve 1% of after-tax earnings for charitable purposes.
Perhaps we are heading back in a full-circle towards the days of Victorian philanthropy — Back towards the days before state provision when organisations like Barnardos, the Salvation Army and the C.O.S. were the dominant providers.
Let me offer you a quote"I believe that the voluntary movement is at the heart of our social welfare provision.
That the statutory services are the supportive ones underpinning where necessary, filling the gaps and helping the helpers"(Margaret Thatcher speaking in 1981).
The general thrust of policy guidelines seems to be to encourage a greater contribution from the voluntary sector.
We have joint liaison and joint planning systems which should make things happen.
These really must be the boom times.
Well, in reality, it certainly doesn't very often feel like it.
For a voluntary organisation the task is not only hard, it is dangerous.
There are pitfalls and temptations and ideological conflicts.
The task is hard mainly because funding is a nightmare.
I have, at the last count, 19 separate applications under consideration by 12 separate funding bodies.
They occupy a major part of my time — time I would prefer to be spending on actually trying to improve the services we offer.
The year follows a cycle not unlike a Gardener's Calendar.
In the early summer you have to prepare the Urban Aids.
Once they are started off you can give some attention to the support finances and the Joint Fundings.
When the leaves being to fall, it's time to think about the Section 9's and the Section 10's.
You also have to watch for the sudden windfalls — like the R.P.I. Index monies this year.
In the spring you reap the harvest — or not as the case might be.
Making sense of all this is a near impossibility.
The system is like a lottery.
Like a good gardener, you scatter the seeds — your applications — as widely as possible and hope that some at least fall on fertile ground.
Small Voluntary Organisations cannot hope to develop the skills necessary to penetrate this funding labyrinth.
There is a real danger that money goes to Voluntary Organisations who are best at filling in forms — that presentation wins out over content.
Even if funding is obtained it is nearly always precarious.
There is no secure route from short-term to long-term funding.
Funding from one source often rules out funding from another.
Existing from year to year saps staff morale and increases staff turnover.
Arbitrary changes in rules and criteria can destroy the most successful schemes.
A notable recent casualty has been the Crossroads schemes — an example of the kind of low-cost community-based support which the Audit Commission Report encouraged.
Practical realities like these call into question the real commitment behind some of the rhetoric about community care.
There are dangers for voluntary organisations who take on an increased responsibility for service provision.
There is a danger that a Voluntary Organisation may lose sight of its basic aims and objectives and become so embroiled in service delivery that other areas are neglected.
There is a danger too that campaigning or lobbying activities fit uneasily with service delivery.
It is hard to bite the hand that feeds you.
There is a danger that a voluntary organisation can take on more than it can handle and consequently overstretch its resources.
There is a danger that a voluntary organisation may become involved in trying to run services that should properly remain the responsibility of a statutory organisation.
There is a temptation that voluntary organisations may be tempted into offering services on the cheap.
We are touching here on the sensitive area of competitive tendering and of privatisation.
These are uncharted waters where a voluntary organisation could find itself well out its depth.
So far these are very far from being boom times.
Indeed it seems to me that the contribution to date of the voluntary sector to service provision in most sectors has been marginal and peripheral.
Perhaps the most useful contribution has been to extend the boundaries of community care and to demonstrate, through pilot projects, that innovative and imaginative kinds of provision can succeed.
Traditionally, the voluntary sector has had this role of pioneer and innovator.
The challenge is then to persuade the statutory agencies that their priorities should be adjusted and that money should be found elsewhere to fund these new kinds of service.
That takes us to Joint Planning and the part of the voluntary organisations play or should play in the process.
The first point to make is that Joint Planning is happening at very different rates and in very different ways across Scotland.
In some areas, there are complex structures with sub-groups, forums and working parties galore.
In other areas the process seems to have hardly begun.
Dementia seems to pose particular problems.
Sometimes it is lumped in with mental health services, sometimes with elderly services, sometimes with both.
Sometimes it merits a separate sub-group or working party of its own.
The second point is that though everyone subscribes to the principle that voluntary organisations should be included in Joint planning, the principle is often executed in fairly ad hoc ways.
Only 3 out of the is Joint Liaison Committees in Scotland for example actually have a voluntary sector representative with full voting rights.
It isn't always easy to work out how to involve voluntary organisations.
Even in a relatively small area of provision like dementia, a fair number of voluntary organisations will be involved — they cannot all be represented.
usually one person is elected to represent the voluntary sector but that places a heavy onus on that representative to liaise and consult with the other voluntary organisations.
Systems start becoming cumbersome and unwieldy.
A third consideration is the involvement of consumers or carers.
Griffiths is particular gives this great play and constantly stresses the need to get input and feedback from the actual consumers of services.
There have been some attempts to do this.
A Lothian Working Party Report incorporated an appendix with comments from consumer organisations and users.
A working party in Ayrshire and Arran recently invited consumers to meetings and commissioned a survey on consumer views.
Consumers are rarely if ever directly represented in Joint planning and as a right.
Lay people don't mix easily with professionals.
They question conventional wisdom, they ask awkward questions, they do not speak the jargon.
Nevertheless if we are to plan services to meet the needs of people, we need to consider consumer representation far more seriously.
Finally what is the outcome of the Joint planning process.
Usually a weighty document crammed with recommendations.
Some are general principles with which it would be impossible to disagree.
The reports tend to be better at planning statutory services than the kinds of services that voluntary organisations tend to provide.
The requested numbers of psychogeriatric beds may be defined precisely.
The need for respite care or day care or domiciliary support is rarely so precisely detailed.
Usually there is a section of the report which lists the initiatives taken by the voluntary sector and says they are generally admirable and deserving of continued support.
Joint Planning, it seems to me, still has a very long way to go.
It certainly hasn't to date provided too many solutions for the voluntary sector.
How could things be made better?
This would be my shopping list: I would like voluntary organisations to accept a continued role as innovators — they perform this role better than anyone.
They can provide certain types of services more effectively than the statutory sector.
That doesn't mean a takeover or a dismantling of the statutory sector — it means a partnership and a working together — the mixed economy that Griffiths referred to.
I would like to see that view also accepted by statutory agencies and service provision by voluntary agencies properly integrated into service with future funding requirements properly identified and secured.
I would like to see a streamlined funding system operated by a simple agency with lead responsibility Perhaps a defined percentage should be made available to voluntary organisations I would like to see proper involvement of voluntary organisations at all levels of the Joint Planning Process.
I would like to see a real effort to include consumer views.
I think we need to plan services from the bottom-up. hope that S.A.D.
's new initiative — GLAD — will make a real contribution to this.
We look forward to the creation of the DSDC. which will monitor and evaluate service development
These are serious issues.
We desperately need to find effective ways of working together, of improving services, of offering perhaps we are emerging real choices to consumers.
Perhaps we are emerging from the Dark Ages of Community Care and we are moving into a new age of enlightenment.
I would very much like to think so.
SPECIALIST TEAMS AND SERVICE DEVELOPMENT
Stephen Brown, Research Fellow, Centre for Research in Social policy, Loughborough University of technology There seems little doubt that multi-disciplinary teams have become one of the principal vehicles for improving health and social care services in the community.
In the vanguard of this movement are community mental handicap teams (CMHTs).
The notion of the community mental handicap team emerged during the middle of the 1970's — largely through the influential observations of the National Development Group that services for mentally handicapped people were fragmented and partial.
It was both extended and refined by the successive reports of the Development Team for the mentally handicapped and through the work of Simon.
Over the last ten years, the model of the multi-disciplinary community team has become one of the central means for developing services for mentally handicapped people.
It is worthwhile, then, to explore what lessons may be drawn from the experiences of CMHTs and relate them to other areas of service.
For, evidence suggests that the CMHT model is being seen as appropriate for quite different areas of service development.
A recent report to the DHSS suggests that issues emerging from studies of CMHTs may be reliable pointers for appraising inter alia the effective development of teams for the elderly and elderly mentally ill.
In these sectors of service there are similar concerns to those which prompted the development of CMHTs.
Gaps and boundaries lie between service agencies and between professional groups.
Specialist multi disciplinary teams, it is advocated, are the fabric for patching them together.
INTRODUCTION
It is not surprising that community mental handicap teams are seen as being in the vanguard of this movement.
Their spread across the country has been impressive.
In England, over a period of less than 10 years, almost 350 teams have become established Eighty per cent of the Health DistrictS have one or more teams operating within their boundaries.
2,250 staff working with mentally handicapped people are now organised into multi-disciplinary community mental handicap teams of one kind or another; almost 1600 professional staff are full-time core members of teams.
90,000 people classified as mentally handicapped receive services from teams.
It is an impressive development.
Indeed, the more recent history of community mental handicap teams is even more impressive.
In 1982, Morag Plank, from the Campaign for Mentally Handicapped People, reported a survey of CMHTs in England.
She identified just over 70 teams.
Five years later, 348 teams have been identified, with perhaps another dozen who have not yet been identified.
A fivefold increase in teams, then, in five years.
Inevitably, the ways in which CMHTs operate, their organisation, their responsibilities vary considerably.
They are, for example, responsible for rather different population sizes.
About one third of teams have catchment populations in the range recommended by the National Development Group — between 60,000 and 80,000.
However, 40% serve populations of 120,000 or more.
By the same token, teams vary in size.
Just under a third are relatively small groupings of staff; about one half have a membership within the 5–10 range; a fifth have more than 10 members.
It might be noted that 6 teams report a membership of more than 20 people.
The variation in size begins to suggest that the notion of the community mental handicap team is not a unitary concept.
It is difficult to suppose that a core team (consisting typically of a small group of community mental handicap nurses and social workers) operates at all like a 20-person team.
Rather, the evidence suggests a classification of teams which distinguishes the core team "from the" extended team ", which in turn is distinguished from the" service network"team — if, indeed, a 20-person grouping can be called a team.
Such a typology, and the implied differences in operational style, appears to have some general relevance.
Morag McGrath and Stuart Humphries note a similar range of types in their discussion of CMHTs in Wales.
Susan Clements borrows it for discussing some issues to do with drug and alcohol teams.
COMMUNITY MENTAL HANDICAP TEAMS: MAPPING THE PICTURE
This classification refers not only to the size of teams, but to their composition.
For, whilst core teams are made up almost exclusively from social workers and community mental handicap nurses, the larger teams draw on a wider range of professionals.
Thus, psychiatrists (or consultants in mental handicap), clinical psychologists, occupational therapists, physiotherapists and speech therapists are represented on between 40% and 50, of teams.
It is, of course, no surprise to find social workers and nurses on 90%.
Clearly, CMHTs have been a vehicle for coordinating the work of a wide variety of professionals involved with mentally handicapped people.
But, equally clearly, the organisational complexity of teams varies, with all the concomitant problems of integrating different traditions and styles of work into a common framework.
Descriptive statistics like these point to the differences which are emerging between teams and the way they operate.
They vary with respect to size.
They vary with respect to their professional representation.
They vary with respect to their location (indeed, 10% of the teams replying did not have a common base at all).
They vary with respect to their catchment populations.
And, of course, at the back of all this there are the obvious and well-known variations between authorities across the country — variations which stem from different socio-demographic profiles, different resource priorities, and different service patterns.
It is appropriate to ask, then, about what is going on here in terms of the organisational and operational dynamics of teams.
How, for example, have CMHTs managed to resolve a number of broad problems — ones which were well known and which were uncontentiously accepted by policy-makers and practitioners alike.
These problems may be recited in a familiar litany cited for all service sectors concerned with all dependency groups: services are remote from individuals and their families; services are difficult for families and clients to get in touch with or access; services are organisationally and professionallY fragmented, So that families and clients are unclear about who was doing what; furthermore, services are unconnected or discontinuous, so that families and clients fall into gaps between services; finally, the statutory agencies were not able to liaise extensively with voluntary or informal care networks However, these general observations do not point precisely to operational tasks.
Indeed, at this level they have the disturbing effect of implying that a whole range of tasks can be undertaken concurrently.
Thus, many community mental handicap teams have devised absurdly ambitious operational policies which attempt to do all things for all persons.
What, for example, can be made of an operational policy statement that reads: "The objectives of the team are: to build an informed and accurate picture of the needs of mentally handicapped people and their familieS in the area with special reference to social, cultural and environmental factors; to develop policies and models of practice that are sensitive to the identified needs and to initiate new approaches to the care and support of mentally handicapped people as appropriate; to encourage the participation of mentally handicapped people and their familieS in the planning and evaluation of services; to put forward proposals for and be involved in initiating an independent advocacy scheme; to achieve better coordination for services for mentally handicapped people through the multidisciplinary operation of the CMHT and by establishing good liaison with all relevant agencies; to plan and assist in the rehabilitation of mentally handicapped people from hospital and residential care to family, semi-independent and independent living in conjunction with other professionals and agencies; to publicise and create better public understanding of the needs and potentials of mentally handicapped people and to encourage the local community to become more positively involved in their care and support; to gather, collate and disseminate as appropriate information about relevant services, events and new developments.
This is not a bad set of objectives for a team whose professional membership consists of one social worker, one community nurse and a psychologist, with administrative and social work assistance.
There are 2 issues here which need to be unpacked.
They have to do with overlapping, but not necessarily co-extensive aspirations for specialist teams.
One set of aspirations has to do with the development of new forms of service for clients and their carers or families; another with the direct provision of services.
This distinction between service delivery and service development has become one of the key areas of attention in the examination of CMHTs.
It underpins the work of Wigstow and Wray in their evaluation of CMHTs in Nottinghamshire.
They write of the purpose behind the Nottinghamshire teams as involving the explicit premise that casework and service coordination at the level of individual clients should logically take second place to the creation of more adequate service infrastructure — at least in the first instance (Wistow and Wray, p 16) Developmental teams of the Notts kind, then, might be expected to place priority on establishing a range of new services, "accommodation services, adult placement schemes, family support services, play schemes, parent groups and Further Education courses" (Wray and Wistow, op cit).
These functions may be distinguished from individual casework (and particularly the demands of short term crisis management) which broadly characterises a fieldwork service delivery role.
However, the notion of service development remains somewhat vague.
The Notts version emphasises the development of service infrastructure.
By contrast, the National Development Group  implies a different kind of development work in its emphasis on"joint working in the actual delivery of services Clearly, service coordination of this kind is a form of service development in the absence of coordinated services.
Indeed, the advocacy of the multi disciplinary CMHT is based precisely on the observation that services for mentally handicapped people are fragmented; the CMHT is the vehicle for developing a comprehensive and articulated service system.
The NDG model is oriented towards casework with individual mentally handicapped people and their families.
The developmental role which is implied is a notion of individualised service planning — an approach which is exemplified in the process of negotiating individual programme plans for mentally handicapped clients.
A third version of the developmental role may also be distinguished.
It circles around the idea of the mobilisation of informal care.
Gordon Grant, for example, suggests that CMHTs play a crucial role in assisting the development of voluntary sector services, although he is cautious about the ability of teams to unlock"an unlimited capacity for care amongst voluntary groups or family carers The developmental function here clearly picks up on the prominence given to the involvement of voluntary groups and parents in the service planning process in Wales, where Grant and his colleagues are monitoring aspects of the All-Wales Strategy.
It relates, too, to the recommendations with the NDG model that CMHTs work closely with the voluntary sector.
However, as Grant points out, working with voluntary groups and networks of carers (indeed, creating and enhancing the capacity of such groups to provide care) brings into play a different repertoire of activities and skills on the part of team members from those involved in the development of statutory services.
The upshot of the discussion is, perhaps unsurprisingly, that the notion of service development is somewhat ambiguous and that, as a consequence, different forms of working practice are implied by it.
In reality, of course, the 3 versions of the developmental role are blurred.
Teams attempting to develop the service infrastructure undoubtedly try to liaise with and support voluntary groups, as the Nottinghamshire experience shows.
Individualised service planning, if carried out systematically, may be seen as part of a process which, in general terms, identified service gaps and deficits.
This is, undoubtedly, an important precursor of rational service-level planning, although it is not to say that the service infrastructure will necessarily develop from individual service plans.
Nevertheless, the ambiguities remain and contribute to the uncertainty with which the CMHT members go about and account for their own work.
The other end of the distinction — the delivery of services -is perhaps less uncertain.
It is, after all, the focus of much research, writing and commentary about health and social services provision.
One can say, as the Audit Commission did  in 1986, that at its heart is the idea of a "structured care process" The Audit Commission model is that care is organised around 3 elements: the assessment of need prescribing care reviewing and monitoring care outcomes.
This may be an entirely uncontentious outline of the process of delivering care to individuals, although it conceals the profound organisational and operational difficulties of devising appropriate mechanisms and relationships to ensure that it happens.
It is, nevertheless, helpful, to use these elements to point up some differences between service development and service delivery tasks.
But, if service development and service delivery are the broad ambitions for community mental handicap teams, the selection of operational priorities and the creation of operational procedures for supporting joint work has been more difficult.
Four key features emerge from studies of CMHTs which bear on these problems.
They may act as signal warning for developments in other fields.
They can be expressed in the form of 4 propositions about the shaping of multidisciplinary working styles.
the operating priorities of a CMHT are set by manifest, but more importantly latent lines of local service policy; without clear specifications as to the roles of team members, members will drift towards their common ground; where team members have no actual or perceived authority to coordinate services, they will create their own service niche to fill; where teams have little direct control over service resources, their own role will be limited to using their own personnel as resources.
The complex interplay of such pressures may be illustrated through a brief case example, drawn from research being undertaken on CMHTs.
In brief, a District-wide CMHT has been established, one which was originally based on a team of hospital social workers and nurses supervised by a consultant psychiatrist.
The team now consists of 5 social workers, 5 community mental handicap nurses and 3 clinical psychologists.
They are managed by a joint group which includes the consultant, a principal psychologist and a social services specialist advisor.
The broad aims of the team have been strongly influenced by statements of service principles devised by a Regional consortium of local authorities, in which the team's social services manager plays a prominent role.
However, the practices and procedures which the team has adopted seem to have been shaped more directly by a -latent agenda of issues: a preference amongst the team's management for a"hands on service; the maintenance, until recently, of a strong health authority orientation to the team (a hospital base, the dominance of the psychiatrist's authority, the hospital itself as a central feature of the Borough's service pattern); a separatism which has been maintained between the social workers and the CMHNs over the team's access to health and social service resources, so that social workers may refer clients for social service resources, and nurses for health authority resources, but not vice versa; These features have tended to rule out for the team any sustained attention to the developmental role — a role which is certainly a part of its official brief, but which is clearly not a priority in terms of its current practice.
Instead, it has developed a necessary, but somewhat mundane "routine domiciliary support service" .
It seems clear that this approach contains elements familiar to both the social workers and the nurses on the team.
The work they do with clients is similar to the routine surveillance and monitoring, and the "management of daily living" which is part of the training and tradition of CMHNs.
By the same token, it is sufficiently close to notions of family oriented casework, and also the administrative liaison between other service agencies or departments which are familiar features of a social worker's role.
The drift towards this common ground appears to be a result of the general desire that the team "work together" , but the absence of any explicit guidance about what this means.
Thus, the lack of rules about case allocation and re-allocation procedures, and a consequent separatism which has grown up between social worker and nurse caseloads, mean that team members work in a similar way to each other, but in parallel.
SHAPING A TEAM: AN EXEMPLARY CASE
If there has been little precise guidance to team members about the professional relationships and operational procedures to be followed, so, equally, there has been little guidance about their relationship to the rest of the service system.
What liaison they have developed with the special schools, the day centres, or the general service fieldwork teams of the Social Service Department is conducted on an informal basis.
One might suggest that the support service which the team gives to families has been developed largely because it was an "unclaimed" service area, as it were.
As a consequence, the members of the team have been thrown back on what amounts to a re-discovery of the mental welfare officer role — visiting, keeping an eye on things, and acting as a gatekeeper for routing some resources to individuals and families.
This is not to say that the service role which has been adopted resolves tension between team members or their management.
One fraction of the team has tried to sustain a developmental role-going about establishing play schemes and mobilising parent support groups.
This sometimes throws an additional casework burden on their colleagues.
Equally, all team members have professional aspirations to deploy their specialist skills in a sustained and structured fashion.
The social workers speak a language of "task-centred social work" — a reference to a course of programmed activities with clients; the nurses speak of behavioural change programmes — again, a reference to sustained work with clients, although not entirely identical to social work approaches.
But such aspirations may easily be frustrated when managerial priorities are that a local population of mentally handicapped people is routinely visited and monitored and that recurrent crises are dealt with by team members.
Some lessons, then, which may be drawn from the experience of community mental handicap teams.
They suggest that specialist teams are blown off course, that their promise to create a new order of services is confounded by the established order, that their activities are shaped by a "politics of the tenable" rather than a politics of good practice.
But, in conclusion, one may also see community mental handicap teams embarking (albeit hesitantly) on a new phase of development.
This phase appears to be concerned with nuts and bolts issues of securing joint approaches to working.
It is useful to outline 3 central tasks which are being undertaken.
Evidence suggests that the collection of information by health and local authorities about the extent and levels of dependency amongst mentally handicapped people is patchy and uncoordinated.
Similarly, the documentation of the ability of families or carers of mentally handicapped people to provide care is scant.
This points to the absence of reliable information (beyond somewhat crude prevalence rates) which  indicate the circumstances in which the population of mentally handicapped people live and the support they receive and require.
If services are to develop in a needs-led way, of course, such information is vital.
ASSESSING THE STRUCTURE OF NEED AND THE CAPACITY TO CARE
There are some signs that CMHTs are playing a role in mapping the structure of need in their localities.
Special needs registers, for example, have been established which either directly involve CMHT members of which link closely with teams.
At fieldwork level, this makes possible more informed decisions about priorities and care planning, although it is less clear whether information gathered through special needs registers is routinely available to fieldworkers and is routinely updated by them.
Equally, it is not clear whether such information is firmly connected to the planning process.
Registers offer the possibility of ensuring that planning decisions are firmly based on reliable information and also of anticipating changes in the structure of need, with consequential changes in resource developments.
Devising the organisational mechanisms which link the routine collection of information with the on-going planning process is more problematic — perhaps more so if development takes place on inter-agency lines.
There are also signs that CMHTs have begun to develop a range of operational practices which pragmatically limit their responsibilities from the (usually over-ambitious) remits which they are given.
There appears to be broad consensus that mentally handicapped people and their families need a range or structure of help if they are to be supported in the community.
The broad categories of tasks which are required to support them are understood.
They include: domiciliary support and mundane practical help ensuring contact between individuals and services ensuring contact between the range of staff contributing to care a structured "care process" the active coordination of case management the development of service schemes the mobilisation of informal and voluntary care resources One might add, as well, that the contribution of service users and their carers to the provision of care is to be acknowledged and their participation ensured.
However, research suggests that the agencies involved in providing community support for  mentally handicapped people have different priorities or place different emphases on the elements of such a support structure.
In this light, the attempts by CMHTs to develop realistic operational objectives may be seen as a process by which the respective priorities and range of expectations of the agencies providing community support services are more clearly specified.
And this also involves, crucially, the identification of areas where there are disagreements between agencies over objectives or methods.
Specifying the range of community support tasks
Finally, one may discern more imaginative approaches to the question of who will perform community support tasks.
For, the list above suggests not only a range of tasks, but a hierarchy of skills.
This, in turn, implies that a range of personnel will be deployed to support mentally handicapped people in different ways.
The initial growth of CMHTs seems to have been based on assumptions that traditional professional practices could be transformed by organising existing staff (or existing kinds of professional workers) in new ways.
However, it is becoming apparent that new kinds of services and the development of new kinds of inter-agency relationships require new kinds of staff mixes.
Indeed, such an observation is by no means confined to the service sectors discussed here, and is a result of service policy pressures much wider than (and perhaps in opposition to) concerns about the provision of high quality community support.
Nevertheless, CMHTs appear to be exploring ways of incorporating new kinds of workers (community aides, development workers, family support aides) alongside the relatively established staff mix of specialist social workers and community mental handicap nurses.
This is, in a sense, a reversal of the more familiar organisational response which gave rise to multi-disciplinary teams themselves — change the structure and fit staff into it.
It is rather an attempt to move from a clearer understanding of support tasks to the organisation of skill (and staff) mixes required to perform support tasks.
PEOPLE TO DO IT
Clearly, then, the experience of community mental handicap teams provides lessons about reshaping the provision of care, especially care in the community.
But, the lessons are more subtle than the direct borrowing of the approach and importing it into different service sectors.
In the course of this discussion it has become apparent that the CMHT model is a varied animal, that teams have not fully resolved problems of integrating different professional and agency interests and approaches into streamlined service delivery systems, that a simple organisational re-shuffling of staff does not surmount tensions over professional relationships and responsibilities.
Equally, it has been suggested that it is precisely the growing awareness amongst CMHTs themselves that they are only a partial solution to the problems of inter-professional collaboration which is leading them to specify more precisely their  objectives and responsibilities.
The lessons to be drawn from the CMHT experience are, in part, along the lines of "if I were you, I wouldn't start from here" .
More positively, they show how attention to detail may bring off results which a simple reorganisation of staff does not.
DAY CARE — ISSUES FOR PLANNERS
Joyce Cormie, Development Officer, Fife, Age Concern Scotland Having spent the last year doing a study on day care in Fife, I have been asked to do this presentation on the implications of day care for planners.
Many issues came up curing this work —both day care in general and also specifically around day care for dementia sufferers.
I will touch on some of these issues and how they have import for planners.
A ISSUES
What is day care?
What is its function?
What is it meant for?
Both through my background reading and my own observations it appeared that day care is perceived differently by different providers of services.
It is viewed by some as having a prime role as a respite for carers, others additionally see their role as assisting in the more practical needs such as baths, chiropody, medication etc.
Others, however, see the individual's emotional, social and other more personal needs as top priority and put their emphasis on such things as stimulation, reality orientation and reminiscence work, whilst still acknowledging the value of the former services.
There thus seems to be a need for those planning services to have a clear idea as to the role of any planned day care.
Their response to the above questions could determine the level, quality and variety of care put in.
If the function is seen as the delivery of a service to carers and hence taking on the role of respite care rather than that of aiming for functional improvement then this could have import for the type of staff, ie specifically trained, ratio of staff and the drawing of expertise from other fields, ie occupational therapists.
care Planners need to address this issue.
It may be that a variety of different approaches is considered appropriate.
What should be clear, however, is that whatever approach is arrived at is done through a thorough look at, and understanding of, the aims and objectives of the specific day care — and not by default.
This seems less of an issue within the health service than in the social work and voluntary setting.
Arguments can be posed for mixing or not mixing and examples of excellent practice can be found, but it is vital that whatever conclusions are finally arrived at they come from a true understanding of what day care in any particular instance is trying to achieve for its attenders and their carers.
B The ethos of fixing dementia sufferers with other elderly people in day
It appears common practice within the health service to place specialist day care for dementia sufferers centrally and have people transported in.
Planners must be aware of the less acceptable aspects of bringing people from too large a catchment area.
Such problems as length of journey leading to even further disorientation in some instances, problems of incontinence and travel sickness, problems of timing for carers in preparing and receiving back the sufferers.
The length of the day can obviate much of the good accomplished in day care for both the sufferer and the carer.
C Location: Hospital; Residential Rome; Community Based
Planners will have to consider alternatives to accommodating the needs of those living in more rural areas.
Such issues as domiciliary day care, mobile day care and the day care which the voluntary sector can provide will need to be looked into.
In discussing future development of day care, current facilities must be examined as to their suitability in ensuring that the objectives of the day care can be effectively met.
The type of building can determine and/or limit the service being offered to dementia sufferers.
This can be particularly true in the voluntary and social work setting.
D Suitability of buildings
The role of day care needs to be set against the background of other services.
It was observed in the study on day care that often the placing of someone into day care appeared to be the end of the story for that individual.
Day care should be viewed as only part of a strategy and should link in with other locally based resources.
E Community Care
Before considering future development it would be advisable for those agencies already providing or assisting in the provision of day care to evaluate current service to determine its efficacy.
Although evaluation is a complex issue, it is important in considering future development to ascertain whether day care is fulfilling its objectives as perceived both by the providers and also by the consumers of services.
F Evaluation
In looking at future development the service providers must address the geographic problems that can occur and also the duration of provision (days, hours, weekends etc) and consider whether these can best be met in a joint planning context.
Also whether services are seen as more appropriate for health board, social work or voluntary organisations.
Shared provision and support to other agencies including not only financial but also staff must be discussed.
Planners need to look at the long term provision of locally based day care  as well as reviewing current provision in terms of suitability, costs etc.
G Joint Planning
Planners need to look thoroughly into transport from various points of view; lack of provision, inappropriateness (no tail lift, ambulances etc) the unavailability at certain times, eg public holidays, weekends, and into the more flexible use of transport within the duration of the day.
H Transport
I Demographic changes
Planners will need to investigate and attempt to quantify the numbers of dementia sufferers they may be considering within the planning period.
Prevalence figures can give a rough guide but it would be useful to know also the numbers of those living within the community and their situation ie living alone or with family.
SPECIALIST DAY HOSPITAL CARE
Dr P J Connelly, Consultant Geriatrician Murray Royal Hospital, Perth In this talk I hope to cover the questions of what Day Hospital Care is, and to whom it should be given.
In Perth & Kinross, Day Hospital services for the physically and mentally ill are separate.
Two day hospitals are provided to cater for the elderly mentally ill, one for those with functional illnesses and one for those with dementia.
Unfortunately, since the catchment area is in excess of 2,000 square miles, both are situated within the grounds of the only mental hospital in the area.
The prime role of the day hospital for patients with dementia (The Pinel Centre) is to cater for more severely dementing patients than can usually be cared for in alternative facilities, particularly when behaviour disturbance is a prominent feature of the patient's condition.
To this end, a multi-disciplinary approach, with particular emphasis on occupational therapy, physiotherapy, chiropody and nursing, is used.
The day hospital facilitates prolonged observation, allowing the assessment of consistency of a patient's behaviour and possible behavioural modification to be achieved.
In addition, the level of a patient's day-to-day functioning can be assessed.
Of particular interest are patients' abilities to wash, dress and toilet themselves, to carry out tasks in the kitchen and in dealing with electric or gas appliances, mobility and social integration.
Therapeutic input makes heavy use of group work, though individual therapy is also possible.
Individual and group exercise programmes promote mobility and confidence, helping to diffuse anxiety and aggression.
Craft and social groups help to structure a patient's day, improving orientation, which is further reinforced by staff use of reality orientation, while reminiscence packs help to improve concentration, encourage communication and increase self-esteem as well as providing fun and enjoyment!
Physical activities and games decrease the isolation of patients and encourage the patient to develop appropriate attitudes to new situations.
Medical input ensures that physical illness is treated where possible, and attendance at the day hospital allows regular review of medication to take place.
The day hospital does not exist in isolation.
Prior to attendance, the physical and mental health of the patient is carefully assessed by a consultant psychiatrist, who in addition will assess the level of care presently being provided to the patients and also, to a lesser extent, the physical and  mental health and motivation of carers involved.
A social worker specialising in the field of dementia will often become involved with the patient and carers, as may community psychiatric nurses, while nursing staff at the day hospital will have regular liaison with carers, social services and voluntary agencies involved in care of the patient in the community.
The goal of the day hospital is to ensure that the patient's level of functioning is maintained at as high a level as possible, while levels of anxiety in both patient and carer are decreased, levels of confidence being likewise increased.
Increased integration of the patient and carers is encouraged, combatting the isolation which has frequently preceded referral.
Achieving these goals improves and prolongs a patient's stay in the community, and as such, the day hospital is seen very much as a "community" rather than "hospital" resource.
Having said that, the question of to whom the resource should be provided must be addressed, and here I propose to generalise to a large extent, though initially to make reference to the local situation.
Perth and Kinross is a large, scenic area popular as a retirement area for elderly people.
Out of a population of 120,000, 22,000 are over 65, though in some towns almost 40% of the population are over 65!
There is a central county town (pop.
50,000) with satellite market towns of 10,000 each at 20–30 mile distances around the compass.
Day services are generally concentrated in Perth and lacking in the peripheral towns.
The need for day hospital services in these towns is of course dependent upon the presence of other community resources, and before planning a new resource one must first decide upon the target client group and then attempt to accurately identify numbers in the community.
In the absence of locally based population studies, combined social work/GP screening etc, one must plan on general guidelines.
Having said this, I feel presently available guidelines underestimate rather than over-estimate the prevalence of dementia in the community, since in general no account is taken of the rapidly rising prevalence with age increases beyond 75.
A suggested rule of thumb might be 1% of the population aged 65–74, 10% of the population aged 75–84 and 25% of the population aged over 85 would have moderate/severe dementia.
In one of our satellite towns with a typical population of 10,000, 2,000 may be over 65.
Applying the above rule of thumb, the figure for moderate/severe dementia would be around 120.
Of these some would inevitably have been admitted to long-stay residential or hospital care, but perhaps 80 would still be living in the community, 30–40 on their own.
Although  formalised assessment is useful, other factors such as physical illness, family support, degree of isolation, concurrent psychiatric symptomatology etc are likely to determine an individual's need for day hospital attendance.
In planning for groups however, formalised guidelines such as in the Clifton Assessment Procedures for the elderly (CAPE) are useful.
The target groups for a day hospital for dementing patients would be the 3 lowest categories — C, D and E. All category E patients would be included as well as a proportion of those in group D and a smaller proportion of group C. Although inevitably factors such as level of agreement to use day hospital facilities and the frequency of attendance of patients influence the final figure, 7–9 day places is not an unrealistic figure, though this exceeds current nationally derived guidelines.
However, the provision of such a small resource on a cost-effective basis is open to debate, particularly when small facilities would be required for those with functional illness, physical illness and social problems.
The question arises therefore, of combining care with other groups, but other than noting a joint social work/geriatric medicine/geriatric psychiatry proposal to build a combined day facility locally, discussion of this topic lies out with the scope of this talk.
SMALL IS BEAUTIFUL — TOE ROLE OF SPECIALIST DAY CARE IN THE COMMUNITY
Linda Lee, Development Officer, Renfrew District Project, Alzheimer's Scotland The AIMS of the specialist day care unit are as follows: a To provide a respite break to the carer and give the sufferer a positive place in the community where something positive can be put back into their lives and improve their awareness on a day-to-day basis.
b To provide the carer with a weekly contact with a specialist group who understand their problems and needs.
The day care centre can often be the link to other agencies when special needs are identified.
Hence the reason why the day centres do not operate on their own but are a part of a flexible range of services.
These specialist day centres are in Renfrew District and operate 5 days a week.
They are placed as follows: Monday and Wednesday Paisley (District Hall) Tuesday and Thursday Linwood (Church Hall) Friday Erskine (Church Hall) The funding for the project originally came from Social Work Services Group under section 10.
As of 1st April 1988 the day care centres have joint funding from Health Board and Social Work.
The staffing at each of the day care centres consists of our paid day centre manager and 10–12 volunteers.
Volunteers are recruited in a variety of ways but usually through the Volunteer Centre in Paisley.
They are introduced to the day centre and attend regular training sessions organised by the project and other outside agencies.
Their main line of support is through the day centre manager.
We have a wide range in our volunteers (aged between 18 and 74) and equal male and female.
The day centre manager is totally responsible for the day to day management of the centre including transport, meals etc.
The transport is provided by our tail-lift mini bus.
This was provided through "Help the Aged" who donated £6,500 to the cost and the volunteers, staff, carers and donations provided a further £6,500.
We received the mini bus on the 5th January 1988, and it has become a tremendous asset to the project.
We have been able to use it to take clients away for short term holiday respite breaks which have proved very successful.
Referrals are taken from anybody.
Quite a few come directly from carers and we advise them to have the sufferer assessed by a consultant so a proper diagnosis is obtained.
When we go out to visit a new client — we look at the needs of the sufferer and the carer.
We then put together a package of care within the resources that are available within the community to meet their individual needs and this will be changing as the sufferer's condition deteriorates.
Once the day care centre is no longer suitable we may introduce the sitter service; link in with the local day hospital or it may lead to long term care.
We work in partnership with the Health Board, Social Work, other agencies and also the voluntary sector and we require their services when planning packages of care for each individual.
Our daily programme at the day care centres is geared to meet the needs of people suffering from all degrees of dementia from the moderate to the severe.
The day starts with our tail-lift bus leaving the centre at 9.30 am to pick up the clients with the help of 2 escorts.
This can take as little as one hour to a maximum of 2 hours.
The cause for delays can be numerous, eg Mrs Smith not being ready or Mr Brown can't find his key or requires another trip to the toilet.
When they arrive at the centre they start the day with tea/toast and a chat.
Everybody sits down to tea — clients and volunteer carers.
The next part of the day is an exercise session and other simple games, eg passing of a ball and saying their name, use of coloured bean bags, large coloured floor dominoes, hoopla etc.
All exercises are carried out without music — we all count to 10-music is used at other periods during the day.
We then have lunch and this comprises a main course, sweet followed by tea/coffee and biscuits.
Lunch and all refreshments provided to the clients costs them £1.00.
After lunch we have a quiet period before we begin any afternoon activities, this could involve any one of the following: 1 Walk 2 Visit a local park or the coast 3 Board games 4 Hairdresser 5 Nails manicured 6 Sing song 7 Musical entertainment 8 Dance 9 Reminiscence sessions and many more depending on the clients' needs and capabilities.
All these activities are used to improve the clients' awareness and in turn hopefully improve their quality of life.
Tea and biscuits end the afternoon session giving everyone a chance to rest.
Soon afterwards the clients go home usually between 3 and 3.30 pm.
The day centre manager oversees the daily running  of the centres and is also involved in other areas of the services.
We have a high number of volunteer carers at the day centre so that we can provide a 1–1 ratio to our 12 clients, therefore all the needs of the individual client can be met.
The reason why we consider it important to have a specialist day care centre for sufferers of dementia is because of the following areas which can cause tremendous problems in a "NORMAL" situation but the specialist unit will be trained to respond in a very positive way: a Mood changes b Individual capabilities c Higher level of care required for the moderate to severely demented clients d Creates a greater depth of security through familiarity and able to get to know the client e Positive attitudes towards dementia f Clients with a severe dementia may require 2 carers g Greater stimulation in the appropriate surroundings creates greater awareness in the home environment h A place where the clients can be "NORMAL" i Helps reduce the possibility of the clients becoming apathetic Time to spend with a group and work at their own pace k Not creating a ghetto but creating a positive environment where they can get the most out of their lives — improve their quality of life I Gives them confidence m On-going deterioration can be catered for, eg feeding, toileting and many other problems The specialist day care centre is only a part of a flexible range of services available to dementia sufferers in the community.
On its own, it would not be so successful.
The other services we offer are Relative Support Group, Sitter Service, Information, Advice and Counselling, Training and Telephone Link.
TOE CONTRIBUTION OF SPECIALIST PRIVATE CARE TO TOE PATTERN OP LOCAL PROVISION — A FOCUS ON KNOWESOUTH
Michael and Minna O'Reilly Both of us run a unit in the Scottish Borders catering for the behaviourally disturbed, confused elderly.
What we propose to do today is: I discuss how we see our unit fitting in with the Borders psychiatric service and services for the confused elderly in the Borders.
2 discuss the philosophy of our unit and give an example of our resident's day.
3 discuss our experiences of running such a unit and what we have learned over the last 3 years and some of the myths which we have explored and exploded for ourselves.
4 show a short extract from one of our training videos Knowesouth is a private Nursing Home situated between the towns of Jedburgh and Hawick.
1 KNOWESOUTH- Relationship with Borders
It is registered by the Borders Health Board to cater for 28 ambulant confused elderly residents.
Knowesouth provides a locally based service for the population of the Eastern Borders which consists mainly of the towns of Jedburgh, Hawick and Kelso.
The referrals come mainly through the resident's GP and/or the local community psychiatric service.
After the resident is admitted his or her GP continues to provide primary health care.
Of the present 28 residents, 26 were referred via the Dingleton community Team for the Elderly Mentally ill, and the other 2 from local GPs who had requested Dingleton advice.
When a referral request from other parts of the Borders is received the GPs of Jedburgh are involved with the assessment and, if agreeable to the admission, will assume primary health care responsibility.
At present 85% of our residents' care are paid for by DHSS Supplementation and we emphasise constantly that it is need that determines care with us not finance.
In other words — care is free at the point of delivery.
Summary We strive to provide a continuing care unit for the elderly mentally infirm of the Hawick/Jedburgh/Kelso area, and I hope that this is how our professional colleagues see us.
a) We offer a group-orientated approach to the care of elderly people with dementia.
b) We encourage the active involvement of all our residents to the level of their ability in the day-to-day running of the home.
We do this by having a structured programme to our day which, hopefully introduces leaning to each individual's life and encourages their participation in the daily tasks within the home.
We actively encourage them to take on tasks out with the role of resident to give them some leaning to their life, to give them some creativeness to actively tap some of the skills they have had as a housewife or when they were out in the community.
ii Example of a resident's day 8 — 10.30 am Rise when awake assisted to dress/with personal hygiene assisted with breakfast 11– 12 noon group activities newspaper groups music/movement plan afternoon outings etc 12.00 — 12.30 Set tables for dinner 12.30 — 1.30 Lunch/assist with dishes 1.30– 2.00 Quiet period — neighbours 2.00– 3.15 Small group activities outings using mini bus Hairdressing games/quiz walks 3.15– 4.45 tea and relaxation 4.45– 6.00 set tables, Supper and dishwashing 6.00– 7.00 news/informal period  7.00– 9.00 Structured evenings can include: singsong videos bingo outside entertainers come in Drinks served at 8 pm Summary In all these activities we attempt to restore some choices to our residents, and having assessed each one individually before and after admission to the home, we can tailor each programme/activity to the individual strengths of our residents.
2 Philosophy of the Home
If one assesses the gains and losses surrounding the admission of an elderly resident to any strange environment then you can begin to identify what you must strive to achieve if you will go anywhere near compensating for these losses.
a These past 3 years have reinforced for us the importance of listening to relatives.
How often in the past have I not given due credence to relatives' statements of how bad the client was?
Our experience has been that where we are able to admit a person who is dementing we wonder after a couple of days — How did the relatives manage? b The past 3 years have shown us the myth that exists in many professionals' minds about relatives pushing an old person into care.
It's been our experience that families, and particularly carers, go through great anguish, much pain and heartache associated with this process.
When the time comes that relatives actually begin to cry for help — damage done within the relationship ma be irreversible.
For this reason we spend a lot of time with relatives trying to help them come to terms with the whole admission process.
There could be an argument for saying that the DHSS controlled funds have given, for the first time, relatives the choice of care for elderly relatives — we feel this is very important and should be remembered in any discussion about funding and who controls it.
c The past 3 years have destroyed the myth that elderly dementing people cannot play a role in the running of a nursing home — we have seen even severe Alzheimer residents respond to normalization programme and reality orientation work and enjoy it and, indeed, remain at a plateau much longer than they would  otherwise have done (highly subjective comment, I know).
More research would be needed to substantiate that claim.
d The past 3 years have destroyed the myth that long stay elderly identification residents are not visited.
We are inundated with relatives we encourage it and we make it a special time.
We provide tea and we all enjoy the contacts it creates.
e We have learned that our residents need for companionship and physical contact far exceeds their need for privacy.
Our residents occupying rooms are not as well integrated in the community as those who share.
While wandering is not a major problem in the home it is nevertheless important that there is space for that to take place.
There are no "no-go," areas in the home and, as in most homes, the kitchen is the most sought after area for both staff and residents.
f The past 3 years have made us see how very interested GPs can be with this group.
We have found our GPs very caring, very attentive.
Maybe it's the Border Culture! g Staff do enjoy this work immensely — if treated as adults within an open management system they will treat residents likewise and are so committed and enthusiastic.
We have no staff room and all "unofficial" breaks are taken with the residents.
h Lastly, I finish with the Biggest Myth of All This work is Easy!
It is the most demanding and requires a high commitment of all staff involved.
It is my firm belief that if you can successfully run a group with elderly dementing people — you can run it with any client group.
3 Discussion of experiences
THE ROLE OF LOCAL AUTHORITY RESIDENTIAL CARE
Sylvia Cox, Principal Officer Elderly Care, Strathclyde Regional Council Social Work Department The original purpose of local authority residential care, back in 1948, was to provide almost "hotel" type care for those in need of "care and attention" but "capable of self care" .
The phrase "mobile, lucid and continent" can still be heard on the lips of Officers-in-Charge who remember when this was the case.
Over time, concessions have been made to incontinence, lack of mobility and degrees of mental frailty, but these have happened due to lack of resources elsewhere, as much as a response to carefully assessed needs of elderly people and their carers within clear objectives for residential care.
In Scotland, the lack of development of Elderly Mentally Infirm Homes and the failure to implement the recommendations of the Timbury Report has meant that there has been increasing pressure on local authorities to care for "the mentally confused" (the SWSG term) and problems getting people into psychiatric care as they deteriorate.
Studies in Glasgow, Camden and many other local authorities have described homes where the level of dementia is at least equal to the levels in many hospitals.
The Camden Study put the figure as high as ⅓ severely dementing, and a total of ⅔ of mild, moderate and severe dementia were combined.
A model or perhaps a myth, of complete integration persists in many local authority homes in Scotland.
In such "integrated" homes, segregation by stealth (as the working group described it) may develop.
Either residents or staff at various levels may initiate such developments and this usually reflects a real problem in living with or caring for people who may be regarded as disruptive or anti-social.
Hence those segregated may not all suffer from dementia.
Planned segregation in an integrated home can be Seen when one floor or wing is used specifically for those people with dementia or more broadly with some mental impairment.
There are signs that this pattern is developing in a number of Regions — perhaps most extensively in Borders.
As the numbers of elderly people with dementia within the home increase — will the non-dementing group be in one wing with three others providing care for old people with dementia.
An example of positive segregation is the Specialist dementia unit, Williamwood, jointly funded by the Church of Scotland and Strathclyde Social Work Department, and other developments by the Church of Scotland in other Regions, usually jointly funded by the appropriate Health Board and Social Work Department.
The term "negative segregation" may be used to describe the policy — implicit or explicit — to exclude the person with dementia from residential care.
Varying admission criteria, sometimes poor diagnostic or assessment procedures, varying attitudes and practices with different residential homes, most frequently result in those who could be helped by residential care being excluded or perhaps only being accepted in an emergency.
Strathclyde and, presumably, many other local authorities in Scotland have a dilemma.
Apart from the current pressures from Central Government not to build or replace residential homes but to rely more heavily on the private and voluntary sector and housing associations, they are also being pressed to see Residential Care as a positive choice (Wagner Report 1987), to see the residential home as a community resource by providing more flexible patterns, respite, short-term and long term care and extended day care.
How can they develop a coherent strategy for residential care in general if the needs of dementing elderly people and their carers cannot be met by more positive and appropriate patterns of care?
The SAD working group suggested that the development of options depended on clarification of the responsibilities between health Boards and local authorities — perhaps we have to await Griffiths and the NHS Review before this can happen conclusively.
The SAD paper set out a number of options — I wish to concentrate on the fourth.
 "Another option is that Health Boards provide" Timbury Units"for a considerable number of mildly and moderately demented patients, or that the private and voluntary sectors continue to increase their provision.
On the one hand, this might lessen the load of dementia on local authority care.
On the other it might end up with the negative attitudes about dementia and care for dementia sufferers attaching to the segregated units."
(SAD)
The issue of the SHHD building Note would appear to confirm that the Scottish Office sees this as the way forward.
Perhaps local authorities should thankfully accept this solution and turn their attention to the needs of non-dementing elderly residents and community services.
I would suggest that it is highly unlikely that sufficient numbers of Timbury type continuing care units will be provided.
I am not sure that Health Boards will wish to initiate a strategy which is 10 years out of date.
The problems of early diagnosis and assessment, the views of those with dementia and their carers and not least the spectre of stigmatisation will result in many people remaining in the community and needing flexible, responsive and residential services.
The developments in relation to jointly funded residential care by Health and Social Work, in partnership with voluntary organisations such as Church of Scotland and Bield Housing Association are a positive step forward; they can develop specialist skills, though again the question is how many specialist facilities will be required?
Figures for Glasgow would probably indicate about 8, and will such specialist homes as they increase in number attract the additional medical and nursing input that is so necessary
Social Work Departments have two major problems when they consider residential services for dementia sufferers.
First, an existing management problem — how do they provide the best possible for those already in residential homes? secondly — a development problem — how to use valuable resources — staff and buildings in the future.
In Strathclyde, we decided that our strategy would be to address the existing management and development issues in a general way by raising the profile of the needs of dementia sufferers and their carers across the Region — and obviously initiatives and educational material were invaluable in this and also by developing a training package, aimed at care staff in residential, day and domiciliary settings.
In order to evaluate the most effective ways of meeting the needs of dementia sufferers and their carers, we decided to set up a variety of pilot projects — these will be discussed by Ian Baillie in his talk on the Strathclyde development Fund.
I will only refer to 2 projects in the short time available.
The first, Walker House, was aimed to provide specialist long-term residential care, with an element of flexible day care, in one unit of a new group unit home in Rutherglen.
As it has developed the residential unit, which incorporates 2 beds which can be used by the consultant providing the psychogeriatric services, has developed an emphasis on early diagnosis, assessment and rehabilitation Two people have moved into the unit from hospital and a further 3 or 4 may be rehoused in a group living situation in a house nearby.
staffing levels are double the norm — the major cost element — this allows a ratio of at least 1 care staff to 4 residents, excluding management and domestic staff.
This facilitates one to one forking when appropriate.
The second project is not yet operational but staff are to be interviewed shortly.
The base is an old villa called Blairtum in its own grounds close to the large dousing estate of Castlemilk.
It will provide extended day care for up to 10 people — any time between 8 am and 10 pm over 7 days, in a pattern which suits the sufferer and the carer.
Additional home support can be provided for a further 10 clients who do not wish to or cannot attend the day centre.
Short periods of residential care will also be provided, for up to 10 residents, to provide assessment, rehabilitation and respite.
The outreach work and support to carers is seen as a major component and a worker on qualified social worker grade is provided specifically for the project.
Like Walker House, staffing levels are double the norm, 1 to 5 in day care, 1 to 4  in residential care.
The emphasis will be on flexible, individualised care, with close links with the local psychogeriatric services, GPs and community nursing services being built in.
Blairtum is situated within a reasonable distance of Walker House.
The plan is for both units to work closely together.
It is anticipated that a research and evaluation study will be carried out under the direction of Professor Rex Taylor, Glasgow University Walker House and the other pilot projects are currently being evaluated by Dennis McCullough, Jordanhill College, Glasgow.
The increasing numbers of dementia sufferers living alone; the pressures on carers, will mean that the need for all services will increase and I would suggest that the level of our knowledge is such that we do not know what the "best" care for dementia sufferers is — and what may be best for sufferers may not be best for carers.
I would agree that some of our residential homes, in spite of difficulties do provide very good residential care for people with dementia and that ideally, we need a combination of residential care and cursing skills with good support from community and hospital psychiatric and paramedical services as and when it is needed.
I think that the skills developed in small, local units, similar to Blairtum and the Domus type model developed by Professor Elaine Murphy, are more likely to respond appropriately to the needs of sufferers and carers in a particular area and are more likely to build up relationships with carers which allows the carer to continue their baring role without sacrificing themselves.
The importance of staff training, support and commitment cannot be underestimated — neither can the need for appropriate staffing levels.
It is the major cost in maintaining a specialist home.
Indications are that costs will compare favourably with, for instance, the cost of a bed in a private nursing home; additional benefits of a local authority specialist unit may be the ability to provide services such as carers' support, home care, day care, despite staff training to maximise the use of staff and buildings It is always more difficult to evaluate the effectiveness of preventive services but the higher cost of specialist provision may be offset if it has a preventive role in the wider community.
In conclusion I would offer a very positive role for residential care — whether integrated or specialist but all I have said emphasises that there is no simple way forward, there are pros and cons for practically every service.
To be effective, services have to plan and work together and respect the need for a truly multi-disciplinary approach to the needs of dementia sufferers and their carers.
SHHD BUILDING DESIGN GUIDANCE ON CONTINUING CARE UNITS FOR THE ELDERLY WITH MENTAL DISABILITY
Dr Patrick Brooks, Senior Medical Adviser, Scottish Rome and Health Department The current "family" of design guidance notes for use in planning new hospitals buildings in the Scottish Health Service is at present Hospital Planning Note 1 (HPN1), and its collection of supplements which, at November 1988, numbered 11 in all, with one further one expected early in 1989.
HPN1 itself, which was revised in 1977, consists of the basic design guidance for acute medical and surgical wards in a district general hospital, comprising 2 x 30-bed intermediate nursing care sections linked by a 12-bed intensive nursing care section.
This design guidance itself is currently under review and is likely to be revised in 1989.
Bound with it in the same volume are the first 7 Supplements; this volume is now out of print.
Of particular interest to this group will be Supplements C, a 60-bed sub-unit for elderly patients, D a 60-bed sub-unit for geriatric psychiatry patients, E a 60-bed subunit for psychiatric patients in district general hospital and F a 48–60-bed sub-unit for mentally handicapped patients (it is this last supplement which has formed the basis for the so-called "Merchiston Units" ).
In addition, of interest to workers in the mental health field, there is Supplement J, a 30-bed section for psychiatric rehabilitation, and SupplementS K and L which are 12-bed intensive nursing care units for, respectively, the mentally handicapped and the mentally ill.
The decision to produce a further supplement for continuing care units for the elderly with mental disability arose out of the recommendations of the Timbury Report which was published in 1978 and which recommended "the provision and management by the health service of continuing care unit accommodation for the elderly confused." 
It was suggested that "such units should be part of the psychiatric service and would compare with continuing care units' of the geriatric service." 
The report envisaged units of approximately 40–60 beds which, although a development of the psychiatric service, should be located in the community which they serve preferably in close association with small geriatric hospitals and staffed mainly by nursing assistants with trained nurse supervision.
It was suggested that "The provision of these new additional and replacement continuing care units will also facilitate the desirable reduction in size of many larger inappropriately sited mental illness hospitals." 
(Timbury Report, paragraph 3.6).
The accommodation described is intended to meet the needs of confused elderly patients who are suffering from a dementing illness but not from gross behaviour disorders or severe physical disability.
They will not therefore require the full  range of facilities offered by mental illness hospitals, though many will still require assistance with the normal activities or daily living.
The majority will be mobile but a few may require walking aids or wheelchairs.
A homely and caring environment is the aim.
For many residents it will be their last home.
While it is difficult to be firm about the exact numbers required, the generally accepted "bed norm" in Scotland for geriatric psychiatry beds specifically for the confused elderly is as recommended in Timbury, that is to say 10 beds per 1,000 population aged 65+.
Timbury recommended that approximately half of such psychogeriatric accommodation should be in continuing care units.
The remainder would be in psychogeriatric assessment wards and in the long-stay wards of psychiatric hospitals.
For Scotland this would mean that in 1996 there would require to be approximately 7,860 psychogeriatric beds of which little under 4,000 should be in continuing care units.
The schedule of accommodation which forms the basic document around which the rest of the building note is developed, and which I shall illustrate, was prepared, for this particular group of patients, in precisely the same way as it had been done for some of the other sub-groups within mental illness and mental handicapped for which various supplements have been prepared to which I referred above.
In each case a small working party met within SHHD over a period of a number of months.
This working party consisted of representatives from the Scottish Division of Royal College of Psychiatrists, the Scottish Section of Royal College of Nursing, Medical and Nursing Officers from within SHHD, and Medical and Nursing Officers from the Common Services Agency Building Division which has its headquarters in Glasgow.
Before getting down to the fine detail of the schedule and of room sizes, the working party first considered a number of basic principles including the desirable size of wards and nursing charges and the basic philosophies of care and treatment which it was felt were most applicable to this group of patients.
Some of these basic philosophies subsequently appear in certain sections of the Supplement, and I can illustrate these by showing you copies of the relevant pages.
I have already described above the group of patients for whom these units are intended, and the recommendations regarding location which, as I have already indicated, are drawn from the Timbury Report.
These are contained within section 1, the Introduction to the Supplement.
While Timbury recommended that it was preferable that these be provided in association with small geriatric hospitals, it was recognised that some of these may be provided "free standing" in the community.
Such units would still require to be served from a more fully equipped hospital or other establishment to ensure the availability of the appropriate service departments, catering, supplies, laundry (including personal clothes laundry etc) and especially the rehabilitation department with assessment and rehabilitation facilities.
The emphasis will be on the provision of an informal and domestic environment offering some gentle physical and intellectual activities consistent with the needs of such patients.
A limited number of personal furnishing items should be allowed in bedrooms to encourage a domestic atmosphere and to reinforce identity."
One of the major decisions taken by the working party was that in order to reinforce domesticity and encourage small group living, the nursing section or charge of up to 30 beds should be designed so that there are 3 subsections (2 in exceptional circumstances), of not more than 10 beds nor less than 8, each of these forming complete living units and having one 4 bedroom plus an appropriate number of single bedrooms, adequate WC and bashing facilities and a fitting room, dining room and severity/pantry.
The subdivision into groups or subsections is similar to that employed in supplement J for Psychiatric Rehabilitation One suggestion that was made was that "an adjoining pair of single bedrooms might be made inter-connecting to accommodate, for instance, a married couple." 
With regard to day space this has been agreed on a provision of 4m2 per patient and it was also suggested that in addition to providing that space for each resident, there should be extra space to accommodate 2 day patients per sub section.
This, of course, particularly has the benefit for residents of giving them a little extra space during the evenings and weekends when, generally speaking, day patients do not attend.
The rest of this slide illustrates a number of other recommendations, and I would particularly highlight 2.6 where it says "A safe enclosed external space should also be provided linked to the internal day spaces." 
and"There is no need for each of the subsections to be identical.
Each could have a different emphasis or character.
3.2 8 Bed sub-section Suggested area of each (m2) 4 Single bedroom 11 Four bed room 40 3 WC and washing compartment 3 Bathroom with WC and wash hand basin 10 Sitting room) 4m2 Dining room) per person Servery/Pantry 10–12
3.3 10 Bed sub-section Suggested area of each (m2) 6 Single bedroom 11 Four bed room 40 4 WC and washing compartment 3 Bathroom with WC and wash hand basin 10 Sitting room) 4m2 Dining room) per person 20 Servery/Pantry 10–12
3.4 Central Support Area (24 or 30 Bed Section) Suggested area of each (m2) Office 11 Preparation room 12 Disposal/Sluice Room 8 Store (patients' clothes) 12 Store (Equipment/furniture) 10 Interview/overnight room 11 WC and washing compartment 2 Domestic Service room 8 2 Staff changing room (male and female) including WC and shower compartment 10 Reception/waiting area 12 A store outside the section may suffice if available.
NOTES 1 The area sizes listed have been derived from preferred dimensions and rounded to the nearest m2 for convenience.
There is a +/- tolerance of 5% on all figures which will allow the designer to adjust length and width to structural and constructional constraints.
Size is not the only consideration of importance.
It is important to ensure that rooms are of the right shape to serve their function.
2 An additional may be added to the above areas to allow for circulation, ducts, services cupboards and internal wall thicknesses. 3 Since the accommodation will normally be free standing and at ground level, no further space is likely to be necessary for access and escape, ie communications.
Boiler house/calorifier room and main switchboard are costed separately.
The decision to include a multi-bedroom was arrived at after considerable debate.
while recognising the desirability of privacy, it was nevertheless felt there were some patients, particularly those, for example, transferred from the larger wards of psychiatric hospitals, who preferred shared accommodation.
It will be noted that the multi-bedroom has a WC and washing compartment with direct access to a lobby for patients' use while the remaining WC and washing compartments and bathroom should be located so as to be of easy access from the single rooms.
It will be noted that the day space, to be provided on the basis of 4m2 per person, and including the 2 day patients, mean that a 10-bed sub-section would have a total and an 8-bed sub-section would have a day space of 40m 2.
In the former case this is divided into a sitting room of 28m 2 an a dining room of 2Om 2: in the latter case the sizes are 24m 2 an 16m 2 respectively.
Whichever size of unit is built, there requires to be shared accommodation at section level mainly for staff and services, and these are listed in 3.4.
Once the working party had drawn up a schedule of accommodation, illustrated above, it then fell to medical and nursing officers within SHHD, and CSABD, together with colleagues from SDD Building Directorate to work this schedule up into a detailed design guidance.
The main body of that guidance consists of a detailed description of each room listed in the schedule, and dealt with under the headings of functions, fittings, furniture and equipment, services, finishes, area/shape, and relationship to other rooms.
Finally Section 5 deals with Design Consideration: Architectural and Services as a detailed guidance for architects working with a schedule and the room descriptions to prepare notional plans and drawings.
In so far as some of these considerations relate specifically to the environment of the unit, they are worth mentioning here.
For example, it is suggested that: "The rooms should be grouped in a simple manner, easy for patients and visitors to find their way around; the whole building should be on one level and should look as far as is possible both externally and internally like a house not a hospital: there should be a clearly defined main entry/exit point for patients, staff, visitors and supplies which should have a ramped approach and in which the main door should be lockable: WC and washing compartment should be shared between pairs of single bed rooms and should be readily accessible to the sitting and dining rooms; the bathroom should be readily accessible to both day and night areas; the WC and the bathroom should be equipped for wheelchairs and standing users: the sitting and dining rooms and the external enclosure should be accessible by wheelchair: rooms should be differentiated in colour and finish while remaining domestic in scale and character: an informal, welcoming and comfortable reception/waiting area is required at the entrance to provide shelter and waiting spaces for visitors: the area between main entrance and sub-section entrances is likely to be an extensive area of circulation and will be the hub of the building but it could also be, spaciously, rather than an enlarged corridor, a positive amenity and focus if designed as a conservatory, for example , to contain plants or even birds and fish providing a stimulus to patients' visitors and staff, and, finally: the safe external enclosure (to which I referred earlier,) should take the form of a walled garden matching the materials of parent buildings, suitably softened with appropriate planting.
It should be sheltered from the wind and should catch the sun and should be easily accessible to the building perhaps by a partially covered or glazed canopy: planting should be simple, bold and easily maintained, with more variable and small scale flowers and herbs being grown and planted so they can be changed seasonally.
Raised beds and planters, even a raised pool or a table and bath for wild birds are attractive to the elderly."
Finally given the schedule, the detailed room description, and these architectural considerations,(amongst others) an attempt has been made to draw up some exemplar plans and two of these are illustrated.
It would be noted that in fact one of these plans is for a 20-bed unit consisting of 2 10-bed sections.
This design guidance will be published as Supplement M to HPN1 and is expected early in the New Year.
Using exemplar plans this will be costed and provisional Cost Allowances will be issued to health boards along with the guidance note.
(Since this talk was given, Supplement M was issued to health boards on 2 March 1989 under cover of SJIHD/DGM (1989) 18.
The provisional Cost Allowances for the accommodation were for a 24-bed unit 430,000 and for a 30-bed unit £500,000.
These are to be inserted in the Schedule of Departmental Cost Allowances published in August 1988 and are to be adjusted by the increase in the cost allowances announced in SHHD/DGM (1989) 8 which amounts to 10.08%; further they exclude on-costs, professional fees, equipment costs and land costs).
ASSESSMENT OF NEEDS, RESOURCES AND OUTPUTS FOR CARE IN THE COMMUNITY
Dr Martin Knapp, Deputy Director, Personal Social Services Research Unit, University of Kent I am going to talk about the programme of pilot, projects described in"Care in the Community: The First Steps The starting point for that was the 1983 Care in the community circular which referred only to England and built on the Department of Health's Care in the community consultative document of 1981.
The Circular brought together a number of themes which run through public policy over most of the postwar period.
Those themes, some of which are very clear within the document, others were hidden away in 1983 and have become more important since then.
First we're talking about de-institutionalisation The Care in the Community circular was concerned with the movement of people from long stay hospital settings into Community settings.
It was emphasising that for many people hospital residence is inappropriate and they are simply living there because there is nowhere else for them.
They do need support, they do need often 24 hour attention, but they do not necessarily need to be in hospital.
Secondly joint working is emphasised.
The 1983 circular invited applications for pilot project funding and it also set out new rules and regulations, new guidelines for joint working, not only between the health service and local authorities but also between statutory and voluntary agencies.
There are some very explicit recommendations to involve the voluntary sector in an important way.
Thirdly, there is a theme of evaluation and cost-effectiveness The move to the community or the changing emphasis on community services should be evaluated.
Now cost effectiveness if often taken to mean cheap.
This is not the case with the circular which emphasises that the move to the community must be beneficial for the people concerned.
It must also not be too expensive.
But there is no reason why community services shouldn't be more expensive than hospitals if at the same time they are enhancing the quality of people's lives.
The other two themes were less important in the circular but have become more important in the past 5 years.
Consumerism — there was some mention in the circular about taking note of the views of the people both of the users of services and their carers, the consumers of the range of services.
Emphasis on mixed economy — on involving a range of different agencies, not only statutory agencies, but voluntary and private, not only  formal organisations but informal groups, informal carers and so on.
Needless to say, it was an English-only circular.
Two main components of it — one a pilot project, the other, changed financial relationships between health authorities and local authorities.
In England, prior to 1983, local authorities could receive up to 3 years' worth of joint finance money.
The circular changed and allowed that joint finance money to be paid over a much longer period and virtually in perpetuity.
I am going to focus not on dowry payments, but on the pilot programme.
It is relevant to describe these experiences in order to raise issues, to remind ourselves of important topics and to offer local solutions to some of the problems which arise.
Issues, topics and solutions relevant for at least the next two decades of practice.
£20 million was "top-sliced" from joint finance budgets and set aside to fund a number of pilot projects.
It focussed on a number of different client groups and 28 projects set out to move about 900 people from hospital settings to community settings.
It was to be promoted, monitored and evaluated.
It was to be a and to have good demonstration programme and to have good dissemination of experiences.
PILOT Programme
Many of the people who were targeted to move from hospital under the scheme have been in hospital for many years, many of them for more than 40 or 50 years.
whilst the group who have made the move from the hospital to the community are not typical of the hospital population — they are generally not as dependent as the average person in hospital — they are certainly much more typical than those people who are moving out of hospital elsewhere in England and to some extent in Scotland.
They are not the "easy to move" people, they are not people who can live more or less independently in the Community.
Most of them have quite considerable continuing care needs.
So we are talking about a fairly dependent population.
Care in the community is not a new concept.
It has been the predominant mode of care for people with long term care needs, whether their needs are concerned with mental illness, learning difficulty, mental handicap, age related needs or physical handicap.
Care in the community has been the dominant and the predominant mode of care for centuries.
What's new about the focus in the last few years, and what's important about the circular and the programme was the emphasis on quality, and on providing good quality services.
Some of the services which are being provided, if you look at them critically as we are doing now, are not of as good quality as one would hope.
But  the original intention was not to shift people from one setting to another on the cheap; the emphasis was on quality.
The other important thing is that a spotlight was going to be shone on this programme and that would reveal both the beauty spots of community care and the warts and the carbuncles.
It's always easier to talk about warts and carbuncles than it is to focus on beauty spots, but I hope to get the balance right this morning.
Those projects covered a range of different client groups.
There were 4 for elderly people with mental impairment (dementia projects effectively) English authorities were eligible for grant aid.
Each of 28 projects received 3 years worth of money.
Some of them were funded from 1984 to 1987 some of them from 1985 until March 1989.
They received this 3 years' worth of money to set up their new community facilities.
They are geographically dispersed which gave a difficult research task for the 2 ½, equivalent full time researchers.
It was important for the demonstration aspects of the initiative to have it geographically dispersed in order to get the message across that community care maybe can work but also has its problems.
It was dispersed in terms of client groups.
There were 8 projects for people with a mental illness, most of those people were not elderly.
11 were for people with learning difficulty or mental handicap, and 4 were for elderly people with a mental impairment, 3 for elderly people who were physically frail, I for children and 1 for physically handicapped adults.
The initiative covered 28 district health authorities in England and 28 local authorities It covered about 40 voluntary agencies and more than 50 hospitals.
There were a lot of people to work with, but I hope that the experience from monitoring these projects will be valuable.
The 4 projects for people with dementia were Camberwell, St Helens, West Cumbria and Hillingdon.
The Camberwell project was initiated and led by Age Concern.
There was some strength of feeling at the Institute of psychiatry at the Maudsley hospital that there should be a good psycho-geriatric project in London.
I think the department of Health was swayed rather more than it should have been by that lobby, because the sort of service that was intended to set up in Camberwell has not yet been set up.
The project is running about 3 ½ years behind schedule.
That's not a criticism of the project as such, it's just that the sort of service that was intended which included the conversion of a building, did not check out that a building was available — there was no building.
After some time of searching for the right facility they have had to go back and build something anew.
So not a very successful project in terms of getting people out into the community but people are due to move at the end of this calendar year and I have no  doubt that the project will be very successful thereafter.
It is, as I said, initiated and led by a voluntary agency.
It has a multi-disciplinary team both for the selection of people to move to the community and to manage their services — take decisions on their services once they are in the community.
The Hillingdon project was initiated and led by social services.
It is now funded by the health authority under the normal joint finance arrangements and there have been one or two local disputes which I'll come back to later on.
The district which was due to take over the funding is now claiming that some of the people who are now living in the special units attached to old people's homes are not their responsibility They did not originally come from their districts and so they are refusing to pay some of the finance over.
I get upset by this rather petty response sometimes.
In the short term at least, these can have quite major complications for the quality of life of the people that you are concerned with.
Again in Hillington you have a multi-disciplinary team, selecting and preparing for the move, planning care, providing key worker services.
The St Helens project was initiated and led by the health authority but really managed by the joint care planning team.
Again it's 20 places in a residential setting.
All these 4 projects are effectively providing residential settings so they are not community care in the most exciting way.
Multi-disciplinary team again — although it's led by one particular agency, there are inputs from a whole range of agencies.
West Cumbria is a local authority led project.
It's a hostel which was originally being used by people with a mental illness which is being converted for elderly people moving out into the community.
It has very enhanced staffing.
It provides a reality orientation programme, reminiscence therapy and the very much higher levels of staffing needed there have proved to be very important for the successful working of that project.
It has been a very successful project indeed.
I t has been very successful too in involving relatives and neighbours people living around the facility.
Each client, again, has an identified key worker.
That's 4 of the projects and some of the other projects for other client groups are I think, in terms of the concept of community care, more exciting and more interesting.
That's not to criticise those.
I think these projects have, within their localities, often faced a lot of criticism, because they have perhaps been trying to move too far or too fast.
They have had to proceed cautiously.
I think we may be in a position now to take more risks.
I want to look at some general features of the 28 projects that we are studying.
This money was not intended to provide the total provision for services but to prime the community care pump to galvanise local action.
It was focussed on a long-stay population.
To qualify for money, the projects had to demonstrate that they were going to work effectively in a joint way.
There had to be very clear indications of joint working.
Case management was one of the requirements.
This was where the influence of the research unit (PSSRU) was most obvious.
There had been some very successful case-managed projects- the first of which was the Kent community care projects The evaluative work of David Challis and Bledyyn Davies shows that case management with devolved budgets, giving field workers much more responsibility to over resources can be very, very successful on almost every criterion.
1 Common Features
2 Focus on case management.
3 Client well being was emphasised.
The projects must enhance the quality of life and well being of the clients.
4 They should be cost-effective.
5 They should be in the spotlight.
They were to demonstrate good and bad practices but hopefully mostly good.
6 Variety — they have very different philosophises they have very different local and national positions, very different styles of forking.
7 They put some emphasis on consumer choice.
Nobody across the programme was dragged kicking and screaming out of their hospital bed into the community.
The people who moved into the community were given the choice.
There is an issue about how much choice some people can exercise and I recognise that issue but the idea was not to force anybody to make the move.
That contrasts with what some policies will lead to in a few years time if we are going to have complete closure of some long stay hospitalS.
There is an important emphasis in this set of projects on consumer choice.
1 Projects are special.
There is 20 million pounds earmarked for them.
All succeeded in meeting most of their local and national objectives of moving people into the community.
They have done this particularly because new money was made available and when budgets are tight it's often difficult to put aside quite a substantial chunk of money, particularly if you've got some capital  investment that's required.
Money was "earmarked" or ringfenced"for the particular service and client group with which the project was concerned.
2 That additional money was not enough.
You cannot provide community services for 900 people for 3 years out of 19 million pounds.
Whilst projects were delighted when they got pump-priming money they also had to draw on a range of local resources.
3 These local resources as part of packages emphasise what we mean by joint working.
In joint working I tend to think first of health and social services but that is not joint working in its most realistic and adventurous kind.
It is joint working which involves all the groups, agencies and individuals — voluntary organisations, consumer groups and private agencies, housing associations, education departments.
Joint working can be seen across our programme.
For instance in Coventry, the local authority social services department provided the day centre.
It wasn't funded by DHSS.
It was a local additional new resource.
The Islington project provided houses for conversion into flats quite separate from this money.
In Bolton the education authority made special arrangements for clients with a learning difficulty to go to local colleges.
So there was a range of local resources which are important.
There was a range of health authority resources.
We tend to think of joint finance, in the English context, as involving the district health authority, but there is a range of agencies — from the highest level in the NHS down to the family practitioner committees — who must have a part to play in planning community services and of course in supporting community services.
4 Social security — that famous jungle.
The most revealing anecdote that I can tell you about that is from Coventry.
A number of elderly people moved into very sheltered housing and they were entitled to a range of social security benefits.
Those patients with surnames from A-L received one level of benefit.
Those patients with surnames M-Z, received another level of benefit — a much lower level.
The point was that their claims had gone to different adjudication officers and they had made different decisions.
These People are not typical social security clients.
There is not a lot of case law for the adjudication officers to base their decisions on.
That was sorted out after a while.
Those sort of problems can create huge difficulties, particularly for non statutory agencies that rely on social security benefits for their very survival.
One of the experiences of the programme is that it is important to involve social security officers early on, to tell them what's going to happen, not to wait until people are in the community and then make the claim.
Get them involved early because often people with on special needs are very special as far as social security agencies are concerned.
5 The voluntary sector is involved in a number of different ways.
Housing associations play a big part a cross the programme.
National and local organisations are very important.
The private sector tends not to be involved very much yet in planning they tend to be involved in the reactive and service delivery role.
Voluntary and private sector should be involved in community care, in joint working.
6 Clients and their carers have an important part to play.
Clearly in both the provision of resources and also their views on the way services can and should move.
Virtually none of the people looked at in this demonstration have gone into an informal care setting where they are relying to a large degree on informal caring.
This is mainly because they are long stay hospital patients who have no informal carers, who have no communities to return to initially.
One of the tasks of the project is to develop informal care networks, community, local neighbourhood networks for these people.
The first project started loving people in about 1984.
The number of people identified who have made the move to the community was 768 at the last count, up to about September 1988. 526 are included in the evaluation, so we are already getting a lot of information about the potential of community care.
A number of people were readmitted to Hospital (mostly long term readmissions).
In the elderly group out of the 122 half were readmitted and half died.
In some of those cases, the most crucial period is immediately after relocation.
A lot of people went back to hospital within 2 or 3 months of moving to the community.
They could not cope even with very enhanced staffing levels and very supportive community care services.
Lessons to be learnt from these projects
7 The numbers of people who have moved.
Generally progress in loving people into community care settings has been slow, slower than anticipated I think there are good and bad reasons for that.
The good reasons are that these projects have not been chucking people out into the community "willy-nilly" .
a) They have been carefully planning very comprehensive and supportive care services.
They have endeavoured and succeeded in providing good community care packages.
b) They have also wanted to set up good case management arrangements, not just macro level working, not just providing the context within the health authority but also to provide the right case management at the micro practice level.
c) Consumer choice issue — people have not been rushed into the community until they were ready.
Many people wanted very long rehabilitation programmes before they were prepared to move.
The bad reasons for slow progress are: a) Staff recruitment problems b) Capital development delays.
This has confirmed my Suspicions that builders are inefficient the world over.
Each project has had problems with builders -buildings have always taken longer than anticipated.
c) Hospital and community resistance.
It is important to have a clear, conceptual framework for analysing and evaluating community services.
What was interesting about the projects was that they were asked at the outset to establish their local objectives, and set criteria for success for themselves.
They knew what the national objectives were ie to improve the wellbeing of people who moved; not to be too expensive and to work jointly with other agencies — but what were their local objectives?
Those objectives can be arranged schematically.
What have projects set out to do and what have we found?
These were pitched at a number of different levels.
Some of them were out to show that they could achieve good quality community care at a lower cost than hospitals, or to provide community care which was at least no more expensive than a hospital.
Local Objectives
1 Finance objectives
Community care is not cheap, but it is also not horrendously expensive either.
The problem with drawing a conclusion about cost is that it is dangerous to start talking about the cost of community care because the cost of community care varies tremendously with local circumstances and particularly with the characteristics of the people you are looking at.
What we are finding is a range of costs.
At the lowest end the cost if £74 per person per week; at the highest end the cost if £600–700  per person per week.
That is a huge variation which reflects differences in circumstances, differences in local style and a whole range of other factors.
What we are now trying to do is to explain that variation in cost.
So there is no simple solution, and no simple conclusion that coming into community care is cheaper or more expensive.
It very much depends on local circumstances.
What is important is that the costs of community services are not easily observed.
There is a range of hidden or indirect costs.
For example, every one of the 768 people who moved into the community is making greater demands on general practitioners than was expected.
General practitioners have had to bear a much heavier load than even the most pessimistic were expecting.
Also a very large proportion retain strong links with hospitals.
About a third have had some out patient attendances in the first 9 months in the community across the whole programme, and the proportion for elderly people was higher.
About 17% across the programme are day patients in hospitals, going for industrial therapy perhaps in the younger age groups.
12% have had in-patient stays in the first 9 months in the community.
Most of them have been short term.
So there is a range of hidden costs of community care which we have to remember when we are trying to set up new services.
2.
In relation to both the social environment and the broader environment of care services.
I have already mentioned the reality orientation objective of the Cumbria project.
Advocacy was an important objective for many projects and has become an important objective for every project.
They have all taken on board some advocacy objectives, trying to represent users of services effectively in planning and other decisions.
Regime objectives
3.
We can see how costs and resources and the regime (or the environment of care) combine to define service inputs.
Service inputs combine to deliver and define the packages of services.
It's important to see care not as a set of isolated services but as a package and to coordinate that effectively.
Service inputs objectives
Final outcomes Every project sets out to enhance the quality of life for the people that they were going to provide services for.
They were doing that in a number of ways.
PSSRU Evaluation: Our evaluation has a number of objectives.
Our evaluation has a number of objectives.
It is difficult to get the real client view.
We have to try and get behind the "happy face" mask that they might put on when the interviewer comes along.
Often there is another problem that clients have complained of ie sometimes the staff coming on shift are full of energy and very committed and full of ideas — the client, having just survived one shift with a previous enthusiastic staff, may be reluctant to start the whole process again.
We have to realise that clients may not be quite as energetic as staff would like them to be.
1 Evaluating consumer satisfaction
How do we evaluate the range of objectives that we are looking at and the range of outcome dimensions?
We interview the service users about their morale and life satisfaction We rely on carers and on staff for assessing skills and behaviour and some of the other factors — daily activities, social contacts.
We rely on the interviewer/researchers to assess personal presentation whether it's appropriate to the setting in which people are living.
Design of the study — "before and after" We look at people in hospital, hopefully before they get into any rehabilitation programme but that's not always been possible.
We do an assessment and allow them to express their views on the quality of life in hospital.
We then do the same set of assessments in the community about 9 months after people have made the move.
It is based on different assessments, different views.
There is a common instrumentation across all the client groups.
The only variation is in the project for elderly people, where the questions have been changed slightly to make them, more appropriate to their needs and expectations.
The idea is to learn from the experiences of different client groups, not just one particular client group.
Overlaying local objectives are broader, system-wise objectives, for example efficiency objectives.
Many projects have set out to demonstrate that they could set up efficient and effective monitoring systems.
They had as one of their objectives a broad attempt to provide efficient systems.
2 Evaluating local objectives
Systems effects have in many cases knock-on effects, even though they were providing care, providing new services for perhaps just 6 people.
In Cambridge and Glossop there were just 3 people in the project.
Most of the projects were also trying to have knock on effects, not just for their client group but for services which would benefit other people.
This was particularly for people who have not been in hospital, but who may have exactly the same sort of needs as the people who are the focus of the particular project.
Finally, an issue we became aware of — in England at least-because of the "dowry" system of funding was that a two tier system may be set up which benefits those people who have come out of hospital and ignores the others.