

quite as young as that er you know but I mean er then as I got older I d I did live with me grandmother.
When?
For a bit.
Wh at what age?
Er ooh I figure I'd only be quite young  perhaps might be about five.
I can just remember m I can just picture my grandma  she was.
And I can just remember  where she lived.
I know it went up two steps.
Of course and then she dies and erm I went back to me own mother you see.
Why why did you with your grandmother ?
I don't know  my grandmother must have took to me.


And er and then er of course I went back to me mother after me grandmother died, I went to me mother and er mind you when I was th young there was a lot of poverty about you know there was er no security pay and no er  and you couldn't get any money from anywhere or anything like that you know and er so it used to er had to do the best  you can.
Me dad used to do anything  kind you know or work.
To well they used to call what they call them a labour man you know he'd do any sort of work.
Do you mean that he didn't have a permanent job ?
no he didn't have a permanent one, no not for a bit.
Not for quite a while.
And then erm then when er once when I was only little there was a pit strike on I think I'd only be about seven, somewhere there.
And you was allowed to go and get the coal from the pit siding.
Like there such as housewives have always got no coal.
Of course there was no gas fires about then.
no gas fires.
You used to have to cook everything on your fire.
You had to cook everything?
On your fire.
Yes there used to be a oven one side, a boiler on other and er your fire in the middle and the fire used to have er a a thing what used to come down, and you used to stand your kettle on there to boil.
Or you used to stand your saucepans on there to boil.
And then when you was boiling your potatoes or vegetables you you used to have tho th the iron saucepans in them days.
And you used to be ab well you used to be able to  over the flames of the fire on one side, and then er a saucepan on the other on the in one side with your vegetables in one side, with your potatoes in and then you used to have your oven with a for your meat.
There used to be two shelves in the oven.
Oh I see.
And on that side, what we  fireplace it used to be what we used to call a boiler, you used to fill it with water and it used to the fire used to heat it for you to take it we used to call what we used to call ladle it out into a a bowl to wash your pots with or wash your floor with or anything with.
So you had to scoop it out into 
Yes well you used to  scoop your water out with what you used to call a ladle in them days.
S and er and then of course when you'd got your so much water out again you used to go and fill it up again.
Fill your fill your boiler up again.
Oh it used to last all day.
You know and then er and then er  and we'd got no gas in when I was quite little.
There was no gas.
You used to use oil lamps.
Paraffin lamps.
I've seen my mother stand them on the table, middle of the table you know, the oil lamps.
And then I've seen t er me mother once had er oil lamp from the ceiling and it was round and the oil lamp used to stand in the middle.
And the surround used to have nice fancy work round you know to make it so it wouldn't stand on the table cos me mother bought one of those because it used to be a bit dangerous on the table if you knocked it you see and
What with the children?
Er yes if you know if knocked the table any time they fall over, liable to set fire you see with the paraffin and that.
And you used to have what they call a wick in it you know to light it and turn it down at night time and blow it out down the .
And then in the streets, there was no electric lights in the street, they all used to be gas.
And er a gent used to have er a gentleman going round with a great long stick.
And er just pulling the chain in the thing what er like a big white globe they used to be.
Stand high up and big white globe, and the used to little got a little door.
He used to lift this door up  with his stick and just put it inside and light it.
And then er in the morning part, he'd come and turn them all out.
That's how it was in them days.
Can you tell me something about, can you describe the house where you lived?
How how many rooms did they have?
Oh we used to er there used to be er er two rooms downstairs and then there used to be what you used to call er the attic they used to call them in them days.
Er go up another flight of stairs to another room.
They used call the it used to be called the attic you see in them days.
And er you used to have erm  lot of old houses now.
They used to have er a a what you call a front room, and then we used to call it the kitchen and then the other place where you wash your pots and the sink in and everything in, it used to be called the scullery in them days.
And erm some houses used to some houses used to go up some steps and two steps and The one where I used to be and you went you used to go up two steps.
And er and then there used to be some houses what er we didn't live in one of them but there used to be a lot of houses what used to be railings round, and there used to be steps and you'd go down the steps, into the And they used to c they used to live downstairs and then well of course when you're in the house in the side the room they used to have another flight of steps to come upstairs to a l a front room or a lounge or whatever you mind to call it.
All them sort of houses in them days.
What would be downstairs then?
Pardon?
It used to er be same as ordinary room you know it people used to 
The kitchen? was it?
live in it.
Yes.
Oh they used to be ever so funny houses you know and in them days and The er you never used to see in the oh a lot of houses and  you never used to see big windows like these.
They used to have big windows, but they used to a all be them there little tiny ones like that.
You'd got to clean and then er
Can you can you remember your mother doing the housework?
Yes.
Yes  
Well sort of 
telling you that.
She used to mind you in them days you there was no er fitted carpets on your floor.
You used to have to scrub them.
And er just the same as your table there was no er polish top tables when I was little.
You used to have to scrub them.
Scrub them white.
And they were like that and then of course they used to be er no washing machines you used to be at these here tubs.
And there used to be a rub board.
You used to have to rub all your clothes and on this rub board or get a little brush and and scrub the s collar and your cuffs and then in the salt water and get all them in and then you used to have to  ponch them with a  ponch or a dolly peg, what used to go round like that you see.
And there used to be all them sort of things.
Then me mother used to do lace work.
Turn a shilling or two what they call lace work.
They used to In the lace market there used to be factories what used to make lace er and er a lady used to er go and take fetch so much lace out and she used to give it out to people what wanted to do it.
They used to call it drawing or clipping and scalloping you see.
And  er lace what's got all the scallops round, well you used to have to do that.
And then they used to well it used to be ever so long, yards and yards of it and then we used to what they call drawing.
Th drawing you see there used to perhaps be some like that there wide and then the er then that narrow well you'd got to divide them by what they call drawing.
It's just a thread and draw it out and then it they used to come apart.
I used to sit and help me mother to do it.
And 
How how much time would she spend on this work ?
Oh it er oh it used to take it all depends how much they gave her to do you see.
And of course then when she had done it they used to fold it up they used to just get it then and go like that you know, and just fold it up and then when it was done all done you see, they'd take it back to this here lady and then of course they used to pay you for it.
It might be two or three shillings perhaps five shillings, it all depends how much your you got done.
But would she say spend about two hours doing it?
Ooh yes
Mhm.
Yes oh aye sometimes two hours or s or sometimes sit all afternoon and you know and and er a l a lot.
Well all that and then there used to be what they used call er net mending but my mother used to do that.
She made these er mosquito nets, people used to fetch them out and mend them.
And then take them back again.
But my mother never done that.
Why  
Well cos she d she couldn't do it.
Used to have to be very rather experienced in them days to do this here net mending.
Mosquito net mending you know we used to do a lot in Nottingham.
Of course then there's me mother,as we got older older me mother used to work at er what they used to call dressing rooms.
They used to do a lot of these er mosquito nets.
And li you know, er clean them and starch them and stretch them on frames and Have you ever been in a dressing room?
No.
Can you 
Well you just ought to.
There's a it's a great long room then a at the top here they call what they call fans.
big swing wide things used to go round when they was going.
Well then there used to be frames Ooh er as long as a street the room used to be.
Well when they've got this here lace, there used to be all pins at the side of this er of these er frames.
And then er when  
These would be made of wood, would they?
No they was made of steel.
Ah.
They used to be sharp if you wasn't careful.
Didn't know how to do them.
And they used to erm er get this er net or lace right what they were gonna what they after it'd been starched and everything.
And they used to have to put it like that on these er pins all the way down.
And then then after that, the overlooker what was there used to say, Well you you pull frame out so many pegs you see, and it used to pull out, stretch this here lace, and pull out and then they used to  dowels at the bottom used to plug in to stop the frames from going back.
And then they used to put this er these er wafters on you see to dry.
This er lace.
Well and then when it was dry, the at the ends there there used to be another long of pins that road to put the ends on.
Well and then there used to be a stripper it's a a long thing like that and there and er you'd put it on.
There used to be one woman one end and one woman the other, with something like something similar to the shape as a ladder.
And er get and then strip this er at the side, cos a girl used to be at the front to strip all this here lace of these here pins.
Then thes they used a pole this er and you used to have to behind stripping all these off lace off the pins while these here ladies was folding this er net up.
On these here ladders.
Like a same shape as a ladder I used to say they was .
Mm.
And er that's and then of course and then of course in the other place where they used to do it, they used to just pull these ladders out and these there nets was all folded up and everything ready to to do away abroad or anywhere you know.
Which which firm was this?
Can you remember the name?
Well there used to be a dressing rooms on erm on  Road there.
Er now what was the dressing rooms called?
And then then there used to be on  Boulevard.
You know where that there where they're building now?
Before it got burnt and that there used to be a dressing rooms there.
As well I forget the names.
How many hour How long would your mother work there?
Ooh she worked there for years me mother did.
But but how many hours a day did she work there ?
Well in them days you used to have to er work for eight till six or anything like that you see same as when I was wo first went to work.
Our time was eight till six.
And then Saturday mornings eight till twelve.
They never used to call it overtime, that was your proper weeks work.
From Monday to Saturday.
There was n no Saturdays knocking off then.
And you and you used to get the same money.
When I went first went to work at a laundry.
I used to work there eight till six and er I got four and six a week.
Four and six when I went down Nottingham to work, at the box place, Henry  's I got seven and six a week.
And I got paid one and six some weeks for a weekly ticket.
In them days mother used to give me sixpence to spend and


Mind you you could do a lot with that sixpence.
We used to go to pictures.
Used to get in pictures for thruppence, tuppence and thruppence.
Which picture house was that?
And  there used to be two on the  Road, one used to be called Palladium and one used to be called the Palace.
They all pulled down and superma er shops built there now.
But this was when you moved to  wasn't it ?
Yes.
Can can we go back again to when you lived at the other place.
At Nottingham?
In in Nottingham.
Can you can you can you remember the area where you lived.
Can you describe 
Oh 
it were there many shops there?
Oh yes there was a lot of shops round there.
There was a a lot of shops on  and then as across the road there used to be a  Road and there used to be a lot of shops there.
There used to be er a fish shop and er that used to be called  's that fish shop did.
You used to go and get a penn'orth of chips and a penny fish.
And you could go and get er a  get a good dinner for anybody w yeah when they was poor if they had fish and chips for their dinner you see it never used to cost them all that much for for a dinner.
And of course the tram cars used to run along there.
And then where the ice rink is, there used to be a lot of houses and shops round there.
you see then they pulled them all down and built the ice rink there.
And then er where the facing the ice rink there used to be a pub called the cricketers, well that's still there.
Well there used to be a lot of shops there.
When there used to be all houses round there, there used to be a fish shop there as well.
And then there used to be erm Mrs  her name was, used to keep her little shop at bottom of the yard.
And you used to go there and we used to have er anybody  mashing the tea what they used to call it.
She used to th she used to sell it and er hap'orth of milk for a ha'penny.
Half a cupful you used to get for a ha'penny.
You see round the factories round there.
And er lot of shops there.
And  and then what we used to call .
There was a little post office there and there used to be some shop on there.
There was erm Mrs  's was on .
And er she used to sell corned beef and er pickled onions or anything like that for people what was working round there what couldn't get home for dinner.
If they didn't bring any dinner of their own.
You see.
And er then er then at the at bottom there used to be er a clothes shop.
Well it used to be a clothes shop but what you used to call a pawn shop in them days as well.
At bottom of er .
And er 
Did did many people take stuff to to the 
Pardon?
Did many people take stuff to the pawn shop ?
Yes used to be ever such a lot.
Ever such a lot of people.
Perhaps you used to go and pawn the husbands suits or a anything like that till the following Saturday or Friday and fetch them out you see, and that cos there was very  for people in them days, I mean they didn't get a deal of help from anywhere.
And then they they used to pape lads going round selling papers you know the newspapers with no shoes and stockings on the feet.
They used to be nice little lads and all going round and quiet and the they used to then the tram cars used to lo run along  Road.
And er and and er through the meadows there.
Down through Midland Station and all down there.
And it all used to leave to Trent Bridge.
And then er I were telling you about the er where the marshes wasn't I.
Where there used to be a great big island.
Ooh it were ever such a big island there was.
With a little wall round and on this island there used to be a lot of houses on and they used to be all what they call alms hous old people lived in them and that.
And then er when then as far as where  is there used to be erm a fountain.
A water fountain and it used to have little cups all the way round as you could go and have a drink.
Out of.
And then er then  I mean er, wasn't so big then as it is now.
It and they never used to sell nothing over sixpence.
And then when  first opened, they never used to sell anything over five shillings.
They used to be tea services, carpets, nice odd carpets and mirrors and dolls and everything.
You well you used to get a lovely doll for one and eleven in the old money.
Beautiful doll.
And then you know where the foun the water fountain was where the marsh is, there used to every weekend there used to be a er a chip and fish stall there w and hot peas.
There used to have people used to all go and get some hot peas and the fish and chips and eat them you know, as they was going home and and all like that.
Was this on a Saturday did you say ?
Oh yes.
Fridays and Saturdays there's always always one there every week.
And then there was with er where Saint Peter's church is, where  is now,th there used to be a Punch and Judy show there t every week as well.
And th you used kiddies used to go round there, looking at them.
And then just same as these barrel organs.
They used to all walk round.
They didn't only stop in one place.
They'd perhaps go round streets, different streets playing them and then they'd er they'd go up  and play them up there you know, and and that 
What would they do would they s stand on a corner or or
Yeah stand yeah stand anywhere and fellow with his er little monkey on and children as you know asking the gentleman all sorts of questions about his monkey, you know, and the monkey'd  all dance all sorts of tricks on it you know and the kiddies used to laugh and that.
And then er then where  Market is where  Market is there used to be er er there's a school there I don't know I think it's still there.
used to be called a ragged school.
I don't know why.
But it used to be called a ragged school.
Well it used to be er one road used to be called Meadow Flats, and then you go a little way down another road and it used to be called the bottoms.
One used to be called the bottoms and one used to be called the Meadow Flats and yet they both led to the same place.
You could go right along there and th and it'd land you right into the Victoria nearly.
Well it used to be the Victoria Station in them days then before it come Victoria Centre.
And er and it all and you used to when our Queen's grandfather was crowned king in nineteen hundred and ten, ooh they trimmed it up beautiful.
All Nottingham was beautiful and along there'd got great big flags and they'd trimmed all Christmas they'd they'd sewed all Christmas things on them.
Oh of course down there the bottom and that there used to be a lot of erm there used to be some lodging houses what they call lodging houses for people what's got nowhere to go you know, you used to sleep and.
And it's just the same where the er marsh is now.
But it used to be called Broadmarsh.
Well along Broadmarsh there used to be er a lodging house there.
And it used to be called  's N's lodging house.
There through Broadmarsh.
Cos there used to be a lot of houses under the shops along there as well.
And it used to lead you up to what they called  Hill, the steps, they're still there.
And you can cut through there now.
And er well you go further  through and you can go to the erm And the the Narrowmarsh it was narrow and all, you could shake hands with one another o off the  but it now is all council houses is built down there now where they only used to be ordinary little houses.
Used to be ever so narrow.


Called it narro and that's reason they called it Narrowmarsh.
The 
Where there just houses there then?
 
Just houses?
Yes lots of nice houses down there.
There used to be a lot of nice shops as you went through Broadmarsh as well.
And er then er these two erm er Then when we used to when we was the young you used to be able to go down to Skeggie for a day on train for two and six.
To go to Skeggie.
Or Cleethorpes and that for the day.
Your parents would take you and
Mm.
Er yes parents'd take you.
Yeah  yes the we went to we used to go down there for a day to Skeggie.
And er fare's two and six for the day's trip.
Er and then I'll tell you then when  was in the er on  Square and of course this council house as what this council house what's built now, it wasn't there then,it used to be different council house, there used to be a great big archway.
And underneath this archway you used to have meat stalls and fish stalls and it used to be called the shambles.
And then on the other side there used to be what they called the market.
Had all these er stalls it you know er
What did they sell?
Oh they used to all different stalls used to sell One stall they used to sell fruit and and that and then perhaps another stall they'd sell pots and er and all like that all down on them stalls.
It used to be like just like a the market as in er what's in the Victoria but it was more on open air what they call it in them days.
On there.
Did they have any street entertainers around the market ?
Oh there used to be a lot of s er entertainment coming round the streets there used to be er gentlemen as coming round singing.
And er there used to be these er like Scotch people you know, with kilts, with swords and put them on the floor and dance round the swords and.
All like that and.
And then there used to be the Hippodrome and the Empire.
That used to be all stage you know not pictures then it used to be all stage.
Well me father used to take us there.
And er and then there used to be er
Can you remember what you went to see?
Yeah I well I I've seen .
And I've seen Harry Lloyd and er Houdini what they call him you know, where he used to be all strapped in chains and get out of tanks and that.
Oh I've seen I've seen all them.
And then of course and then when we used to go to pictures in afternoon Saturday afternoons when we was little.
It only used to be a penny.
And they used to er have er a film Of course they used to be silent films and then er er had er and there used to be what they call interval.
And they used to stage, well when we used to go for a penny the stage, they used to perhaps have competitions for the  childrens what used to want to go on.
Perhaps there used to be er erm a lot of hot cross er buns hanging down.
And the children's used to be tied behind their back and them what er eat this er cross bun first, used to get a prize.
And er and of course that was interval and then er and they used to come and sit down and they used to show you another film.
Perhaps it might be Charlie Chaplin, a bit of a comic one or or summat like that and er
What sort of prizes would the children get ?
Ooh they sometimes used to get books or er they used to get some nice prizes you know, and books and er and that and er and when I was little I once went on stage for a in a skipping competition.
And er I won I won a book called Kathleen's Victory.


I can always remember that yeah, I won a book called And then er when we came out pictures on Saturday afternoon, there always used to be a gentleman there and he'd had a great big basket and he'd like he'd have a bag of sweets and oranges in these er basket and they used to give the children a bag of sweet and orange and they came out and see pictures for a penny.
You used to get them free?
You used to get them free.
Yes.
So er they wouldn't do that in our days would they?
And we used to follow serials up in the er on Saturday afternoons you know.
There used to be some nice serials for They used to be thrilling you know, er I can remember I wish they'd show them now They used to be what we used to call, The voice on the wire  and then there was another serial called, Peggo the Ring.
And er and then there was another voice voice called another film called, The er The Second Black Pearl, or some and them and there was the  Dagger and


These were all se 
And the grey ghost and all them we saw in serials and of course we used to follow them up go every Saturday afternoon and follow these serials up.
For a penny  we used to always go to pictures Saturday afternoon when we was little.
What would you do Saturday morning when you were little?
Well we used to er well really we never used to do anything kind of perhaps er go out and play or anything like that.
Of course as we got older, me dad used to make us helpers mothers you know.
We always used to As we got older we all had a little job to do.
Such as what?
What sort of job ?
Er like such as er like er at er night time before we went, we always used to I had to go to bed early.
And when we went to bed early we used to we One used to have to fill the kettle, and then the other one used to have to set the table for next morning for next morning.
And er well perhaps there was one that used to do anything cos she was perhaps too young.
But erm And then we weren't allowed to stay up.
Not till we got older.
Might be about When we start work we could stay up a little bit later.
But on a Saturday nights we used to stay up when we was young.
So how late did you stay up till ?
Well perhaps about er ten o'clock or something because what er me father used to do.
Me mother er and me father they er me mother used to go to picture and then er when the cur and then me me dad didn't like pictures so he used to always meet me mother outside and then they'd perhaps go and have a little drink together and a walk.
Well me dad'd never let us stand outside pubs or anywhere you know.
Wouldn't let us stand outside anywhere.
So we used to go to pictures at Saturday nights.
Me dad'd take us to pictures.
He didn't used to come in with us but he'd take us.
And we'd sit there on er a  and then when it was time to come home, when me father used perhaps might be about er nine o'clock or half past, he used to come and the gentleman always used to him.
Mr  always used to know me dad, he used to say, Are you come for the  childrens?
And he says, Yes.
And me dad used to say, Come on me ducks, just like that and we used to come out with him.
And there used to be a sweet shop on the High Road er next to 's and er me dad'd call in He used to keep open till late then.
Me dad'd call in there and buy some sweets.
And he'd share them between us when we got home.
But didn't to eat any that night, we'd got to save them till next day.


And we'd all go to bed.
And would your mother be there as well?
Yes me mother'd be there yes.
Oh yeah.
No me mother she she did work hard well we all had to do in them days.
And of course and then when we got older, when we got in us teens, we used to have to help us mother with the cleaning.
You see, when we was at home.
One'd have to do the bedrooms, to clean the bedrooms.
And ano and the other one'd have to do the stairs.
But that one as done the stairs had have to do the bedrooms the other week.
And the other one'd do the stairs that week.
We used to change it like that.
Did you just help out on a Saturday or 
And er we used to all do that and then in the week in the weekday 
Oh only during the week.
at nighttime.
How many children were there?
Oh there was er three three daughters.
Three where there used to be me,or Mary and er May, she was the youngest, she was only a baby May and Miss er May was cos she was the youngest.
But I had two brothers.
Of course they didn't used to do anything.
No.
They didn't do any housework?
No they didn't do any housework.
Only the girls.
And then on a Sunday morning, we used to erm get up and we used to have to do the cleaning between us.
All as me mother's got to do that day was the dinners.
In the morning part.
And then in the afternoon we'd er We used to get ready and we used to go anywhere where we like you know, as long ann er back for tea.
I used to there used to be me and my sister.
We er always used to stick together.
She's the not a dearly difference between us.
There was me and er s and m me sister Mary.
She was about er only fifteen months difference between us.
What she was older 
 
than you?oh you're the eldest?
No I'm older.
Yes I shall be eighty one next month.
And she'll as be er she'd be er about er seventy seventy nine she would be.
Seven between seventy nine and eighty she'd be.
And er we always used to pal out together.
And people used to say, Oh you're not sisters.
You don't see sisters palling out together.
Said, Well we doesn't when we're  one another.
Did you used to enjoy one another 's company?
You got on well together?
Pa Yes yes yeah.
And we have done all us lives.
And then we she got married we still kept in touch with one another and I got married and we didn't live far from one another.
We lived in the same street.
But she lived higher up and I lived lower down.
And I used to er very often go up to her house and she'd come down to my house and er.
And that and then we'd erm we'd have cups of tea and that.
And then er then when her husband died, he er we went out We used to go out together cos me husband never went out much.
And er we used to go on the High Road together, shopping together, And perhaps Sunday afternoons she'd say, Oh come on Ada let's have a ride down Nottingham.
I said well it's best place to go on Sunday afternoons, we don't spend any money.
We'll go and have a cup of coffee, tea something like that you see.
Always go and have a cup of tea.
And then er and then of course when the council houses pulled dow er when the council pulled the down again, there was these houses you see.
We was told to get a mortgage and that of course she she was on her own.
Cos her sons had got married and she lived in a little bu flat, bungalow rather.
And er and we still used to meet.
We used to meet Su Monday afternoon.
And we used to meet Tuesday.
And then someti we meet Thursday and every Saturday  afternoon we used to meet.
We used to go walk round and shopping and then we'd go and have a cup of coffee and then we'd both catch a bus.
I'd catch one down here, she'd catch her's up home.
And er of course and then she took ill and died.
She's only been dead s er six year.
Ca can I go back a bit to to your childhood.
Oh to me chi 
A A and your and your schooldays.
Oh me schoold Oh well there was er
Can you remember any games that you played as a child?
Oh yes there used to be what they used to called er we used to call Ticky.
You know  scatter run and tic one another you know, and and then you used to we used to play er diabolo what you used to call them  have you ever seen them.
There us used to be two sticks.
And there used to be like a big bobbin there and you to  and they used to go like that and chuck it up and try and catch it you know, and And we used to play shuttlecock and battledore.
What's that.
Why er pardon why it was er You know like these tennis rackets?
Yes.
They're like that, and then they've got a shuttlecock the shuttlecock used to er have er like a a cork thing and then there used to be feathers round.
And perhaps a little bell in the middle.
And you used to er get it on this here one, chuck it up and ca keep catching it.
And we used to have what they call er a  stick and  goos it used to I remember we used to have sti what you call stick and  goos It was like a great long thing like that and you used to have a stick and it used to be on the floor and you just tap it and and hit it like that and it goes


Erm there's er
Where wo where would you play these games?
Oh we used to play them in the streets or anywhere like that.
Yes.
you know we never The children wasn't any any trouble.
No they play all these these play these er  and everything.
They used to These  they used to be a round used to be round you know and not very  used to hit them as you hit them with a stick you see, they used to wheel wheel round and round .
Oh like a like a loop er 
Yeah.
a round
Then we then of course then used to be this er game skipping.
Two one girl one end one girl another you know, turning the rope and you skipping in the middle and counting 
Did you sort of sing any songs or anything when you were skipping ?
Ooh yeah.
Ooh well they used to well they didn't used to sing a lot of songs but er they used to do a lot of you know playing about and perhaps and then they'd perhaps have a ball.
You see.
You'd s er a lot of them you'd sta you'd  stand up against a wall and then they say, Goaler throw a ball.
and you'd just hit it like that and as you hit, you'd got to run and come back again, before she got the ball to t er tap you on er you know, with the ball.
And er then you'd got to be on then.
Oh we used to oh play all sorts of things like that.
When we was young.
Whe when you were didn't it happen Mrs  that when you were playing in the street one day, you were knocked over by a tram ?
Yes well well I were I think I was running after me mother more than anything.
Cos I was on me own and er I me ma I think me mother had gone of an errand and of course I run after her.
And it it was on .
First car that ever run along  and it was facing a  a chemist what they call .
Any old people knows the  chemists and it was ge there used to be a park at the side on it and all.
Well I got erm and them boards underneath there's some boards underneath the tram car there was, and they s picked me up you see they so when er there was a crowd outside the chemist, I was in somebody took me inside.
I can't remember who took me inside.
And then er somebody told me mother and of course me mother come in then, And a policeman was there.
And of course this policeman used to come and see me ever so often, but me mother never saw his co-operation.
No.
And er then of course when I got better It hit me all on the head  and that well Then er when I went back to school they found out as I couldn't see the board properly.
So the sent me to the er eye infirmary and of course the eye infirmary sent me to the blind school.
And there used to be a lady named Mrs , used to come and take us.
And er the corporation used to give her so many tickets to last her the week.
And of course we used to have to go on tram cars to the school and   Road.
Was this you and and some other children that she took ?
Yes.
Yes there used to be her son, and there used to be me, and there used to be a a girl name Edith right, and there used to be her sister, Ethel right, and then there used to be another young girl named Clara .
And then she used to take all those together and she used to have to give the conductor so many tickets each time she went.
And then er we used to take us dinners to school erm whatever your mother had got to give you.
If you took eggs there used to always be a lady there at dinner time what used to come round and ask you what you'd got for dinner, and then if you'd got eggs, she used to write your name on the eggs and do them for you.
Oh what, and boil them?
Yes.
Oh.
Boil them.
Or if your mother had got a say she made you a meat and tater pie in a little dish, if you took this little dish with you, the lady used to er warm it up for you.
They used the oven there and we used to sit and the  you see.
And er there was only three classes, there was er I can remember two teachers' names.
There was er one named Miss , and the other one was named Mr .
And er er and he was alive till not many years ago.
And er and of course 