

11
The next morning after breakfast I crossed over to Demetriades's table.
He had been in the village the previous evening and I hadn't bothered to wait up until he returned.
Demetriades was small, very plump, frog-faced, a Corfiot, with a pathological dislike of sunshine and the rural.
He grumbled incessantly about the ‘disgusting’ provincial life we had to lead on the island.
In Athens he lived by night, indulging in his two hobbies, whoring and eating.
He spent all his money on these two pursuits and on his clothes, and he ought to have looked sallow and oily and corrupt, but he was always pink and immaculate.
His hero in history was Casanova.
He lacked the Boswellian charm, to say nothing of the genius, of the Italian, but he was in his alternately gay and lugubrious way better company than Mitford had suggested.
And at least he was not a hypocrite.
He had the charm of all people who believe implicitly in themselves, that of integration.
I took him out into the garden.
His nickname was Méli, or honey.
He had a childlike passion for sweet things.
‘Méli, what do you know about the man over at Bourani?’
‘You've met him?’
‘No.’
‘Aï !
’ He shouted petulantly at a boy who was carving a word on an almond tree.
The Casanova persona was confined strictly to his private life; in class he was a martinet.
‘You don't know his name?’
‘Conchis.’
He pronounced the ch hard.
‘Mitford said he had a row with him.
A quarrel with him.’
‘He was telling lies.
He was always telling lies.’
‘Maybe.
But he must have met him.’
‘Po po .’
Po po is Greek for ‘Tell that to the marines.’
‘That man never sees anyone.
Never.
Ask the other professors.’
‘But why?’
‘Ech…’
He shrugged.
‘Many old stories.
I don't know them.’
‘Come on.’
‘It is not interesting.’
We walked down a cobbled path.
Méli disliked silence, and in a moment he began to tell me what he knew about Conchis.
‘He worked for the Germans in the war.
He never comes to the village.
The villagers would kill him with stones.
So would I, if I saw him.’
I grinned.
‘Why?’
‘Because he is rich and he lives on a desert island like this when he could be in Paris…’
He waved his pink right hand in rapid small circles, a favourite gesture.
It was his own deepest ambition — an apartment overlooking the Seine, containing a room with no windows and various other peculiar features.
‘Does he speak English?’
‘I suppose.
But why are you so interested?’
‘I'm not.
I just saw the house.’
The bell for second school rang through the orchards and paths against the high white walls of the grounds.
On the way back to class I invited Méli to have dinner with me in the village the next day.
The leading estiatoras of the village, a great walrus of a man called Sarantopoulos, knew more about Conchis.
He came and had a glass of wine with us while we ate the meal he'd cooked.
It was true that Conchis was a recluse and never came to the village, but that he had been a collaborationist was a lie.
He had been made mayor by the Germans during the Occupation, and had in fact done his best for the villagers.
If he was not popular now, it was because he ordered most of his provisions from Athens.
He launched out on a long story.
The island dialect was difficult, even for other Greeks, and I couldn't understand a word.
He leant earnestly across the table.
Demetriades looked bored and nodded complacently in the pauses.
‘What's he say, Méli?’
‘Nothing.
A war story.
Nothing at all.’
Sarantopoulos suddenly looked past us.
He said something to Demetriades, and rose.
I turned.
In the door stood a tall, mournful-looking islander.
He went to a table; n the far comer, the islanders' corner, of the long bare room.
I saw Sarantopoulos put his hand on  the man's shoulder.
The man stared at us doubtfully, then gave in and allowed himself to be led to our table.
‘He is the agogiati of Mr Conchis.’
‘The how much?’
‘He has a donkey.
He takes the mail and the food to Bourani.’
‘What's his name?’
His name was Hermes.
I had become far too used to hearing not conspicuously brilliant boys called Socrates and Aristotle, and to addressing the ill-favoured old woman who did my room out as Aphrodite, to smile.
The donkey-driver sat down and rather grudgingly accepted a small tumbler of retsina.
He fingered his koumbologi , his amber patience-beads.
He had a bad eye, fixed, with a sinister pallor.
From him Méli, who was much more interested in eating his lobster, extracted a little information.
What did Mr Conchis do?
He lived alone — yes, alone — with a housekeeper, and he cultivated his garden, quite literally, it seemed.
He read.
He had many books.
He had a piano.
He spoke many languages.
The agogiati did not know which — all, he thought.
Where did he go in winter?
Sometimes he went to Athens, and to other countries.
Which?
The man did not know.
He knew nothing about Mitford visiting Bourani.
No one ever visited.
‘Ask him if he thinks I might visit Mr Conchis.’
No; it was impossible.
Our curiosity was perfectly natural, in Greece — it was his reserve that was strange.
He might have been picked for his sullenness.
He stood up to go.
‘Are you sure he hasn't got a harem of pretty girls hidden there?’ said Me1li.
The agogiati raised his blue chin and eyebrows in a silent no, then turned contemptuously away.
‘What a villager!’
Having muttered the worst insult in the Greek language at his back Méli touched my wrist moistly.
‘My dear fellow, did I ever tell you about the way two men and two ladies I once met on Mykonos made love?’
‘Yes.
But never mind.’
I felt oddly disappointed.
And it was not only because it was the third time I had heard precisely how that acrobatic quartet achieved congress.
Back at the school I picked up, during the rest of the week, a little more.
Only two of the masters had been there before the war.
They had both met Conchis once or twice then, but not since the school had re-started in 1949.
One said he was a retired musician.
The other had found him a very cynical man, an atheist.
But they both agreed that Conchis was a man who cherished his privacy.
In the war the Germans had forced him to live in the village.
They had one day captured some andarte — resistance fighters — from the mainland and ordered him to execute them.
He had refused and had been put before a firing-squad with a number of the villagers.
But by a miracle he had not been killed outright, and was saved.
This was evidently the story Sarantopoulos had told us.
In the opinion of many of the villagers, and naturally of all those who'd had relatives massacred in the German reprisal, he should have done what they ordered.
But that was all past.
If he had been wrong, it was to the honour of Greece.
However, he had never set foot in the village again.
Then I discovered something small, but anomalous.
I asked several people besides Demetriades, who had been at the school only a year, whether Leverrier, Mitford's predecessor, or Mitford himself had ever spoken about meeting Conchis.
The answer was always no — understandably enough, it seemed, in Leverrier's case, because he was very reserved, ‘too serious’ as one master put it, tapping his head.
It so happened that the last person I asked, over coffee in his room, was the biology master.
Karazoglou said in his aromatic broken French that he was sure Leverrier had never been there, as he would have told him.
He'd known Leverrier rather better than the other masters; they had shared a common interest in botany.
He rummaged about in a chest of drawers, and then produced a box of sheets of paper with dried flowers that Leverrier had collected and mounted.
There were lengthy notes in an admirably clear handwriting and a highly technical vocabulary, and here and there professional-looking sketches in Indian ink and water-colour.
As I sorted uninterestedly through the box I dropped one of the pages of dried flowers, to which was attached a sheet of paper with additional notes.
This sheet slipped from the clip that was holding it.
On the back was the beginning of a letter, which had been crossed out, but was still legible.
It was dated June 6th, 1951, two years before.
Dear Mr  Conchis, I am much afraid that since the extraordinary …and then it stopped.
I didn't say anything to Karazoglou, who had noticed nothing; but I then and there decided to visit Mr Conchis.
I cannot say why I suddenly became so curious about him.
Partly it was for lack of anything else to be curious about, the usual island obsession with trivialities; partly it was that one cryptic phrase from Mitford and the discovery about Leverrier; partly, perhaps mostly, a peculiar feeling that I had a sort of right to visit.
My two predecessors had both met this unmeetable man; and not wanted to talk about it.
In some way it was now my turn.
I did one other thing that week: I wrote a letter to Alison.
I sent it inside an envelope addressed to Ann in the flat below in Russell Square, asking her to post it on to wherever Alison was living.
I said almost nothing in the letter; only that I'd thought about her once or twice, that I had discovered what ‘the waiting-room’ meant; and that she was to write back only if she really wanted to, I'd quite understand if she didn't.
I knew that on the island one was driven back into the past.
There was so much space, so much silence, so few meetings that one too easily saw out of the present, and then the past seemed ten times closer than it was.
It was likely that Alison hadn't given me a thought for weeks, and that she had had half a dozen more affaires.
So I posted the letter rather as one throws a message in a bottle into the sea; not quite as a joke, perhaps, but almost.
12
The absence of the usually unfailing sun-wind made the next Saturday oppressively hot.
The cicadas had begun.
They racketed in a ragged chorus, never quite finding a common beat, rasping one's nerves, but finally so familiar that when one day they stopped in a rare shower of rain, the silence was like an explosion.
They completely changed the character of the pine-forest.
Now it was live and  multitudinous, an audible, invisible hive of energy, with all its pure solitude gone, for besides the tzitzikia the air throbbed, whined, hummed with carmine-winged grasshoppers, locusts, huge hornets, bees, midges, bots, and ten thousand other anonymous insects.
In some places there were nagging clouds of black flies, so that I climbed through the trees like a new Orestes, cursing and slapping.
I came to the ridge again.
The sea was a pearly turquoise, the far mountains ash-blue in the windless heat.
I could see the shimmering green crown of pine trees around Bourani.
It was about noon when I came through the trees out on to the shingle of the beach with the chapel.
It was deserted.
I searched among the rocks, but there was nothing, and I didn't feel watched.
I had a swim, then lunch, black bread and ochra and fried squid.
A long way south a plump caique thudded past towing a line of six little lamp-boats, like a mallard with ducklings.
Its bow-wave made a dark miraging ripple on the creamy blue surface of the sea, and that was all that remained of civilization when the boats had disappeared behind the western headland.
There was the infinitesimal lap of the transparent blue water on the stones, the waiting trees, the myriad dynamos of the insects, and the enormous landscape of silence.
I dozed under the thin shade of a pine, in the agelessness, the absolute dissociation of wild Greece.
The sun moved, came on me, and made me erotic.
I thought of Alison, of sex things we had done together.
I wished she was beside me, naked.
We would have made love against the pine-needles, then swum, then made love again.
I was filled with a dry sadness, a mixture of remembering and knowing; remembering what was and what might have been and knowing it was all past; at the same time knowing, or beginning to know, that other things were happily past — at least some of my illusions about myself, and then the syphilis, for there were no signs that it was going to come back.
I felt physically very well.
What was going to become of my life I didn't know; but lying there that day by the sea it didn't seem to matter much.
To be was enough.
I felt myself in suspension, waiting without fear for some impulse to drive me on.
I turned on my stomach and made love to the memory of Alison, like an animal, without guilt or shame, a mere machine for sensation spreadeagled on the earth.
Then I ran across the burning stones into the sea.
I climbed the path by the wire and the undergrowth, passed beside the peeling gate, stood once more before the mysterious sign.
The grassy track ran level, curved and dipped a little, emerged from the trees.
The house, dazzlingly white where the afternoon sun touched it, stood with its shadowed back to me.
It had been built on the seaward side of a small cottage that had evidently existed before it.
It was square, with a flat roof and a colonnade of slender arches running round the south and east sides.
Above the colonnade was a terrace.
I could see the open french windows of a first-floor room giving access to it.
To the east and back of the house there were lines of swordplants and small clumps of bushes with vivid scarlet and yellow flowers.
In front, southwards and seawards, there was a stretch of gravel and then the ground fell away abruptly down to the sea.
At both corners of the gravel stood palm trees, in neat whitewashed rings of stones.
The pines had been thinned to clear the view.
The house abashed me.
It was too reminiscent of the Côte d'Azur, too un-Greek.
It stood, white and opulent, like Swiss snow, and made me feel sticky-palmed and uncouth.
I walked up a small flight of steps to the red-tiled side colonnade.
There was a closed door with an iron knocker cast in the shape of a dolphin.
The windows beside it were heavily shuttered.
I knocked on the door; the knocks barked sharply over stone floors.
But no one came.
The house and I waited silently in a sea of insect sound.
I went along the colonnade to the corner of the southern front of the house.
There the colonnade was wider and the slender arches more open; standing in the deep shade, I looked out over the tree-tops and the sea to the languishing ash-lilac mountains…a déjà vu feeling of having stood in the same place, before that particular proportion of the arches, that particular contrast of shade and burning landscape outside — I couldn't say.
There were two old cane chairs in the middle of the colonnade, and a table covered with a blue-and-white folkweave cloth, on which were two cups and saucers and two large plates covered in muslin.
By the wall stood a rattan couch with cushions; and hanging from a bracket by the open french windows was a small brightly polished bell with a faded maroon tassel hanging from the clapper.
I noticed the twoness of the tea-table, and stood by the corner, embarrassed, aware of a trite English desire to sneak away.
Then, without warning, a figure appeared in the doorway.
It was Conchis.
13
Before anything else, I knew I was expected.
He saw me without surprise, with a small smile, almost a grimace, on his face.
He was nearly completely bald, brown as old leather, short and spare, a man whose age was impossible to tell: perhaps sixty, perhaps seventy; dressed in a navy-blue shirt, knee-length shorts, and a pair of salt-stained gym shoes.
The most striking thing about him was the intensity of his eyes; very dark brown, staring, with a simian penetration emphasized by the remarkably clear whites; eyes that seemed not quite human.
He raised his left hand briefly in a kind of silent salutation, then strode to the comer of the colonnade, leaving me with my formed words unspoken, and called back to the cottage.
‘Maria!’
I heard a faint wail of answer.
‘My name is…’
I began, as he turned.
But he raised his left hand again, this time to silence me; took my arm and led me to the edge of the colonnade.
He had an authority, an abrupt decisiveness, that caught me off balance.
He surveyed the landscape, then me.
The sweet saffron-like smell of some flowers that grew below, at the edge of the gravel, wafted up into the shade.
‘I chose well?’
His English sounded perfect.
‘Wonderfully.
But you must let me —’
Once again his arm, brown and corded, swept silencingly towards the sea and the mountains and the south, as if I might not have properly appreciated it.
I looked sideways at him.
He was obviously a man who rarely smiled.
There was something mask-like, emotion-purged, about his face.
Deep furrows ran from beside his nose to the corners of his mouth; they suggested experience, command, impatience with fools.
He was slightly mad, no doubt harmlessly so, but mad.
I had an idea that he thought I was someone else.
He kept his ape-like eyes on me.
The silence and the stare were alarming, and faintly comic, as if he was trying to hypnotize a bird.
Suddenly he gave a curious little rapid shake of the head; quizzical, rhetorical, not expecting an answer.
Then he changed, as if what had happened between us till then was a joke, a charade, that had been rehearsed and gone according to plan, but could now be ended.
And I was completely off balance again.
He wasn't mad after all.
He even smiled, and the ape-eyes became almost squirrel-eyes.
He turned back to the table.
‘Let us have tea.’
‘I only came for a glass of water.
This is…’
‘You came here to meet me.
Please.
Life is short.’
I sat down.
The second place was mine.
An old woman appeared, in black, a black grey with age, her face as lined as an Indian squaw's.
She was incongruously carrying a tray with an elegant silver teapot, a kettle, a bowl of sugar, a saucer with sliced lemon.
‘This is my housekeeper, Maria.’
He spoke to her in very precise Greek, and I heard my own name and the name of the school.
The old woman bobbed at me, her eyes on the ground, unsmiling, and then unloaded her tray.
Conchis plucked the muslin away from one of the plates with the quick aplomb of a conjurer.
I saw cucumber sandwiches.
He poured the tea, and indicated the lemon.
‘How do you know who I am, Mr Conchis?’
‘Anglicize my name.
I prefer the ‘ch’ soft.’
He sipped his tea.
‘If you question Hermes, Zeus will know.’
‘I'm afraid my colleague was tactless.’
‘You no doubt found out all about me.’
‘I found out very little.
But that makes this even kinder of you.’
He looked out to sea.
‘There is a poem of the T'ang dynasty.’
He sounded the precious glottal stop.
‘'Here at the frontier, there are falling leaves.
Although my neighbours are all barbarians, and you, you are a thousand miles away, there are always two cups on my table.’'
I smiled.
‘Always?’
‘I saw you last Sunday.’
‘They were your things down there?’
He bowed his head.
‘And I also saw you this afternoon.’
‘I hope I haven't kept you from your beach.’
‘Not at all.
My private beach is down there.’
He pointed over the gravel.
‘But I always like a beach to myself.
And I presume the same of you.
Now.
Eat the sandwiches.’
He poured me more tea.
It had huge torn leaves and a tarry China fragrance.
On the other plate were kourabièdes , conical butter-cakes rolled in icing sugar.
I'd forgotten what a delicious meal tea could be; and sitting there I felt invaded by the envy of the man who lives in an institution, and has to put up with institution meals and institution everything else, for the rich private life of the established.
I remembered having tea with one of my tutors, an old bachelor don at Magdalen; and the same envy for his rooms, his books, his calm, precise, ticking peace.
I bit into my first kourabiè , and gave an appreciative nod.
‘You are not the first English person to have admired Maria's cooking.’
‘Mitford?’
His eyes fixed me sharply again.
‘I met him in London.’
He poured more tea.
‘How did you like Captain Mitford?’
‘Not my type.’
‘He spoke of me?’
‘Not at all.
That is…’
His eyes were intent.
‘He just said you'd had a…disagreement?’
‘Captain Mitford made me ashamed to have English blood.’
Till then I had felt I was beginning to get his measure; first of all, his English, though excellent, was somehow not contemporary, more that of someone who hadn't been in England for many years; and then his whole appearance was foreign.
He had a bizarre family resemblance to Picasso; saurian as well as simian, decades of living in the sun, the quintessential Mediterranean man, who had discarded everything that lay between him and his vitality.
A monkey-glander, essence of queen bees; and intense by choice and exercise as much as by nature.
He was plainly not a dandy about clothes; but there are other sorts of narcissism.
‘I didn't realize you were English.’
‘I spent the first nineteen years of my life in England.
Now I have Greek nationality and my mother's name.
My mother was Greek.’
‘You go back to England?’
‘Rarely.’
He jumped swiftly on.
‘Do you like my house?
I designed and built it myself.’
I looked round.
‘I envy you.’
‘And I envy you.
You have the one thing that matters.
You have all your discoveries before you.’
His face was without the offensively avuncular smile that usually accompanies such trite statements; and something intent about the look he gave me made it clear he did not mean it tritely.
‘Well.
Now I will leave you for a few minutes.
Then we shall have a look round.’
I had risen with him, but he gestured me down again.
‘Finish the cakes.
Maria will be honoured.
Please.’
He walked into the sunlight at the edge of the colonnade, stretched his arms and fingers, and with another gesture to me to help myself passed back inside the room.
From where I was sitting I could see one end of a cretonne-covered sofa, a table with a bowl of milky flowers on it.
The wall behind was covered by book-shelves, from the ceiling to the floor.
I stole another kourabiè .
The sun was beginning to float down on the mountains, and the sea glittered lazily at the foot of their ashy, opaque shadows.
Then there was an unannounced shock of antique sound, a rapid arpeggio, far too real to come from a radio or record.
I stopped eating, wondering what new surprise I was being presented with.
There was a moment's silence, perhaps to leave me guessing.
Then came the quiet plangent sound of a harpsichord.
I hesitated, then decided that two could play the independence game.
He played quickly, and then tranquilly; once or twice he stopped and retook a phrase.
The old woman came and silently cleared away, without once looking at me, even when I pointed at the few cakes left and praised them in my stilted Greek; the hermit master evidently liked silent servants.
The music came clearly out of the room, and flowed round me and out through the colonnade into the light.
He broke off, repeated a passage, and then stopped as abruptly as he had begun.
A door closed, there was a silence.
Five minutes passed, then ten.
The sun crept towards me over the red tiles.
I felt I ought to have gone in earlier; that now I had put him in a huff.
But he appeared in the doorway, speaking.
‘I have not driven you away.’
‘Not at all.
It was Bach?’
‘Telemann.’
‘You play very well.’
‘Once, I could play.
Never mind.
Come.’
His jerkiness was pathological; not only as if he wanted to get rid of me, but of time itself.
I stood up.
‘I hope I shall hear you play again.’
He made a little bow, refusing the invitation to invite.
‘One gets so starved of music here.’
‘Only of music?’
He went on before I could answer.
‘Come now.
Prospero will show you his domaine.’
As we went down the steps to the gravel I said, ‘Prospero had a daughter.
‘Prospero had many things.’
He turned a dry look on me.
‘And not all young and beautiful, Mr Urfe.’
I smiled tactfully, thinking he must be referring to memories of the war, and left a little silence.
‘You live alone here?’
‘What some would call alone.
What others would not.’
It was said with a kind of grim contempt, and he stared ahead as he spoke.
Whether to mystify me once more or because there was no more to be said to a stranger, I couldn't tell.
He walked rapidly on, incessantly pointing things out.
He showed me round his little vegetable-garden terrace; his cucumbers, his almonds, his long-leaved loquats, his pistachios.
From the far edge of the terrace I could see down to where I had been lying only an hour or two before.
‘Moutsa.’
‘I haven't heard it called that before.’
‘Albanian.’
He tapped his nose.
‘Snout.
Because of the cliff over there.’
‘Not very poetic for such a lovely beach.’
‘The Albanians were pirates, not poets.
Their word for this cape was Bourani.
Two hundred years ago it was their slang word for gourd.
Also for skull.’
He moved away.
‘Death and water.’
As I walked behind him, I said, ‘I wondered about the sign by the gate.
Salle d'attente .’
‘The German soldiers put it there.
They requisitioned Bourani during the war.’
‘But why that?’
‘I think they had been stationed in France.
They found it dull being garrisoned here.’
He turned and saw me smile.
‘Precisely.
One must be grateful for the smallest grain of humour from the Germans.
I should not like the responsibility of destroying such a rare plant.’
‘You know Germany?’
‘It is not possible to know Germany.
Only to endure it.’
‘Bach?
Isn't he reasonably endurable?’
He stopped.
‘I do not judge countries by their geniuses.
I judge them by their racial characteristics.
The ancient Greeks could laugh at themselves.
The Romans could not.
That is why France is a civilized society and Spain is not.
That is why I forgive the Jews and the Anglo-Saxons their countless vices.
And why I should thank God, if I believed in God, that I have no German blood.’
We had come to an arbour of  bougainvillaea and morning glory at the end of the kitchen-garden terrace, set back and obliquely.
He gestured me in.
In the shadows, in front of an outcrop of rock, stood a pedestal.
On it was a bronze manikin with a grotesquely enormous erect phallus.
Its hands were flung up as well, as if to frighten children; and on its face it had a manic-satyric grin.
It was only eighteen inches or so high, yet it emitted a distinct primitive terror.
‘You know what it is?’
He was standing close behind me.
‘Pan?’
‘A Priapus.
In classical times every garden and orchard had one.
To frighten away thieves and bring fertility.
It should be made of pearwood.’
‘Where did you find it?’
‘I had it made.
Come.’
He said ‘Come’ as Greeks prod their donkeys; as if , it later struck me, I was a potential employee who had to be shown briefly round the works.
We went back towards the house.
A narrow path zigzagged steeply down from in front of the colonnade to the shore.
There was a small cove there, not fifty yards across at its cliffed mouth.
He had built a miniature jetty, and a small green and rose-pink boat, an open island boat with an engine fitted, was tied up alongside.
At one end of the beach I could see a small cave; drums of kerosene.
And there was a little pump-house, with a pipe running back up the cliff.
‘Would you like to swim?’
We were standing on the jetty.
‘I left my trunks at the house.’
‘A costume is not necessary.’
His eyes were those of a chess-player who has made a good move.
I remembered a joke of Demetriades' about English bottoms; and the Priapus.
Perhaps this was the explanation: Conchis was simply an old queer.
‘I don't think I will.’
‘As you please.’
We moved back to the strip of shingle and sat on a large baulk of timber that had been dragged up away from the water.
I lit a cigarette and looked at him; tried to determine him.
I was in something not unlike a mild state of shock.
It was not only the fact that this man who spoke English so fluently, who was seemingly cultured, cosmopolitan, had come to ‘my’ desert island, had sprung almost overnight from the barren earth, like some weird plant.
It was not even that he conformed so little to what I had imagined.
But I knew that there must really be some mystery about the previous year, some deliberate and inexplicable suppression on Mitford's part.
Second meanings hung in the air; ambiguities, unexpectednesses.
‘How did you first come here, Mr Conchis?’
‘Will you forgive me if I ask you not to ask me questions?’
‘Of course.’
‘Good.’
And that was that.
I bit my lip.
If anyone else had been there I should have had to laugh.
Shadows began to fall across the water from the pines on the bluff to our right, and there was peace, absolute peace over the world; the insects stilled and the water like a mirror.
He sat in silence with his hands on his knees, apparently engaged in deep-breathing exercises.
Not only his age but everything about him was difficult to tell.
Outwardly he seemed to have very little interest in me, yet he watched me; even when he was looking away, he watched me; and he waited.
Right from the beginning I had this: he was indifferent to me, yet he watched and he waited.
So we sat there in the silence as if we knew each other well and had no need merely to talk; and as a matter of fact it seemed in a way to suit the stillness of the day.
It was an unnatural, but not an embarrassing, silence.
Suddenly he moved.
His eyes had flicked up to the top of the small cliff to our left.
I looked round.
There was nothing.
I glanced back at him.
‘Something there?’
‘A bird.’
Silence.
I watched his profiled face.
Was he mad?
Was he making fun of me?
I tried to make conversation again.
‘I gather you've met both my predecessors.’
His head turned on me with a snake-like swiftness, accusingly, but he said nothing.
I prompted.
‘Leverrier?’
‘Who told you this?’
For some reason he was terrified about what we might have said of him behind his back.
I explained about the sheet of notepaper, and he relaxed a little.
‘He was not happy here.
On Phraxos.’
‘So Mitford told me.’
‘Mitford?’
Again the accusing stare.
‘I suppose he heard gossip at the school.’
He searched my eyes, then nodded, but not very convincedly.
I smiled at him, and he gave me the trace of a wary smile back.
We were playing obscure psychological chess again.
I apparently had the advantage, but I didn't know why.
From the invisible house above came the sound of the bell.
It rang twice; then after a moment, three times; then twice again.
It clearly had a meaning, and it gave a voice to the peculiar state of tension that seemed to pervade both the place and its owner, and which clashed so oddly with the enormous peace of the landscape.
Conchis stood at once.
‘I must go.
And you have a long walk.’
Halfway up the cliff, where the steep path broadened, there was a small cast-iron seat.
Conchis, who had set a quickish pace, sat down gratefully on it.
He was breathing hard; so was I. He patted his heart.
I put on a look of concern, but he shrugged.
‘When you grow old.
The annunciation in reverse.’
He grimaced.
‘Not to be.’
We sat in silence and got our breaths back.
I watched the yellowing sky through the delicate fenestrations in the pines.
The sky in the  west was hazy.
A few evening wisps of cloud were curled high, tranced over the stillness of the world.
Then once more out of the blue he said quietly, ‘Are you elect?’
‘Elect?’
‘Do you feel chosen by anything?’
‘Chosen?’
‘John Leverrier felt chosen by God.’
‘I don't believe in God.
And I certainly don't feel chosen.’
‘I think you may be.’
I smiled dubiously.
‘Thank you.’
‘It is not a compliment.
Hazard makes you elect.
You cannot elect yourself.’
‘And what chooses me?’
‘Chance wears many faces.’
But then he stood, although his hand rested momentarily on my shoulder, as if to reassure me; to say it did not matter.
We climbed the rest of the hill.
At last we were on the gravel by the side colonnade.
He stopped.
‘So.’
‘Thank you very much indeed.’
I tried to get him to return my smile, to confess that he had been pulling my leg; but his brooding face was drained of humour.
‘I make two requests of you.
One is that you tell no one over there that you have met me.
This is because of certain events that happened during the war.’
‘I've heard about that.’
‘What have you heard?’
‘The story.’
‘There are two versions of the story.
But never mind now.
For them I am a recluse.
No one ever sees me.
You understand?’
‘Of course.
I shan't tell anyone.’
I knew what the next request would be: not to visit him again.
‘My second request is that you come here next week-end.
And stay Saturday and Sunday nights.
That is, if you do not mind the walking back early on Monday morning.’
‘Thank you.
Thank you very much.
I'd love to.’
‘I think we have many things to discover.’
‘'We shall not cease from exploration’?’
‘You read that in the book on the beach?’
‘Didn't you leave it for me to read?’
‘How should I have known you were coming?’
‘I had a feeling someone was watching me.’
His dark-brown eyes burnt into mine; he took a long moment to reply.
The faintest ghost of a smile.
‘Do you feel you are being watched now?’
And once again his eyes flicked past my shoulders, as if he could see something inside the trees.
I looked round.
The pines were empty.
I looked back at him; a joke?
He was still smiling, a small dry smile.
‘Am I?’
‘I merely wondered, Mr Urfe.’
He held out his hand.
‘If for some reason you cannot come, leave a message at Sarantopoulos's for Hermes.
It will get here the next day.’
Looking as wary as he had begun to make me, I took his hand.
He retained it beyond courtesy.
There was a stronger pressure in his grip, a quizzical searching in his eyes.
‘Remember.
Hazard.’
‘If you say.’
‘Go now.’
I had to smile.
It was too absurd — the invitation, then this curt dismissal, as if I had exhausted his patience.
But he would concede nothing, and in the end I gave him a dry little bow and thanked him for the tea.
All I received was a dry little bow in return.
I could only make my exit.
After fifty yards I looked back.
He was still standing there, master of his domaine.
I waved and he raised both his arms in an outlandish hieratic gesture, one foot slightly advanced, as if in some kind of primitive blessing.
When I looked back again, just before the trees hid the house, he had disappeared.
Whatever else he was he was not like anyone else I had ever met.
Something more than mere loneliness, mere senile fantasies and quirks, burnt in his striking eyes, in that abrupt, probing then dropping conversation, in those sudden oblique looks at nothing.
But I certainly didn't think, as I went into the trees, that I should have the apparent answer within another hundred yards.
14
Long before I came up to the gate out of Bourani, I saw something whitish lying in the gap.
At first I thought it was a handkerchief, but when I stooped to pick it up I saw it was a cream-coloured glove; and of all gloves, an elbow-length woman's glove.
Inside the wrist was a yellowish label with the words Mireille, gantière embroidered on it in blue silk.
The label, like the glove, seemed unreasonably old, something from the bottom of a long-stored trunk.
I smelt it, and there it was, that same scent as on the towel the week before — musky, old-fashioned, like sandalwood.
When Conchis had said that he'd been down on Moutsa the week before, it had been this one fact, the sweet womanish perfume, that had puzzled me.
Now I began to understand why he might not want unexpected visits, or gossip.
Why he should want to risk his secret with me, perhaps, next week, let me know it, I couldn't imagine; what the lady was doing out in Ascot gloves, I couldn't imagine; and who she was, I couldn't imagine.
She might be a mistress, but she might equally well be a daughter, a wife, a sister — perhaps someone weak-minded, perhaps someone elderly.
It flashed through my mind that it was someone who was allowed out in the grounds of Bourani and down at Moutsa only on pain of keeping herself concealed.
She would have seen me the week before; and this time, have heard my arrival and tried to catch a glimpse of me — that explained the old man's quick looks past me, and perhaps some of his nervous strangeness.
He knew she was ‘out’; it explained the second place at the tea-table, and the mysterious bell.
I turned round, half-expecting to hear a giggle, a rather inane giggle; and then as I looked at the thick shadowy scrub near the gate, and remembered the grim reference to Prospero, a more sinister explanation came to me.
Not weak-mindedness, but some terrible disfigurement.
‘Not all young and beautiful, Mr Urfe .’
I felt, for the first time on the island, a small cold shiver of solitary-place fear.
The sun was low and night comes with near-tropical speed in  Greece.
I didn't want to have to negotiate the steep north-side paths in darkness.
So I hung the glove nearly over the centre of the top bar of the gate and went on quickly.
Half an hour later the charming hypothesis occurred to me that Conchis was a transvestite.
After a while I began, for the first time in months, to sing.
I told no one, not even Méli, about my visit to Conchis, but I spent many hours conjecturing about the mysterious third person in the house.
I decided that a weak-minded wife was the most likely answer; it would explain the seclusion, the taciturn servants.
I tried to make up my mind about Conchis too.
I was far from sure that he was not just a homosexual; that would explain Mitford's inadequate warning, though not very flatteringly to me.
The old man's nervous intensity, that jerking from one place to another, one subject to another, his jaunty walk, the gnomic answers and mystifications, the weird flinging-up of his arms when I left — all his mannerisms suggested, were calculated to suggest, that he wanted to seem younger and more vital than he was.
There remained the peculiar business of the poetry book, which he must have had ready to puzzle me.
I had been swimming a long time that first Sunday, far out in the bay, and he could easily have slipped the things on to the Bourani end of the beach while I was in the water.
But it seemed an oddly devious means of introduction.
Then what did my being ‘elect’ mean — our having ‘many things to discover’?
In itself it could mean nothing; in regard to him it could mean only that he was mad.
And ‘Some would say I lived alone ’: I remembered the scarcely concealed contempt with which he had said that.
I found a large scale map of the island in the school library.
The boundaries of the Bourani estate were marked.
I saw it was bigger, especially to the east, than I had realized: six or seven hectares, some fifteen acres.
Again and again I thought of it, perched on its lonely promontory, during the weary hours of plodding through Eckersley's purgatorial English Course .
I enjoyed conversation classes, I enjoyed doing more advanced work with what was known as the Philologic Sixth, a small group of eighteen-year-old duds who were doing languages only because they were hopeless at science, but the  endless business of ‘drilling’ the beginners bored me into stone.
‘What am I doing?
I am raising my arm.
What is he doing?
He is raising his arm.
What are they doing?
They are raising their arms.
Have they raised their arms?
They have raised their arms .’
It was like being a champion at tennis, and condemned to play with rabbits, as well as having always to get their wretched balls out of the net for them.
I would look out of the window at the blue sky and the cypresses and the sea, and pray for the day's end, when I could retire to the masters' wing, lie back on my bed and sip an ouzo.
Bourani seemed greenly remote from all that; so far, and yet so near; its small mysteries, which grew smaller as the week passed, no more than an added tang, or hazard, in its other promise of civilized pleasure.
15
This time he was waiting for me at the table.
I dumped my duffel bag by the wall and he called for Maria to bring the tea.
He was much less eccentric, perhaps because he had transparently determined to pump me.
We talked about the school, about Oxford, my family, about teaching English to foreigners, about why I had come to Greece.
Though he kept asking questions, I still felt that he had no real interest in what I was saying.
What interested him was something else, some syndrome I exhibited, some category I filled.
I was not interesting in myself, but only as an example.
I tried once or twice to reverse our roles, but he again made it clear that he did not want to talk about himself I said nothing about the glove.
Only once did he seem really surprised.
He had asked me about my unusual name.
‘French.
My ancestors were Huguenots.’
‘Ah’
‘There's a writer called Honoré d'Urfé —’
He gave me a swift look.
‘He is an ancestor of yours?’
‘It's just a family tradition.
No one 's ever traced it.
As far as I know.’
Poor old d'Urfé; I had used him before to suggest that centuries of high culture lay in my blood.
Conchis's smile was  genuinely warm, almost radiant, and I smiled back.
‘That makes a difference?’
‘It is amusing.’
‘It's probably all rubbish.’
‘No no, I believe it.
And have you read L'Astrée ?’
‘For my pains.
Terrible bore.’
‘Oui, un peu fade.
Mais pas tout à fait sans charmes .’
Impeccable accent; he could not stop smiling.
‘So you speak French.’
‘Not very well.’
‘I have a direct link with le grand siècle at my table.’
‘Hardly direct.’
But I didn't mind his thinking it, his sudden flattering benignity.
He stood up.
‘Now.
In your honour.
Today I will play Rameau.’
He led the way into the room, which ran the whole width of the house.
Books lined three walls.
At one end there was a green-glazed tile stove under a mantelpiece on which stood two bronzes, both modern.
Above them was a life-size reproduction of a Modigliani, a fine portrait of a sombre woman in black against a glaucous green background.
He sat me in an armchair, sorted through some scores, found the one he wanted; began to play; short, chirrupy little pieces, then some elaborately ornamented courantes and passacaglias.
I didn't much like them, but I realized he played with some mastery.
He might be pretentious in other ways, but he was not posing at the keyboard.
He stopped abruptly, in midpiece, as if a light had fused; pretension began again.
‘Voila.’
‘Very charming.’
I determined to stamp out the French ‘flu before it spread.
‘I've been admiring that.’
I nodded at the reproduction.
‘Yes?’
We went and stood in front of it.
‘My mother.’
For a moment I thought he was joking.
‘Your mother?’
‘In name.
In reality, it is his mother.
It was always his mother.’
I looked at the woman's eyes; they hadn't the usual fish-like pallor of Modigliani eyes.
They stared, they watched, they were simian.
I also looked at the painted surface.
I belatedly realized I was not looking at a reproduction.
‘Good lord.
It must be worth a fortune.’
‘No doubt.’
He spoke without looking at me.
‘You must not think that because I live simply here I am poor.
I am very rich.’
He said it as if ‘very rich’ was a nationality; as perhaps it is.
I stared at the picture again.
‘It cost me…nothing.
And that was charity.
I should like to say that I recognized his genius.
But I did not.
No one did.
Not even the clever Mr Zborowski.’
‘You knew him?’
‘Modigliani?
I met him.
Many times.
I knew Max Jacob, who was a friend of his.
That was in the last phase of his life.
He was quite famous by then.
One of the sights of Montparnasse.’
I stole a look at Conchis as he gazed up at the picture; he had, by no other logic than that of cultural snobbery, gained a whole new dimension of respectability for me, and I began to feel much less sure of his eccentricity and his phoniness, of my own superiority in the matter of what life was really about.
‘You must wish you'd bought more from him.’
‘I did.’
‘You still own them?’
‘Of course.
Only a bankrupt would sell beautiful paintings.
They are in my other houses.’
I stored away that plural; one day I would mimic it to someone.
‘Where are your…other houses?’
‘Do you like this?’
He touched the bronze of a young man beneath the Modigliani.
‘This is a maquette by Rodin.
My other houses.
Well.
In France.
In the Lebanon.
In America.
I have business interests all over the world.’
He turned to the other characteristically skeletal bronze.
‘And this is by Giacometti.’
‘I'm staggered.
Here on Phraxos.’
‘Why not?’
‘Thieves?’
‘If you have many valuable paintings, as I have — I will show you two more upstairs later — you make a decision.
You treat them as what they are — squares of painted canvas.
Or you treat them as you would treat gold ingots.
You put bars on your windows, you lie awake at night worrying.
There.’
He indicated the bronzes.
‘If you want, steal them.
I shall tell the police, but you may get away with them.
The only thing you will not do is make me worry.’
‘They're safe from me.’
‘And on Greek islands, no thieves.
But I do not like everyone to know they are here.
‘Of course.’
‘This picture is interesting.
It was omitted from the only catalogue raisonné of his work I have seen.
You see also it is not signed.
However — it would not be difficult to authenticate.
I will show you.
Take the corner.’
He moved the Rodin to one side and we lifted the frame down.
He tilted it for me to see.
On the back were the first few lines of a sketch for another painting, then scrawled across the lower half of the untreated canvas were some illegible words with numbers beside them, added up at the bottom, by the stretcher.
‘Debts.
That one there.
‘Toto.’
Toto was the Algerian he bought his hashish from.’
He pointed.
‘'Zbo.’
Zborowski.’
I stared down at those careless, drunken scrawls; felt the immediacy of the man; and the terrible but necessary alienation of genius from ordinariness.
A man who would touch you for ten francs, and go home and paint what would one day be worth ten million.
Conchis watched me.
‘This is the side the museums never show.’
‘Poor devil.’
‘He would say the same of us.
With much more reason.’
I helped him put the frame back.
Then he made me look at the windows.
They were rather small and narrow, arched, each one with a centre pillar and a capital of carved marble.
‘These come from Monemvasia.
I found them built into a cottage.
So I bought the cottage.’
‘Like an American.’
He did not smile.
‘They are Venetian.
Of the fifteenth century.’
He turned to the bookshelves and pulled down an art book.
‘Here.’
I looked over his shoulder and saw Fra Angelico's famous ‘Annunciation’; and at once knew why the colonnade outside had seemed so familiar.
There was even the same white-edged floor of red tiles.
‘Now what else can I show you?
My harpsichord is very rare.
It is one of the original Pleyels.
Not in fashion.
But very beautiful.’
He stroked its shining black top, as if it were a cat.
There was a music-stand on the far side, by the wall.
It seemed an unnecessary thing to have with a harpsichord.
‘You play some other instrument, Mr Conchis?’
He looked at it, shook his head.
‘No.
It has sentimental value.’
But he sounded quite unsentimental.
‘Good.
Well.
Now I must leave you to your own devices for a while.
I have some correspondence to deal with.’
He gestured.
You will find newspapers and magazines over there.
Or books — take what you want.
You will excuse me?
Your room is upstairs…if you wish?’
‘No, this is fine.
Thank you.’
He went; and I stared again at the Modigliani, caressed the Rodin, surveyed the room.
I felt rather like a man who has knocked on a cottage door and found himself in a palace; vaguely foolish.
I took a pile of the French and American magazines that lay on a table in the corner and went out under the colonnade.
After a while I did something else I hadn't done for several months: I began to rough out a poem.
From this skull-rock strange golden roots throw Ikons and incidents; the man in the mask Manipulates.
I am the fool that falls And never learns to wait and watch, Icarus eternally damned, the dupe of time…
He suggested we look over the rest of the house.
A door led into a bare, ugly hall.
There was a dining-room, which he said he never used, on the north side of the house, and another room which resembled nothing so much as a second-hand bookshop; a chaos of books — shelves of books, stacks of books, piles of magazines and newspapers, and one large and evidently newly arrived parcel that lay unopened on a desk by the window.
He turned to me with a pair of calipers in his hand.
‘I am interested in anthropology.
May I measure your skull?’
He took my permission for granted, and I bent my head.
As he gently pinched it, he said, ‘You like books?’
He seemed to have forgotten, but perhaps he hadn't, that I had read English at Oxford.
‘Of course.’
‘What do you read?’
He wrote down my measurements in a little notebook.
‘Oh…novels mainly.
Poetry.
And criticism.’
‘I have not a single novel here.’
‘No?’
‘The novel is no longer an art form.’
I grinned.
‘Why do you smile?’
‘It was a sort of joke when I was at Oxford.
If you didn't know what to say at a party, you used to ask a question like that.’
‘Like what?’
‘'Do you think the novel is exhausted as an art form?’
No serious answer was expected.’
‘I see.
It was not serious.’
‘Not at all.’
I looked at the notebook.
‘Are my measurements interesting?’
‘No.’
He dismissed that.
‘Well — I am serious.
The novel is dead.
As dead as alchemy.’
He cut out with his hands, with the calipers, dismissing that as well.
‘I realized that one day before the war.
Do you know what I did?
I burnt every novel I possessed.
Dickens.
Cervantes.
Dostoievsky.
Flaubert.
All the great and all the small.
I even burnt something I wrote myself when I was too young to know better.
I burnt them out there.
It took me all day.
The sky took their smoke, the earth their ashes.
It was a fumigation.
I have been happier and healthier ever since.’
I remembered my own small destroying; and thought, grand gestures are splendid — if you can afford them.
He picked up a book and slapped the dust off it.
‘Why should I struggle through hundreds of pages of fabrication to reach half a dozen very little truths?’
‘For fun?’
‘Fun!’
He pounced on the word.
‘Words are for truth.
For facts.
Not fiction.’
‘I see.’
‘For this.’
A life of Franklin Roosevelt.
‘This.’
A French paperback on astrophysics.
‘This.
Look at this.’
It was an old pamphlet —An Alarme for Sinners, Containing the Last Words of the Murderer Robert Foulkes, 1679 .
‘There, take that and read it over the week-end.
See if it is not more real than all the historical novels ever written.’
His bedroom extended almost the seaward width of the house, like the music-room below.
At one end was a bed — a double bed, I noticed — and a huge wardrobe; at the other, a closed door led through into what must have been a very small room, a dressing-room perhaps.
Near that door stood a strange-looking table, the top of which he lifted.
It was (I had to be told) a clavichord.
The centre of the room was fitted out as a kind of sitting-room and study.
There was another tiled stove, and a desk littered with the papers he must have been working on, and two armchairs upholstered in pale brown to match a chaise-longue.
In a far corner, a triangular cabinet full of pale-blue and green Isnik ware.
Flooded with evening light, it was altogether a more homely room than the one downstairs, and by contrast pleasantly free of books.
But its tone was really set by its two paintings: both nudes, girls in sunlit interiors, pinks, reds, greens, honeys, ambers; all light, warmth, glowing like yellow fires with life, humanity, domesticity, sexuality, Mediterraneity.
‘You know him?’
I shook my head.
‘Bonnard.
He painted them both five or six years before he died.’
I stood in front of them.
He said, behind me, ‘These, I paid for.’
‘They were worth it.’
‘Sunlight.
A naked girl.
A chair.
A towel, a bidet.
A tiled floor.
A little dog.
And he gives the whole of existence a reason.’
I stared at the one on the left, not the one he had inventoried.
It showed a girl by a sunlit window with her back turned, apparently drying her loins and watching herself in the mirror at the same time.
I was remembering Alison, Alison wandering about the flat naked, singing, like a child.
It was an unforgettable painting; it set a dense golden halo of light round the most trivial of moments, so that the moment, and all such moments, could never be completely trivial again.
Conchis moved out on to the terrace, and I followed him.
By the westward of the two french doors stood a small Moorish ivory-inlaid table.
It carried a bowl of flowers set, as if votively, before a photograph.
It was a large picture in an old-fashioned silver frame.
A girl in an Edwardian dress stood by a vase of roses on an improbable Corinthian pedestal, while painted foliage drooped sentimentally across the background.
It was one of those old photographs whose dark  chocolate shadows are balanced by the creamy richness of the light surfaces; of a period when women had bosoms, not breasts.
The young girl in the picture had a massed pile of light hair, and a sharp waist, and that plump-softness of skin and slightly heavy Gibson-girl handsomeness of feature that the age so much admired.
Conchis saw me giving it a lingering glance.
‘She was once my fiancée.
I looked again.
The photographer's name was stamped floridly in gold across the bottom corner — a London address.
‘You never married her?’
‘She died.’
‘She looks English.’
‘Yes.’
He paused, surveying her.
The girl seemed absurdly historical, standing by the pompous vase in front of the faded, painted grove.
‘Yes, she was English.’
I looked at him.
‘What was your English name, Mr Conchis?’
He smiled one of his rare smiles; like a monkey's paw flashing out of a cage.
‘I have forgotten.’
‘You never married at all?’
He remained staring down at the  the photograph, then slowly shook his head.
‘Come.’
A table stood in the south-east corner of the parapeted L-shaped terrace.
It was already laid with a cloth, presumably for dinner.
We looked over the trees at the superb view, the vast dome of light over land and sea.
The mountains of the Peloponnesus had turned a violet-blue, and Venus hung in the pale-green sky like a white lamp, with the steady soft brilliance of gaslight.
The photo stood in the doorway, placed rather in the way children put dolls in a window to let them look out.
He sat against the parapet with his back to the view.
‘And you?
You are engaged?’
In my turn I shook my head.
‘You must find life here very lonely.’
‘I was warned.’
‘A good-looking young man of your age.’
‘Well, there was a girl, but…’
‘But?’
‘I can't explain.’
‘Is she English?’
I thought of the Bonnard; that was the reality; such moments; not what one could tell.
I smiled at him.
‘May I ask you what you asked me last week?
No questions?’
‘Of course.’
We sat in silence then, that same peculiar silence he had imposed on the beach the Saturday before.
At last he turned to the sea and spoke again.
‘Greece is like a mirror.
It makes you suffer.
Then you learn.’
‘To live alone?’
‘To live.
With what you are.
A Swiss came to end his days here many years ago now — in an isolated ruined cottage at the far end of the island.
Over there, under Aquila.
A man of my age now.
He had spent all his life assembling watches and reading about Greece.
He had even taught himself classical Greek.
He repaired the cottage himself, cleared the cisterns, made some terraces.
His passion became — you cannot guess — goats.
He kept one, then two.
Then a small flock of them.
They slept in the same room as he did.
Always exquisite.
Always combed and brushed, since he was Swiss.
He used to call here sometimes in spring and we would have the utmost difficulty in keeping his seraglio out of the house.
He learnt to make excellent cheeses — they fetched good prices in Athens.
But he was alone.
No one ever wrote to him.
Visited him.
Totally alone.
And I believe the happiest man I have ever met.’
‘What happened to him?’
‘He died in 1937.
A stroke.
They did not discover him till a fortnight later.
By then all his goats were dead too.
It was winter, so you see the door was fastened.’
His eyes on mine, Conchis grimaced, as if he found death a joker.
His skin clung very close to his skull.
Only the eyes lived.
I had the strange impression that he wanted me to believe he was death; that at any moment the leathery old skin and the eyes would fall, and I should find myself the guest of a skeleton.
Later we went back indoors.
There were three other rooms on the north side of the first floor.
One room he showed me only a glimpse of, a lumber-room.
I saw crates piled high, and some furniture with  dust-covers on.
Then there was a bathroom, and beside the bathroom, a small bedroom.
The bed was made, and I saw my duffel bag lying on it.
I had fully expected one locked room, the woman-of-the-glove's room.
Then I thought that she lived in the cottage — Maria looked after her, perhaps; or perhaps this room that was to be mine for the week-end was normally hers.
He handed me the seventeenth-century pamphlet, which I had left on a table on the landing.
‘I usually have an aperitif downstairs in about half an hour.
I will see you then?’
‘Of course.’
‘I must tell you something.’
‘Yes.’
‘You have heard some disagreeable things about me?’
‘I only know one story about you and that seems very much to your credit.’
‘The execution?’
‘I told you last week.’
‘I have a feeling that you have heard something else.
From Captain Mitford?’
‘Absolutely nothing.
I assure you.’
He was standing in the doorway, giving me his intensest look.
He seemed to gather strength; to decide that the mystery must be cleared up; then spoke.
‘I am psychic.’
The house seemed full of silence; and suddenly everything that had happened earlier led to this.
‘I'm afraid I'm not psychic.
At all.’
We seemed drowned in dusk; two men staring at each other.
I could hear a clock ticking in his room.
‘That is unimportant.
In half an hour?’
‘Why did you tell me that?’
He turned to a small table by the door, struck a match to light the oil-lamp, and then carefully adjusted it, making me wait for an answer.
At last he straightened and smiled.
‘Because I am psychic.’
He went down the passage and across the landing into his own room.
His door shut, then silence welled back.
16
The bed was a cheap iron one.
Besides a second table, a carpet, and an armchair, there was only an old, locked cassone , of a kind to be found in every cottage on the island.
It was the least likely millionaire's spare-room imaginable.
The walls were bare except for a photograph of a number of village men standing in front of a house the house.
I could make out a younger Conchis in the centre, wearing a straw hat and shorts, and there was one woman, a peasant-woman, though not Maria, because she was Maria's age in the photo and it was plainly twenty or thirty years old.
I held up the lamp and turned the picture round to see if there was anything written on the back.
But the only thing there was a fragile gecko, which clung splay-footed to the wall and watched me with cloudy eyes.
Geckoes like seldom-used rooms.
On the table by the head of the bed there was a flat shell to serve as an ashtray, and three books: a collection of ghost stories, an old Bible and a large thin volume entitled The Beauties of Nature .
The ghost stories purported to be true, ‘authenticated by at least two reliable witnesses’.
The list of contents —‘Borley Rectory’, ‘The Isle of Man Polecat’, ‘No. 18 Dennington Road’, ‘The Man with the Limp’— reminded me of being ill at boarding school.
I opened The Beauties of Nature .
The nature was all female, and the beauty all pectoral.
There were long shots of breasts, shots of breasts of every material from every angle, and against all sorts of background, closer and closer, until the final picture was of nothing but breast, with one dark and much larger-than-natural nipple staring from the centre of the glossy page.
It was much too obsessive to be erotic.
I picked up the lamp and went into the bathroom.
It was well fitted out, with a formidable medicine chest.
I looked for some sign of a woman's occupation, and found none.
There was running water, but it was cold and salt; for men only.
I went back to my room and lay on the bed.
The sky in the open window was a pale night-blue and one or two first faint northerly stars blinked over the trees.
Outside, the crickets chirped  monotonously, with a Webern-like inconsistency yet precision of rhythm.
I heard small noises from the cottage below my window, and I could smell cooking.
In the house was a great stillness.
I was increasingly baffled by Conchis.
At times he was so dogmatic that I wanted to laugh, to behave in the traditionally xenophobic, continentals-despising way of my race; at times, rather against my will, he impressed me — not only as a rich man with some enviable works of art in his house.
And now he frightened me.
It was the kind of illogical fear of the supernatural that in others made me sneer; but all along I had felt that I was invited not out of hospitality, but for some other reason.
He wanted to use me in some way.
I now discounted homosexuality; he had had his chances and ignored them.
Besides, the Bonnards, the fiancée, the book of breasts, all discounted it.
Something much more bizarre was afoot.
‘Are you elect ?’…
‘I am psychic ’…it all pointed to spiritualism, to table-tapping.
Perhaps the lady of the glove was a medium of some kind.
Certainly Conchis hadn't got the petty-bourgeois gentility and the woolly vocabulary I associated with séance -holders; but he was equally certainly not a normal man.
I lit a cigarette, and after a while I smiled.
In that small bare room, it seemed not to matter, even if I was a shade scared.
The truth was that I was full of a sort of green stir.
Conchis was no more than the chance agent, the event that had come at the right time; just as in the old days I might, after a celibate term at Oxford, have met a girl and begun an affaire with her, I had begun something exciting with him.
It seemed linked in a way with my wanting to see Alison again.
I wanted to live again.
The house was as quiet as death, as the inside of a skull; but the year was 1953, I was an atheist and an absolute non-believer in spiritualism, ghosts and all that mumbo-jumbo.
I lay there waiting for the half-hour to pass; and the silence of the house was still, that day, much more a silence of peace than one of fear.
17
When I went downstairs, the music-room was lamplit but empty.
There was a tray on the table in front of the stove with a bottle of ouzo, a jug of water, glasses, and a bowl of fat blue-black Amphissa olives.
I poured out some ouzo and added enough water to make it go milkily opaque.
Then, glass in hand, I began a tour of the bookshelves.
The books were methodically arranged.
There were two entire sections of medical works, mostly in French, including many — they hardly seemed to go with spiritualism — on psychiatry, and another two of scientific books of all kinds; several shelves of philosophical works, and also a fair number of botanical and ornithological books, mostly in English and German; but the great majority of the rest were autobiographies and biographies.
There must have been thousands of them.
They appeared to have been collected without any method: Wordsworth, Mae West, Saint-Simon, geniuses, criminals, saints, nonentities.
The collection had the eclectic impersonality of a public library.
Behind the harpsichord and under the window there was a low glass cabinet which contained two or three classical pieces.
There was a rhyton in the form of a human head, a black-figure kylix on one side, a small red-figure amphora on the other.
On top of the cabinet were also three objects: a photo, an eighteenth-century clock, and a white-enamelled snuff-box.
I went behind the music-stool to look at the Greek pottery.
The painting on the flat inner bowl of the kylix gave me a shock.
It involved two satyrs and a woman and was very obscene indeed.
Nor were the paintings on the amphora of a kind any museum would dare put on display.
Then I looked closer at the clock.
It was mounted in ormolu with an enamelled face.
In the middle was a rosy little naked cupid; the shaft of the one short hand came through his loins, and the rounded tip at its end made it very clear what it was meant to be.
There were no hours marked round the dial, and the whole of the right-hand half was blacked out, with the one word Sleep in white upon it.
On the white enamel of the other half were written in neat black script  the following faded but still legible words: at six,Encounter ; at eight,Enchantment ; at ten,Erection ; at twelve,Ecstasy .
The cupid smiled; the clock was not going and his manhood hung permanently askew at eight.
I opened the innocent white snuff-box.
Beneath the lid was enacted, in Boucheresque eighteenth-century terms, exactly the same scene as some ancient Greek had painted in the kylix two thousand years before.
It was between these two objets that Conchis had chosen, whether with perversion, with humour, or with simple bad taste, I couldn't decide, to place another photo of the Edwardian girl, his dead fiancée.
She looked out of the oval silver frame with alert, smiling eyes.
Her splendidly white skin and fine neck were shown off by a square décolletage , messy swathes of lace tied over her bosom by what seemed a white shoe-lace.
By one armpit was a floppy black bow.
She looked very young, as if she was wearing her first evening dress; and in this photo she looked less heavy-featured; rather piquant, a touch of mischief, almost a shy delectation in being queen of a cabinet of curiosa .
A door closed upstairs, and I turned away.
The eyes of the Modigliani seemed to glare at me severely, so I sneaked out under the colonnade, where a minute later Conchis joined me.
He had changed into a pair of pale trousers and a dark cotton coat.
He stood silhouetted in the soft light that flowed out of the room and silently toasted me.
The mountains were just visible, dusky and black, like waves of charcoal, the sky beyond still not quite drained of afterglow.
But overhead — I was standing on the steps down to the gravel — the stars were out.
They sparkled less fierily than they do in England; tranquilly, as if they were immersed in limpid oil.
‘Thank you for the bedside books.’
‘If you see anything more interesting on the shelves, take it.
Please.’
There was a strange call from the dark trees to the east of the house.
I had heard it in the evenings at the school, and at first thought it made by some moronic village boy.
It was very high-pitched, repeated at regular intervals: Kew.
Kew.
Kew.
Like a melancholy transmigrated bus-conductor.
‘There is my friend,’ said Conchis.
For an absurd and alarming  moment I thought he must mean the woman of the glove.
I saw her flitting through the island trees in her Ascot gloves, for ever searching for Kew.
The call came again, eery and stupid, from the night behind us.
Conchis counted five slowly, and the call came as he raised his hand.
Then five again, and again it came.
‘What is it?’
‘Otus scops .’
The scops owl.
It is very small.
Not twenty centimetres.
Like this.’
‘I saw you had some books on birds.’
‘Ornithology interests me.’
‘And you have studied medicine.’
‘I studied medicine.
Many years ago.’
‘And never practised?’
‘Only on myself.’
Far out to sea to the west I saw the bright lights of the Athens boat.
On Saturday nights it went on south down to Kythera.
But instead of relating Bourani to the ordinary world, the distant ship seemed only to emphasize its hiddenness, its secrecy.
I took the plunge.
‘What did you mean by saying that you were psychic?’
‘What did you think I meant?’
‘Spiritualism?’
‘Infantilism.’
‘That's what I think.’
‘Of course.’
I could just make out his face in the light from the doorway.
He could see more of mine, because I had swung round during that last exchange.
‘You haven't really answered my question.’
‘Your first reaction is the characteristic one of your contrasuggestible century: to disbelieve, to disprove.
I see this very clearly underneath your politeness.
You are like a porcupine.
When that animal has its spines erect, it cannot eat.
If you do not eat, you will starve.
And your prickles will die with the rest of your body.’
I swilled the last of the ouzo round in my glass.
‘Isn't it your century too?’
‘I have lived a great deal in other centuries.’
‘You mean in literature?’
‘In reality.’
The owl called again, at monotonously regular intervals.
I stared out into the darkness of the pines.
‘Reincarnation?’
‘Is rubbish.’
‘Then…’
I shrugged.
‘I cannot escape my human life-span.
So there is only one way I could have lived in other centuries.’
I was silent.
‘I give up.’
‘Not give up.
Look up.
What do you see?’
‘Stars.
Space.’
‘And what else?
That you know are there.
Though they are not visible.’
‘Other worlds?’
I turned to look at him.
He sat, a black shadow.
I felt a small chill run down my spine.
He took the thought out of my mind.
‘I am mad?’
‘Mistaken.’
‘No.
Neither mad nor mistaken.’
‘You…travel to other worlds?’
‘Yes.
I travel to other worlds.’
I put the glass down and pulled out a cigarette; lit it before speaking.
‘In the flesh?’
‘If you can tell me where the flesh ends and the mind begins, I will answer that.’
‘You um…you have some evidence of this?’
‘Ample evidence.’
He allowed a moment to pass.
‘For those with the intelligence to see it.’
‘This is what you meant by election and being psychic?’
‘In part.’
I was silent, thinking that I must make up my mind what course of action to take.
I sensed an inherent hostility, which rose from beyond anything that had passed between us; the subconscious resistance of water to oil.
A course of polite scepticism seemed best.
‘You do this…travelling by, I don't know, something like telepathy?’
But before he could answer there was a soft slap of footsteps round the colonnade.
Maria stood and bobbed.
‘Sas efcharistoume , Maria.
Dinner is served,’ said Conchis.
We stood and went into the music-room.
As we put our glasses on the tray he said, ‘There are things that words cannot explain’
I looked down.
‘At Oxford we were taught to assume that if words can't explain, nothing else is likely to.’
‘Very well.’
He smiled.
‘May I call you Nicholas now?’
‘Of course.
Please.’
He poured a drop of ouzo into our glasses.
We raised and clinked them.
‘Eis ‘ygeia sas, Nicholas.’
‘Sygeia.’
But I had a strong suspicion even then that he was drinking to something other than my health.
The table in the corner of the terrace glittered, an unexpectedly formal island of glass and silver in the darkness.
It was lit by one tall lamp with a dark shade; the light flowed downwards, concentrated on the white cloth, and was then reflected up, lighting our faces strangely, Caravaggio fashion, against the surrounding darkness.
The meal was excellent.
We ate small fish cooked in wine, a delicious chicken, herb-flavoured cheese and a honey-and-curd flan, made, according to Conchis, from a medieval Turkish recipe.
The wine we drank had a trace of resin, as if the vineyard had merely been beside a pine-forest, and was nothing like the harsh turpentine-tasting rotgut I sometimes drank in the village.
We ate largely in silence.
He evidently preferred this.
If we talked, it was of the food.
He ate slowly, and very little, but I left nothing to take away.
When we had finished, Maria brought Turkish coffee in a brass pot and took the lamp, which was beginning to attract too many insects.
She replaced it by a single candle.
The flame rose untrembling in the still air; now and again a persistent insect would fly round, in, round and away.
I lit my cigarette, and sat like Conchis, half-turned towards the sea and the south.
He did not want to talk, and I was content to wait.
Suddenly there were footsteps below on the gravel.
They were  going away from the house towards the sea.
At first I took them for Maria's, though it seemed strange that she should be going down to the beach at that time.
But a second later I knew that they could not, or could no more plausibly than the glove, be hers.
They were light, rapid, quiet steps, as if the person was trying to make as little noise as possible.
They might even have belonged to a child.
I was sitting away from the parapet, and could see nothing below.
I glanced at Conchis.
He was staring out into the darkness as if the sound was perfectly normal.
I shifted unobtrusively, to crane a look over the parapet.
But the steps had passed away into silence.
With alarming speed a large moth dashed at the candle, repeatedly and frantically, as if attached to it by elastic cord.
Conchis leant forward and snuffed the flame.
‘You do not mind sitting in darkness?’
‘Not at all.’
It occurred to me that it might after all have really been a child, from one of the cottages at the bay to the east; someone who had come to help Maria.
‘I should tell you how I came here.’
‘It must have been a marvellous site to find.’
‘Of course.
But I am not talking of architecture.’
He paused, seemingly at a loss to say what he did mean.
‘I came to Phraxos looking for a house to rent.
A house for a summer.
I did not like the village.
I do not like coasts that face north.
On my last day I had a boatman take me round the island.
For pleasure.
By chance he landed me for a swim at Moutsa down there.
By chance he said there was an old cottage up here.
By chance I came up.
The cottage was crumbled walls, a litter of stones choken with thorn-ivy.
It was very hot.
About four o'clock on the afternoon of April the eighteenth, 1928.’
He paused again, as if the memory of that year had stopped him; and to prepare me for a new facet of himself, a new shift.
‘There were many more trees then.
One could not see the sea.
I stood in the little clearing round the ruined walls.
I had immediately the sensation that I was expected.
Something had been waiting there all my life.
I stood there, and I knew who waited, who expected.
It was myself.
I was here and this house was here, you and I and this evening were here, and they had always been here, like reflections of my own coming.
It was like a dream.
I had been walking towards a  closed door, and by a sudden magic its impenetrable wood became glass, through which I saw myself coming from the other direction, the future.
I speak in analogies.
You understand?’
I nodded, cautious, not concerned with understanding; because underlying everything he did I had come to detect an air of stage-management, of the planned and rehearsed.
He did not tell me of his coming to Bourani as a man tells something that chances to occur to him; but far more as a dramatist tells an anecdote where the play requires.
He went on.
‘I knew at once that I must live here.
I could not go beyond.
It was only here that my past would merge into my future.
So I stayed.
I am here tonight.
And you are here tonight.’
In the darkness he was looking sideways at me.
I said nothing for a moment; there had seemed to be some special emphasis on the last sentence.
‘Is this also what you meant by being psychic?’
‘It is what I mean by hazard.
There comes a time in each life like a point of fulcrum.
At that time you must accept yourself.
It is not any more what you will become.
It is what you are and always will be.
You are too young to know this.
You are still becoming.
Not being.’
‘Perhaps.’
‘Not perhaps.
For certain.’
‘What happens if one doesn't recognize the…point of fulcrum?’
But I was thinking, I have had it already — the silence in the trees, the siren of the Athens boat, the black mouth of the shotgun barrel.
‘You will be like the many.
Only the few recognize this moment.
And act on it.
‘The elect?’
‘The elect.
The chosen by hazard.’
I heard his chair creak.
‘Look over there.
The lamp-fishermen.’
Away at the far feet of the mountains there was a thin dust of ruby lights in the deepest shadows.
I didn't know whether he meant simply, look; or that the lamps were in some way symbolic of the elect.
‘You're very tantalizing sometimes, Mr Conchis.’
‘I am prepared to be less so.’
‘I wish you would be.’
He was silent again.
‘Suppose that what I tell you should mean more to your life than the mere listening?’
‘I hope it would.’
Another pause.
‘I do not want politeness.
Politeness always conceals a refusal to face other kinds of reality.
I am going to say something about you that may shock you.
I know something about you that you do not know yourself’ He paused, again as if to let me prepare myself.
‘You too are psychic, Nicholas.
You are sure you are not.
I know that.’
‘Well, I'm not.
Really.’
I waited, then said, ‘But I'd certainly like to know what makes you think I am.’
‘I have been shown.’
‘When?’
‘I prefer not to say.’
‘But you must.
I don't even know what you really mean by the word.
If you merely mean some sort of intuitive intelligence, then I hope I am psychic.
But I thought you meant something else.’
Again silence, as if he wanted me to hear the sharpness in my own voice.
‘You are treating this as if I have accused you of some crime.
Of some weakness.’
‘I'm sorry.
But I've never had a psychical experience in my life.’
I added, naively, ‘Anyway, I'm an atheist.’
His voice was gentle and dry.
‘If a person is intelligent, then of course he is either an agnostic or an atheist.
Just as he is a physical coward.
They are automatic definitions of high intelligence.
But I am not talking about God.
I am talking about science.’
I said nothing.
His voice became much drier.
‘Very well.
I accept that you believe that you are…not psychic.’
‘You can't refuse to tell me what you promised now.’
‘I wished only to warn you.’
‘You have.’
‘Excuse me for one minute.’
He disappeared into his bedroom.
I got up and went to the corner of the parapet, from where I could see in three directions.
All round the house lay the silent pine trees, dim in the starlight.
Absolute peace.
High and very far to the north I could just hear an aeroplane, only the third or fourth I had heard at night since coming to the island.
I thought of an Alison on it, moving down a gangway with a  trolley of drinks.
Like the ship the faint drone accentuated, rather than diminished, the remoteness of Bourani.
I had an acute sense of the absence of Alison, of the probably permanent loss of her; I could imagine her beside me, her hand in mine; and she was human warmth, normality, standard to go by.
I had always seen myself as potentially a sort of protector of her; and for the first time, that evening at Bourani, I saw that perhaps she had been, or could have been, a protector of me.
A few seconds later Conchis returned.
He went to the parapet, and breathed deeply.
The sky and the sea and the stars, half the universe, stretched out before us.
I could still just hear the aeroplane.
I lit a cigarette, as Alison, at such a moment, would have lit a cigarette.
18
‘I think we should be more comfortable in the lounging-chairs.’
I helped him pull the two long wicker chairs from the far end of the terrace.
Then we both put our feet up and sat back.
And at once I could smell it on the tied-on head-cushion — that same elusive, old-fashioned perfume of the towel, of the glove.
I was sure it did not belong to Conchis or old Maria.
I should have smelt it by then.
There was a woman, and she often used this chair.
‘It will take me a long time to define what I mean.
It will take me the story of my life.’
‘I've spent the last seven months among people who can speak only the most rudimentary English.’
‘My French is better than my English now.
But no matter.
Comprendre, c'est tout .’
‘'Only connect.’'
‘Who said that?’
‘An English novelist.’
‘He should not have said it.
Fiction is the worst form of connection.’
I smiled in the darkness.
There was silence.
The stars gave signals.
He began.
‘I told you my father was English.
But his business, importing tobacco and currants, lay mainly in the Levant.
One of his competitors was a Greek living in London.
In 1892 this Greek had tragic news.
His eldest brother and his wife had been killed in an earthquake over the mountains there on the other side of the Peloponnesus.
Three children survived.
The two youngest, two boys, were sent out to South America, to a third brother.
And the eldest child, a girl of seventeen, was brought to London to keep house for her uncle, my father's competitor.
He had long been a widower.
She had the prettiness that is characteristic of Greek women who have some Italian blood.
My father met her.
He was much older, but quite good-looking, I suppose, and he spoke some demotic Greek.
There were business interests which could be profitably merged.
In short, they married…and I exist.
‘The first thing I remember clearly is my mother's singing.
She always sang, whether she was happy or sad.
She could sing classical music quite well, and play the piano, but it was the Greek folk-tunes I remember best.
Those she always sang when she was sad.
I remember her telling me — much later in life — of that standing on a distant hillside and seeing the ochre dust float slowly up into the azure sky.
When the news about her parents came, she was filled with a black hatred of Greece.
She wanted to leave it then, never to return.
Like so many Greeks.
And like so many Greeks she never accepted her exile.
That is the cost of being born in the most beautiful and the most cruel country in the world.
‘My mother sang — and music was the most important thing in my life, from as far back as I can remember.
I was something of a child prodigy.
I gave my first concert at the age of nine, and people were very kind.
But I was a bad pupil at all the other subjects at school.
I was not stupid, but I was very lazy.
I knew only one obligation: to play the piano well.
Duty largely consists of pretending that the trivial is critical, and I was never accomplished at that.
‘I was fortunate, I had a very remarkable music-teacher — Charles-Victor Bruneau.
He had many of the traditional faults of his kind.
Vain of his methods and vain of his pupils.
A sarcastic agony if one was not talented, and a painstaking angel if one was.
But he was a very learned man musicologically.
In those days that meant he was rarissima  avis .
Most executants then wanted only to express themselves.
And so they developed accomplishments like enormous velocity and great skill at expressive rubato.
No one today plays like that.
Or could play like it, even if they wanted to.
The Rosenthals and Godowskis are gone for ever.
But Bruneau was far in advance of his time and there are still many Haydn and Mozart sonatas I can hear only as he played them.
‘However, his most remarkable acquirement — I speak of before 1914 — was the then almost unknown one of being as good a harpsichordist as a pianist.
I first came under him at a period in his life when he was abandoning the piano.
The harpsichord requires a very different finger technique from the piano.
It is not easy to change.
He dreamed of a school of harpsichord players trained as early as possible as pure harpsichordists.
And not, as he used to say,des pianistes en costume de bal masqué .
‘When I was fifteen, I had what we could call today a nervous breakdown.
Bruneau had been driving me too hard.
I never had the least interest in games.
I was a day-boy, I had permission to concentrate on music.
I never made any real friends at school.
Perhaps because I was taken for a Jew.
But the doctor said that when I recovered I would have to practise less and go out more often.
I made a face.
My father came back one day with an expensive book on birds.
I could hardly tell the commonest birds apart, had never thought of doing so.
But my father's was an inspired guess.
Lying in bed, looking at the stiff poses in the pictures, I began to want to see the living reality — and the only reality to begin with for me was the singing that I heard through my sickroom window.
I came to birds through sound.
Suddenly even the chirping of sparrows seemed mysterious.
And the singing of birds I had heard a thousand times, thrushes, blackbirds in our London garden, I heard as if I had never heard them before.
Later in my life —ça sera pour un autre jour — birds led me into a very unusual experience.
‘You see the child I was.
Lazy, lonely, yes, very lonely.
What is that word?
A cissy.
Talented in music, and in nothing else.
And I was an only child, spoilt by my parents.
As I entered my fourth lustre, it became evident that I was not going to fulfil my early promise.
Bruneau saw it first, and then I did.
Though we tacitly agreed not to tell my parents, it was difficult for me to accept.
Sixteen is a bad age at which to know one will never be a genius.
But by then I was in love.
‘I first saw Lily when she was fourteen, and I was a year older, soon after my breakdown.
We lived in St John's Wood.
In one of those small white mansions for successful merchants.
You know them?
A semi-circular drive.
A portico.
At the back was a long garden, at the end of it a little orchard, some six or seven overgrown apple and pear trees.
Unkempt, but very green.
I had a private ‘house’ under a lime tree.
One day — June, a noble blue day, burning, clear, as they are here in Greece — I was reading a life of Chopin.
I remember that exactly.
You know at my age you recall the first twenty years far better than the second — or the third.
I was reading and no doubt seeing myself as Chopin, and I had my new book on birds beside me.
It is 1910.
‘Suddenly I hear a noise on the other side of the brick wall which separates the garden of the next house from ours.
This house is empty, so I am surprised.
And then…a head appears.
Cautiously.
Like a mouse.
It is the head of a young girl.
I am half hidden in my bower, I am the last thing she sees, so I have time to examine her.
Her head is in sunshine, a mass of pale blonde hair that falls behind her and out of sight.
The sun is to the south, so that it is caught in her hair, in a cloud of light.
I see her shadowed face, her dark eyes, and her small half-opened inquisitive mouth.
She is grave, timid, yet determined to be daring.
She sees me.
She stares at me for a moment in her shocked haze of light.
She seems more erect, like a bird.
I stand up in the entrance of my bower, still in shadow.
We do not speak or smile.
All the unspoken mysteries of puberty tremble in the air.
I do not know why I cannot speak…and then a voice called her name.
‘The spell was broken.
And all my past was broken, too.
There is a line from Seferis —‘The broken pomegranate is full of stars’?
It was like that.
She disappeared, I sat down again, but to read was impossible.
I went to the wall near the house, and heard a man's voice and silver female voices that faded through a door.
‘I was in a morbid state.
But that first meeting, that mysterious…how shall I say, message from her light, from her light to my shadow, haunted me for weeks.
‘Her parents moved into the house next door.
I met Lily face to face.
And there was some bridge between us.
It was not all my imagination, this something came from her as well as from me — a joint umbilical cord, something we dared not speak of, of course, yet which we both knew was there.
‘She was not unlike me in many ordinary ways.
She too had few friends in London.
And the final touch to this fairy story was that she too was musical.
Not very strikingly gifted, but musical.
Her father was a peculiar man, Irish, with private means, and with a passion for music.
He played the flute very well.
Of course he had to meet Bruneau, who sometimes came to our house, and through Bruneau he met Dolmetsch, who interested him in the recorder.
Another forgotten instrument in those days.
I remember Lily playing her first solo on a flat-sounding descant recorder made by Dolmetsch and bought for her by her father.
‘Our two families grew very close.
I accompanied Lily, we sometimes played duets, sometimes her father would join us, sometimes the two mothers would sing.
We discovered a whole new continent of music.
The Fitzwilliam Virginal Book, Arbeau, Frescobaldi, Froberger — in those years people suddenly realized that there had been music before 1700.’
He paused.
I wanted to light a cigarette, but more than that I wanted not to distract him; his reaching back.
So I held the cigarette between my fingers, and waited.
‘She had, yes, I suppose a Botticelli beauty, long fair hair, grey-violet eyes.
But that makes her sound too pale, too Pre-Raphaelite.
She had something that is gone from the world, from the female world.
A sweetness without sentimentality, a limpidity without naivety.
She was so easy to hurt, to tease.
And when she teased, it was like a caress.
I make her sound too colourless to you.
Of course, in those days, what we young men looked for was not so much the body as the soul.
Lily was a very pretty girl.
But it was her soul that was sans pareil .
‘No obstacles except those of propriety were ever put between us.
I said just now that we were alike in interests and tastes.
But we were opposites in temperament.
Lily was always so very self-controlled, patient, helping.
I was temperamental.
Moody.
And very selfish.
I never saw her hurt anyone or anything.
But if I wanted something I wanted it at once.
Lily used to disgust me with myself.
I used to think of my Greek blood as dark blood.
Almost Negro blood.
‘And then too I soon began to love her physically.
Whereas she loved me, or treated me, as a brother.
Of course we knew we were going to marry, we promised ourselves to each other when she was only sixteen.
But I was hardly ever allowed to kiss her.
You cannot imagine this.
To be so close to a girl and yet so rarely be able to caress her.
My desires were very innocent.
I had all the usual notions of the time about the need for chastity.
But I was not completely English.
‘There was o Pappous — my grandfather — really my mother's uncle.
He had become a naturalized Englishman, but he never carried his anglophilia to the point of being puritan, or even respectable.
He was not, I think, a very wicked old man.
What I knew of him corrupted me far less than the false ideas I conceived.
I always spoke with him in Greek, and as you perhaps realize, Greek is a naturally sensual and uneuphemistic language.
I surreptitiously read certain books I found on his shelves.
I saw La Vie Parisienne .
I came one day on a folder full of tinted engravings.
And so I began to have erotic daydreams.
The demure Lily in her straw hat, a hat I could describe to you now, still, as well as if I had it here in front of me, the crown swathed in a pale tulle the colour of a summer haze…in a long-sleeved, high-necked, pink-and-white striped blouse…a dark-blue hobble skirt, beside whom I walked across Regent's Park in the spring of 1914.
The entranced girl I stood behind in the gallery at Covent Garden in June, nearly fainting in the heat — such a summer, that year — to hear Chaliapin in Prince Igor …
Lily — she became in my mind at night the abandoned young prostitute.
I thought I was very abnormal to have created this second Lily from the real one.
I was bitterly ashamed again of my Greek blood.
Yet possessed by it.
I blamed everything on that, and my mother suffered, poor woman.
My father's family had already humiliated her enough, without her own son joining in.
‘I was ashamed then.
I am proud now to have Greek and Italian and English blood and even some Celtic blood.
One of my father's grandmothers was a Scotswoman.
I am European.
That is all that matters to me.
But in 1914 I wanted to be purely English so as to be able to offer myself untainted to Lily.
‘You know, of course, that something far more monstrous than my adolescent Arabian Nights was being imagined in the young mind  of twentieth-century Europe.
I was just eighteen.
The war began.
They were unreal, the first days.
So much peace and plenty, for so long a time.
In the collective unconscious, perhaps everyone wanted a change, a purge.
A holocaust.
But it appeared to us unpolitical citizens a matter of pride, of purely military pride.
Something which the Regular Army and His Majesty's invincible Navy would settle.
There was no conscription, no feeling in my world, of necessity to volunteer.
It never crossed my mind that I might one day have to fight.
Moltke, Bülow, Foch, Haig, French — the names meant nothing.
But then came the sombre coup l'archet of Mons and Le Cateau.
That was totally new.
The efficiency of the Germans, the horror stories about the Prussian Guards, the Belgian outrages, the black shock of the casualty lists.
Kitchener.
The Million Army.
And then in September the battle of the Marne — that was no longer cricket.
Eight hundred thousand — imagine them drawn up down there on the sea — eight hundred thousand candles all blown out in one gigantic breath.
‘December came.
The ‘flappers’ and the ‘nuts’had disappeared.
My father told me one evening that neither he nor my mother would think the worse of me if I did not go.
I had started at the Royal College of Music, and the atmosphere there was at first hostile to volunteering.
The war had nothing to do with art or artists.
I remember my parents and Lily's discussing the war.
They agreed it was inhuman.
But my father's conversation with me became strained.
He became a special constable, a member of the local emergency committee.
Then the son of his head clerk was killed in action.
He told us that one silent dinner-time, and left my mother and me alone immediately afterwards.
Nothing was said, but everything was plain.
One day soon afterwards, Lily and I stood and watched a contingent of troops marching through the streets.
It was wet after rain, the pavements were shining.
They were going to France, and someone beside us said they were volunteers.
I watched their singing faces in the yellow of the gas-lamps.
The cheering people around us.
The smell of wet serge.
They were drunk, marchers and watchers, exalted out of themselves, their faces set in the rictus of certainty.
Medieval in their certainty.
I had not then heard the famous phrase.
But this was le consentement frémissant à la guerre .
‘They are mad ,I said to Lily.
She did not seem to hear me.
But  when they had gone she turned and said, If I was going to die tomorrow I should be mad.
It stunned me.
We went home in silence.
And all the way she hummed, I now — but could not then — believe without malice, a song of the day.’
He paused, then half sung it:
‘'We shall miss you, we shall kiss you, But we think you ought to go.’
‘I felt like a small boy beside her.
Once again I blamed my miserable Greek blood.
It had made me a coward as well as a lecher.
I see, when I look back, that indeed it had.
Because I was less a true coward, a calculating coward, than someone so innocent, or so Greek, that he could not see what the war had to do with him.
Social responsibility has never been a Greek characteristic.
‘When we reached our houses, Lily kissed my cheek and ran in.
I understood.
She could not apologize, but she could still pity.
I spent a night and a day and a second night in agony.
The next day I saw Lily and told her I was going to volunteer.
All the blood left her cheeks.
Then she burst into tears and threw herself into my arms.
So did my mother when I told her.
But hers was a purer grief.
‘I was passed fit, accepted.
I was a hero.
Lily's father presented me with an old pistol he had.
My father opened champagne.
And then when I got to my room, and sat on my bed with the pistol in my hands, I cried.
Not from fear — for the sheer nobility of what I was doing.
I had never felt public-spirited before.
And I also thought that I had conquered that Greek half of me.
I was fully English at last.
‘I was pushed into the 13th London Rifles — Princess Louise's Kensington Regiment.
There I became two people — one who watched and one who tried to forget that the other watched.
We were trained less to kill than to be killed.
Taught to advance at two-pace intervals — against guns that fired two hundred and fifty bullets a minute.
The Germans and the French did the same.
No doubt we should have objected if we had ever seriously thought about action.
But the current myth at that time maintained that the volunteers were to be used only for guard and communication duties.
The regulars and the reservists were the fighting troops.
Besides, every week we were told that because of its enormous cost the war could not last another month.’
I heard him move in his chair.
In the silence that followed I waited for him to continue.
But he said nothing.
The stars shimmered in their dustless, glittering clouds; the terrace was like a stage beneath them.
‘A glass of brandy?’
‘I hope you're not going to stop.’
‘Let us have some brandy.’
He stood up and lit the candle.
Then he disappeared.
I lay in my chair and stared up at the stars.
1914 and 1953 were aeons apart; 1914 was on a planet circling one of those furthest faintest stars.
The vast stretch, the pace of time.
Then they came again, those footsteps.
This time, they approached.
It was the same rapid walk.
But it was much too warm for rapid walking.
Someone wanted to reach the house urgently, and without being seen.
I got quickly to the parapet.
I was just in time to glimpse a pale shape at the far end of the house move up the steps and under the colonnade.
I could not see well, my eyes had been dazzled, after the darkness, by the candle.
But it was not Maria; a whiteness, a flowing whiteness, a long coat or a dressing-gown — I had only a second's sight, but I knew it was a woman and I knew it was not an old woman.
I suspected, too, that I had been meant to see her.
Because if one wanted to get into the house unheard, one wouldn't cross the gravel, but approach the house from the rear, or the far side.
There was a sound from the bedroom and Conchis appeared in the lamplit doorway, carrying a tray with a bottle and two glasses.
I waited till he had set it by the candle.
‘You know someone has just come in downstairs.’
He betrayed not the least surprise.
He uncorked the bottle and carefully poured the brandy.
‘A man or a woman?’
‘A woman.’
‘Ah.’
He handed me my brandy.
‘This is made at the monastery of Arkadion in Crete.’
He snuffed the candle and went back to his chair.
I remained standing.
‘You did say you lived alone.’
‘I said that I liked to give the islanders the impression that I lived alone.’
The dryness in his voice made me feel that I was being very naive.
The woman was simply his mistress, whom for some reason he did  not want me to meet; or who perhaps did not want to meet me.
I went and sat down on the lounging chair.
‘I'm being tactless.
Forgive me.’
‘Not tactless.
Perhaps a little lacking in imagination.’
‘I thought perhaps I was meant to notice what obviously I'm not meant to notice.’
‘Noticing is not a matter of choice, Nicholas.
But explaining is.’
‘Of course.’
‘Patience.’
‘I'm sorry.’
‘Do you like the brandy?’
‘Very much.’
‘It always reminds me of Armagnac.
Now.
Shall I continue?’
As he began to speak again I smelt the night air, I felt the hard concrete under my feet, I touched a piece of chalk in my pocket.
But a strong feeling persisted, when I swung my feet off the ground and lay back, that something was trying to slip between me and reality.
19
‘I found myself in France a little more than six weeks after I enlisted.
I had no aptitude with the rifle.
I could not even bayonet an effigy of Kaiser Bill convincingly.
But I was considered ‘sharp’ and they also discovered that I could run quite fast.
So I was selected as company runner, which meant that I was also a kind of servant, I forget the word…’
‘Batman.’
‘That is it.
My training company commander was a Regular Army officer of thirty or so.
His name was Captain Montague.
He had broken his leg some time before and so had been unfit for active service till then.
A kind of phosphorescent pale elegance about his face.
A delicate, gallant moustache.
He was one of the most supremely stupid men I have ever met.
He taught me a great deal.
‘Before our training was finished, he received an urgent posting to France.
That same day he told me, as if he were giving me a magnificent present, that he thought he could pull strings and have me  posted with him.
Only a man as blank as he would have failed to see the hollowness of my enthusiasm.
But unfortunately he had grown fond of me.
‘He had a brain capable of only one idea at a time.
With him it was the offensive à outrance — the headlong attack.
Foch's great contribution to the human race.
‘The force of the shock is the mass,’ he used to say —‘the force of the mass is the impulsion and the force of the impulsion is the morale.
High morale, high impulsion, high shock — victory!’
Thump on the table —‘Victory!’
He made us all learn it by heart.
At bayonet-drill.
Vic-tor-ee!
Poor fool.
‘I spent a last two days with my parents and Lily.
She and I swore undying love.
The idea of heroic sacrifice had contaminated her, as it had contaminated my father.
My mother said nothing, except an old Greek proverb: A dead man cannot be brave.
I remembered that later.
‘We went straight to the front.
One of the company commanders there had died of pneumonia, and it was his place Montague had to take.
This is early in 1915.
It sleeted and rained incessantly.
We spent long hours in stationary trains in railway-sidings, in grey towns under greyer skies.
One knew the troops who had been in action.
The ones who sang their way to death, the new recruits, were the dupes of the romance of war.
But the others were dupes of the reality of war, of the ultimate Totentanz .
Like those sad old men and women who haunt every casino, they knew the wheel must always win in the end.
But they could not force themselves to leave.
‘We spent a few days on manoeuvres.
And then one day Montague addressed the company.
We were going into battle, a new sort of battle, one in which victory was certain.
One that was going to bring us to Berlin in a month.
The night of the next day we entrained.
The train stopped somewhere in the middle of a flat plain and we marched eastwards.
Dykes and willows in the darkness.
Endless drizzle.
It crept down the columns that the place we were to attack was a village called Neuve Chapelle.
And that the Germans were to receive something revolutionary.
A giant gun.
A mass attack by the new aeroplanes.
‘After a while we turned into a field, thick with mud, and were marched up to some firm-buildings.
Two hours’ rest before taking up position for the attack.
No one can have slept.
It was very cold, and fires were forbidden.
My real self began to appear, I began to be afraid.
But I told myself that if I was ever to be truly frightened, I should have known it before then.
This is what I had willed to execute.
That is how war corrupts us.
It plays on our pride in our own free will.
‘Before dawn we filed slowly forward, many stops, to the assault positions.
I overheard Montague talking with a staff officer.
The entire First Army, Haig's, was engaged, with the Second in support.
And there seemed to me a safety, a kind of warmth in such numbers.
But then we entered the trenches.
The terrible trenches, with their stench of the urinal.
And then the first shells fell near us.
I was so innocent that in spite of our so-called training, of all the propaganda, I had never really been able to believe that someone might want to kill me.
We were told to halt and stand against the walls.
The shells hissed, whined, crashed.
Then silence.
Then a splatter of falling clods.
And shivering, I awoke from my long sleep.
‘I think the first thing I saw was the isolation of each.
It is not the state of war that isolates.
It is well known, it brings people together.
But the battlefield — that is something different.
Because that is when the real enemy, death, appears.
I no longer saw any warmth in numbers.
I saw only Thanatos in them, my death.
Just as much in my own comrades, in Montague, as in the invisible Germans.
‘The madness of it, Nicholas.
Standing in holes in the ground.
thousands of men, English, Scots, Indians, French, Germans, one March morning — and what for?
If there is a hell, then it is that.
Not flames, not pitchforks.
But a place without the possibility of reason, like Neuve Chapelle that day.
‘A reluctant light began to spread over the eastern sky.
The drizzle stopped.
A trill of song from somewhere outside the trench.
I recognized a hedge-sparrow, the last voice from the other world.
We moved forward again some way and into the assault trenches — the Rifle Brigade was to form the second wave of the attack.
The German trenches were less than two hundred yards ahead, with our front trench only a hundred yards from theirs.
Montague looked at his watch.
He raised his hand.
There was complete silence.
His hand fell.
For some ten seconds nothing happened.
Then, far behind us, there was a gigantic drum-roll, a thousand tympani.
A pause.
And then the whole world ahead exploded.
Everyone ducked.
A shaking  of earth, sky, mind, all.
You cannot imagine what the first few minutes of that bombardment were like.
It was the first massive artillery barrage of the war, the heaviest ever delivered.
‘A runner came from the front trenches, down the communicating trench.
His face and uniform were streaked with red.
Montague asked if he was hit.
He said everyone in the front trenches was splashed with blood from the German trenches.
They were so close.
If only they could have stopped to think how close…
‘After half an hour the barrage was moving over the village.
Montague, at the periscope, cried ‘They're up!’
And then —‘The Boches are done for!’
He leapt on to the parapet, and waved to all of us around him to look over the edge of the trench.
A hundred yards ahead a long line of men trotted slowly across the scarred earth towards some shattered trees and broken walls.
A few isolated shots.
A man fell.
Then stood up and ran on.
He had simply tripped.
The men about me began to shout as the line reached the first houses and a cheer came back.
A red light soared up, and then we in our turn advanced.
It was difficult to walk.
And as we went forward, fear was driven out by horror.
Not a shot was fired at us.
But the ground became increasingly hideous.
Nameless things, pink, white, red, mud-bespattered, still with rags of grey or khaki.
We crossed our own front trench and traversed the no-man's-land.
When we came to the German trenches there was nothing to see.
Everything had been either buried or blown out of them.
There we halted for a moment, lying down in the craters, almost in peace.
To the north the firing was very intense.
The Cameronians had been caught on the wire.
In twenty minutes they lost every officer except one.
And four-fifths of their men were killed.
‘Figures appeared between the wrecked cottages ahead, their hands high.
Some of them being held up by friends.
They were the first prisoners.
Many of them were yellow with lyddite.
Yellow men out of the white curtain of light.
One walked straight towards me, lurching, with his head tilted, as if in a dream, and fell straight into a deep crater.
A moment later he reappeared, crawling up over the edge, then slowly standing.
Lurching forward again.
Other prisoners came weeping.
One vomited blood in front of us, and collapsed.
‘Then we were running towards the village.
We came into what  must have once been a street.
Desolation.
Rubble, fragments of plastered wall, broken rafters, the yellow splashes of lyddite everywhere.
The drizzle that had started again gleaming on the stones.
On the skin of corpses.
Many Germans had been caught in the houses.
In ten minutes I saw a summary of the whole butcher's shop of war.
The blood, the gaping holes, the bone sticking out of flesh, the stench of burst intestines — I am telling you this only because the effect on me, a boy who had never seen even a peacefully dead body before that day, was one I should never have predicted.
It was not nausea and terror.
I saw several men being sick.
But I was not.
It was an intense new conviction.
Nothing could justify this.
It was a thousand times better that England should be a Prussian colony.
One reads that such scenes give the green soldier nothing but a mad lust to kill in his turn.
But I had exactly the contrary feeling.
I had a mad lust not to be killed.’
He stood up.
‘I have a test for you.’
‘A test?’
He went into his bedroom, returned almost at once with the oil-lamp that had been on the table when we had dinner.
In the white pool of light he put what he had brought.
I saw a dice, a shaker, a saucer, and a pill-box.
I looked up at him on the other side of the table, at his severe eyes on mine.
‘I am going to explain to you why we went to war.
Why mankind always goes to war.
It is not social or political.
It is not countries that go to war, but men.
It is like salt.
Once one has been to war, one has salt for the rest of one's life.
Do you understand?’
‘Of course.’
‘So in my perfect republic it would be simple.
There would be a test for all young people at the age of twenty-one.
They would go to a hospital where they would throw a dice.
One of the six numbers would mean death.
If they threw that they would be painlessly killed.
No mess.
No bestial cruelty.
No destruction of innocent onlookers.
But one clinical throw of the dice.’
‘Certainly an improvement on war.’
‘You think so?’
‘Obviously.’
‘You are sure?’
‘If it was possible.’
‘You said you never saw action in the last war?’
‘No.’
He took the pill-box, and shook out, of all things, six large molars; yellowish, two or three with old stoppings.
‘These were issued to spies on both sides during the last war, for use if they were interrogated.’
He placed one of the teeth on the saucer, then with a small downward jab of the shaker crushed it; it was brittle, like a liqueur chocolate.
But the odour of the colourless liquid was of bitter almonds, acrid and terrifying.
He hastily removed the saucer at arm's length to the far corner of the terrace; then returned.
‘Suicide pills?’
‘Precisely.
Hydrocyanic acid.’
He picked up the dice, and showed me six sides.
I smiled.
‘You want me to throw?’
‘I offer you an entire war in one second.’
‘Supposing I don't want it?’
‘Think.
In a minute from now you could be saying, I risked death.
I threw for life, and I won life.
It is a very wonderful feeling.
To have survived.
‘Wouldn't a corpse be rather embarrassing for you?’
I was still smiling, but it was wearing thin.
‘Not at all.
I could easily prove it was suicide.’
He stared at me, and his eyes went through me like a trident through a fish.
With ninety-nine persons out of a hundred, I would have known it was a bluff; but he was different, and a nervousness had hold of me before I could resist it.
‘Russian roulette.’
‘Less fallible.
These pills work within a few seconds.’
‘I don't want to play.’
‘Then you are a coward, my friend.’
He leant back and watched me.
‘I thought you believed brave men were fools.’
‘Because they persist in rolling the dice again and again.
But a young man who will not risk his life even once is both a fool and a coward.’
‘Did you try this on my predecessors?’
‘John Leverrier was neither a fool nor a coward.
Even Mitford was not the second.’
And he had me.
It was absurd, but I would not let my bluff be called.
I reached for the shaker.
‘Wait.’
He leant forward, and put his hand on my wrist; then placed a tooth by my side.
‘I am not playing at make-believe.
You must swear to me that if the number is six you will take the pill.’
His face was totally serious.
I felt myself wanting to swallow.
‘I swear.’
‘By all that is most sacred to you.’
I hesitated, shrugged, then said, ‘By all that is most sacred to me.’
He held out the dice and I put it in the shaker.
I shook it loosely and quickly and threw the dice.
It ran over the cloth, hit the brass base of the lamp, rebounded, wavered, fell.
It was a six.
Conchis was absolutely motionless, watching me.
I knew at once that I was never, never going to pick up the pill.
I could not look at him.
Perhaps fifteen seconds passed.
Then I smiled, looked at him and shook my head.
He reached out again, his eyes still on me, took the tooth beside me, put it in his mouth and bit it and swallowed the liquid.
I went red.
Still watching me, he reached out and put the dice in the shaker, and threw it.
It was a six.
Then again.
And again it was a six.
He spat out the empty shell of the tooth.
‘What you have just decided is precisely what I decided that morning forty years ago at Neuve Chapelle.
You have behaved exactly as any intelligent human being should behave.
I congratulate you.’
‘But what you said?
The perfect republic?’
‘All perfect republics are perfect nonsense.
The craving to risk death is our last great perversion.
We come from night, we go into night.
Why live in night?’
‘But the dice was loaded.’
‘Patriotism, propaganda, professional honour,esprit de corps — what are all those things?
Cogged dice.
There is just one small difference, Nicholas.
On the other table these are real.’
He put the remaining teeth back in the box.
‘Not just ratafia in coloured plastic.’
‘And the other two — how did they react?’
He smiled.
‘Another means society employs to control hazard — to prevent a freedom of choice in its slaves — is to tell them that the past was nobler than the present.
John Leverrier was a Catholic.
And wiser than you.
He refused even to be tempted.’
‘And Mitford?’
‘I do not waste time teaching the blind.’
His eyes lingered a dry moment on mine, as if to make sure I took the implicit compliment; and then, as if to limit it, he turned out the lamp.
I was left in more than the literal darkness.
What last thin pretence had remained that I was merely a guest lay discarded.
He had evidently been through all this before.
The horrors of Neuve Chapelle had been convincing enough as he described them, yet they turned artificial with this knowledge of repetition.
Their living reality became a matter of technique, of realism gained through rehearsal.
It was like being earnestly persuaded an object was new by a seller who simultaneously and deliberately revealed it must be second-hand: an affront to all probability.
I was not to believe in appearances…but why, why, why?
Meanwhile he had started weaving his web again; and once more I flew to meet it.
20
‘The middle six hours of that day we passed in waiting.
The Germans hardly shelled us at all.
They had been bombarded to their knees.
The obvious thing would have been to attack at once.
But it takes a very brilliant general, a Napoleon, to see the obvious.
‘About three o'clock the Gurkhas came alongside us and we were told an attack on the Aubers Ridge was to be launched.
We were to be the first line.
Just before half past three we fixed bayonets.
I was beside Captain Montague, as usual.
I think he knew only one thing about himself.
That he was fearless, and ready to swallow the acid.
He kept looking along the lines of men beside him.
He scorned the use of a periscope, and stood and poked his head over the parapet.
The Germans still seemed stunned.
‘We began to walk forward.
Montague and the sergeant-major  called incessantly, keeping us in line.
We had to cross a cratered ploughed field to a hedge of poplars, and then across another small field lay our objective, a bridge.
I suppose we had gone about half the distance we had to cover, and then we broke into a trot and some of the men began to shout.
The Germans seemed to stop firing altogether.
Montague called triumphantly.
‘On, lads!
Victo ree !’
‘They were the last words he ever spoke.
It was a trap.
Five or six machine guns scythed us like grass.
Montague spun round and fell at my feet.
He lay on his back, staring up at me, one eye gone.
I collapsed beside him.
The air was nothing but bullets.
I pressed my face right into the mud, I was urinating, certain that at any moment I should be killed.
Someone came beside me.
It was the sergeant-major.
Some of the men were firing back, but blindly.
In despair.
The sergeant-major, I do not know why, began dragging Montague's corpse backwards.
Feebly, I tried to help.
We slipped down into a small crater.
The back of Montague's head had been blown away, but his face still wore an idiot's grin, as if he were laughing in his sleep, mouth wide open.
A face I have never forgotten.
The last smile of a stage of evolution.
‘The firing stopped.
Then, like a flock of frightened sheep, everyone who survived began to run back towards the village.
I as well.
I had lost even the will to be a coward.
Many were shot in the back as they ran, and I was one of the few who reached the trench we had started from unhurt — alive, even.
We were no sooner there than the shelling began.
Our own shells.
Owing to the bad weather conditions, the artillery were shooting blind.
Or perhaps still according to some plan established days before.
Such irony is not a by-product of war.
But typical of it.
‘A wounded lieutenant was now in command.
He crouched beside me, with a great gash across his cheek.
His eyes burned dully.
He was no longer a nice upright young Englishman, but a neolithic beast.
Cornered, uncomprehending, in a sullen rage.
Perhaps we all looked like that.
The longer one survived the more unreal it was.
‘More troops came up with us, and a colonel appeared.
Aubers Ridge must be captured.
We had to have the bridge by nightfall.
But I had meanwhile had time to think.
‘I saw that this cataclysm must be an expiation for some barbarous crime of civilization, some terrible human lie.
What the lie was, I had  too little knowledge of history or science to know then.
I know now it was our believing that we were fulfilling some end, serving some plan — that all would come out well in the end, because there was some great plan over all.
Instead of the reality.
There is no plan.
All is hazard.
And the only thing that will preserve us is ourselves.’
He was silent; I could just make out his face, his staring to sea, as if Neuve Chapelle was out there, grey mud and hell, visible.
‘We attacked again.
I should have liked simply to disobey orders and stay in the trench.
But of course cowards were treated as deserters, and shot.
So I clambered up with the rest when the order came.
A sergeant shouted at us to run.
Exactly the same thing happened as earlier that afternoon.
There was a little firing from the Germans, just enough to bait the trap.
But I knew that there were half a dozen eyes watching down their machine-guns.
My one hope was that they would be truly German.
That is, methodical, and not open fire until the same point as before.
‘We came to within fifty yards of that point.
Two or three bullets ricocheted close by.
I clasped my heart, dropped my rifle, staggered.
Just in front of me I had seen a large shell-crater, an old one.
I stumbled, fell and rolled over the edge of it.
I heard the cry ‘Keep on!’
I lay with my feet in a pool of water, and waited.
A few seconds later there was the violent unleashing of death I had expected.
Someone leapt in the other side of the shell-hole.
He must have been a Catholic, because he was gabbling Ave's.
Then there was another scuffle and I heard him go in a falling of bits of mud.
I drew my feet out of the water.
But I did not open my eyes until the firing had stopped.
‘I was not alone in that shell-hole.
Half in, half out of the water opposite me was a greyish mass.
A German corpse, long dead, half eaten by rats.
Its stomach gaped, and it lay like a woman with a stillborn child beside it.
And it smelt…it smelt as you can imagine.
‘I stayed in that crater all night.
I accustomed myself to the mephitic stench.
It grew cold, and I thought I had a fever.
But I made up my mind not to move until the battle was over.
I was without shame.
I even hoped the Germans would overrun our positions and so allow me to give myself up as a prisoner.
‘Fever.
But what I thought was fever was the fire of existence, the passion to exist.
I know that now.
A delirium vivens .
I do not mean to  defend myself.
All deliria are more or less anti-social, and I speak clinically, not philosophically.
But I possessed that night an almost total recall of physical sensations.
And these recalls, of even the simplest and least sublime things, a glass of water, the smell of frying bacon, seemed to me to surpass or at least equal the memories of the greatest art, the noblest music, even my tenderest moments with Lily.
I experienced the very opposite of what the German and French metaphysicians of our century have assured us is the truth: that all that is other is hostile to the individual.
To me all that is other seemed exquisite.
Even that corpse, even the squealing rats.
To be able to experience, never mind that it was cold and hunger and nausea, was a miracle.
Try to imagine that one day you discover you have a sixth, a till then unimagined new sense — something not comprehended in feeling, seeing, the conventional five.
But a far profounder sense, the source from which all others spring.
The word ‘being’ no longer passive and descriptive, but active…almost imperative.
‘Before the night was ended I knew that I had had what religious people would call a conversion.
A light in heaven indeed shone on me, for there were constant star-shells.
But I had no sense of God.
Only of having leapt a lifetime in one night.’
He was silent for a moment.
I wished there was someone beside me, an Alison, some friend, who could savour and share the living darkness, the stars, the terrace, the voice.
But they would have had to pass through all those last months with me.
The passion to exist: I forgave myself my failure to die.
‘I am trying to describe to you what happened to me, what I was.
Not what I should have been.
Not the rights and wrongs of conscientious objection.
I beg you to remember that.
‘Before dawn there was another German bombardment.
They attacked at first light, their generals having made exactly the same mistake as ours the day before.
They suffered even heavier casualties.
They got past my crater and to the trenches we had attacked from, but they were driven back again almost at once.
All I knew of this was the noise.
And the foot of a German soldier.
He used my shoulder for a support while he was firing.
‘Night fell again.
There was war to the south, but our sector was quiet.
The battle was over.
Our casualties were some thirteen thousand  killed.
Thirteen thousand minds, memories, loves, sensations, worlds, universes — because the human mind is more a universe than the universe itself- and all for a few hundred yards of useless mud.
‘At midnight I crawled back to the village on my stomach.
I was afraid I might be shot by a startled sentry.
But the place was manned by corpses, and I was in the middle of a desert of the dead.
I found my way down a communication trench.
There, too, only silence and corpses.
Then a little further on I heard English voices ahead, and called out.
It was a party of stretcher-bearers, passing round for a final ascertaining that only the dead remained.
I said I had been knocked out by a shell-blast.
‘They did not doubt my story.
Stranger things had happened.
From them I learnt where what was left of my battalion were.
I had no plan, nothing but the instinct of a child to return to its home.
But as the Spanish say, a drowning man soon learns to swim.
I knew I must be of officially dead.
That if I ran away, at least no one would be running after me.
By dawn I was ten miles behind the lines.
I had a little money and French had always been the lingua franca of my home.
I found peasants who sheltered and fed me that next day.
The next night I marched again, over the fields, always westwards, across the Artois towards Boulogne.
‘A week later, travelling always like this, like the émigrés in the 1790s, I arrived there.
It was full of soldiers and of military police, and I was near despair.
Of course it was impossible to board a returning troopship without papers.
I thought of presenting myself at the docks and saying that my pocket had been picked…but I lacked the impudence to carry it off.
Then one day fate was kind to me.
She gave me an opportunity to pick pockets myself.
I met a soldier from the Rifle Brigade who was very drunk, and I made him drunker.
I caught the leave ship while he, poor man, was still snoring in a room above an estaminet near the station.
‘And then my real troubles began.
But I have talked enough.’
21
There was silence.
The crickets chirped.
Some night-bird, high overhead, croaked primevally in the stars.
‘What happened when you got home?’
‘It is late.’
‘But —’
‘Tomorrow.’
He lit the lamp again.
As he straightened up from adjusting the wick, he stared at me.
‘You are not ashamed to be the guest of a traitor to his country?’
‘I don't think you were a traitor to the human race.’
We moved towards his bedroom windows.
‘The human race is unimportant.
It is the self that must not be betrayed.’
‘I suppose one could say that Hitler didn't betray his self.’
He turned.
‘You are right.
He did not.
But millions of Germans did betray their selves.
That was the tragedy.
Not that one man had the courage to be evil.
But that millions had not the courage to be good.’
He led the way through to my room, and lit the lamp there for me.
‘Good night, Nicholas.’
‘Good night.
And…’
But his hand was up, silencing me and what he must have guessed were to be my thanks.
Then he was gone.
When I came back from the bathroom, I looked at my watch.
It was a quarter to one.
I undressed and turned out the lamp, then stood a moment by the open window.
There was a vague smell of drains in the still air, of a cesspool somewhere.
I got into bed, and lay thinking about Conchis.
Or losing him, since all my thoughts ended in paradox.
If in one way he seemed much more human, more normally fallible, than  before, that was tainted by what seemed like a lack of virginity in the telling.
Calculating frankness is very different from the spontaneous variety; there was some fatal extra dimension in his objectivity, which was much more that of a novelist before a character than of even the oldest, most changed man before his own real past self.
It was finally much more like biography than the autobiography it purported to be; patently more concealed lesson than true confession.
It was not that I was so self-blind that I saw nothing to be learnt.
But how could he presume this on so little knowledge of me?
Why should he care?
And then there were the footsteps, a whole tangle of unrelated ikons and incidents, the photo on the curiosa cabinet, oblique looks, Alison, the little girl called Lily with her head in sunlight…
I was about to go to sleep.
At first hallucinatorily faint, impossible to pinpoint, it began.
I thought it must be coming through the walls from a gramophone in Conchis's bedroom.
I sat up, put my ear to the wall, listened.
And then I leapt out of bed and went to the window.
It was creeping down from outside, from somewhere far to the north, well up in the hills a mile or more away.
There was no light, no obvious sound except the crickets in the garden.
Only, so barely perceptible that it fringed the imagined, this faintest drone of men, a lot of men, singing.
I thought: fishermen.
But why should they be in the hills?
Then shepherds — but shepherds are solitaries.
It grew a little clearer, as if on a gust of wind — but there was no wind; swelling, then fading away.
I thought for an incredible moment that I caught something familiar in the sound — but it couldn't be.
And it sank away, almost to complete silence.
Then — unimaginable the strangeness of it, the shock of it — the sound swelled again and I knew beyond doubt what was being sung up there.
It was ‘Tipperary’.
Whether it was the distance, whether the record, because it must have been a record, had been deliberately slowed — there seemed to be some tonal distortion as well— I couldn't tell, but the song came with a dreamlike slowness and dimness, almost as if it was being sung out of the stars and had had to cross all that night and space to reach me.
I went to the door of my room and opened it.
I had some idea that the record-player must be in Conchis's room.
Somehow he had had the sound relayed to a speaker, or speakers, in the hills — perhaps  that was what was in the little room, relaying equipment, a generator.
But there was absolute silence in the house.
I closed the door and leant back against it.
The voices and the song washed dimly down out of the night, through the pine-forest, over the house and out to sea.
Suddenly the humour, the absurd, tender, touching poetry of the whole thing, made me smile.
It must be some elaborate joke of Conchis's, mounted for my exclusive benefit; and as a subtle test of my own humour, tact and intelligence.
There was no need to rush about trying to discover how it was done.
I should find that out in the morning.
Meanwhile, I was to enjoy it.
I went back to the window.
The voices had become very dim, barely audible; but something else had grown penetratingly strong.
It was the cesspool smell I had noticed earlier.
Now it was an atrocious stench that infested the windless air, a nauseating compound of decomposing flesh and excrement, so revolting that I had to hold my nose and breathe through my mouth.
Below my room there was a narrow passage between the cottage and the house.
I craned down, because the source of the smell seemed so close.
It was clear to me that the smell was connected with the singing.
I remembered that corpse in the shell-hole.
But I could see nothing anomalous, no movement.
The sound faded, went completely.
After a few minutes, the smell too was fainter.
I stood another ten or fifteen minutes, straining eyes and ears for the faintest stir.
But there was none.
And there was no sound inside the house.
No creeping up the stairs, no doors gently closed, nothing.
The crickets chirped, the stars pulsed, the experience was wiped clean.
I sniffed at the window.
The foul odour still lingered, but under the normal antiseptic smell of the pines and the sea, not over it.
Soon it was as if I had imagined everything.
I lay awake for at least another hour.
Nothing more happened; and no hypothesis made sense.
I had entered the domaine.
22
Someone was knocking at the door.
Through the shadowy air of the open window, the burning sky.
A fly crawled across the wall above the bed.
I looked at my watch.
It was half past ten.
I went to the door, and heard the slap of Maria's slippers going downstairs.
In the glaring light, the racket of cicadas, the events of the night seemed in some way fictional; as if I must have been slightly drugged.
But I felt perfectly clear-headed.
I dressed and shaved and went down to breakfast under the colonnade.
The taciturn Maria appeared with coffee.
‘O kyrios ?’
I asked.
‘Ephage.
Eine epano .’
Has eaten; is upstairs.
Like the villagers, with foreigners she made no attempt to speak more comprehensibly, but uttered her usual fast slur of vowel-sounds.
I had my breakfast and carried the tray back along the side colonnade and down the steps to the open door of her cottage.
The front room was fitted out as a kitchen.
With its old calendars, its lurid cardboard ikons, its bunches of herbs and shallots and its blue-painted meat-safe hanging from the ceiling, it was like any other cottage living-kitchen on Phraxos.
Only the utensils were rather more ambitious, and the stove larger.
I went in and put the tray on the table.
Maria appeared out of the back room; I glimpsed a large brass bed, more ikons, photographs.
A shadow of a smile creased her mouth; but it was circumstantial, not genuine.
It would have been difficult enough in English to ask questions without appearing to be prying; in my Greek it was impossible.
I hesitated a moment, then saw her face, as blank as the door behind her, and gave up.
I went through the passage between house and cottage to the vegetable garden.
On the western side of the house a shuttered window corresponded to the door at the end of Conchis's bedroom.
It appeared as if there was something more than a cupboard there.
Then I looked up at the north-facing back of the house, at my own room.
It was easy to hide behind the rear wall of the cottage, but the  ground was hard and bare; showed nothing.
I strolled on into the arbour.
The little Priapus threw up his arms at me, jeering his pagan smile at my English face.
No entry.
Ten minutes later I was down on the private beach.
The water, blue and green glass, was for a moment cold, then deliciously cool; I swam out between the steep rocks to the open sea.
After a hundred yards or so I could see behind me the whole cliffed extent of the headland, and the house.
I could even see Conchis, who was sitting where we had sat on the terrace the night before, apparently reading.
After a while he stood up, and I waved.
He raised both his arms in his peculiar hieratic way, a way in which I knew now that there was something deliberately, not fortuitously, symbolic.
The dark figure on the raised white terrace; legate of the sun facing the sun; the most ancient royal power.
He appeared, wished to appear, to survey, to bless, to command;dominus and domaine.
And once again I thought of Prospero; even if he had not said it first, I should have thought of it then.
I dived, but the salt stung my eyes and I surfaced.
Conchis had turned away — to talk with Ariel, who put records on; or with Caliban, who carried a bucket of rotting entrails; or perhaps with…but I turned on my back.
It was ridiculous to build so much on the sound of quick footsteps, the merest glimpse of a glimpse of a white shape.
When I got back to the beach ten minutes later he was sitting on the baulk.
As I came out of the water he stood and said, ‘We will take the boat and go to Petrocaravi.’
Petrocaravi, the ‘ship of stone’, was a deserted islet half a mile off the western tip of Phraxos.
He was dressed in swimming-shorts and a garish red-and-white water-polo player's cap, and in his hand he had the blue rubber flippers and a pair of underwater masks and schnorkels.
I followed his brown old back over the hot stones.
‘Petrocaravi is very interesting underwater.
You will see.’
‘I find Bourani very interesting above water.’
I had come up beside him.
‘I heard voices in the night.’
‘Voices?’
But he showed no surprise.
‘The record.
I've never had an experience quite like it.
An extraordinary idea.’
He didn't answer, but stepped down into the boat and opened the engine housing.
I untied the painter from its iron ring in  the concrete, then squatted on the jetty and watched him fiddle inside the hatch.
‘I suppose you have speakers in the trees.’
‘I heard nothing.’
I teased the painter through my hand, and grinned.
‘But you know I heard something.’
He looked up at me.
‘Because you tell me so.’
‘You're not saying, how extraordinary, voices, what voices.
That would be the normal reaction, wouldn't it?’
He gestured curtly to me to get aboard.
I stepped down and sat on the thwart opposite to him.
‘I only wanted to thank you for organizing a unique experience for me.’
‘I organized nothing.’
‘I find it hard to believe that.’
We remained staring at each other.
The red-and-white skull-cap above the monkey eyes gave him the air of a performing chimpanzee.
And there stood the sun, the sea, the boat, so many unambiguous things, around us.
I still smiled; but he wouldn't smile back.
It was as if I had committed a faux pas by referring to the singing.
He stooped to fit the starting-handle.
‘Here, let me do that.’
I took the handle.
‘The last thing I want to do is to offend you.
I won't mention it again.’
I bent to turn the handle.
Suddenly his hand was on my shoulder.
‘I am not offended, Nicholas.
I do not ask you to believe.
All I ask you is to pretend to believe.
It will be easier.’
It was strange.
By that one gesture and a small shift in expression and tone of voice, he resolved the tension between us.
I knew on the one hand that he was playing some kind of trick on me; a trick like the one with the loaded dice.
On the other, I felt that he had after all taken a sort of liking for me.
I thought, as I heaved at the engine, if this is the price, I'll seem his fool; but not be his fool.
We headed out of the cove.
It was difficult to talk with the engine going, and I stared down through fifty or sixty feet of water to patches of pale rock starred black with sea-urchins.
On Conchis's left side were two puckered scars.
They were both back and front, obviously bullet wounds; and there was another old wound high on his right arm.
I guessed that they came from the execution during the second war.
Sitting there steering he looked ascetic, Ghandi-like; but as we approached Petrocaravi, he stood up, the tiller expertly  against his dark thigh.
Years of sunlight had tanned him to the same mahogany brown as the island fishermen.
The rocks were gigantic boulders of conglomerate, monstrous in their barren strangeness, much larger now we were close to them than I had ever realized from the island.
We anchored about fifty yards away.
He handed me a mask and schnorkel.
At that time they were unobtainable in Greece, and I had never used them before.
I followed the slow, pausing thresh of his feet over a petrified landscape of immense blocks of stone, among which drifted and hovered shoals of fish.
There were flat fish, silvered, aldermanic; slim, darting fish; palindromic fish that peered foully out of crevices; minute poised fish of electric blue, fluttering red-and-black fish, slinking azure-and-green fish.
He showed me an underwater grotto, a light-shafted nave of pale-blue shadows, where the large wrasse floated as if in a trance.
On the far side of the islet the rocks plunged precipitously away into a mesmeric blind indigo.
Conchis raised his head above the surface.
‘I am going back to fetch the boat.
Stay here.’
I swam on.
A shoal of several hundred golden-grey fish followed me.
I turned, they turned.
I swam on, they followed, truly Greek in their obsessive curiosity.
Then I lay over a great slab of rock which warmed the water almost to bath-heat.
The shadow of the boat fell across it.
Conchis led me a little way to a deep fissure between two boulders, and there suspended a piece of white cloth on the end of a line.
I hung like a bird in the water overhead, watching for the octopus he was trying to entice.
Soon a sinuous tentacle slipped out and groped the bait, then other swift tentacles, and he began skilfully to coax the octopus up.
I had tried this myself and knew it was not nearly as simple as the village boys made it seem.
The octopus came reluctantly but inevitably, slow-whirling, flesh of drowned sailors, its suckered arms stretching, reaching, searching.
Conchis suddenly gaffed it into the boat, slashed its sac with a knife, turned it inside out in a moment.
I levered myself aboard.
‘I have caught a thousand in this place.
Tonight another will move into that same hole.
And let himself be caught as easily.’
‘Poor thing.’
‘You notice reality is not necessary.
Even the octopus prefers the ideal.’
A piece of old white sheeting, from which he had torn his  ‘bait’, lay beside him.
I remembered it was Sunday morning; the time for sermons and parables.
He looked up from the puddle of sepia.
‘Well, how do you like the world below?’
‘Fantastic.
Like a dream.’
‘Like humanity.
But in the vocabulary of millions of years ago.’
He threw the octopus under the thwart.
‘Do you think that has a life after death?’
I looked down at the viscid mess and up to meet his dry smile.
The red-and-white skull-cap had tilted slightly.
Now he looked like Picasso imitating Ghandi imitating a buccaneer.
He let in the clutch lever and we moved forward.
I thought of the Marne, of Neuve Chapelle; and shook my head.
He nodded, and raised the white sheeting.
His even teeth gleamed falsely, vividly in the intense sunlight.
Stupidity is lethal, he implied; and look at me, I have survived.
23
We had lunch, a simple Greek meal of goat's-milk cheese and green pepper salad with eggs, under the colonnade.
The cicadas rasped in the surrounding pines, the heat hammered down outside the cool arches.
I had, on the way back, made one more effort to penetrate the situation; by trying, too casually, to get him to talk about Leverrier.
He had hesitated, then glanced at me with a gravity that did not quite hide the smile behind it.
‘Is this how they teach you at Oxford now?
One reads last chapters first?’
And I had had to smile and look down.
If his answer had not quenched my curiosity at all, it had at least jumped another pretence, and moved us on.
In some obscure way, one I was to become very familiar with, it flattered me: I was too intelligent not to be already grasping the rules of the game we played.
It was no good my knowing that old men have conned young ones like that ever since time began.
I still fell for it, as one still falls for the oldest literary devices in the right hands and contexts.
All though the lunch we talked of the undersea world.
For him  it was like a gigantic acrostic, an alchemist's shop where each object had a mysterious value, an inner history that had to be deduced, unravelled, guessed at.
He made natural history sound and feel like something central and poetic; not an activity for Scoutmasters and a butt for Punch jokes.
The meal ended, and he stood up.
He was going upstairs for his siesta.
We would meet again at tea.
‘What will you do?’
I opened the old copy of Time magazine I had beside me.
Tucked carefully inside lay his seventeenth-century pamphlet.
‘You have not read it yet?’
He seemed surprised.
‘I intend to now.’
‘Good.
It is rare.’
He raised his hand and went in.
I crossed the gravel and started idly off through the trees to the east.
The ground rose slightly, then dipped; after a hundred yards or so a shallow outcrop of rocks hid the house.
Before me lay a deep gulley choked with oleanders and thorny scrub, which descended precipitously down to the private beach.
I sat back against a pine-stem and became lost in the pamphlet.
It contained the posthumous confessions and letters and prayers of a Robert Foulkes, vicar of Stanton Lacy in Shropshire.
Although a scholar, and married with two sons, in 1677 he had got a young girl with child, and then murdered the child; for which he was condemned to death.
He wrote the fine muscular pre-Dryden English of the mid-seventeenth century.
He had ‘mounted to the top of impiety’, even though he had known that ‘the minister is the people's Looking-glass’.
‘Crush the cockatrice,’ he groaned, from his death-cell.
‘I am dead in law’— but of the girl he denied that he had ‘attempted to vitiate her at Nine years old’; for ‘upon the word of a dying man, both her Eyes did see, and her Hands did act in all that was done’.
The pamphlet was some forty pages long, and it took me half an hour to read.
I skipped the prayers, but it was as Conchis had said, more real than any historical novel — more moving, more evocative, more human.
I lay back and stared up through the intricate branches into the sky.
It seemed strange, to have that old pamphlet by me, that tiny piece of a long-past England that had found its way to this Greek island, these pine trees, this pagan earth.
I closed my eyes and watched  the sheets of warm colour that came as I relaxed or increased the tension of the lids.
Then I slept.
When I woke, I looked at my watch without raising my head.
Half an hour had passed.
After a few minutes more of dozing I sat up.
He was there, standing in the dark ink-green shadow under a dense carob tree seventy or eighty yards away on the other side of the gulley, at the same level as myself.
I got to my feet, not knowing whether to call out, to applaud, to be frightened, to laugh, too astounded to do anything but stand and stare.
The man was costumed completely in black, in a high-crowned hat, a cloak, a kind of skirted dress, black stockings.
He had long hair, a square collar of white lace at the neck, and two white bands.
Black shoes with pewter buckles.
He stood there in the shadows, posed, a Rembrandt, disturbingly authentic and yet enormously out of place — a heavy, solemn man with a reddish face.
Robert Foulkes.
I looked round, half expecting to see Conchis somewhere behind me.
But there was no one.
I looked back at the figure, which had not moved, which continued to stare at me from the shade through the sunlight over the gulley.
And then another figure appeared from behind the carob.
It was a white-faced young girl of fourteen or so, in a long dark-brown dress.
I could make out a sort of close-fitting purple cap on the back of her head.
Her hair was long.
She came beside him, and she also stared at me.
She was much shorter than he was, barely to his ribs.
We must have stood, the three of us, staring at each other for nearly half a minute.
Then I raised my arm, with a smile on my face.
There was no response.
I moved ten yards or so forward, out into the sunlight, as far as I could, to the edge of the gulley.
‘Good day,’ I called in Greek.
‘What are you doing?’
And then again: ‘Ti kanete ?’
But they made not the least reply.
They stood and stared at me the man with a vague anger, it seemed, the girl expressionlessly.
A flaw of the sun-wind blew a brown banner, some part of the back of her dress, out sideways.
I thought, it's Henry James.
The old man's discovered that the screw could take another turn.
And then, his breathtaking impudence.
I remembered the conversation about the novel.
‘Words are for facts.
Not fiction .’
I looked round again, towards the house; Conchis must declare himself now.
But he did not.
There was myself, with an increasingly foolish smile on my face — and there were the two in their green shadow.
The girl moved a little closer to the man, who put his hand ponderously, patriarchally, on her near shoulder.
They seemed to be waiting for me to do something.
Words were no use.
I had to get close to them.
I looked up the gulley.
It was uncrossable for at least a hundred yards, but then my side appeared to slope more easily to its floor.
Making a gesture of explanation, I started up the hill.
I looked back again and again at the silent pair under the tree.
They turned and watched me until a shoulder on their side of the small ravine hid them from view.
I broke into a run.
The gulley was finally negotiable, though it was a tough scramble up the far side through some disagreeably sharp-thorned smilax.
Once through that I was able to run again.
The carob came into sight below.
There was nothing there.
In a few seconds — it had been perhaps a minute in all since I had lost sight of them — I was standing under the tree, on an unrevealing carpet of shrivelled carats.
I looked to where I had slept.
The small grey and red-edged squares of the pamphlet and Time lay on the pale carpet of needles.
I went well beyond the carob until I came to strands of wire running through the trees, at the edge of the inland bluff, the eastern limit of Bourani.
The three cottages lay innocently below in their little orchard of olives.
In a kind of panic I walked back to the carob and along the east side of the gulley to the top of the cliff that overlooked the private beach.
There was more scrub there, but not enough for anyone to hide, unless they lay flat.
And I could not imagine that choleric-looking man lying down flat, in hiding.
Then from the house I heard the bell.
It rang three times.
I looked at my watch — teatime.
The bell rang again: quick, quick, slow, and I realized it was sounding the syllables of my name.
I ought, I suppose, to have felt frightened.
But I wasn't.
Apart from anything else I was too intrigued and too bewildered.
Both the man and the whey-faced girl had looked remarkably English; and whatever nationality they really were, I knew they didn't live on the island.
So I had to presume that they had been specially brought; had been standing by, hiding somewhere, waiting for me to read the Foulkes pamphlet.
I had made it easy by falling asleep, and at the  edge of the gulley.
But that had been pure chance.
And how could Conchis have such people standing by?
And where had they disappeared to?
For a few moments I had let my mind plunge into darkness, into a world where the experience of all my life was disproved and ghosts existed.
But there was something far too unalloyedly physical about all these supposedly ‘psychic’ experiences.
Besides, ‘apparitions’ obviously carry least conviction in bright daylight.
It was almost as if I was intended to see that they were not really supernatural; and there was Conchis's cryptic, doubt-sowing advice that it would be easier if I pretended to believe.
Why easier?
More sophisticated, more polite, perhaps; but ‘easier’ suggested that I had to pass through some ordeal.
I stood there in the trees, absolutely at a loss; and then smiled.
I had somehow landed myself in the centre of an extraordinary old man's fantasies.
That was clear.
Why he should hold them, why he should so strangely realize them, and above all, why he should have chosen me to be his solitary audience of one, remained a total mystery.
But I knew I had become involved in something too uniquely bizarre to miss, or to spoil, through lack of patience or humour.
I recrossed the gulley and picked up Time and the pamphlet.
Then, as I looked back at the dark, inscrutable carob tree, I did feel a faint touch of fear.
But it was a fear of the inexplicable, the unknown, not of the supernatural.
As I walked across the gravel to the colonnade, where I could see Conchis was already sitting, his back to me, I decided on a course of action — or rather, of reaction.
He turned.
‘A good siesta?’
‘Yes, thank you.’
‘You have read the pamphlet?’
‘You're right.
It is more fascinating than any historical novel.’
He kept a face impeccably proof to my ironic undertone.
‘Thank you very much.’
I put the pamphlet on the table.
Calmly, in my silence, he began to pour me tea.
He had already had his own and he went away to play the harpsichord for twenty minutes.
As I listened to him, I thought.
The  incidents seemed designed to deceive all the senses.
Last night's had covered smell and hearing; this afternoon's, and that glimpsed figure of yesterday, sight.
Taste seemed irrelevant — but touch…how on earth could he expect me even to pretend to believe that what I might touch was ‘psychic’?
And then what on earth — appropriately, on earth — had these tricks to do with ‘travelling to other worlds’?
Only one thing was clear; his anxiety about how much I might have heard from Mitford and Leverrier was now explained.
He had practised his strange illusionisms on them, and sworn them to secrecy.
When he came out he took me off to water his vegetables.
The water had to be drawn up out of one of a battery of long-necked cisterns behind the cottage, and when we had done that and fed the plants we sat on a seat by the Priapus arbour, with the unusual smell, in summer Greece, of verdant wet earth all around us.
He did his deep-breathing exercises; evidently, like so much else in his life, ritual; then smiled at me and jumped back twenty-four hours.
‘Now tell me about this girl.’
It was a command, not a question; or a refusal to believe I could refuse again.
‘There's nothing really to tell.’
‘She turned you down.’
‘No.
Or not at the beginning.
I turned her down.’
‘And now you wish…?’
‘It's all over.
It's all too late.’
‘You sound like Adonis.
Have you been gored?’
There was a silence.
I took the step; something that had nagged me ever since; I had discovered he had studied medicine; and also to shock his mocking of my fatalism.
‘As a matter of fact I have.’
He looked sharply at me.
‘By syphilis.
I managed to get it early this year in Athens.’
Still he observed me.
‘It's all right.
I think I'm cured.’
‘Who diagnosed it?’
‘The man in the village.
Patarescu.’
‘Tell me the symptoms.’
‘The clinic in Athens confirmed his diagnosis.’
‘No doubt.’
His voice was dry; so dry that my mind leapt to what he hinted at.
‘Now tell me the symptoms.’
In the end he got them out of me; in every detail.
‘As I thought.
You had soft sore.’
‘Soft sore?’
‘Chancroid.
Ulcus molle .
A very common disease in the Mediterranean; Unpleasant, but harmless.
The best cure is frequent soap and water.
‘Then why the hell…’
He rubbed his thumb and forefinger together in the ubiquitous Greek gesture for money, for money and corruption.
‘You have paid?’
‘Yes.
For this special penicillin.’
‘You can do nothing.’
‘I can damn well sue the clinic.’
‘You have no proof that you did not have syphilis.’
‘You mean Patarescu —’
‘I mean nothing.
He acted with perfect medical correctness.
A test is always advisable.’
It was almost as if he were on their side.
He shrugged gently: thus the world goes.
‘He could have warned me.’
‘Perhaps he considered it more important to warn you against venery than venality.’
‘Christ.’
In me battled a flood of relief at being reprieved and anger at such vile deception.
After a moment Conchis spoke again.
‘Even if it had been syphilis — why could you not return to this girl you love?’
‘Really — it's too complicated.’
‘Then it is usual.
Not unusual.’
Slowly, disconnectedly, prompted by him, I told him a bit about Alison; remembering his frankness the night before, produced some of my own.
Once again I felt no real sympathy coming from him; simply his obsessive and inexplicable curiosity.
I told him I had recently written a letter.
‘And if she does not answer?’
I shrugged.
‘She doesn't.’
‘You think of her, you want to see her — you must write again.’
I smiled then, briefly, at his energy.
‘You are leaving it to hazard.
We no more have to leave everything to hazard than we have to drown in the sea.’
He shook my shoulder.
‘Swim!’
‘It's not the swimming.
It's knowing in which direction.’
‘Towards the girl.
She sees through you, you say, she understands you.
That is good.’
I was silent.
A primrose-and-black butterfly, a swallowtail, hovered over the bougainvillaea round the Priapus arbour; found no honey, and glided away through the trees.
I scuffed the gravel.
‘I suppose I don't know what love is, really.
If it isn't all sex.
And I don't even really care a damn any more, anyway.’
‘My dear young man, you are a disaster.
So defeated.
So pessimistic.’
‘I was rather ambitious once.
I ought to have been blind as well.
Then perhaps I wouldn't feel defeated.’
I looked at him.
‘It's not all me.
It's in the age.
In all my generation.
We all feel the same.’
‘In the greatest age of enlightenment in the history of this earth?
When we have destroyed more darkness in this last fifty years than in the last five million?’
‘As at Neuve Chapelle?
Hiroshima?’
‘But you and I!
We live, we are this wonderful age.
We are not destroyed.
We did not even destroy.’
‘No man is an island.’
‘Pah.
Rubbish.
Every one of us is an island.
If it were not so we should go mad at once.
Between these islands are ships, aeroplanes, telephones, wireless — what you will.
But they remain islands.
Islands that can sink or disappear for ever.
You are an island that has not sunk.
You cannot be such a pessimist.
It is not possible.’
‘It seems possible.’
‘Come with me.’
He stood up, as if time was vital.
‘Come.
I will show you the innermost secret of life.
Come.’
He walked quickly round to the colonnade.
I followed him upstairs.
There he pushed me out on to the terrace.
‘Go and sit at the table.
With your back to the sun.’
In a minute he appeared, carrying something heavy draped in a white towel.
He put it carefully on the centre of the table.
Then he paused, made sure I was looking, before gravely he removed the cloth.
It was a stone head, whether of a man or a woman it was difficult to say.
The nose had been broken short.
The hair was done in a fillet, with two sidepieces.
But the power of the fragment was in the face.
It was set in a triumphant smile, a smile that would have been smug if it had not been so full of the purest metaphysical good  humour.
The eyes were faintly oriental, long, and as I saw, for Conchis put a hand over the mouth, also smiling.
The mouth was beautifully modelled, timelessly intelligent and timelessly amused.
‘That is the truth.
Not the hammer and sickle.
Not the stars and stripes Not the cross.
Not the sun.
Not gold.
Not yin and yang .
But the smile.
‘It's Cycladic, isn't it?’
‘Never mind what it is.
Look at it.
Look into its eyes.’
He was right.
The little sunlit thing had some numen; or not so much a divinity, as a having known divinity, in it; of being ultimately certain.
But as I looked, I began to feel something else.
‘There's something implacable in that smile.’
‘Implacable?’
He came behind my chair and looked down over my head.
‘It is the truth.
Truth is implacable.
But the nature and meaning of this truth is not.’
‘Tell me where it came from.’
‘From Didyma in Asia Minor.’
‘How old is it?’
‘The sixth or seventh century before Christ.’
‘I wonder if it would have that smile if it knew of Belsen.’
‘Because they died, we know we still live.
Because a star explodes and a thousand worlds like ours die, we know this world is.
That is the smile: that what might not be, is.’
Then he said, ‘When I die, I shall have this by my bedside.
It is the last human face I want to see.’
The little head watched our watching; bland, certain, and almost maliciously inscrutable.
It flashed on me that it was also the smile that Conchis sometimes wore; as if he sat before the head and practised it.
At the same time I realized exactly what I disliked about it.
It was above all the smile of dramatic irony, of those who have privileged information.
I looked back up at Conchis's face; and knew I was right.
24
A starry darkness over the house, the forest, the sea; the dinner cleared away, the lamp extinguished.
I lay back in the long chair.
He let the night silently envelop and possess us, let time fall away; then began to draw me back down the decades.
‘April, 1915.
I returned without trouble to England.
I did not know what I should become.
Except that I had in some way to justify myself.
At nineteen one is not content simply to do things.
They have to be justified as well.
My mother fainted when she saw me.
For the first and last time in my life I saw my father in tears.
Until that moment of confrontation I had determined that I would tell the truth.
That I could not deceive them.
Yet before them…perhaps it was pure cowardice, it is not for me to say.
But there are some truths too cruel, before the faces one has to announce them to, to be told.
So I said that I had been lucky in a draw for leave, and that now Montague was dead I was to rejoin my original battalion.
I grew possessed by madness to deceive.
Not economically, but with the utmost luxury.
I invented a new battle of Neuve Chapelle, as if the original had not been bad enough.
I even told them I had been recommended for a commission.
‘At first fortune was on my side.
Two days after I returned, of official notification came that I was missing, believed killed in action.
Such mistakes occurred frequently enough for my parents to suspect nothing.
The letter was joyously torn up.
‘And Lily.
Perhaps what had passed had made her see more clearly her real feelings for me.
Whatever it was, I could no longer complain that she treated me more like a brother than a lover.
You know, Nicholas, that whatever miseries the Great War brought it destroyed a great deal that was unhealthy between the sexes.
For the first time for a century woman discovered that men wanted something more human from them than a nun-like chastity, a bien pensant idealism.
I do not mean that Lily suddenly lost all reserve.
Or gave herself to me.
But she gave as much to me as she could.
The time I spent alone with her…those hours allowed me to gather strength to go on with  my deception.
At the same time as they made it more terrible.
Again and again I was possessed by a desire to tell her all, and before justice caught up with me.
Every time I returned home I expected to find the police waiting.
My father outraged.
And worst of all, Lily's eyes on mine.
But when I was with her I refused to talk about the war.
She misinterpreted my nervousness.
It touched her deeply and brought out all her gentleness.
Her warmth.
I sucked on her love like a leech.
A very sensual leech.
She had become a very beautiful young woman.
‘One day we went for a walk in woods to the north of London near Barnet, I think, I no longer recall the name, except that they were in those days very pretty and lonely woods for a place so near London.
‘We lay on the ground and kissed.
Perhaps you smile.
That we only lay on the ground and kissed.
You young people can lend your bodies now, play with them, give them as we could not.
But remember that you have paid a price: that of a world rich in mystery and delicate emotion.
It is not only species of animal that die out, but whole species of feeling.
And if you are wise you will never pity the past for what it did not know, but pity yourself for what it did.
‘That afternoon Lily said she wanted to marry me.
To marry by special licence, and if necessary without her parents’ permission, so that before I went away again we should have become one in body as we were in — dare I say spirit?— at any rate, in mind.
I longed to sleep with her, I longed to be joined to her.
But always my dreadful secret lay between us, like the sword between Tristan and Isolde.
So I had to assume, among the flowers, the innocent birds and trees, an even falser nobility.
How could I refuse her except by saying my death was so probable that I could not allow such a sacrifice?
She argued.
She cried.
She took my faltering, my tortured refusals for something far finer than they really were.
At the end of the afternoon, before we left the wood, and with a solemnity and sincerity, a complete dedication of herself that I cannot describe to you because such unconditional promising is another extinct mystery…she said, ‘Whatever happens I shall never marry anyone but you.’’
He stopped speaking for a moment, like a man walking who comes to a brink; perhaps it was an artful pause, but it made the stars, the night, seem to wait, as if story, narration, history, lay imbricated  in the nature of things; and the cosmos was for the story, not the story for the cosmos.
‘My fortnight's supposed leave drew to an end.
I had no plan, or rather a hundred plans, which is worse than having none at all.
There were moments when I considered returning to France.
But then I saw ghastly yellow figures staggering like drunkards out of the wall of smoke…
I saw the war and the world and why I was in it.
I tried to be blind, but I could not.
‘I put on my uniform and let my father and mother and Lily see me off at Victoria.
They believed I had to report to a camp near Dover.
The train was full of soldiers.
I once again felt the great current of war, the European death-wish, rushing me along.
When the train stopped at some town in Kent I got off.
For two or three days I stayed there in a commercial travellers’ hotel.
I was hopeless.
And purposeless.
One could not escape the war.
It was all one saw, all one heard.
In the end I went back to London to the one person in England where I thought there might be refuge: to my grandfather's — my great-uncle in fact.
I knew he was Greek, that he loved me because I was my mother's child, and that a Greek will put family above every other consideration.
He listened to me.
Then he stood up and came to me.
I knew what he was going to do.
He struck me hard, very hard, so hard that I still feel it, across the face.
Then he said, ‘That is what I think.’
‘I knew very well that when he said that he meant ‘in spite of whatever help I shall give you’.
He was furious with me, he poured every insult in the Greek language over my head.
But he hid me.
Perhaps because I said that even if I returned I should now be shot for desertion.
The next day be went to see my mother.
I think that he may have given her the choice.
Of doing her duty as a citizen or as a mother.
She came to see me, with a lack of spoken reproach that was worse to me than o Pappous 's anger.
I knew what she would suffer when my father heard the truth.
She and o Pappous came to a decision.
I would have to be smuggled out of England to our family in the Argentine.
Fortunately o Pappous had both the money and the necessary friends in the shipping world.
The arrangements were made.
A date was fixed.
‘I lived in his house for three weeks, unable to go out, in such an agony of self-disgust and fear that many times I wanted to give myself  up.
Above all it was the thought of Lily that tortured me I had promised to write every day.
And of course I could not.
What other people thought of me, I did not care.
But I was desperate to convince her that I was sane and the world was mad.
It may have something to do with intelligence, but I am certain it has nothing to do with knowledge — I mean that there are people who have an instinctive yet perfect moral judgment, who can perform the most complex ethical calculations as Indian peasants can sometimes perform astounding mathematical feats in a matter of seconds.
Lily was such a person.
And I craved her approval.
‘One evening I could stand it no longer.
I slipped out of my hiding-place and went to St John's Wood.
It was an evening when I knew Lily went to a weekly patriotic sewing and knitting circle in a near-by parish hall.
I waited in the road I knew she must take.
It was a warm May dusk.
I was fortunate.
She came alone.
Suddenly I stepped out into her path from the gateway where I had been waiting.
She went white with shock.
She knew something terrible had happened, by my face, my civilian clothes.
As soon as I saw her my love for her overwhelmed me — and what I had planned to say.
I cannot remember now what I said.
I can remember only walking beside her in the dusk towards Regent's Park, because we both wanted darkness and to be alone.
She would not argue, she would not say anything, she would not look at me for a long time.
We found ourselves by the gloomy canal that runs through the north of the park.
On a seat.
Then she began to cry.
I was not allowed to comfort her.
I had deceived her.
That was the unforgivable.
Not that I had deserted.
But that I had deceived.
For a time she stared away from me, down the black canal.
Then she put her hand on mine and stopped me talking.
Finally she put her arms round me, and still without words.
And I felt myself all that was bad in Europe in the arms of all that was good.
‘But there was so much misunderstanding between us.
It is possible, even normal, to feel right in front of history and very wrong in front of those one loves.
After a while Lily began to talk, and I realized that she understood nothing of what I had said about the war.
That she saw herself not as I so much wanted, as my angel of forgiveness, but as my angel of salvation.
She begged me to go back.
She thought I would be spiritually dead until I did.
Again and  again she used the word ‘resurrected’.
And again and again, on my side, I wanted to know what would happen to us.
And finally she said, this was her judgment, that the price of her love was that I should return to the front — not for her, but for myself.
To find my true self again.
And that the reality of her love was as it had been in the wood: she should never marry anyone else, whatever happened.
‘In the end we were silent.
You will have understood.
Love is the mystery between two people, not the identity.
We were at the opposite poles of humanity.
Lily was humanity bound to duty, unable to choose, suffering, at the mercy of social ideals.
Humanity both crucified and marching towards the cross.
And I was free, I was Peter three times to renounce — determined to survive, whatever the cost.
I still see her face.
Her face staring, staring into the darkness, trying to gaze herself into another world.
It was as if we were locked in a torture chamber.
Still in love, yet chained to opposite walls, facing each other for eternity and for eternity unable to touch.
‘Of course, as men always will, I tried to extract some hope from her.
That she would wait for me, not judge me too quickly…such things.
But she stopped me with a look.
A look I shall never forget, because it was almost one of hatred, and hatred in her face was like spite in the Virgin Mary's; it reversed the entire order of nature.
‘I walked back beside her, in silence.
I said goodbye to her under a street lamp.
By a garden full of lilac trees.
We did not touch.
Not a single word.
Two young faces, suddenly old, facing each other.
The moment that endures when all the other noises, objects, all that dull street, have sunk into dust and oblivion.
Two white faces.
The scent of lilac.
And bottomless darkness.’
He paused.
There was no emotion in his voice; but I was thinking of Alison, of that last look she had given me.
‘And that is all.
Four days later I spent a very disagreeable twelve hours crouched in the bilges of a Greek cargo boat in Liverpool docks.’
There was a silence.
‘And did you ever see her again?’
A bat squeaked over our heads.
‘She died.’
I had to prompt him.
‘Soon after?’
‘In the early hours of February the nineteenth, 1916.’
I tried to see  the expression on his face, but it was too dark.
‘There was a typhoid epidemic.
She was working in a hospital.’
‘Poor girl.’
‘All past.’
‘You make it seem present.’
He inclined his head.
‘The scent of lilac.’
‘Old man's sentiment.
Forgive me.’
He was staring into the night.
The bat flitted so low that I saw its silhouette for a brief moment against the Milky Way.
‘Is this why you never married?’
‘The dead live.’
The blackness of the trees.
I listened for footsteps, but none came.
A suspension.
‘How do they live?’
And yet again he let the silence come, as if the silence would answer my questions better than he could himself; but just when I had decided he would not answer, he spoke.
‘By love.’
It was as if he said it not to me, but equally to everything around us; as if she stood listening, in the dark shadows by the doors; as if the telling of his past had reminded him of some great principle he was seeing freshly again.
I found myself touched, and this time let the silence stay.
A minute later, he turned to me.
‘I should like you to come next week.
If your duties permit.’
‘If you invite me nothing could keep me away.’
‘Good.
I am glad.’
But his gladness now sounded merely polite.
Peremptoriness had regained command.
He stood.
‘To bed.
It is late.’
I followed him through to my room, where he bent to light the lamp.
‘I do not want my life discussed over there.’
‘Of course not.’
He straightened, faced me.
‘So.
I shall see you next Saturday?’
I smiled.
‘You know you will.
I shall never forget these last two days.
Even though I don't know why I'm elect.
Or elected.’
‘Perhaps your ignorance is why.’
‘As long as you know the election feels a great privilege.’
He searched my eyes, then did something strange: reached out, as he had in the boat, and touched my shoulder paternally.
I had indeed, it seemed, passed some test.
‘Good.
Maria will have some breakfast for you.
Till next week.’
And he was gone.
I went to the bathroom, closed my door, turned the lamp out.
But I didn't undress.
I stood by the window and waited.
25
For at least twenty minutes there was no sound.
Conchis went to the bathroom and back to his room.
Then there was silence.
It went on so long that finally I did undress and started to give in to the sleep I could feel coming on me.
But the silence was broken.
His door opened and closed, quietly, but not secretively, and I heard him going down the stairs.
A minute, two minutes passed; then I sat up and swung out of bed.
It was music again, but from downstairs, the harpsichord.
It echoed, percussive but dim, through the stone house.
For a few moments I felt disappointment.
It seemed merely that Conchis was sleepless, or sad, and playing to himself.
But then there was a sound that sent me swiftly to the door.
I cautiously opened it.
The downstairs door must also have been open, because I could hear the clatter of the harpsichord mechanism.
But the thing that sent a shiver up my back was the thin, haunted piping of a recorder.
I knew it was not on a gramophone; someone was playing it.
The music stopped and went on in a brisker six-eight rhythm.
The recorder piped solemnly along, made a mistake, then another; though the player was evidently quite skilled, and executed professional-sounding trills and ornaments.
I went out naked on the landing and looked over the banisters.
There was a faint radiance on the floor outside the music-room.
I was probably meant to listen, not to go down; but this was too much.
I pulled on a sweater and trousers and crept down the stairs in  bare feet.
The recorder stopped and I heard the rustle of paper being turned — the music-stand.
The harpsichord began a long lute-stop passage, a new movement, as gentle as rain, the sounds stealing through the house, mysterious, remote-sounding harmonies.
The recorder came in with an adagio-like slowness and gravity, momentarily wobbled off-key, then recovered.
I tiptoed to the open door of the music-room, but there something held me back — an odd childlike feeling of misbehaving after bedtime.
The door was wide open, but it opened towards the harpsichord, and the end of one of the bookshelves blocked the view through the crack.
The music came to a stop.
A chair shifted, my heart raced, Conchis spoke a single indistinguishable word in a low voice.
I flattened myself against the wall.
There was a rustle.
Someone was standing at the door of the music-room.
It was a slim girl of about my own height, in her early twenties.
In one hand she held a recorder, in the other a small crimson fluebrush for it.
She was wearing a wide-collared blue-and-white striped dress, that left her arms bare.
There was a bracelet above one elbow, and the skirt came down, narrowing at the bottom, almost to her ankles.
She had a ravishingly pretty face, but completely untanned, without any make-up, and her hair, her outline, the upright way she held herself, everything about her was of forty years before.
I knew I was supposed to be looking at Lily.
It was unmistakably the same girl as in the photographs; especially that on the cabinet of curiosa .
The Botticelli face; grey-violet eyes.
The eyes especially were beautiful; very large, their ovals faintly twisted, a cool doe's eyes, almond eyes, giving a natural mystery to a face otherwise so regular that it risked perfection.
She saw me at once.
I stood rooted to the stone floor.
For a moment she seemed as surprised as I was.
Then she looked swiftly, secretly with her large eyes back to where Conchis must have been sitting at the harpsichord, and then again at me.
She raised the fluebrush to her lips, shook it, forbidding me to move, to say anything, and she smiled.
It was like some genre picture — The Secret.
The Admonition.
But her smile was strange — as if she was sharing a secret with me, that this was an illusion it was for us two, not the old man, to foster.
There was something about her mouth, calm and amused, that was at the same time enigmatic and debunking; pretending and  admitting the pretence.
She flashed another covert look back at Conchis, then leant forward and lightly pushed my arm with the tip of the brush, as if to say, Go away.
The whole business can't have taken more than five seconds.
The door was closed, and I was standing in darkness and an eddy of sandal-wood.
I think if it had been a ghost, if the girl had been transparent and headless, I might have been less astonished.
She had so clearly implied that of course it was all a charade, but that Conchis must not know it was; that she was in fancy-dress for him, not for me.
I went swiftly down the hall to the front door, and eased its bolts open.
Then I padded out on to the colonnade.
I looked through one of the narrow arched windows and immediately saw Conchis.
He had begun to play again.
I moved to look for the girl.
I was sure that no one could have had time to cross the gravel.
But she was not there.
I moved round behind his back, until I had seen into every part of the room.
And she was not there.
I thought she might be under the front part of the colonnade, and peered cautiously round the corner.
It was empty.
The music went on.
I stood, undecided.
She must have run through the opposite end of the colonnade and round the back of the house.
Ducking under the windows and stealing past the open doors, I stared out across the vegetable terrace, then walked round it.
I felt sure she must have escaped this way.
But there was no sign of anybody, no sound.
I waited out there for several minutes, and then Conchis stopped playing.
Soon the lamp went out and he disappeared.
I went back and sat in the darkness on one of the chairs under the colonnade.
There was a deep silence.
Only the crickets cheeped, like drops of water striking the bottom of a gigantic well.
Conjectures flew through my head.
The people I had seen, the sounds I had heard, and that vile smell, had been real, not supernatural; what was not real was the absence of any visible machinery — no secret rooms, nowhere to disappear — or of any motive.
And this new dimension, this suggestion that the ‘apparitions’ were mounted for Conchis as well as myself, was the most baffling of all.
I sat in the darkness, half hoping that someone, I hoped ‘Lily’, would appear and explain.
I felt once again like a child, like a child who walks into a room and is aware that everyone there knows something about him that he does not.
I also felt deceived by  Conchis's sadness.
‘The dead live by love ’; and they could evidently also live by impersonation.
But I waited most for whoever had acted Lily.
I had to know the owner of that young, intelligent, amused, dazzlingly pretty North European face.
I wanted to know what she was doing on Phraxos, where she came from, the reality behind all the mystery.
I waited nearly an hour, and nothing happened.
No one came, I heard no sounds.
In the end I crept back up to my room.
But I had a poor night's sleep.
When Maria knocked on the door at half past five I woke as if I had a hangover.
Yet I enjoyed the walk back to the school.
I enjoyed the cool air, the delicate pink sky that turned primrose, then blue, the still-sleeping grey and incorporeal sea, the long slopes of silent pines.
In a sense I re-entered reality as I walked.
The events of the week-end seemed to recede, to become locked away, as if I had dreamt them; and yet as I walked there came the strangest feeling, compounded of the early hour, the absolute solitude, and what had happened, of having entered a myth; a knowledge of what it was like physically, moment by moment, to have been young and ancient, a Ulysses on his way to meet Circe, a Theseus on his journey to Crete, an Oedipus still searching for his destiny.
I could not describe it.
It was not in the least a literary feeling, but an intensely mysterious present and concrete feeling of excitement, of being in a situation where anything still might happen.
as if the world had suddenly, during those last three days, been re-invented, and for me alone.
26
There was a letter.
The Sunday boat had brought it.
Dear Nicholas,
I thought you were dead.
I'm on my own again.
More or less.
I've been trying to decide whether I want to see you again — the point is, I could.
I come through Athens now.
I mean I haven't decided whether you aren't such a pig that it's crazy to get involved with you again.
I can't forget you, even when I'm with much nicer boys than you'll ever be.
Nicko, I'm a little bit drunk and I shall probably tear this up anyway.
Well, I may send a telegram if I can work a few days off at Athens.
If I go on like this you won't want to meet me.
You probably don't now as it is.
When I got your letter I knew you'd just written it because you were bored out there.
Isn't it awful I still have to get boozed to write to you.
It's raining, I've got the fire on it's so bloody cold.
It's dusk, it's grey it's so bloody miserable.
The wallpaper's muave or is it mauve hell with green plums.
You'd be sick all down it.
A.
Write care of Ann.
Her letter came at the wrongest time.
It made me realize that I didn't want to share Bourani with anyone.
After the first knowledge of the place, and still after the first meeting with Conchis, even as late as the Foulkes incident, I had wanted to talk about it — and to Alison.
Now it seemed fortunate that I hadn't; just as it seemed, though still obscurely, fortunate that I hadn't lost my head in other ways when I wrote to her.
One doesn't fall in love in five seconds; but five seconds can set one dreaming of falling in love, especially in a community as unrelievedly masculine as that of the Lord Byron School.
The more I thought of that midnight face, the more intelligent and charming it became; and it seemed too to have had a breeding, a fastidiousness, a delicacy, that attracted me as fatally as the local fishermen's lamps attracted fish on moonless nights.
I reminded myself that if Conchis was rich enough to own Modiglianis and Bonnards, he was rich enough to pick the very best in mistresses.
I had to presume some sort of sexual relationship between the girl and him — to do otherwise would have been naive; but for all that there had been something much more daughterly, affectionately protective, than sexual in her glance back at him.
I must have read Alison's letter a dozen times that Monday, trying to decide what to do about it.
I knew it had to be answered, but I carne to the conclusion that the longer I left it, the better.
To stop its silent nagging I pushed it away in the bottom drawer of my desk; went to bed, thought about Bourani, drifted into various romantic-sexual fantasies with that enigmatic figure; and failed entirely, in spite of my tiredness, to go to sleep.
The crime of syphilis had made me ban sex from my mind for weeks; now I was found not guilty half an hour with a textbook Conchis had given me to look at had convinced me his diagnosis was right — the libido rose strong.
I began to think erotically of Alison again; of the dirty week-end pleasures of having her in some Athens hotel bedroom; of birds in the hand being worth more than birds in the bush; and with better motives, of her loneliness, her perpetual mixed-up loneliness.
The one sentence that had pleased me in her unfastidious and not very delicate letter was the last of all — that simple ‘Write care of Ann.’
Which denied the gaucheness, the lingering resentment, in all the rest.
I got out of bed and sat in my pyjama trousers and wrote a letter, quite a long letter, which I tore up at the first re-reading.
The second attempt was much shorter and hit off, I thought, the right balance between regretful practicality and yet sufficient affection and desire for her still to want to climb into bed if I got half a chance.
I said I was rather tied up at the school over most week-ends; though the half-term holiday was the week-end after next and I might just be in Athens then — but I couldn't be sure.
But if I was, it would be fun to see her.
As soon as I could I got Méli on his own.
I had decided that I had to have a partial confidant at the school.
One did not have to attend school meals with the boys over the week-end if one was off duty; and the only master who might have noticed I had been away was Méli himself, but as it happened he'd been in Athens.
We sat after lunch on Monday in his room; or rather he sat chubbily at his desk, living up to his nickname, spooning Hymettus honey out of a jar and telling me of the flesh and fleshpots he had bought himself in Athens; and I lay on his bed, only half listening.
‘And you, Nicholas, you had a nice week-end?’
‘I met Mr Conchis.’
‘You…no, you are joking.’
‘You are not to tell the others.’
He raised his hands in protest.
‘Of course, but how…
I can't believe it.’
I gave him a very expurgated version of the first visit, the week before, and made Conchis and Bourani as dull as possible.
‘He sounds as stupid as I thought.
No girls?’
‘Not a sign.
Not even little boys.’
‘Nor even a goat?’
I threw a box of matches at him.
Half by desipience, half by proclivity, he had come to live in a world where the only significant leisure activities were coupling and consuming.
His batrachian lips pursed into a smile, and he dug again into the honey.
‘He's asked me over next week again.
As a matter of fact, Me1li, I wondered, if I do two preps for you…would you do my noon to six on Sunday?’
Sunday duty was easy work.
It meant only that one had to stay inside the school and stroll through the grounds a couple of times.
‘Well.
Yes.
I will see.’
He sucked the spoon.
‘And tell me what to tell the others, if they ask.
I want them to think I'm going somewhere else.’
He thought a moment, waved the spoon, then said, ‘Tell them you are going to Hydra.’
Hydra was a stop on the way to Athens, though one didn't have to catch the Athens boat to go there, as there were often calques doing the run.
It had an embryonic artistic colony of sorts; the kind of place I might plausibly choose to go to.
‘Okay.
And you won't tell anyone?’
He crossed himself.
‘I am as silent as the…the what is it?’
‘Where you ought to be, Me1li.
The bloody grave.’
I went to the village several times that week, to see if there were any strange faces about.
There was no sign of the three people I was looking for, although there were a few strange faces: three or four wives with young children sent out to grass from Athens, and one or two old couples, dehydrated rentiers , who doddered in and out of the mournful lounges of the Hotel Philadelphia.
One evening I felt restless and walked down to the harbour.
It was about eleven at night and the place, with its catalpas and its old black cannon of 1821, was almost deserted.
After a Turkish coffee and a nip of brandy in a kapheneion I started to walk back.
Some way  past the hotel, still on the few hundred yards of concrete ‘promenade’, I saw a very tall elderly man standing and bending in the middle of the road, apparently looking for something.
He looked up as I approached — he was really remarkably tall and strikingly well-dressed for Phraxos; evidently one of the summer visitors.
He wore a pale fawn suit, a white gardenia in his button-hole, an old-fashioned white panama hat with a black band, and he had a small goatee beard.
He was holding by its middle a cane with a meerschaum handle, and he looked gravely distressed, as well as naturally grave.
I asked in Greek if he had lost anything.
‘Ah pardon…est-ce que vous parlez français, monsieur?’
I said, yes, I spoke some French.
It seemed he had just lost the ferrule of his stick.
He had heard it drop off and roll away.
I struck a few matches and searched round, and after a little while found the small brass end.
‘Ah, très bien.
Mille mercis, monsieur.’
He produced a pocket-book and I thought for a moment he was going to tip me.
His face was as gloomy as an El Greco; insufferably bored, decades of boredom, and probably, I decided, insufferably boring.
He didn't tip me, but placed the ferrule carefully inside the wallet, and then politely asked me who I was, and fulsomely, where I had learnt such excellent French.
We exchanged a few sentences.
He himself was here for only a day or two.
He wasn't French, he said, but Belgian.
He found Phraxos ‘pittoresque, mais moins belle que Délos ’.
After a few moments more of this platitudinous chat we bowed and went our ways.
He expressed a hope that we might meet again during the remaining two days of his stay and have a longer conversation.
But I took very good care that we didn't.
At last Saturday came.
I had done the two extra duties during the week to clear my Sunday, and was thoroughly exhausted with the school.
As soon as the morning lessons were over and I had snatched a quick lunch I headed towards the village with my bag.
Yes, I told the old man at the gate — a sure method of propagating the lie — I was off to Hydra for the week-end.
As soon as I was out of sight of the  school I cut up through the cottages and round the back of the school on to the path to Bourani.
But I didn't go straight there.
I had speculated endlessly during the week about Conchis, and as futilely as endlessly.
I thought I could discern two elements in his ‘game’— one didactic, the other aesthetic.
But whether his cunningly mounted fantasies hid ultimately a wisdom or a lunacy I could not decide.
On the whole I suspected the latter.
Mania made more sense than reason.
I had also wondered more and more during the week about the little group of cottages at Agia Varvara, the bay east of Bourani.
It was a wide sweep of shingle with a huge row of athanatos , or agaves, whose bizarre twelve-foot candelabra of flowers stood facing the sea.
I lay on a thyme-covered slope above the bay, having come quietly through the trees, and watched the cottages below for any sign of unusual life.
But a woman in black was the only person I saw.
Now I examined it, it seemed an unlikely place for Conchis's ‘assistants’ to live.
It was so open, so easy to watch.
After a while I wound my way down to the cottages.
A child in a doorway saw me coming through the olives and called, and then the entire population of the tiny hamlet appeared — four women and half a dozen children, unmistakably islanders.
With the usual peasant hospitality they offered me a little saucer of quince jam and a thimbleful of raki as well as the glass of cistern water I requested.
Their men were all off fishing.
I said I was going to see o kyrios Conchis, and their surprise seemed perfectly genuine.
Did he ever visit them?
Their heads all went back swiftly together, as if the idea was unheard of.
I had to listen to the story of the execution again — at least, the oldest woman launched out into a welter of words among which I heard ‘mayor’ and ‘Germans’; and the children raised their arms like guns.
Maria, then?
They saw her, of course?
But no, they never saw her.
She is not a Phraxiot, one of them said.
Then the music, the songs in the night?
They looked at one another.
What songs?
I was not too surprised.
Very probably they went to bed and woke with the sun.
‘And you,’ asked the grandmother, ‘are you a relation of his?’
They evidently thought of him as a foreigner.
I said I was a friend.
He has no friends here, said the old woman, and with a faint hostility in her voice she added, bad men bring bad  luck.
I said he had guests — a young girl with fair hair, a tall man, a younger girl so high.
They had seen them?
They had not.
Only the grandmother had even been inside Bourani; and that was long before the war.
Then they had their way and asked me the usual series of childish but charmingly eager questions about myself, about London, about England.
I got free in the end, after being presented with a sprig of basil, and walked inland along the bluff until I could climb on to the ridge that led to Bourani.
For some time three of the barefoot children accompanied me along the seldom-used path.
We topped a crest among the pines, and the distant flat roof of the house came into sight over the sea of trees ahead.
The children stopped, as if the house was a sign that they should go no farther.
I turned after a while and they were still wistfully standing there.
I waved, but they made no gesture in return.
27
I went with him and sat in his music-room and listened to him play the D minor English suite.
All through tea I had waited for some indication on his part that he knew I had seen the girl — as he must have known, for it was obvious that the nocturnal concert had been given to announce her presence.
But I intended to follow the same course of action as I had over the earlier incident: to say nothing until he gave me an opening.
Not the slightest chink had appeared in our conversation.
Conchis seemed to me, no expert, to play as if there was no barrier between him and the music; no need to ‘interpret’, to please an audience, to satisfy some inner vanity.
He played as I suppose Bach himself would have played — I think at a rather slower tempo than most modern pianists and harpsichordists, though with no loss of rhythm or shape.
I sat in the cool, shuttered room and watched the slightly bowed bald head behind the shining black harpsichord.
I heard the driving onwardness of Bach, the endless progressions.
It was the first time I had heard him play great music, and I was moved as I had been by the Bonnards; moved in a different way, but still  moved.
Once again his humanity rose uppermost.
It came to me as I listened that I didn't want to be anywhere else in the world at that moment, that what I was feeling at that moment justified all I had been through, because all I had been through was my being there.
Conchis had spoken of meeting his future, of feeling his life balanced on a fulcrum, when he first came to Bourani.
I was experiencing what he meant; a new self-acceptance, a sense that I had to be this mind and this body, its vices and its virtues, and that I had no other chance or choice.
It was an awareness of a new kind of potentiality, one very different from my old sense of the word, which had been based on the illusions of ambition.
The mess of my life, the selfishnesses and false turnings and the treacheries, all these things could fall into place, they could become a source of construction rather than a source of chaos, and precisely because I had no other choice.
It was certainly not a moment of new moral resolve, or anything like it.
No doubt our accepting what we are must always inhibit our being what we ought to be; for all that, it felt like a step forward — and upward.
He had finished, was watching me.
‘You make words seem shabby things.’
‘Bach does.’
‘And you.’
He grimaced, but I could see he was not unpleased, though he tried to hide it by marching me off to give his vegetables their evening watering.
An hour later I was in the little bedroom again.
I saw that I had new books by my bedside.
There was first a very thin volume in French, a bound pamphlet, anonymous and privately printed, Paris, 1932; it was entitled De la communication intermondiale .
I guessed the author easily enough.
Then there was a folio:Wild Life in Scandinavia .
As with The Beauties of Nature of the week before, the ‘wild life’ turned out to be all female — various Nordic-looking women lying, standing, running, embracing among the fir-forests and fjords.
There were lesbian nuances I didn't much like; perhaps because I was beginning to take against the facet in Conchis's polyhedral character that obviously enjoyed ‘curious’ objects and literature.
Of course I was not — at least I told myself I was not — a puritan.
I was too young to  know that the having to tell myself gave the game away; and that to be uninhibited about one's own sexual activities is not the same as being unshockable.
I was English;ergo , puritan.
I went twice through the pictures; they clashed unpleasantly with the still-echoing Bach.
Finally there was another book in French — a sumptuously produced limited edition:Le Masque Français au Dix-huitième Siècle .
This had a little white marker in.
Remembering the anthology on the beach, I turned to the page, where there was a passage bracketed.
It read:
At last it began to seem plain.
All that happened at Bourani was in the nature of a private masque; and no doubt the passage was a hint to me that I should, both out of politeness and for my own pleasure, not poke my nose behind the scenes.
I felt ashamed of the questions I had asked at Agia Varvara.
I washed and, in deference to the slight formality Conchis apparently liked in the evenings, changed into a white shirt and a summer suit.
When I came out of my room to go downstairs the door of his bedroom was open.
He called me in.
‘We will have our ouzo up here this evening.’
He was sitting at his desk, reading a letter he had just written.
I  waited behind him a moment, looking at the Bonnards again while he addressed the envelope.
The door of the little room at the end was ajar.
I had a glimpse of clothes, of a press.
It was simply a dressing-room.
By the open doors, Lily's photograph stared at me from its table.
We went out on to the terrace.
There were two tables there, one with the ouzo and glasses on, the other with the dinner things.
I saw at once that there were three chairs at the dinner-table; and Conchis saw me see.
‘We shall have a visitor after dinner.’
‘From the village?’
But I was smiling, and he was too when he shook his head.
It was a magnificent evening, one of those limitless Greek spans of sky and world fluxed in declining light.
The mountains were the grey of a Persian cat's fur, and the sky like a huge unfaceted primrose diamond.
I remembered noticing, one similar sunset in the village, how every man outside every taverna had turned to face the west, as if they were in a cinema, with the eloquent all-saying sky their screen.
‘I read the passage you marked in Le Masque Français .’
‘It is only a metaphor.
But it may help.’
He handed me an ouzo.
We raised glasses.
Coffee was brought and poured, and the lamp moved to the table behind me, so that it shone on Conchis's face.
We were both waiting.
‘I hope I shan't have to forgo the rest of your adventures.’
He raised his head, in the Greek way, meaning no.
He seemed a little tense, and looked past me at the bedroom door; and I was reminded of that first day.
I turned, but there was no one there.
He spoke.
‘You know who it will be?’
‘I didn't know if I was meant to come in last week or not.’
‘You are meant to do as you choose.’
‘Except ask questions.’
‘Except ask questions.’
A thin smile.
‘Did you read my little pamphlet?’
‘Not yet.’
‘Read it carefully.’
‘Of course.
I look forward to it.’
‘Then tomorrow night perhaps we can perform an experiment.’
‘On communicating with other worlds?’
I didn't bother to keep scepticism out of my voice.
‘Yes.
Up there.’
The star-heavy sky.
‘Or across there.’
I saw him look down, making the visual analogy, to the black line of mountains to the west.
I risked facetiousness.
‘Up there — do they speak Greek or English?’
He didn't answer for nearly fifteen seconds; didn't smile.
‘They speak emotions.’
‘Not a very precise language.’
‘On the contrary.
The most precise.
If one can learn it.’
He turned to look at me.
‘Precision of the kind you mean is important in science.
It is unimportant in —’
But I never found out what it was unimportant in.
We both heard the footsteps, those same light footsteps I had heard before, on the gravel below, coming as if up from the sea.
Conchis looked at me quickly.
‘You must not ask questions.
That is most important.’
I smiled.
‘As you wish.’
‘Treat her as you would treat an amnesiac.’
‘I'm afraid I've never met an amnesiac.’
‘She lives in the present.
She does not remember her personal past — she has no past.
If you question her about the past, you will only disturb her.
She is very sensitive.
She would not want to see you again.’
I wanted to say, I like your masque, I shan't spoil it.
I said, ‘If I don't understand why, I begin to understand how.’
He shook his head.
‘You are beginning to understand why.
Not how.’
His eyes lingered on me, burning the sentence in; than looked aside, at the doors.
I turned.
I realized then that the lamp had been put behind me so that it would light her entrance; and it was an entrance to take the breath away.
She was dressed in what must have been the formal evening style of 1915: an indigo silk evening wrap over a slim ivory-coloured dress of some shot material that once more narrowed and ended just above her ankles.
The hobble skirt trammelled her steps, yet charmingly; she swayed a little, seemed to both hesitate and float as she  came towards us.
Her hair was up, in a sort of Empire fashion.
She was smiling and looking at Conchis, though she glanced with a cool interest at me as I stood.
Conchis was already on his feet.
She looked as stunningly elegant, as poised and assured — because even her slight nervousness seemed professional — as if she had just stepped out of a cabine at Dior.
That was indeed my immediate thought: She's a professional model.
And then, The old devil.
The old devil spoke, after first kissing her hand.
‘Lily.
May I present Mr Nicholas Urfe.
Miss Montgomery.’
She held out her hand, which I took.
A cool hand, no pressure.
I had touched a ghost.
Our eyes met, but hers gave nothing away.
I said, ‘Hallo.’
But she replied only with a slight inclination, and then turned for Conchis to take off her wrap, which he placed over the back of his own chair.
She had bare shoulders and arms; a heavy gold and ebony bracelet; an enormously long necklace of what looked like sapphires, though I presumed they must be paste, or ultramarines.
I guessed her to be about twenty-two or three.
But there clung about her something that seemed much older, ten years older, a sort of coolness — not coldness or indifference, but a limpid aloofness; coolness in the way that one thinks of coolness on a hot summer's day.
She arranged herself in her chair, folded her hands, then smiled faintly at me.
‘It is very warm this evening.’
Her voice was completely English.
For some reason I had expected a foreign accent; but I could place this exactly.
It was my own; product of boarding school, university, the accent of what a sociologist once called the Dominant Hundred Thousand.
I said, ‘Isn't it?’
Conchis said, ‘Mr Urfe is the young schoolmaster I mentioned.’
His voice had a new tone in it: almost deference.
‘Yes.
We met last week.
That is, we caught a glimpse of each other .’
And once again she smiled faintly, but without collusion, at me before looking down.
I saw that gentleness Conchis had prepared me for.
But it was a teasing gentleness, because her face, especially her mouth, could not conceal her intelligence.
She had a way of looking slightly obliquely at me, as if she knew something I did not — not anything to do with  the role she was playing, but about life in general; as if she too had been taking lessons from the stone head.
I had expected, perhaps because the image she had presented me with the week before had been more domestic, someone less ambiguous and far less assured.
She opened a small peacock-blue fan she had been holding and began to fan herself.
Her skin was very white.
She obviously never sunbathed.
And then there was a curious little embarrassed pause, as if none of us knew what to say.
She broke it, rather like a hostess dutifully encouraging a shy dinner-guest.
‘Teaching must be a very interesting profession.’
‘Not for me.
I find it rather dull.’
‘All noble and honest things are dull.
But someone has to do them.’
‘Anyway, I forgive teaching.
Since it's brought me here.’
She slipped a look at Conchis, who bowed imperceptibly.
He was playing a kind of Talleyrand role: the gallant old fox.
‘Maurice has told me that you are not completely happy in your work.’
She pronounced Maurice in the French way.
‘I don't know if you know about the school, but —’ I paused to give her a chance to answer.
She simply shook her head, with a small smile.
‘I think they make the boys work too hard, you see, and I can't do anything about it.
It's rather frustrating.’
‘Could you not complain?’
She gave me an earnest look; beautifully and convincingly earnest.
I thought, she must be an actress.
Not a model.
‘You see…’
So it went on.
We must have sat talking for nearly fifteen minutes, in this absurd stilted way.
She questioned, I replied.
Conchis said very little, leaving the conversation to us.
I found myself formalizing my speech, as if I too was pretending to be in a drawing-room of forty years before.
After all, it was a masque, and I wanted, or after a very short while began to want, to play my part.
I found something a shade patronizing in her attitude, and I interpreted it as an attempt to upstage me; perhaps to test me, to see if I was worth playing against.
I thought once or twice that I saw a glint of sardonic amusement in Conchis's eyes, but I couldn't be sure.
In any case, I found her far too pretty, both in repose and in action (or acting), to care.
I thought of myself as a connoisseur of girls' good looks; and I knew that this was one to judge all others by.
There was a pause, and Conchis spoke.
‘Shall I tell you now what happened after I left England?’
‘Not if it would bore…
Miss Montgomery.’
‘No.
Please.
I like to listen to Maurice.’
He kept watching me, ignoring her.
‘Lily always does exactly what I want.’
I glanced at her.
‘You're very fortunate, then.’
He did not take his eyes off me.
The furrows beside his nose caught shadow, deepening them.
‘She is not the real Lily.’
This sudden dropping of the pretence took all the wind, as once again he knew it would, out of my sails.
‘Well…of course.’
I shrugged and smiled.
She was staring down at her fan.
‘Neither is she anyone impersonating the real Lily.’
‘Mr Conchis…
I don't know what you're trying to tell me.’
‘Not to jump to conclusions.’
He gave one of his rare wide smiles.
‘Now.
Where was I?
But first I must warn you that this evening I give you not a narrative.
But a character.’
I looked at Lily She seemed to me to be perceptibly hurt; and just as another wild idea was beginning to run through my mind, that she really was an amnesiac, some beautiful amnesiac he had, somehow, literally and metaphorically laid his hands on, she gave me what was beyond any doubt a contemporary look, a look out of role — a quick, questioning glance that flicked from me to Conchis's averted head and back again.
At once I had the impression that we were two actors with the same doubts about the director.
28
‘Buenos Ayres.
I lived there for nearly four years, until the spring of 1919.
I quarrelled with my uncle Anastasios, I gave English lessons, I taught the piano.
And I felt perpetually in exile from Europe.
My father was never to speak or write to me again, but after a while I began to hear from my mother.
I glanced at Lily, but now, back in role, she was watching Conchis  with a politely interested expression on her face.
Lamplight became her, infinitely.
‘Only one thing of importance happened to me in the Argentine.
A friend took me one summer on a tour of the Andean provinces.
I learnt about the exploited conditions under which the peons and gauchos had to live.
I urgently felt the need to sacrifice myself for the underprivileged.
Various things we saw decided me to become a doctor.
But the reality of my new career was harsh.
The medical faculty at Buenos Ayres would not accept me, and I had to work day and night for a year to learn enough science to be enrolled.
‘But then the war ended.
My father died soon after.
Though he never forgave me, or my mother for having helped me, both into his world and out of it, he was sufficiently my father to let sleeping dogs lie.
So far as I know my disappearance was never discovered by the authorities.
My mother was left a sufficient income.
The result of all this was that I returned to Europe and settled in Paris with her.
We lived in a huge old flat facing the Panthéon, and I began to study medicine seriously.
Among the medical students a group formed.
We all regarded medicine as a religion, and we called ourselves the Society of Reason.
We saw the doctors of the world uniting to form a scientific and ethical elite.
We should be in every land and in every government, moral supermen who would eradicate all demagogy, an self-seeking politicians, reaction, chauvinism.
We published a manifesto.
We held a public meeting in a cinema at Neuilly.
But the Communists got to hear of it.
They called us Fascists and wrecked the cinema.
We tried another meeting in another place.
That was attended by a group who called themselves the Militia of Christian Youth — Catholic ultras .
Their manners, if not their faces, were identical with those of the Communists.
Which was what they termed us.
So our grand scheme for utopianizing the world was settled in two scuffles.
And heavy bills for damages.
I was secretary of the Society of Reason.
Nothing could have been less reasonable than my fellow-members when it came to paying their share of the bills.
No doubt we deserved what we received.
Any fool can invent a plan for a more reasonable world.
In ten minutes.
In five.
But to expect people to live reasonably is like asking them to live on paregoric.’
He turned to me.
‘Would you like to read our manifesto, Nicholas?’
‘Very much.’
‘I will go and get it.
And fetch the brandy.’
And so, so soon, I was alone with Lily.
But before I could phrase the right remark, the question that would show her I saw no reason why in Conchis's absence she should maintain the pretending to believe, she stood up.
‘Shall we walk up and down?’
I walked beside her.
She was only an inch or two shorter than myself, and she walked slowly, slimly, a shade self-consciously, looking out to sea, avoiding my eyes, as if she now was shy.
I looked round.
Conchis was out of hearing.
‘Have you been here long?’
‘I have not been anywhere long.’
She gave me a quick look, softened by a little smile.
We had gone round the other arm of the terrace, into the shadow cast by the corner of the bedroom wall.
‘An excellent return of service, Miss Montgomery.’
‘If you play tennis, I must play tennis back.’
‘Must?’
‘Maurice must have asked you not to question me.’
‘Oh come on.
In front of him, okay.
I mean, good God, we're both English, aren't we?’
‘That gives us the freedom to be rude to each other?’
‘To get to know each other.’
‘Perhaps we are not equally interested in…getting to know each other.’
She looked away into the night.
I was nettled.
‘You do this thing very charmingly.
But what exactly is the game?’
‘Please.’
Her voice was faintly sharp.
‘I really cannot stand this.’
I guessed why she had brought me round into the shadow.
I couldn't see much of her face.
‘Stand what?’
She turned and looked at me and said, in a quiet but fiercely precise voice, ‘Mr Urfe.’
I was put in my place.
She went and stood against the parapet at the far end of the terrace, looking towards the central ridge to the north.
A breath of listless air from the sea washed behind us.
‘Would you shawl me, please?’
‘Would I?’
‘My wrap.’
I hesitated, then went back for the indigo wrap.
Conchis was still indoors.
I returned and put it round her shoulders.
Without warning she reached her hand sideways and took mine and pressed it, as if to give me courage; and perhaps to make me identify her with the original, gentle Lily.
She remained staring out across the clearing to the trees.
‘Why did you do that?’
‘I did not mean to be unkind.’
I mimicked her formal tone.
‘Can, may I, ask you…where you live here?’
She turned and leant against the edge of the parapet, so that we were facing opposite ways, and came to a decision.
‘Over there.’
She pointed with her fan.
‘That's the sea.
Or are you pointing at thin air?’
‘I assure you I live over there.’
An idea struck me.
‘On a yacht?’
‘On land.’
‘Curious.
I've never seen your house.’
‘I expect you have the wrong kind of sight.’
I could just make out that she had a little smile at the corner of her lips.
We were standing very close, the perfume around us.
‘I'm being teased.’
‘Perhaps you are teasing yourself.’
‘I hate being teased.’
She made a little mock inclination.
She had a beautiful neck; the throat of a Nefertiti.
The photo in Conchis's room made her look heavy-chinned, but she wasn't.
‘Then I shall continue to tease you.’
There was silence.
Conchis was away far too long for the excuse he had given.
Her eyes sought mine, a shade uncertainly, but I kept silent, and she looked away.
Very gently, as to a wild animal, I reached out my hand and made her turn her head.
She let my fingers rest on the cool skin of her check; but something in her now steady look, a declaration of inaccessibility, made me take my hand away.
Yet our eyes lingered, and hers conveyed both an indication and a warning: Subtlety may win me, but force never will.
She turned to face the sea again.
‘Do you like Maurice?’
‘This is only the third time I've met him.’
She appeared to wait for me to go on.
‘I'm very grateful for his asking me over here.
Especially —’
She cut short the compliment.
‘We all love him very much.’
‘Who is we?’
‘His other visitors and myself.’
I could hear the inverted commas.
‘'Visitor’ seems an odd way of putting it.’
‘Maurice does not like ‘ghost’.’
I smiled.
‘Or ‘actress’?’
Her face betrayed not the least preparedness to concede, to give up her role.
‘We are all actors and actresses, Mr Urfe.
You included.’
‘Of course.
On the stage of the world.’
She smiled and looked down.
‘Be patient.’
‘I couldn't imagine anyone I'd rather be more patient with.
Or credulous about.’
She stared out over the sea.
Her voice was suddenly lower, more sincere, out of role.
‘Not for me.
For Maurice.’
‘And for Maurice.’
‘You will understand.’
‘Is that a promise?’
‘A prediction.’
There was a sound from the table.
She glanced back, then into my eyes.
She had the face I had first seen in the music-room door: both amused and conspiratorial, and now appealing as well.
‘Please pretend.’
‘Okay.
But only in his presence.’
She took my arm and we moved back towards him.
He gave us both his little interrogatory headshake.
‘Mr Urfe is very understanding.’
‘I am glad.’
‘All will be well.’
She smiled at me and sat down and remained thoughtfully for a while with her chin resting on her hand.
Conchis had poured her a  minute glass of crème de menthe , which she sipped.
He pointed to an envelope he had put in my place.
‘The manifesto.
It took me a long time to find.
Read it later.
There is an anonymous criticism of great force at the end.’