

Chapter Twelve
Blanche had spent a lot of time, relatively, on her make-up.
It was not every night, she reflected, that she dined with a secret agent.
In the cracked mirror of the restaurant's toilet, she admired the extra blusher on her cheeks, the blue pencil over her fleshy eyelids, the coral lipstick.
Her face was not so much beautiful as interesting, she told herself, her hair thick and full, her eyes alive and sparkling.
Her good humour rapidly dissipated once out in the restaurant.
Urquhart was late, very late.
Blanche read a copy of the Decameron until she could bear it no more and finally took a table, hidden behind a flourishing aspidistra, in a corner of the restaurant.
She told the waiter someone was due to join her and waited.
For half an hour.
The waiter, a cocky Italian who flicked his buttocks at her at the least opportunity, eyed her patronisingly and made attempts to chat her up in feeble English.
She finally called him across and ordered for one.
A pink carnation smirked at her from a transparent vase on the table.
She brooded on this flower with a desiccating look.
A thin, tall shape slipped into the chair opposite.
‘Sorry about the delay.
Important business, I'm afraid.’
She smouldered.
Bad time-keeping in general was high in her canon of sins but not as heinous as bad time-keeping in the particular: spoiling her dinner.
‘You're only an hour late,’ she said with staccato coolness.
‘So I've already ordered.’
‘For two, I hope,’ he replied with desperate good humour.
She massacred the attempt to gloss over his lateness with a stare.
It was the first time she had a chance to look at him closely.
The light, a single bulb in an ethnic basket, was suspended from the ceiling and lit just the table.
The area round it was hidden in the penumbra.
Urquhart's face was thrown into eerie relief from the light which shone downwards and so deepened his eye sockets, yet also bounced upwards  and painted a smudge of white on his chin.
He was neither young nor middle-aged.
Any age between thirty and forty would have stuck to him equally well.
He was clean-shaven with a face that had been ravaged by acne when younger.
As Blanche had decided before, the effect-now he was mature was not unsightly.
It added interest to a face that otherwise would have appeared too white, smooth and bland.
A crest of wavy, blond hair was loosely rooted on a magisterial forehead.
His eyelashes were extravagantly long, tar black and as thick as the teeth on a comb, and his lids were gently slanted, harbouring eyes of an electrifying blue.
They had something Celtic in them, dark and brooding.
Blanche's irritation crackled on the air.
He jabbered about football for the first five minutes to smother her angry silence.
Not about the great figures of the game but of the subtle strategies behind it: the financial deals, how players could be disposed in different formations on the pitch.
He even transformed the table into a football pitch and by pushing a salt cellar here, and a napkin there, explained how a good manager and team could win the advantage.
Soccer had the same effect on Blanche as bad wine: drowsiness and a headache.
She realised that Urquhart had neither the grace nor sensitivity to apologise and she wondered whether it was due to shyness or boorishness.
‘I have the same involvement in soccer as I do in your case,’ he concluded.
‘I'm a spectator, watching with an informed interest.
I don't actually play football any more, you see.
That all stopped when I got a back injury at school.
All I can do now is go to games and watch Glasgow Rangers from the Copeland Road stand.’
‘The trouble is, Mr Urquhart-’
‘— please call me Robert.’
She preferred the surname alone.
It seemed more appropriate for a faceless spectator.
‘The trouble is, I don't think people on the sidelines are going to help me very much.
I want more people — to carry on with your footballing metaphor — to join my team, to kick the ball for me.
I need more people like my detective sergeant who rolls his sleeves up and gets on with the job.’
He sat back calmly and rubbed the end of his neat nose.
He  summoned over the waiter, who was chastened now that a man had arrived, and ordered wine to supplement Blanche's mineral water.
The waiter swaggered away.
‘You see,’ the chief inspector went on, ‘I've come to a dead end.’
Urquhart did not blink.
He listened intently.
Blanche thought she detected a flicker of self-satisfaction, as though she had confirmed what had been for him until then just a suspicion.
‘I've got various suspects.
It could have been the wife or daughter, wanting his money.
The man he sacked for fiddling the books of his business.
A jilted lover.
Or her husband.’
‘Or there's the chance Mills got murdered by a sadistic lunatic,’ Urquhart added.
‘And always the possibility he was killed because of something to do with his time in the secret service.’
His lips tightened.
‘In theory, yes.’
His eyes flickered to left and right, with hardly a turn of the head.
It was the automatic and well-oiled gesture of someone used to trading in secrets.
‘I'll do my best to help you.
What do you want to know?’
‘Not very much.’
She paused and squinted at him.
‘Who killed Graham Mills and why.’
Urquhart laughed and drummed his fingers on the table.
The knuckles were white, the fingers well scrubbed and bony.
Healthy hands, dentist's hands.
‘I don't know.’
‘Come on!
What was the result of your enquiry into Mills’ murder?
It's the least you can tell me after keeping me waiting for an hour!’
‘Didn't Dickinson tell you anything?’
He smiled mischievously.
‘Apart from giving you my private phone number?’
‘I guessed you wanted him to give it to me anyway,’ she punched back.
The fingers stopped drumming.
He flattened his hand on the table.
‘Of course.
Should you need help.’
Blanche was pleased.
He had come to realise she was no puppet to be manipulated.
‘Which I do.
Dickinson said he couldn't give any and I should just go and get on with it.’
‘He was being honest.’
He pursed his lips.
Blanche waited and watched him intently, mouth open, one eye half closed.
‘I was in charge,’ he continued in an offhand way.
‘It seemed to me a fairly routine enquiry.’
He scratched the side of his nose.
‘Mills left the Secret Intelligence Service — that's MI6 if you didn't know—’
‘— I did know.’
‘Good.’
He nodded, as though impressed, before leaning forward.
‘He left SIS back in sixty-two but kept some contact with the service for at least a decade afterwards.’
‘Doing what?’
‘Can't say.’
‘Come on!
It can't have been that important.’
Urquhart looked at her impassively.
‘I just can't tell you.
Six sent me a summary of his career but even refused me access to all his personal files.’
Blanche had her face in what she hoped was an alluring pout of disappointment when the wine arrived.
Urquhart gulped down three glasses almost without a pause.
‘They're obviously not going to let just anyone go burrowing through their Registry willy-nilly.
The whole tone of my contacts with them was that Mills was,’ he paused to scratch his eyelid, ‘'burnt out’.
He wasn't privy to any really sensitive stuff that could have put him in danger — that's according to my liaison fella in SIS.’
‘Who's that?’
‘My business.’
The chief inspector smiled winningly.
‘Please call me Blanche.’
He chuckled-gently.
‘Whatever I call you, it's still my business.’
Urquhart gulped down a fourth glass.
‘Blanche.’
‘So, what did you say in your report?’
‘The truth.’
‘Which is?’
‘There's no evidence of any espionage connection.’
‘Are you always so sure of the truth?’
‘I'm sure there's no evidence if that's what you mean.’
He shrugged.
His hand gestures were slightly more generous, but there were no other signs of the wine he had drunk.
He ordered a second bottle; ‘It's almost impossible to prove anything in the spying world.
The not-proven verdict is standard.
Besides, the KGB doesn't go in for assassinations these days.’
Blanche looked skeptical to draw him out.
Urquhart lifted his chair with both hands and moved it  round so that he could cross his legs.
‘OK, so there was poor Georgi Markov a few years ago in London.
Poisoned by the Bulgarians.
But the KGB and the CIA don't think assassination's worth the candle any more.
Too afraid of the propaganda implications.’
‘So it doesn't happen at all?’
‘Selected targets occasionally.
More often than not, one of their own, who some people might say deserved it — a defector usually.’
He said it without emotion, like someone discussing the death of turkeys in an abattoir.
Urquhart had come straight from the office and was still wearing a grey suit with a red tie.
He loosened the tight knot round his throat.
His eyes had come to rest less on the table and more on her.
His bony shoulders were less hunched.
‘Did you find anything suspicious?’
‘No.
Mills wasn't gay, so that ruled out a killing of that sort.
You've gone through the other possibilities.
They're far more likely.’
Conversation with Urquhart.
was like grappling with warm jelly.
Every solid fact slipped out of Blanche's grasp as soon as she believed she grasped it.
Like her, she thought, he had developed the skill of talking endlessly but saying little.
‘Any doubts at all?’
Her companion stared at her as if to fathom her motives.
He propped his right elbow on the table and rested his chin on the cupped hand — the pose of a football manager pondering how to redeploy his players when neither side has shown any likelihood of scoring a goal.
‘I couldn't make my mind up about exactly why Mills resigned from SIS in 1962.
He was in a fairly senior position.
He seemed to lose more than he gained.’
‘Perhaps,’ the chief inspector remarked flippantly, ‘he was a Soviet agent and decided to get out while the going was good.’
Urquhart looked at her impassively.
His eyelids were raw and red.
He leant forward and spoke in a grim whisper.
‘This is highly confidential, you understand?’
She nodded.
‘There is a lot of circumstantial evidence that Mills did work for the Russians.’
Blanche chewed the last mouthful of spaghetti bolognese to  help her absorb the implications of this discovery.
‘And you don't think that can be related to his murder?’
He shook his head.
‘Lots of Brits who spied for the Soviets died peacefully in their beds.’
Urquhart was enjoying himself.
He was in control, the keeper of the secrets.
He poured himself another glass of wine from the second, half-empty bottle.
Blanche refused.
She wanted to keep a clear head.
‘Have you come across a man called Taczek?’
The MI5 officer ‘s lips tautened.
‘Yeah.
His name cropped up as an acquaintance of Mills.’
He looked steadily at Blanche, watching for a reaction.
‘He did some freelance work for MI6 in the late forties and fifties.
Keeping contact with  émigré groups and so on.
Taczek told me he could think of nothing from those times that would have made Mills any sort of target for a KGB assassin — or any other sort of assassin come to that.’
The waiter arrived with Urquhart's main course, insipid rolls of an unidentifiable substance masquerading as ‘involtini siciliani’.
He picked at it while she pondered the results of his visit to Taczek.
‘That's what Taczek told me as well,’ she remarked.
‘But Tatyana Nowak said to me a number of Poles had a grudge against Mills for something or other — she didn't say what, and I had no chance to find out.’
Urquhart lifted a bony hand in a gesture of resignation, his mouth chomping heartily.
He ate the peas from the cradled fork, not from the back of it as Blanche's mother had taught her.
The chief inspector remembered the photo she had borrowed from Mrs Nowak.
‘What about another man who worked with Mills back in the early fifties.?’
‘Who's that?’
‘I don't know his name.
He's in a photo of Mrs Nowak's taken on the day her husband went back to Poland.
She told me he worked under Mills in the same department of MI6.’
Urquhart widened his eyes slightly, whether as a gesture of surprise or warning — since the waiter came up behind her just then and was about to remove their dirty plates — she could not be sure.
The waiter asked whether they wanted dessert.
Urquhart declined.
She ordered an ice cream.
‘Can't help you if you don't know the name.’
He pushed himself back in his  chair.
‘Did Mrs Nowak make a special mention of him or something?’
‘No.
He was just in this photograph she had on her dresser.’
‘What did it show?’
‘You sound very interested.’
Urquhart shrugged to pretend indifference.
Blanche stared into his face but could read nothing from it.
It was as blank as a stone worn by aeons of tides on the seashore.
‘What else did she talk about?’
‘She tried to spin me a yarn about her husband going back to Poland on holiday in 1950 and being killed in a car crash.
What do you know about it?’
Blanche expected him to mutter with disbelief as she had when she had digested the story.
Instead he rubbed a bony finger along the flank of his nose.
‘The story about the car crash is true, as far as I know.
As for the holiday, I agree with you, it sounds a wee bit unlikely.
But not as unlikely as you think.
The Poles were almost as keen to get foreign currency then as they are now and they allowed certain visits to relatives.’
‘You haven't answered the question,’ she prodded, turning an empty wineglass in her hand.
‘What was Tatyana's husband doing back in Poland?’
‘Snap.’
He bared his clean, white teeth in a smile.
‘I don't know.
My investigation didn't cover irrelevant things like that.’
Robert Urquhart did know more than he pretended, Blanche was convinced, but she was not convinced about the thoroughness of his investigation into Mills' murder.
His attitude towards it was dismissive and arrogant almost as though MI5 had decided the result before the enquiry had begun.
His loftiness irritated and intrigued her.
‘Mrs Nowak was surprised by the amount of money Mills left her.
Were you?’
‘Not particularly.’
‘Didn't you go and see her?’
The chief inspector knew the answer before he spoke it.
‘She wasn't relevant.
It would have been a waste of time.’
He gulped down greedily the last few drops of red wine.
They had finished two bottles.
His pale cheeks had taken on a ruddy glow.
Neither of them were drunk but she became aware of how warm her bare forearms were, their curves emphasised  by the down caught in the back lighting from the restaurant.
They were ripe and plump, she reflected, worthy of caress, and the grasped her right bicep in her left hand.
She held the grip for a second or two, released it and then stroked her fingertips along the edge of the muscle.
She caught Urquhart's glance when she looked up, a musing and erotic stare that swerved away.
He blushed, like a gangly adolescent Blanche once caught ogling her breasts when she wore a bikini on the beach.
She found Urquhart's look, strained through those black eyelashes, oddly arousing.
The waiter conducted two unsteady businessmen to the empty table beside them.
Both had leaky eyes and cheeks etched with scarlet lines of burst blood vessels.
They were smartly dressed in silk ties and well-cut suits.
One, with a tousled bundle of greasy hair, waved his arms about in mock anger.
At the table beyond, two blowsy women and four men were on a works outing from the Midlands.
They flicked ash from their cigarettes into the empty wine-glasses and shouted each other down in vain attempts to be witty.
Urquhart looked to the ceiling in a gesture of comic despair.
Blanche saw her moment.
‘You were rather mean by the way to tell everyone I spoke to — or was about to speak to — not to talk any more to Scotland Yard.
You told Reynolds, the caretaker, to keep quiet.
And Robert Pollock.’
Urquhart blushed — a hue that was even more scarlet than that created by the wine suffusing his skin.
He looked down with a smile.
‘Yeah, I got a call from Pollock.’
‘And since he didn't call me back, you obviously told him to keep quiet.’
‘I've heard a couple of so-called radical journalists are sniffing around, pushed on by Christine Mills.
I was playing safe.
That's all.
Besides, that time of Mills’ life has got nothing to do with his murder.
I've checked it.
You're wasting your time.’
Urquhart ordered a third bottle of wine from the waiter with flicking buttocks.
He had drunk over a bottle and a half already but showed little outward sign of over-consumption, except for his accent curdling into a thicker Scots.
For lack of anything better, she asked Urquhart where he was from.
‘Glasgow, that's my home city.
Born in Govan to Calvinist  parents.
They thought the life of their only son could be fulfilled through belief in Jesus Christ, hard work, a good education and keeping the Sabbath.’
His blue eyes twinkled.
‘Their only son thought a bit differently.’
He said he had two sisters but that he was the only and beloved son.
His father was a shipyard worker, made redundant when the yard was closed.
‘He and my mum live alone in a council flat in one of those awful blocks in Easterhouse.
Because of the cuts in the repair budget, the roof leaks, the windows leak, the walls run with condensation.
I don't suppose you know much about life on council estates?’ he asked sardonically.
She prickled at the implication that she had led a soft and protected life.
But he was right.
She did not know much about it.
Her childhood hardships had been limited to undergoing doting but humourless tirades from her mother.
His voice softened when he saw her reaction and became more confident, as though he could now say what he wanted rather than what he ought to say.
‘Dad was made redundant when the yard was closed in seventy-three.
He and Mum were moved out to the new estate.
The work was meant to follow the workers.
But it never did.
It broke his he art, never working again.
He just shuffles round the house.
Sits in his armchair for hours and says nothing.
Just wheezes.’
The waiter arrived with the third bottle of Valpolicella and Urquhart poured himself a glass with the same relish as if it were his first.
‘Glasgow's had a facelift in the past few years but it's no more than that.
It hasn't given people proper jobs.
The schools are changed in ways people don't want.
They're made to pay taxes they didn't vote for.
Some of the Scots feel they're living in a colony.
Down in Westminster Thatcher's got no idea.’
He spoke passionately, even wildly — a tone that was the complete opposite of his usual, cool manner.
He leant forward on the table, emphasising the points with a thin finger.
Think of yourself first and damn the rest.
Ye shall be judged as ye can spend.
And if you're old or poor or handicapped or just think there should be more to life than this — then go to hell.
I tell you, the times are out of joint.’
He offered her another glass of wine.
She shook her head.
He poured himself another, swilled it down with a grim smile  and cradled the empty wineglass in his hands.
‘I'm sorry,’ he murmured.
‘I tend to get carried away when I've drunk a wee bit too much.
Imitate the way my dad goes on.’
He chuckled.
‘And, my God, does he go on.’
Blanche scanned Robert's face for his true beliefs but in vain: his features had collapsed back into inscrutability.
The waiter smacked a plastic plate containing the bill on to the corner of the table and glared at them.
There was a queue of customers chattering by the door and waiting for places.
‘Your expenses or mine?’ asked the MI5 officer.
‘Yours.
You can launder them better.’
He chuckled and wiped the back of his hand across his lips.
‘Malicious rumour.’
‘Incidentally,was it your lot or Special Branch who were tailing Mills just before the murder?’
Urquhart's hand stopped dead in its trajectory towards the bill.
He dropped his chin and examined her over imaginary spectacles.
‘Where did you get that from?’
‘An informant.’
‘Don't be silly.
Who told you?’
In his voice there was a squeak of alarm.
The policewoman was surprised because she assumed he would have been privy to everything about Mills.
She realised that even the keepers of the secrets did not know them all.
She refused, gently and firmly, to tell him.
She did not want Reynolds troubled again.
Urquhart polished his nose in silence for a few seconds.
He was irritated, the chief inspector decided, by her obstinacy, and hovered on the edge of asking her again.
But his pride did not allow it.
He rose pensively, and a little unsteadily, from the table and disappeared out of sight behind the woven rush lampshade, the same tall shadow she recalled from Mills' flat.
Outside the evening air swept over her like a refreshing bath.
Somewhere behind a block of flats at the top of the street, a rectangle of deep inky blue in the twilight, a dog barked.
A couple strolled past on clicking heels which echoed from one side of the road to the other.
She sensed Urquhart's presence beside her.
‘We should meet in a couple of days’ time.
I might be able to answer a few more of your questions.
I'll give you a call.’
She was not sure whether she wanted to meet Robert  Urquhart again.
He had given her little useful information and spoilt her digestion.
Before Blanche could turn to reply, he was already striding away up the road in his suit.
She noticed for the first time that he was wearing a pair of white, glowing incongruously in the twilight.
Chapter Thirteen
‘Haven't you found out who did it yet?’
‘We're doing our best, Miss Mills.’
the formality, Blanche hoped, would help to calm her.
She had been half expecting the call from Christine ever since Urquhart's warning.
‘It's bloody pathetic.
It's the same with these terrible rape cases.
The police just piss around, taking fingerprints, interviewing people.
They never tell the women in the area when they're in danger.’
‘They can't go around alarming people on the basis of flimsy evidence.’
‘Alarming people!
Alarming people for Chrissake, you should be alarming people.
Just like my dad.
There's a bloody killer out there, Chief Inspector.
A sadistic madman, wandering around free to murder again.
For Chrissake, why haven't you arrested anybody yet?’
The torrent of words tumbled out of the phone pell-mell, a flood that the chief inspector was unable to stem.
Blanche decided to become familiar again to try to tame her hysteria.
‘Look, Christine, we really are doing our best.
We're talking to anybody and everybody.’
‘Doing your best!’
Christine Mills spluttered.
‘The only thing the Met-does best is beat up blacks and sit in front of bloody computers planning how to crush the coming riots of Thatcher's underclass.’
‘That's ridiculous.’
‘Hardly any of you are out on the beat trying to catch murderers and rapists.’
Blanche said nothing.
She wanted to say, ‘I've had enough of your hysterical phone call, you spoilt, confused little bitch.’
But she knew from experience that it was as dangerous for policemen to speak honestly to the public as for members of the royal family.
The woman detective wondered what had  driven Christine to phone her at Scotland Yard.
Genuine frustration?
A guilty conscience?
Delayed shock?
She allowed the silence to hum on the line, hoping it might make Christine Mills understand how ridiculous she sounded.
‘Are you still there, Chief Inspector?’
‘Yes.’
‘Well, have you got nothing to say?’
‘Nothing to add, no.’
Blanche wanted the conversation to finish, otherwise she might become irate and blurt out something she regretted.
She disliked losing her temper against her will because it rarely achieved useful results and symbolised impotence rather than strength: always better to channel anger than display it, she thought.
‘I'll obviously be in touch if I have any news.’
The policewoman waited with a certain mischievous expectation.
‘Look, I have some influential friends, you know, Chief Inspector.
People who might be interested in your lack of progress’.
‘Is that a threat, Miss Mills, or a promise of promotion?’
‘You think you're clever, don't you?’
‘Not particularly,’ Blanche lied.
‘But above average.’
I've phone clicked into a hum as Christine Mills slammed down the receiver.
Blanche wished her patience had lasted longer but she shrugged stoically.
She harried the detective constable who was checking Christine Mills' alibis.
Christine's live-in lover had confirmed the holiday dates she had given: they had travelled abroad around the date-of the murder, and he had vouched for her staying at home in the days leading up to the death.
Blanche was disquieted but not sure why.
Christine Mills' call reminded Blanche that she had no description whatsoever of the killer.
After tedious checks a clutch of people who had been seen on Hampstead Heath around the time of the death had been traced but none could be linked to the murder.
Spittals read the reports his female graduate detective had been sending him and, by one of those acts of intellectual percipience for which he was renowned, concluded that she was far from knowing the identity of the murderer.
He rubbed his hands together frantically as usual.
‘I'll have  to re-allocate you to another job soon, Chief Inspector, unless you can show some progress.’
Blanche noticed he said ‘some progress’ rather, than ‘more progress’.
‘I'm doing my best, sir.’
She realised with a suppressed groan that she was forced to justify herself to the chief superintendent in the same terms as she had defended herself against Christine Mills.
‘Of course you are.’
Spittals even managed to impart a patronising rustle to his whirring hands.
Blanche was about to describe her meeting with Urquhart and hopes of covert sources of information.
But she swallowed the words.
‘Please don't do it yet, sir.
I'm just starting to make progress.’
The chief superintendent stared at her colourlessly and tightened his lips.
The day after, Blanche was telephoned by a callow and panic-stricken press officer.
A well-known columnist on a liberal newspaper — short and fat and pompous, the inspector knew from seeing him interviewed on television, and presumably an ‘influential friend’ of Christine Mills — was demanding details of the latest developments in the Mills case.
He had hinted darkly of rumours of police incompetence and attempts to smother establishment scandal.
Blanche told the press officer to invite him round for an ‘off the record’ briefing.
If he accepted, Blanche would be able to cross examine him but if, as she suspected, he proffered an accuse and refused, the chief inspector could ignore any threat.
Meanwhile she decided to hold Spittals at bay by investigating the dead man's link with the Polish community in London.
Tadeusz Swod did not smile.
Life, Blanche soon discovered, had given him few reasons to do so.
He gestured with a long, withered arm for her to follow him up the stairs.
His house in a respectable street in Balham smelt damp and cold, an effect enhanced rather than discouraged by the adopted English cosiness of the decoration: patterned carpets, patterned wallpaper, smoked-glass lampshades and brass knick-knacks on the walls.
Swod's name and address had been given to Blanche by a librarian in the Polish Centre in Hammersmith — the one to which Mills had bequeathed a legacy.
The librarian smelt  of almonds for some reason, and assured the chief inspector that Swod was a respected historian who knew much about the Poles and their links with the British secret service.
The historian had turned his front bedroom into a study.
Books and papers in neat rows and piles crammed all the available space between floor and ceiling.
His hunched figure padded across to the desk in the bay and Swod gestured for the police officer to sit down.
His face was remarkable: gaunt, wizened and pale, the skin pulled taut across the prominent bones.
His stare was made the more intense by his ability to hardly blink at all.
His eyes were like black pools of water, his hair a hoary white, prickly and short, with a parting down the middle which looked as though it had been cut by a Stanley knife.
Blanche was disappointed.
She had expected for some reason a warm and well-fleshed figure, dressed in tweeds saturated in the comforting perfume of unsmoked tobacco.
She chuckled at her romanticism: even most of the historians who had taught her at Cambridge sported tattered leather jackets and greasy jeans.
‘Could you show me your identification please, Chief Inspector?’
She expected his suspicion and passed across her wallet of blue plastic.
Rather than glance at it as most people did, he reached out and took it gently from her grasp.
He studied her warrant card intently, as though there might be some real doubt about her identity, and then returned it to her without even the glimmer of a smile.
She explained why she had come.
He spoke deliberately, weighing each word.
‘Graham Mills and the Polish  émigrés in London…’
He grunted.
‘Do you have pen and paper?’
She nodded unenthusiastically.
It was going to be a lecture but she hoped a more interesting one than most of those delivered by neat men with grey hair at the Police College.
Swod raised his smouldering eyes to the ceiling to remember a quotation, and recited it with the relish of an evangelist preacher.
‘I keep my Death's Head battalions ready without mercy or pity to kill men, women and children of Polish origin.
That is the only way to get the ‘Lebensraum’, the living space, we need.’’
The Pole scratched his head with an emaciated finger.
‘Hitler said that in 1939 and he had his way.
The Poles  were slaughtered in millions.’
He leant forward in his chair accusingly.
‘Did you know only sixty per cent of Poles with university degrees survived the war?’
The chief inspector shuffled in her armchair.
Not a single fact she had heard so far was relevant to the case.
His unblinking eyes registered her impatience.
‘All of this may not seem important to you, but in history who is to say where understanding of a particular series of events starts?
The point I am making is that Poland was like some living body that had all the life blood sucked out of it at the end of the war.’
Swod paused and looked down at his typewriter.
It was an old-fashioned one, as heavy and solid as a lorry.
He was wearing a thick grey cardigan over a white shirt and it reminded her of how chilly the air was in the house.
Swod was of the generation that reached for an extra layer of clothing rather than turn the heating on.
He looked up again, the head dignified and earnest.
‘But people hope against hope.
Its one of their most endearing characteristics,’ he said, as if they were fools.
‘some Poles hoped that although things were desperate, the West would do something after all.
In that spirit WIN was set up in 1945.’
‘What's that?’ she asked with her usual directness.
‘It stood for ‘Wolność’ i Niepodlegtność’, meaning Freedom and Independence in Polish, and it was formed from the remnants of the Polish Home Army.
The Home Army had fought against the Germans in the second World War.
So WIN was revived with the support of the Western Allies to help the Poles fight against their new rulers.
the Soviets.
The Central Intelligence Agency and Britain's MI6 provided funds.’
Blanche nodded.
she knew at last what the historian had been approaching.
Swod allowed himself a quarter smile at her recognition but his body was so unused to this display of emotion that he began to cough.
He finally wiped a dribble of saliva from the side of his mouth before continuing.
‘It was doomed to failure.
Poland was divided against itself to begin with: the communists and the WIN anti-communists hated each other.
And after the horrors and destruction of the war, people were tired out.
They had had enough of fighting, no matter against whom.
And of course, the Soviet security police  were so efficient.’
He paused and moved in his chair, as if his bones ached.
Blanche scribbled the odd note: she needed few because her memory was retentive.
‘The German Gestapo weren't a patch on the Russians in terms of efficiency.
I was captured by the Gestapo during the war and was terrified because I had on me a number of incriminating documents, lists of names, maps and so on.
They didn't search me straightaway because it was time to change the guard at six o'clock precisely.
The Germans are very orderly.
so they wasted time by changing the guard, and I had all the time in the world to destroy the documents.
The Russians on the other hand would have stripped me naked, even if the temperature was far below zero, and then would have sliced every article of my clothes, even down to my shoes, into tiny pieces.
With the Russians I would have been executed on the spot.
With the Germans, I just spent two years in Auschwitz.’
No wonder, Blanche realised, Swod could only pinion his face into the imitation of a smile.
He waited until his visitor finished a note.
She shivered in her armchair through cold and impatience, thinking that Swod relished a captive audience but that she hated forming it.
Suddenly he leaned forward and a note of pain quavered in his voice.
‘In 1947 people were rounded up, some were executed.
Everyone in the West thought WIN was finished.’
Blanche saw the opportunity to prod the historian towards her goal.
‘And this is where Mills fits in?’
Swod stared at her, unblinking, lifting a hand in a gesture of patience.
Just before WIN was smashed by the KGB, it sent out delegates to Paris and London and Washington and soon afterwards these delegates received news through various sources that WIN was being built up again.
Would the British secret service, MI6, and the CIA help?
And this is where Mills starts to fit in.’
His eyes widened to accentuate the point and reprimand Blanche for thinking that he was straying from the matter in hand.
Swod paused, as though expecting everything to be clear now to the chief inspector.
But to her annoyance it was not.
He reminded her of a mathematics mistress who had taught her at school.
she never finished her explanations of formulae because she used to  stop halfway through for the cleverest girls to give the answer.
The cleverest girls always knew the answer of course.
Blanche never did, and had hated maths ever since.
‘How does he fit in?’
‘MI6, as you probably know, is the British intelligence service charged with spying and secret operations abroad.
Mills worked for it and was the officer responsible for any new Polish operations, amongst others.
He also had some involvement in attempts to land agents and arms on the Baltic cost.
It's all a long time ago now of course.
People have rather forgotten about it, although that doesn't stop the government taking legal action against former agents who want to write about it.’
Blanche adopted a quizzical expression.
She knew little about espionage and, until this murder case, cared less.
One instinct whispered that spying, like some police work, was a necessary but grubby business and so should be secret.
Another told her spying, again like police work, was a sacred cow, the subject of pompous statements of loyalty from overprotective politicians, and so should be regularly threatened with the abattoir.
‘I don't suppose you would know much about MI6's history would you?’ he went on.
‘Pretty chequered at the best of times.
The Russians know all about it.
It's only the British people who are kept in the dark.’
The chief inspector twiddled her ballpoint pen.
she wanted the digression to end.
‘MI6 and CIA pumped in money, arms, radios.
They even parachuted in some agents.
But WIN was leaking like a sieve, the Polish militia were told in advance and the men were picked up as soon as they touched the ground.
Then the KGB decided it was time to roll up the whole operation.’
‘How did they do that?’
‘They arrested about a hundred people.
On Radio Warsaw in December 1952 WIN was revealed to have been a puppet of the KGB since it was revived in 1948.
The West had just been sending gold straight to Stalin's coffers.’
Swod pulled the skin back even tauter over his cheekbones.
‘some were put in jail for two to three years.
A few…
’ His eyes were still directed at her but seemed to turn inwards, glistening with memory.
‘A few were tortured and executed in secret.
Those  were the days of Stalin.’
A gust of wind whisked a patter of rain against the window.
Blanche shuffled in her chair, agitating her toes to restore the circulation.
She wondered whether Swod suffered the cold as a form of endurance.
It fitted his ascetic character.
‘How was Graham Mills involved with all this.?’
‘You think it has something to do with his murder?’ he asked pointedly, narrowing his eyes.
‘I have been wondering about it ever since I first heard.
I thought I might receive a visit from someone — but from security, not the police, checking up.’
With a flutter of surprise, the chief inspector recalled Urquhart's desultory enquiry.
‘You weren't seen by MI5 then?’
‘No.
But then, all this business happened a long time ago.
Decades ago.
People forget.
People forget there were rumours going round that WIN and some of the other spies were not just penetrated in Poland, but betrayed by an agent inside SIS in London — apart from Philby.’
He glanced up, an actor keen to verify whether he had achieved an intended effect.
The chief inspector was fascinated by him: a farrago of high seriousness and mischief.
‘Are you saying Mills was a traitor, that he helped to mislead us into thinking WIN was genuine?’
Swod stared at her impassively and said nothing for moment.
He ran a skeletal hand over the bristles of his hair.
His will was cold and sharp, like a steel blade.
‘No.
What I am saying is that Mills was one of the MI6 officers with responsibility for WIN.
He knew about the whole organisation.
He also kept in touch with Washington, CIA liaison and all that.
Your people in security have very strong suspicions.’
Blanche frantically wiggled her toes inside her shoes again to try to warm them.
‘Is there any proof?’
He shrugged.
‘Espionage, Chief Inspector, is not like arithmetic.
The answer is…to so many decimal points, plus or minus so much.
Unless someone confesses, the answers are grey, not black and white.’
The conversation was destined to be elliptical, the chief inspector concluded, however hard she tried to make it more direct, and decided to make her questions more oblique.
‘How grey was Mills?’
Another flurry of rain whipped across the pane.
Swod twisted in his chair to look, hollow-eyed, out of the window.
‘Mills was investigated at least three times Once in the mid fifties and again about 1964.
Then he was investigated again in the seventies.
There was evidence that could be seen to point either way and so the verdict was left open.
As an historian I would agree with that judgment.’
He picked a stray, white hair from his cardigan.
‘How did you know him?’
Swod raised his hairless eyebrows in surprise.
‘I assumed someone told you.
I helped set up WIN after the war and was one of its representatives in London.
I met him then.
After Auschwitz, WIN gave me some hope.’
A hope that was soon crushed, the chief inspector reflected, scrutinising Swod's stern face.
‘Is there anyone you know who thought Mills was a traitor and cared enough to see him dead?’
‘No,’ Swod answered simply.
‘Besides, why wait so long to do it.
‘Perhaps the murderer only had enough evidence now to decide on revenge?’
‘Fanciful, Chief Inspector.
Fanciful.’
Blanche pressed on.
‘Perhaps Mills confessed?’
‘To confess one needs a sense of sin.
Mills did not have that.’
‘A sense of sin isn't always necessary.
Just unbearable pressure.’
Swod pursed his lips with faint irascibility: his ‘bon mot’ about Mills had not been as conclusive as he hoped.
‘That's always possible.
But the evidence against Mills was circumstantial.
Hardly the sort that makes a chap confess.’
‘How often did you see Mills recently?’
‘Hardly at all.
Occasionally, perhaps once a year, I caught sight of him at Ognisko, the Polish Hearth, in Prince's Gate.
He'd come across for a coffee, wish me all the best.
He used to tell me about the odd trip to Eastern Europe on business.
Then sometimes I had some news of him too through my acquaintance, Jozef Taczek.’
‘He was close to Mills too?’
‘Oh yes, much closer than me.
They were real friends, at least until they quarrelled.’
The detective's pen hovered in the air.
she had guessed Taczek had not told her the whole truth of his relationship with Mills but now had confirmation.
‘What was the cause of there quarrel.?’
‘Jozef wanted him to do some sort of favour and Mills refused.’
‘It must have been something important to break a friendship over.’
‘Quite right.
But I do not know what it was.’
Blanche believed him.
‘Jozef Taczek didn't talk about WIN when I saw him.’
‘None of us like talking about that period very much,’ he replied.
Blanche smiled to herself as she realised that he was unaware of the irony.
‘And we have to be careful who we speak to.’
Taczek, Blanche realised, could also have been-asked to keep silent by Urquhart.
‘There was a young man round at Mr Taczek's flat when I went round to see him.’
The skin puckered at the side of his lips again, this time into a sneer rather than a smile, although with Swod Blanche found it difficult to tell the difference.
‘His secretary.
Jozef is a friend and one forgives a friend many things.
He is obviously less discreet than he used to be.’
Blanche asked how well he knew Tatyana Nowak.
‘Tatyana?
Yes, her suicide is very sad.
I knew her and her husband.
That was sad, as well.’
‘What was sad?’
‘Her husband.’
Blanche saw her opportunity.
She decided on false naïveté as a cover for her suspicions about Zbigniew Nowak.
‘I heard he returned to visit relatives.’
Swod blinked slowly and impassively, like an owl.
‘I don't know who told you that.
He went back to act as a liaison with WIN and as a spy.
Hasn't anyone told you about this?’ he added, with a spark of genuine surprise.
‘No.
I thought he died in a car accident.’
The Pole turned to stare out of the window, his expression once again as bleak as the sky outside.
‘That was a cover story.
The truth was he went back to spy.
I don't think Zbigniew's marriage to Tatyana was going too swell at the time.
Like Mills  he was always chasing women.
He even tried to seduce my wife once.’
Swod twisted his face into a look of disgust at the memory.
‘But he was patriotic.
And courageous.’
He coughed and his breath rattled like a pebble in an empty can.
The chief inspector suddenly understood that the historian's self-important but indomitable spirit was housed in a broken body.
She felt protective towards him and he sensed her warmth.
He dabbed at his mouth with a handkerchief.
‘It's still an official secret.
But I'm old and secrets don't seem so important any more.’
He gulped.
‘After the war the Russians encouraged the Poles in Britain to return home and so a number of army people — including Nowak — went back.
Zbigniew returned in early 1950.
Some of them, good patriots, agreed to spy for the West.
Zbigniew was one of them.
Most were corporal or second-lieutenant level.
Some found jobs in the post office.
Some in factories.
A few even got back into the army.
A few rose to very high levels indeed and sent back invaluable information.
I cannot tell you their names because some are still alive.’
She clutched and unclutched her toes — but now more with excitement than to combat frostbite.
‘And what happened to him?’
‘Betrayed and executed.
The story about the holiday and the car accident were put about, even told to his wife in the beginning, so that none of the others still in Poland should be put in danger.’
He coughed again — the same painful choke and wiped the saliva from his lip.
‘He knew he was betrayed by someone in MI6.
He knew, and he tried to get out of Poland.’
Blanche sat motionless, afraid to move in case Swod understood the value of the information he was giving her.
‘From the time Zbigniew Nowak arrived in Warsaw, he had the feeling something was wrong.
His belongings were searched.
He was followed.
Information that he knew was hard to find, proved easy to locate.
But any information from behind the Iron Curtain was treated like gold dust in those days.
The people at the very top of MI6 insisted Nowak stayed in place.’
Swod rubbed his knees with a groan.
They were arthritic and starting to throb.
‘But Zbigniew finally had  enough.
He smuggled out a message saying he'd discovered who in London had betrayed him and that he was going underground to escape.
He apparently made his way north to Gdańsk and organised a merchant vessel to carry him to Finland.
Details of the ship were forwarded to MI6 in Helsinki and two agents went to Turku to meet him.’
‘What happened?’
Swod rubbed his knees again.
‘They waited and waited.
Zbigniew did not come off the boat.
They found out from the crew that the ship had been boarded the night before a few miles out from Gdańsk by a Russian naval vessel and that a Polish passenger had been arrested and taken off.
That man was Zbigniew Nowak.’
The historian sat back, his eyes glowing with tearful anger.
‘So you believe Zbigniew Nowak, as well as WIN, was betrayed by Mills?’
He shook his head.
‘No.
I just say it is a strong possibility.
No one has any firm evidence.’
‘Mills and Zbigniew Nowak were friends, though, weren't they?’
‘What are friends?’
Swod paused for a moment, as though in doubt.
‘Nowak trusted and admired him, I think, but whether Mills deserved…but I'm digressing.’
‘You didn't like Mills at all, did you?’
The frail hands opened in a gesture of mock candidness.
‘It's like when one sees a snake.
There's an involuntary shudder and, however hard one tries to control it, the shudder is still there.
It was his attitude to women that shocked me.’
Blanche sensed his dislike must have had some personal grounds.
‘Is that all?’
‘No.
I might as well tell you.
I've told you everything else.’
His eyes bored into hers, unblinking.
‘He had a short affair with my wife a long, long time ago.
We forgave each other.
She died four years ago.
But the scar never heals.’
Blanche nodded with genuine compassion.
She found herself agreeing with the historian's distaste for Mills' personal morality.
She used not to be so censorious of others' behaviour but her own betrayal had, she thought, seared her more than she understood.
She made a note in her pad.
‘Chase solicitor about divorce.’
The chief inspector did not believe the man sitting  in front of her had murdered Mills, but he had a motive? and she would have him checked.
‘At the Polish centre they told me that Marek Nowak had been looking into his father's life.
Did he come and see you?’
‘A couple of times.
I referred him to various people who knew his father, including one or two working in the Eastern European section of MI6 at the time.’
‘Who?’
Swod closed his eyes in thought.
‘Various fellows.
One's called Capron.
In MI6 he worked under Mills.
He transferred across to MI5 later, though, and he now works for the Security Service.
But I doubt if he agreed to talk.’
Swod brought his hands together as though ready to pray and raised them to his lips.
The pauses had lengthened and Swod's eyelids drooped more and more frequently, due to fatigue, boredom or perhaps just the sunshine breaking through the clouds and sending the odd flash through the window.
Blanche closed her notebook with a sense of achievement.
Thank God, she thought, Urquhart had not spoken to Swod first.
The historian contemplated the ceiling wistfully.
‘I'm afraid I have no useful contacts in MI5 or MI6 nowadays.
It's the officers working now who are the only ones who can really tell you what went on in the past.
They're the ones who can look at the files.
And with the present government they're more scared to talk now than ever before.’
He rose languidly from behind the desk and padded to the door.
Blanche followed thankfully.
She needed to move and restore circulation to her frozen limbs.
He tendered a dry, crisp hand to her on the doorstep and inclined his head in farewell.
Chapter Fourteen
The chief superintendent stopped rubbing his hands and burst into his cackling laugh which descended into a cough.
Blanche had just asked him for permission to approach the secret services formally and inspect their files on Graham Mills.
‘Blanche, I'm telling you, it's a waste of bloody time going to the spooks.
They wouldn't even tell their own mothers what size socks they wear, in case it got out to the papers.’
‘I think it's worth a try all the same.’
‘MI5 and MI6 will just tell me to piss off.
They'll say, ‘We've done our own investigation, Chief Superintendent, and concluded there's no link between the murder and espionage.
You don't need access to the files.
So, please, sod off.’’
He smiled and spread his ruddy hands in a gesture of helplessness, wanting her to smile too.
Blanche did not.
She stared into space instead.
The same tired Spittals litany, she thought, to justify causing no trouble.
It was too much to ask her boss, a creature of the system, to challenge it in any way.
Spittals' hands began polishing themselves again — in irritation at her obvious disdain.
‘There's no point in being annoyed about it.
That's my decision and it's final.’
She let out a sigh of disappointment.
Spittals' red eyes followed the curve of Blanche's bottom on its gyrating course to the door.
The chief superintendent had something else to tell her.
The commander had reminded him only the day before of the need to use manpower more efficiently: the government was no longer inclined to keep tossing money at the police force without seeing results.
Spittals was still one inspector down on his personnel establishment and had not seen any evidence of progress on the Mills murder.
‘By the way, Chief Inspector, can you give Ken a ring and think about giving him a hand with that robbery case?
You'll find it more productive than the one you're on at the moment.’
She turned and held the door open.
‘Is that an order or a request, sir?’
The chief superintendent dabbed at the stubble of his moustache with a finger.
Although he was irritated by Blanche's upper-class accent, cleverness and rapid promotions, Brian Spittals secretly admired her obstinacy and willingness to buck the system.
He also liked to be popular with his officers.
‘I haven't made my mind up yet.
I'll see what I can do.’
He winked at her like a cheery market tradesman selling substandard goods, already thinking of the lunch he had planned with an old colleague from the Manchester force.
‘I'll let you know.
Carry on for the moment.’
When Blanche had left, Spittals rang a friend who worked in the office of the deputy assistant commissioner in charge of Special Branch.
He explained what his chief inspector wanted to do and asked advice.
The friend said he would make some enquiries and ring back later that day.
Just before he was due to pack his case, tidy the papers on his desk for the last time, and go home, Spittals was surprised to receive a call from the commander of the Squad, who asked the chief superintendent to call in before he went home.
The commander sat in a pinstripe suit behind his desk, an island of teak in a sea of purple carpet.
He rose and guided Spittals towards the low, black sofa in the corner.
Although they met several times a day and were on good terms, the chief superintendent always felt uncomfortable in the commander's presence: he was an earnest, church-going man who never laughed, never drank, never swore and rarely showed emotion.
They exchanged banalities for a couple of minutes.
‘Brian, I think we might-potentially-have a little problem with one of our cases.’
Spittals rubbed his hands with concentration.
‘I got a call this afternoon from the Branch.
Apparently you'd referred some request to them — for access to MI5 and MI6 files.’
Spittals could not understand his boss's motives.
Was he to be reprimanded or not?
He licked his suddenly dry lips.
‘It wasn't my request, sir.
It was DCI Hampton.
And the request wasn't a formal one.
I was just after some informal advice from a friend who works in the main office, really.’
The commander held up gentle, well-scrubbed hands.
‘Oh, don't worry.
I'm not upset about anything you've done.
You behaved perfectly correctly.’
Spittals relaxed.
‘I'm just a bit puzzled, that's all.’
‘Why's that?’
‘Well…
’ The leather of the sofa squeaked as the commander uncrossed his legs and leant forward.
‘Did your friend ring you back?’
Spittals shook his head.
The chief superintendent was seething that his friend had obviously spoken to some other people in Special Branch and that the commander was now involved.
His irritation showed.
The commander nodded his head in understanding.
‘That's what I'm thinking, Brian.
Why involve me?
Why not just call you back and tell you what they told me?— what you obviously knew all along, that there's no hope at all of looking at secret files.’
‘Perhaps there was some other reason why they called you.’
‘There was.
Special Branch say MI5 think it would be for the best if Hampton was taken off this Mills murder case.’
‘Did they give a reason?’
‘Said it was nothing to do with her professional integrity, just that she was pursuing the spying line a bit too vigorously.
Probably likely to turn up something a bit embarrassing for national security.’
‘I did warn her, sir.
But like a lot of these graduate entry people, she feels she's got something to prove.’
‘Woman in a man's world, Brian.
It's hard for her.’
Spittals nodded, unconvinced.
‘So, what do you think we should do, sir?’
The commander stood up and smoothed his trousers.
‘Take her off the case, of course.
We don't want any trouble, do we?’
‘I have a confession to make,’ declared Urquhart that night in the restaurant.
The MI5 man had arrived a few minutes before and handed his grubby Burberry raincoat and umbrella to an unctuous waiter by the door.
Blanche found the dishevelled air he always seemed to carry about with him endearing.
‘I didn't agree to see you last week because I wanted to give you any information.
The idea was to find out what you'd discovered.’
He had rung her in the afternoon and suggested they met.
Blanche had accepted breathlessly.
The chief inspector smiled smugly at Urquhart's remark.
It confirmed what she had already thought.
‘I thought you might be a poacher rather than the gamekeeper you were pretending to be.
But I said nothing.’
She swigged a mouthful of wine with relish, irrigating her tongue to savour the bitter fruitiness.
Her mouth remained parched and she swilled out another glass.
Her thirst sharpened even more.
‘Talking of poachers, what did you find out about the ones who were stalking Mills just before he was murdered?’
She looked flirtatiously at Urquhart and held his gaze before he dropped his eyes to the table.
She squirmed in her seat and tugged her dress down over her knees.
Suddenly the restaurant seemed sultry.
His eyelashes flickered into life as he looked up again a shy, delicate glance, like a cornered deer.
He seemed a little taken aback by her directness.
‘I'm not sure yet.
It seems there was some sort of watch on him, yes.
Special Branch probably.’
Her forehead crinkled.
‘Why?
Were they expecting him to meet someone?’
‘Haven't the faintest idea.
I only found out yesterday that there was some sort of operation.
You've got to allow me some time.’
‘There may not be much more time,’ she countered.
‘My boss hinted this afternoon at asking me to work on another case.’
‘Really?’ said Urquhart in a tone that was meant to indicate disappointment but whose neutrality hid an element of satisfaction.
‘That's a pity.
I'm beginning to like these candlelit dinners at the expense of Her Majesty's government.’
He sounded genuine at least about the candlelit dinners, which pleased Blanche.
He smiled to himself rather than to her, the mark of a shy man who was intermittently confident with women, she hoped, rather than the smile also of someone who enjoyed cheating on his expenses.
Urquhart cupped the glass of wine in his hands.
The wine mellowed the atmosphere between them, and Blanche felt less hurried than the week before to extract information from him.
She was becoming less interested in  any tittle-tattle he might purvey that might help her with the case than in himself.
She had never talked to a spy properly before.
She scrutinised the spare figure before her in crumpled navy-blue suit and silk tie, and tried to penetrate his sunken eyes.
‘You're not exactly James Bond.’
He chuckled.
‘Beneath this bland exterior…
No, you're right.
James Bond in real life might pull the women but he wouldn't pull many spies.’
—‘Which do you reckon's the most important?’
He pondered the question, as if she had posed it seriously, then he leant forward and whispered conspiratorially.
‘I may have to arrest you, Chief Inspector, for flirting with a member of Her Majesty's Security Service.’
His gravelly Scots voice pleased her more than the last time she met him.
Urquhart held himself with the same appealing forcefulness as when he walked.
They did not talk for a minute or so, studiously examining every inch of the tablecloth or the other diners.
‘So what have you been up to?’ he asked finally to crack the silence.
‘Not much.’
‘Have you been to see anyone?’
‘A guy called Swod.’
‘Apparently he knows a lot about Mills’ time in Six.’
‘Then why didn't you bother to go and see him?’ she asked suspiciously.
He smoothed the tablecloth emolliently with the flat of his palm.
‘I didn't know it at the time.
But I've learnt a few things since.’
She waited.
She was determined not to ask questions.
‘Mills was thoroughly investigated once in the fifties, once in the sixties-’
‘— and once in the seventies.
I know.
Swod told me.’
Urquhart breathed in deeply.
‘Did he tell you the results of those enquiries?’
‘Open verdicts.
Not enough evidence either way.
But Swod himself didn't trust Mills an inch.’
‘Probably with good reason.’
‘What do you mean?’
‘Well, the first investigation left the verdict open, according to the files in the Registry, and put a question mark against  him.
The second investigation was just one of hundreds that were done in the sixties.
MI5 decided to do a trace on pretty well everybody who'd been to Cambridge and Oxford during the thirties and showed communist sympathies.
The last was set up in the seventies when apparently some defector had cast some doubt on Mills.
Everything added together puts Mills very much on the side of guilt rather than innocence.’
They said nothing but listened to the chatter in the restaurant, the clatter of cutlery and tinging of glass.
The first bottle of wine was already empty.
Urquhart ordered a second.
Beneath, deep beneath their feet, an underground train rumbled past into oblivion.
‘Why, by the way, didn't you bother to go and see Swod?
He thinks there are some people around, some Poles, who might still have a grudge against Mills, and might be happy to see him murdered.’
‘It wasn't part of my brief.
I was asked to do a straightforward paper chase, as we call it, and a few interviews.
Look for any glaring inconsistencies, any obvious clues in the files, any leads, any untied ends.
There weren't any.’
She had been misled again.
She had assumed, when she was told that Mills' murder had been checked thoroughly for any spying connections, that the enquiry had at least had the semblance of efficiency, if not diligence.
Instead an intelligence officer had ploughed through Mills' personal effects and leafed through a random selection of files.
She was too dumbfounded to be angry.
‘There's no way I can look at those files, I suppose?’
He swung his head from side to side.
‘No way.’
A dim shadow passed across his face.
‘Even I couldn't see some of them last week.
They'd been withdrawn by somebody.’
‘Who?’
‘Don't know.
I learnt by various devious means,’ and here he winked at her, ‘that they'd been taken out by someone in the section that deals with the interrogation of defectors from the Soviet Union.
There might be a new big fish, a defector, who's been landed by us.
Mills, you never know, might have been somehow involved and that might be the reason why he was under surveillance.’
His face turned thoughtful as the waiter approached with the main courses.
‘We'd better carry  on with our conversation a little later.
This restaurant's too public.’
They sidled down Holland Park Avenue, the huge white villas on the left towering up behind solid brick walls.
Leaves danced curlicues on the pavement as the wind ripped them from the plane trees and sent them scurrying along the ground.
The branches above murmured to each other and refracted the light from the street lamps into kaleidoscopic shapes on the pavement, shades of concrete grey, forming and reforming, overlapping and separating.
Urquhart almost had to shout above the roar of the traffic sometimes, lunging forward with his umbrella, in a patch of sulphurous light one moment and in shadow the next.
She had never seen him with an umbrella before.
He wielded it self-consciously, as though he had never owned one before and had just bought it in a Harrods sale.
She was drowsy with the wine.
She shook herself vigorously to throw off the fugginess in her head.
‘So, is there some new big fish, as you put it, who's about to defect?’
Urquhart sauntered along thoughtfully for a moment, stopped and turned to face her.
‘No idea.
Information like that is guarded very carefully.
Besides, defectors are handled first by MI6.
We in MI5 come in a bit later.
But the odd rumour has gone round that Six has been operating someone big, someone quite high up in the KGB.
Someone with an elephant's memory who might be about to finger Mills once and for all.’
‘And who is this person?’ she enquired innocently.
He lifted his eyebrows and sighed with irritation.
‘How do I know?
Finding out things in my line of business isn't like going to the bloody public library.
I'm helping you as much as I can.
‘Sometimes I wonder just how helpful you are being,’— she paused to stress his name with ironical friendliness —‘Robert.
And I also wonder why you're doing it.
MI5 have got no real reason at all to help the Met.’
He poked the leaves with the point of his umbrella, a wrinkle of pain on his forehead.
‘I thought I made all that clear.
I originally decided to meet you because I'd heard the civil police weren't letting ‘sleeping spies lie’.
I wanted to find out  why you were so keen on the espionage angle-just in case I'd missed something.’
‘So it was a form of self-protection?’
He nodded.
The spy turned his face to the road and watched a red bus clatter past them down the hill, one solitary passenger sitting in the brightly lit interior.
‘I still reckon you're wasting your time.’
A hint of desperation tremored in his voice.
He looked lost and alone.
The street, the shadows, the branches rustling above, the cars accelerating up the hill, became menacing and alien.
Her eyes were drawn by the impenetrable blackness of the alleys between the parade of houses opposite, a clutch of raucous youths tumbling out of a Victorian plastic pub on the corner and a drunk dressed in a greasy jacket sitting on a bench set back from the road.
A black cat edged soundlessly along the top of a brick wall behind them, his two eyes luminescent in the reflected light from the street.
London had lost its infant summer and begun the long descent into winter.
‘How long ago since the murder now?
Eight weeks?
Nine weeks?’
Urquhart murmured between clenched teeth, stabbing the pile of dead leaves at his feet with venom.
She started walking again, crossed the road and headed up one of the streets of Regency terraced houses.
Urquhart followed.
‘Why didn't you tell me about WIN by the way?
And Mills’ involvement with it?
Was there anything in those files you talked about?’
‘Mills had his fingers in lots of pies.
Nothing, how shall we say, suggestive came my way.’
He paused for a moment.
‘It was some of the WIN files that had been withdrawn from the Registry — the dossiers cross-referenced from Mills’ personnel file.’
Urquhart meditated.
Away in the distance the ululating cry of an ambulance rose and sank in the night.
‘Did you come across Taczek, Swod or Tatyana Nowak in the files?’
‘There were references to all three, yes.
Taczek was on our books during the fifties and sixties as an informant on the Polish community — what the Polish government in exile was doing, contacts with  émigrés who might have useful information and so on.’
Blanche bristled with anger now she knew the truth about Taczek.
‘It was all very informal,’ he went on.
‘He wasn't a proper agent.
Just dined an officer or diplomat now and again.
He still feeds us the odd titbit, apparently.’
‘Thank you very much,’ she said, ladling on the irony.
‘Taczek must have laughed up his sleeve at me all the time I was interviewing him.
I thought he was just a friend of Mrs Nowak and nothing more.’
Urquhart brushed her annoyance aside.
‘Did you know Swod didn't trust Mills an inch?’ she asked.
‘I'm not surprised.
Those suspicions of Mills were very heavy.
My guess is that Swod blames Mills for a lot of the operations that went wrong.’
Urquhart slowed his pace and glanced around, his head picked out by an orange-yellow from the street lamps.
A knot of youths swaggered along the pavement opposite along a wall sprayed with graffiti.
Urquhart inclined his head and seemed to listen to the wind.
It gusted through the council estate they were now in, picking up sweet papers and whisking them a few yards down the street.
The council houses were low and comfortable.
‘I wish I'd been brought up in one of these,’ he said, ‘rather than a tower block.
Fat chance of you even getting a council house nowadays.’
He was irritated again.
He began to walk faster, as if he had remembered something and had work to do.
His tone became brisk and businesslike.
‘We're in a bizarre situation, aren't we, with me having access to some of the files and a few contacts in the Service and you doing the interrogations?’
Without any coherent sense of direction she turned right again and they found themselves in an almost deserted Portobello Road.
It was Saturday.
The stalls of vegetables and fruit had been dismantled hours before, leaving the gutter choked with cardboard cartons, waste paper and bruised brussels sprouts.
The heady-smell of fish and chips wafted from a take-away shop.
‘The powers that be in MI5, by the way, believed enough in Mills being a KGB agent to offer him immunity from prosecution in exchange for confession and cooperation.
That was back in the early sixties.
It helped push him towards resignation.’
‘What was his reaction?’
‘Mills laughed in their faces and told them not to be so silly.’
Blanche was still thinking about Tatyana Nowak.
‘Was there anything in the files about Zbigniew Nowak, Tatyana's husband?’
Urquhart stabbed his umbrella through the heart of a cardboard box lying helplessly on the pavement.
He looked at her with a hint of suspicion.
‘Only that he was an agent for SIS and had some involvement with WIN, and went back to Poland in 1950.
He was arrested and was executed — when was it?— about September that year.’
He withdrew his umbrella from the innards of the cardboard.
‘What did Swod tell you about Zbigniew Nowak?’
‘Pretty much the same as you.
Taczek and Tatyana Nowak, on the other hand, fed me a cock and bull story about Zbigniew Nowak being killed in a car crash.
The same story you told me the last time we met,’ she said with a sneer.
The clean-shaven figure in front of her smiled patronisingly.
‘Ah, but that was when I was only pumping you for information, not giving it to you.
That story, you see, was invented originally by the Russians to cover up the fact that Zbigniew was badly tortured by the guards before they shot him.
British intelligence- and that includes me — tagged along to cover up their embarrassment.
Mrs Nowak and Taczek must have got to know most of the truth and stuck by the cover story.
People like to be in on a secret.’
They were now on Ladbroke Grove, completing the fourth side of the rectangle.
Her thoughts about Mills were as confused as her emotions towards Urquhart.
Mills was suspected of having worked for the KGB.
The suspicions were behind his enforced retirement in 1962.
But why should someone murder him decades later because he betrayed his country and worked for the Soviet Union?
Unless the KGB feared Mills was about to expose one of its agents.
Did Mills possess such prized information?
How did he gain it?
She was irritated with herself for thinking like a spy, for slipping into Urquhart's world of suspicion and conspiracy, and as she became more irritated with herself, she became sharp with her companion.
‘The trouble with you intelligence people is that you love the back alleys and cul-de-sacs, don't you?
Much prefer them  to the open streets.
You drool when someone tosses you a conspiracy theory.’
‘Perhaps you're right.
But everything I've said to you is based on the Registry files.’
‘It's all right for you.
You can look at those marvellous files.
I can't.’
A flurry of tissue paper used by the market traders to wrap oranges rustled at her feet.
‘I don't trust things or ideas.
I trust people.
And I've only ever trusted one person completely in my life.
My mother.
And she's dead.’
Urquhart was grave again.
He spoke to the trees like a man speaks to a priest in the confessional.
‘I trust my parents too.
They're so honest, so straight.
I know whatever I do they'll love me.’
His voice was infused with a huskiness she had not heard before.
It disappeared quickly, to be replaced again with a bitter, haunting, angry tone she had heard once before, and it puzzled her.
‘Sometimes I just despise you people down in England.
Not you personally, of course.
The English in general.
Their superiority.
Their snobbery.
Their materialism.
It's the English that vote Thatcher into power again and again and the Scots seem to take the brunt of it.
The Labour Party is a busted flush and can do nothing about it.
There's no opposition in parliament any more to keep her in check.
It's one-party rule for the foreseeable future and I find it depressing.’
Urquhart pulled himself up short with a laugh: a dry laugh, empty with insincerity.
‘But we in the spy world love Thatcher because she adores us.
Just say ‘national security’ to her and she has an orgasm.’
He chuckled, this time Blanche thought genuinely.
‘Don't take me seriously.
We all talk like this when we're off duty.
Keeps us sane.’
She said what followed without thinking.
Perhaps it was the air he possessed of inviting confidences.
She told him her husband had left her a few months before for another woman.
Since then, she told him, sometimes she was lonely, sometimes she was happy, but she was cynical about men.
‘Cynicism breeds loneliness,’ murmured Urquhart.
Blanche thought he sounded sincere.
‘Without trust you can't have friends.’
Blanche couldn't remember later how they kissed first.
The weight of his arm slipped across her back, round her waist.
Until then she had always imagined him to be somehow  insubstantial, a shadow of a man.
But suddenly he seemed to blossom out and take weight, like a ghost deciding to cross back over the frontier from the land of death.
His lips were firm and damp enough, the hand that caressed her face dry and sinewy.
His breath smelt of mint.
She thought they must have looked ridiculous, two people over thirty surreptitiously clawing at each other through layer upon layer of raincoat, wool and cotton.
But none the less she was excited.
Urquhart guided her into an alleyway along Ladbroke Grove and their tongues intertwined, playing and toying with the other.
His nimble hands unbuttoned her coat, quested down the back of her skirt and stroked the cleavage where her buttocks divided.
She suggested Urquhart should come home with her.
She did not sleep well that night.
Lovers never do on the first night.
Their new partner snores, or talks in his sleep, or tosses and turns.
There is a tension in the air, each person lying awake yet pretending to sleep, aware of every sigh or murmur from the other's lips.
The air is too hot or too cold, too fresh or too fuggy.
The night creeps by in restless anticipation of the morning.
She slid into sleep as dawn approached but rose early to make tea.
She had forgotten the telephone answering machine the night before.
There were two calls.
One was from her husband asking for a meeting.
With Urquhart upstairs, Blanche felt the satisfaction of post-coital revenge, as she listened to Roger's crackly voice, pleading for a meeting.
She really would have to see him some time.
The other message was from Dexter.
Christine Mills had called several times to say she wanted to see the chief inspector urgently because she had ‘something very important’ to tell her about the death of her father.
Dexter had also been phoned by Mills' accountant.
Blanche and Dexter knew Mills had recovered from his deep financial difficulties the year before and the accountant had at last discovered how: substantial payments had been paid into Mills' Swiss bank account in the months leading up to his death.
No one knew where the money had come from.
Urquhart sat upright in the bed and unstuck a bleary eye.
She told him about Dexter's messages.
He sipped his tea thoughtfully.
Chapter Fifteen
The shops — those endless lines of shabby, plastic-fronted London shops, the paint peeling, the windows steamed up — finally reassembled themselves into council flats; they disintegrated again and reappeared as boarded-up warehouses at Dalston Junction, weeds sprouting vigorously from cracks in the brickwork.
More blacks walked the streets now, loose-limbed and casual, before Blanche and Dexter appeared at the side of Hackney Downs.
The leaves had fallen earlier here and some of the trees were already skeletons against the autumn sky, mingling their inky branches with the black cables of the electric pylons.
At the eastern end of the downs shivered a solitary pub, the walls on two sides scarred with mortar, the whole building dwarfed by the tower blocks striding round about.
Christine Mills lived a few hundred yards away.
Dexter parked and switched off the engine.
Blanche listened to the silence.
An old man staggered across the empty space of the Downs.
His dog scoured ahead, sniffing at crumbling turds and chasing its own mangy shadow.
The chief inspector caught the suspicious glance of two girls who stood against the wall of the railway embankment.
Their skirts were drawn up to the crotch, the heels high, the legs bare, the skin chafed by the cold.
Dexter locked up the car carefully.
The Victorian block of flats where Christine Mills lived had been painted a dark green a decade ago and the wood of the frames now showed through in parts, black and rotten.
In the lobby, there was no carpet on the tiles, only lino.
The scent of boiling greens saturated the air.
Christine held a cigarette between the fore and middle fingers of her left hand.
She dusted some ash from the sleeve of her black, Chinese-style padded jacket.
It floated down to the threadbare navy-blue carpet, some settling on the bedroom slippers she wore.
Her hair was dishevelled and her green eyes  full of sleep.
She showed no surprise.
‘I thought you'd have phoned first,’ she yawned.
A flat male voice from the Midlands crawled round the corner of an open door behind her.
‘Who the fuck's that, Chris?’
‘That policewoman I was telling you about,’ she exclaimed over her shoulder.
Her voice sounded alien, clipped and upper-class, in the dingy flat.
‘With a colleague.’
She smiled at Dexter.
‘What, the one who's meant to be finding out about your dad?’
‘That's right.’
‘I'll go back to fuckin' sleep then.
Will you bring us a cup of coffee in an hour or so?
‘OK.’
The same hostility Blanche had first encountered in the police station still crackled, but tempered by sleepiness and familiarity.
Blanche had summoned up a tearful of sympathy for Christine Mills when she learnt of her father's death.
Tears tend to melt most dislike.
But the more she had discovered about her-pampered upbringing, an unearned regular allowance from her father, a handsome legacy in Mills' will — the more Christine's hypocrisy rankled.
It was to be revolution not on the rates but on a private income.
The girl swung round as a silent invitation to follow, and led them past a tangled bunch of bicycles and a wall of political posters to hopeless causes.
In the main room a patterned, violet carpet had been laid in the centre of brown lino.
Piles of books lounged on the floor, a portable typewriter with newspaper cuttings and papers on a table and withered pot plants on both window sills.
Visible through the windows, behind the plants, were the blank walls of another block of flats opposite, veined by dismal branches of trees in the street below.
An electric fan heater thrummed away on the floor next to the table while the two bars of the electric fire in the hearth burned like red-hot pokers.
She lit another cigarette and pushed the remains of a croissant away from her across the table.
‘Well, are you going to ask me questions or do I just start off?’
The old aggression flashed.
‘Since I've got no idea why you wanted to see me, you'd better tell me what's on your mind.’
The ring-bedecked finger holding her cigarette quivered.
‘There's no point in beating about the bush, I suppose.
I lied to you.
I saw my father the night he was murdered.’
The smoke curled from her mouth and mingled with the harsh, dry heat from the electric fire.
Blanche pushed her chair back a couple of paces.
Her cheeks were already burning from the heat.
She knew there was a reason behind Christine's nagging phone calls and now she had discovered it: a guilty conscience.
‘Why did you and your boyfriend lie?’
‘I don't know.
I was just stupid.
I was afraid of being suspected of the murder, I suppose.’
‘You didn't even know what had happened to your dad when you came to the police saying he was missing-’ added Dexter with venom.
‘Look!
I didn't bloody murder him if that's what you're saying!’
‘I'm not saying that at all.
But I want an explanation that makes sense.’
Blanche peeled off her raincoat and hung it on the back of the chair.
She found the beating heat oppressive and wanted to ponder the implications of what Christine had just said.
She walked over to the window.
The chief inspector was inwardly elated: at last she had a witness who claimed to have met Mills on the night he was murdered.
Christine sucked on her cigarette.
‘I used to see Dad every now and again, say once a month, and we usually spoke over the phone at least once a week.
If I met him we'd go out for a meal.
He'd always treat me.
A few years ago we had rows all the time about politics but more recently we kept off the subject most of the time.
But that particular night, the fourth of August, it…
But I'm jumping ahead of myself.
Dad phoned me up the day before and, knowing I was about to go away on holiday, suggested we meet the next night, on the fourth of August.
So round I went to Daddy's flat.’
Blanche was not content to rely on her story alone.
She had already been deceived once.
‘Did anyone else see you?’
Christine pondered a moment.
‘I don't think so.
That looks bad, doesn't it?’
She looked at them nervously, stubbing out her unfinished cigarette and lighting another.
‘I can't remember.
I  always arrived and went straight up.
Daddy was there and we had a drink.
He was in a strange mood.
as if he had something on his mind.
You could always tell because he would tap his feet on the floor.
Finally it came out.
He said he'd been followed for the last week or so.
I told him he must be going mad, imagining things like that, but he insisted.
Then — this was the really weird part — he asked if I would stay the night round there.
He'd never asked me to do that before.
As though he was scared of something.’
Christine flicked the ash from her cigarette into an empty lager can on the table.
Blanche leant against the window sill and crossed her arms, scrutinising her intently.
‘He was drinking even more than usual that night.
He said he wanted some company because he was lonely and worried.
He wouldn't say why, just said it was one of his morbid moods.
I said I couldn't stop the night because I was going away on holiday early the next morning.
Do you want a cup of coffee by the way?’
They shook their heads.
‘Well, I'll just go and make one for me and Jake.
All this talking gives me a dry throat.’
She padded out with the plate of unfinished croissant.
In the street Dexter watched three kids start to kick a football against a brick wall.
He wandered over to the table.
‘I told you she talked shit,’ he hissed.
‘And of course that drippy boyfriend of hers backed her up.’
The top file next to the typewriter was labelled ‘African Feminists’, the one underneath ‘The Female Phallus’.
A groan issued from the bedroom next door as Christine brought Jake his coffee.
She reappeared with her own mug.
She sat down at the table again.
‘As I was saying, I went round and Daddy took me to a French restaurant he knew.’
‘What did you talk about there?’
‘It's difficult to remember.
Nothing important.’
‘Could you try?’
Blanche said, with deliberate emphasis on the last word.
Christine glared at her, the eyes smouldering like emeralds.
‘Don't patronise me.’
The chief inspector thought the girl was going to spit at her.
Blanche did not care: she was angry with Christine Mills and would spit back.
Christine stubbed out her latest cigarette with-a shaking  hand and lit another to regain her composure.
‘He said he was going out to meet a friend.’
‘Who?’
‘He said it was someone out of his past.
I'm sure it was that meeting that was scaring him.’
‘He didn't say anything more than that?’
‘No,’ Christine said with a jangle of her jewellery.
‘He just said he was meeting this ‘friend’.
I assumed it was a woman.
I asked him why the hell he wanted me to stay the night when he was going out later, and he just shrugged his shoulders and said he was in a funny mood and didn't know what he was saying.’
She suddenly began to gnaw her knuckles and paused for a moment, plunged in memory.
‘I asked him whether the person he was meeting was anything to do with him being followed, but he just laughed.’
‘Did he say anything about where he was going for this meeting?’
‘After he told me what I told you, that was it.
He started on a kind of-well — what Mum and I used to call one of his damage limitation exercises.
He always sort of backpedalled whenever he'd exposed his feelings.’
Christine shuffled uneasily in her chair.
‘He was really weird that night.
By the end, he acted as if he'd said nothing to me at all earlier about being worried, being followed and everything and he turned the conversation round to me and my future.
He kept wondering how I'd look after myself when he'd gone.’
Christine was gazing into space, talking more to herself than the police.
‘Looking back, what he said is really strange, bearing in mind he must have been murdered a little while later.’
‘How do you know he was murdered that night?’ asked Blanche.
She looked up suspiciously.
‘I don't.
I'm just guessing.
I'd never seen him so strange before.’
She looked down at her hands again.
‘He started going on again about me going into mainstream journalism, how a friend of his had contacts in Fleet Street, why the hell didn't I grow up and settle down like normal girls, why did I go around with Jake.
And that was it.’
Christine stopped talking, wringing one hand through the other.
‘Did he threaten you if you didn't?’
She looked up again, with a flash of helplessness in her eyes.
‘What do you mean?’
Blanche repeated the question.
Christine pulled on a sallow smile.
‘I thought you'd ask that.
He said he'd cut me out of his will and scrap my allowance.’
‘And that wasn't all, was it?’ added Blanche.
The dead man's daughter looked across from Dexter to the policewoman.
‘No.
We started shouting at each other.
We both said things we didn't mean and made stupid threats.
Finally I stormed out.’
‘What time was that?’
‘I don't know.
Some time between nine and ten.’
The hum of the electric fire was the only sound in the room.
Dexter bent over a withered fern on the window sill and plucked off some desiccated fronds.
The anger inside Blanche against Christine had dissipated.
Instead, she felt tired and drained suddenly as she walked across to join the sergeant at the window.
They gazed down at the innocent football being kicked back and forth against the wall outside, the thwack of the ball booming in the street amongst the traffic noise.
The three boys should have been at school with their ragged clothes, crew cuts and sullen eyes.
She swung round to face Christine again, her voice calm.
‘It would have been useful if you'd told me all this at the beginning.’
‘Hindsight's always perfect.’
‘What sort of threats did you make during the row?’
Christine squirmed in her chair and stared at the carpet.
‘I can't remember.
I probably told him to go and jump in the river.’
‘You didn't say you'd like to murder him?’ interrupted Blanche, knowing the answer that was to come in advance.
Christine's eyes glittered angrily as she looked up.
She half opened her tight, thin mouth and held it on the verge of speaking.
Her mouth closed after a moment and she said nothing.
She sat devoid of energy and aggression.
Her right cheek twitched and she ran a hand over her head to brush down some stray, dyed hairs.
‘Yes, I did.
I did threaten to kill him.’
Her eyes were blank and colourless with remembered grief.
She shed no tears.
She sat still and silent.
When she did  finally speak it was in a whisper.
‘I didn't want to tell you I saw him that last night, for…well…
I knew you'd get to know about my legacy in the will, the fact I was short of money, the row — and the whole thing just blew up in my mind.
I panicked even before I knew he was murdered.’
She spurted out a tinkling laugh and flicked more cigarette ash into the lager can.
‘Daddy was always trying to use the money as a stick to beat me into changing my way of life.
But I wouldn't.’
The irregular thud of the football floated up from the road.
‘So, your alibi for the night of the murder was a false one?’
Christine looked across and for the first time a defensive flabbiness crawled across her face.
‘Yeah.
I got Jake to lie, and say I went away on holiday earlier than I did.’
From the moment Blanche first met Christine Mills, the taut, angry little figure had irritated her.
She developed in the chief inspector the emotional equivalent of a skin rash, and made her wish for nothing better than to discover Christine was the ‘friend’ her father had met on Hampstead Heath.
She was close enough to the dead man to arrange to meet him at an isolated spot without arousing suspicions.
She had a motive.
‘You probably don't believe it,’ Christine offered with a sneer, ‘but I do have a conscience.’
‘It only seems to work intermittently.’
‘It's like my clapped-out car.’
‘Sounds like they both need a good service,’ muttered Dexter.
‘Most policemen need theirs serviced before mine.’
She sipped some lukewarm coffee from her cracked mug.
‘But my conscience is the only reason I'm telling you this, all the same.
I'm sorry.’
From her tortured look, Blanche understood the curt apology cost Christine's pride dear.
It did not, however, wipe out the waste of time and effort caused by her foolish decision to lie.
The detective was philosophical: time, in this world at least, only flows in one direction and can never be summoned back.
‘Can you think of anyone who might have paid large sums of money into your dad's Swiss bank account in the last few months?’
Mills' daughter laughed.
‘I didn't even know he had one.
I'm not my dad's accountant, you know.
Only his daughter.’
‘You know your father almost went bankrupt about a year ago?’
She drew the cigarette from her lips and blew out the smoke thoughtfully.
‘You're joking?’
‘No.
I'm not.
All his investments in the Far East went bust.’
A shadow of green disappointment passed across Christine's angular face.
She gulped audibly.
The pink drained slowly from her already pale cheeks until they turned the colour of timeworn ivory.
‘The old bastard!
I really need all the money I can get.
Trust him to screw up even when he dies.’
She teetered between tears and the hectic flush of anger.
Christine obviously thought she was going to get much less than she expected from Graham Mills' will.
She had forgotten about the payments made into the Swiss bank account and the Kensington flat.
‘I loved him in my own way.
So did Mummy.
We both know he made far more from the caravan business than he ever admitted to.
There he was, gallivanting around with his ageing tarts — you know, the randy widows on the cocktail circuit who eat nothing but spinach leaves.’
She made a hollow laugh and flicked some more ash into the lager can.
‘We both thought he'd be called to account in the end.
That there'd be some justice.
We were relying on it.’
She stomped over to the window beside Blanche, her voice suddenly strident with anger and sadness.
‘I was going to be free from his constant nagging.
I'd have been free to travel, to write, able to do exactly what I wanted with my life.’
She snatched up the fern from the window sill and for a second Blanche expected it to soar through the air and sow its parched soil across the carpet.
But Christine put the fern back on the sill and deflated herself into an armchair by the window.
‘Is there anything else you want to know?’
Blanche decided to strike while her defences were down.
‘Did you murder your father?’
The reply was murmured into the string of turquoise shark's teeth she wore round her neck.
‘I didn't.
But sometimes I wish I had.’
The policewoman decided to believe her for the moment.
The door squeaked open.
Jake had ventured to investigate Christine's raised voice.
‘Are you all right, Chris?
Have they  been going at you again?’
He sported designer jeans, three days' growth of beard and an elegant leather jacket that he had thrown over his shoulders against the cold.
Clothes, Blanche guessed, that Christine probably paid for.
He was good-looking but of the rough, hirsute kind.
The detective was constantly surprised at the men that some women deigned to have relationships with.
He addressed all his remarks to the chief inspector through Christine in the way that Blanche disliked.
‘Look, you,’ he said, finally turning to the chief inspector, ‘what do you think you're doing?’
‘You, shut up,’ Blanche cut in firmly, ‘or I'll arrest you for wasting police time by giving us a false alibi.’
Jake stood, arms akimbo, on the threshold of the room, nonplussed.
Christine blinked wearily.
Her lower lip twitched as though plucked by an invisible finger.
Jake's eyes looped round her protectively.
He shrugged and slunk away.
Blanche knew he was a coward.
Just like her husband, she thought.
Blanche nodded to Dexter and pulled on her Aquascutum coat, noticing how threadbare it looked.
She made a mental note to rifle her deposit account to buy a new one.
Her night with Robert had reawakened her interest in her appearance.
Christine remained motionless.
Her eyes drilled into the innocent carpet.
The two police officers moved towards the door.
The only alteration in her face was the pucker of her lips melting into a pout of unrelieved gloom as they shut the door behind them.
Back at the car, the two tarts still slouched against the wall next to the railway embankment.
Dexter jumped inside and inserted the ignition key.
He did not turn it straightaway.
The windscreen was splattered with spittle which had dribbled down the glass and dried.
The girls, elbows propping up against the wall behind, hips thrust forward, blew them two almost toothless smirks as the windscreen wipers cut a valiant swathe through the dried spittle.
It was only when Dexter parked the car back at the Yard that they noticed in the paintwork of the boot two long, deep scratches.
Chapter Sixteen
The chief superintendent stood by the window watching the descent of the autumn sun through a cobweb of grey cloud, his hands in the pockets of his trousers, which, Blanche noticed, were always slightly too tight.
The office gossip was that his wife insisted that he wore his suits until they fell apart.
‘Why didn't you come this morning, Chief Inspector?
I left an urgent message in your office.’
‘Sorry, sir.
I had to go direct from home to interview an important witness.
I didn't think you would mind.’
Blanche noticed he was not rubbing his hands together: a sure sign that he had something of significance to impart.
On second thoughts, she wished she had not uttered the last sentence.
His eyebrows beetled with irritation.
He swaggered to the desk.
‘Well, I do mind.’
He gestured for her to take a seat.
Blanche decided to be placatory and repeated her apology.
‘I suppose this witness was in connection with the Mills case?’
The chief inspector nodded.
‘The dead man's daughter.’
Spittals drummed his fingers on the desk for a moment.
He was, Blanche knew, honing the next phrase in his mind before he uttered it.
‘I'm ordering you off the Mills case with immediate effect.’
The clumsy phrasing lodged in Blanche's mind as much as the content.
Why not say ‘immediately’ rather than‘with immediate effect’?
But the content appalled her.
Since Spittals sat behind his desk with a smile of ineffable self-satisfaction and gave no indication of offering an explanation, the policewoman asked for one.
‘I'm not at liberty to offer one, Chief Inspector.
Orders from a higher authority.’
Blanche had heard rumours about the pressures on police  manpower but knew from the chief superintendent's manner that that could not be the reason.
She guessed someone in Special Branch or the intelligence services had objected to her enquiries and that Spittals or the commander had simply capitulated.
‘If I might say so, sir, I think this is absolutely dreadful.
I'm put on a murder case.
I'm told MI5 will investigate any espionage background to the killing.
They find no clues — so they say.
But the more I discover, the more I think Mills’ time in MI6 was probably the reason why he was killed.
Just at the moment I seem to be getting somewhere, I'm dragged off the case.’
She spoke with such vehemence that Spittals was taken aback.
He had sympathy for her, although he was irritated by how many of the new high-fliers questioned orders rather than carried them out.
He tried to cover his embarrassment by starting to rub his hands together with more than the usual combustive force, and was secretly rather proud of how she had managed to annoy Special Branch and the intelligence services.
He did not like their arrogance and exclusivity.
Once Blanche saw his hands whirring over each other, she knew there was some hope.
She had to appeal to his pride.
‘Isn't there anything you can do to help, sir?
Delay things for a few days?’
The chief superintendent quite liked the idea of embarrassing Special Branch and MI5 but only if there were no risk to himself.
After all, he had been ordered directly by the commander to take Blanche off the case.
‘I'll offer you a compromise.
Officially, you're withdrawn from the case with immediate effect.’
Spittals liked the phrase ‘with immediate effect’.
It had the right bureaucratic timbre and, besides, was a favourite of the new commissioner, littering his memos.
‘But if you carry on for a few more days on an unofficial basis, that's your business.
If you create any problems with the funnies, you're on your own.’
‘The ‘funnies’, sir?’
She had never heard the word before.
‘Spooks.
Spies.
Policemen of my generation call them the funnies.’
When she came back into the office Dexter sat comatose, his eyelids drawn down like the venetian blinds, the only sign of  wakefulness his fingers flicking absentmindedly through the pages of a gay magazine he had hidden inside one on gardening.
The wraith of a smile was still strung across the chief inspector's lips — a configuration they fell into naturally when the brain behind them was puzzled — as Dexter unglued one eyelid and focused his eyes on her.
He wiped the boredom from his forehead with an immaculate white handkerchief.
‘So,’ he groaned, ‘when are you going to arrest Christine Mills?’
Dexter, for all his patience and intelligence in most matters, faltered when it came to the moment to arrest the people he investigated.
From a chance remark, an eccentric squint, a shifty gait and nothing more, Detective Sergeant Dexter Bazalgette liked to pronounce on the guilt or innocence of an individual.
Like a Shakespearian monarch he would have liked to be able to send the guilty ones straight to the scaffold, to be despatched on a block still steaming with the blood of the last condemned prisoner.
Deep down, Blanche sometimes thought, he adored the violence he was supposed to quell.
Dexter coaxed his gold-plated gas lighter into flame and lit a cigarette.
‘I shouldn't leave it too long.
Any evidence there is in her flat might evaporate.
Anyway,’ added Dexter, ‘if you're not going to arrest the Mills girl, then perhaps you should go for someone else.
Mills’ first wife.
Taczek.
Smith the car dealer.
I don't know.
But Spittals is going to want to see results in a day or so otherwise we're off to do some time on that robbery job.’
Such a wilful mood of Dexter's bordered on a sulk.
He closed the gay magazine with an elegiac glance at a pair of swollen male buttocks.
Blanche wondered whether Spittals' order to her had leaked out to Dexter already, but decided not.
Dexter's strictures, about the need to make progress soon, because otherwise they would be withdrawn from the case, fizzed in her mind.
Spittals, like some demented bailiff, would soon be foreclosing on her debt.
She ploughed the phone through the scattered papers on her desk top and pressed the digits corresponding to the school where Marek Nowak worked.
‘Yes?’ croaked a high-pitched male voice.
‘Mr Nowak, please.’
‘Old on a minute, will yer?
I'll just put you through to the staff room.’
A succession of clicks followed and finally the  subdued sound of the phone ringing again as if through water.
It was answered by a woman with a military snappiness.
‘What do you want?’
‘Mr Nowak, please.’
‘He's in hospital.’
Blanche sucked in her bottom lip with a presentiment of bad news.
‘As he was cycling into school this morning a car ran him down.’
The hospital stood, square and blank, in the autumn sunshine.
The architect who designed it twenty years before, Blanche reflected, had drawn inspiration from childhood memories of dog-eared graph paper — neatly ruled green squares within a darker grid of ruled squares.
Since the new hospital had not been large enough from the moment it had been built, prefabricated huts bred fissiparously, and straggled now under the shadow of the main building.
There was no wind to bend the plume of black smoke rising from the hospital's incineration chimney.
A few leaves still clung optimistically to the lime saplings planted either side of the path leading to the reception.
The local police had told the sergeant that Marek cycled to school every morning to keep fit and to save money.
That morning, when he was about a quarter of a mile from the school gate, a Volvo estate car drew out from a side-road and drove straight at him.
A freckle-faced child heard the burst of acceleration and screamed at Marek.
He swerved and avoided the worst of the impact, but was catapulted on to the bonnet of the car and then on to the pavement.
The car drove off at speed, the tyres screeching, and disappeared into the endless bricks of suburbia.
Marek was knocked unconscious for a minute or two.
A parent who was taking her children to school noted down the number plate.
It was false.
Witnesses gave only a vague description of the driver, concentrating on his clothes, for the only thing visible inside the car was a blue, fur-edged anorak, the hood pulled up tight.
The local police sounded surprised by Nowak's apparent lack of cooperation.
He grunted, they said, and weaved and ducked like a prize fighter when asked questions.
When Blanche and Dexter arrived he was mumbling to himself on the side of the bed, hands clasped in the lap of his dressing gown.
The chief inspector waited at the end of the  room and tried to siphon off his individual murmur from the swell of coughing and clattering round about.
The words slipped pell-mell into one another, as if Marek were talking in his sleep.
Their harsh footsteps on the tiles attracted curious stares from the other patients and, as they neared him, they caught Marek's attention.
He trembled as intensely as a fly whirs its wings, and stopped talking.
He looked down at the floor again.
‘Poetry,’ he sighed.
‘Old poetry.’
Dexter turned round one of the gold rings that adorned his fingers and made a stab at humour.
‘I was told poetry was dead when I was at school.’
Marek was impassive.
‘God may be dead.
But poetry will never die!
For centuries civilised man thought poetry was the pinnacle he must reach for —’ He caught himself suddenly and smiled for the first time Blanche had known him to, the embarrassed smile of a passionate devotee who suddenly discovers that everyone around him, whom he thought entranced by his obsession, was in fact sniggering behind his back.
Marek blushed and scratched his hair.
‘Whose poetry was it?’ asked Dexter with a strange tenderness that surprised Blanche.
She remembered the sergeant had never met Marek before, and introduced them.
Marek looked up and slid his hands on to his knees.
‘You wouldn't be interested.’
‘Try me,’ asked the sergeant.
Marek eyed them up his nose for a moment, breathed in and recited two verses, his head flung back, his eyes damp.
His toneless voice caught fire and was blessed with new colour and depth.
The mottled old man two beds away stared at them with poached eyes.
Nowak's face glittered with febrile urgency.
He was no longer mean with his words, speaking only in monosyllables, as he had when Blanche first met him.
The chief inspector recognised the classic symptoms of shock in his talkativeness, but intermingled with fear.
Fear of the driver who had tried to run him down?
Or fear of her?
She examined him protectively, for he was, she reflected, the only surviving member of the Nowak family.
Dexter shook his long limbs loose and a frown of puzzlement bunched his forehead.
‘What does the poem mean?’
Dexter asked impassively, scrutinising every hair, every pore, on Marek's face.
It was as though Dexter had met Marek somewhere before: an invisible thread of emotion bound them and excluded her.
‘I'll try a translation but it's never quite the same,’ Nowak murmured apologetically.
He eased his body back on to the bed, tucking the dressing gown fussily round his legs.
‘It's from a poem called ‘My Will and Testament’ by Slowacki.
My mother used to recite it to me often when I was a kid.’
He caught his breath.
‘'Here behind me I leave no heir to either lute or name.
This name of mine vanishes like lightning and its echo shall ring — but hollowly — in the mouths of future generations.
But you who knew me, pass on these words: that I squandered my youth for my country, that while the ship was fighting I kept to my post up in the cross trees and, when she sank-I went down with her.’’
He gazed at the cream wall opposite, unblinking.
When he spoke again, Marek reverted to that low, colourless tone of his, and spoke more to himself than to her.
‘I look ahead sometimes and wonder what people will think of me when I'm dead.
How little I've done.
That poem reminds me that I did my best, did my duty if you like.’
His fingers tugged at his moustache.
Dexter chuckled, that big, broad, white smile of his.
‘No one talks about Britain like that any more.
The Empire's dead and buried.’
Marek gently lowered his eyelids and laughed.
He had gained a sense of humour, or perhaps of irony, since Blanche questioned him the first time.
‘It's not Britain I'm talking about.
It's Poland.’
He jutted his chin out proudly and his voice regained its animation.
‘I was born in England, true enough.
But I've stuck with Poland and done my duty by her.’
‘How?’
Blanche enquired.
‘Various things,’ he murmured.
‘Such as?’
His gaze swung back to the wall as though Blanche's features held no more interest.
She had that feeling of insult often felt at a party when the person one is talking to focuses his gaze on people round about all the time, searching for someone more interesting, powerful or sexy to talk to.
She waited for a second, hoping Marek would turn and  catch her eye.
He did not.
His eyes resolutely scanned the wall and bed opposite.
There a bundle of balding, middle-aged man lay asleep, a blissful smile on his face, exhausted by the tedium of hospital life.
She was taking a long time to come to the attempt on Marek's life that morning.
It was better that way.
Marek asked how much progress she had made in her murder investigation.
The question was posed with almost too obvious an innocence.
She replied, ‘Some.’
‘Have you arrested anyone?’
A mischievous twinkle lurked in Dexter's eyes.
‘No one yet,’ she said.
Marek was fencing with her, keeping her at bed's length.
His impassive, fierce stare reminded her of an owl squatting on a fence post, watchful and ready to plunge at the first rustle in the undergrowth.
‘I think though that I'll soon have to open another murder investigation to add to the one on Mills — yours.’
The eyes widened and the pupils, floating on a reef of chestnut, dilated a fraction.
She saw fear slither across his face.
It had been there all the time hidden beneath the forced gaiety, the conversational duelling.
‘You're not suggesting that what happened to me this morning was attempted murder, are you?
It was an accident.
That's all there is to it.’
The words flowed out of his bristly lips with unaccustomed swiftness.
He clasped and unclasped his hands nervously.
‘From what I can remember this lunatic just accelerated out from the side of the road.
Probably didn't look where he was going — you know, the usual story — and he knocked me down.
That's all there is to it.’
Marek snatched up a bunch of grapes from the bedside table.
He plucked and ate them with surprising sensuality, sucking out the juice and spitting the pips into his left hand.
Sensing her disbelief grow and surround him, he flashed with petulant anger.
‘Look, I should know.
I just wish you'd leave me alone.
It was like this at the time of Mum's suicide, you police just wouldn't leave me alone.’
Even when Dexter took over the questioning, Marek said he remembered nothing about the car or its driver.
Nor could he think of anyone who would want to kill him.
He showed no surprise when Blanche told him the number plate of the car was false, and Nowak emphasised he did not want the police  to press charges if the driver was found.
He thought the whole incident had been blown up out of proportion.
An old man by the entrance began coughing.
A nurse scurried past with a covered bedpan.
Blanche found the man in front of her an enigma, impenetrable and secretive.
She knew hardly anything about his life: just a few disjointed notes.
‘Why didn't you marry?
Was it your mother?’
Marek lowered his eyebrows a millimetre.
‘I never really wanted to.
I never met the right woman.
I loved my mum too much perhaps.’
‘She must have missed your father a lot?’
Blanche fished, tickling him into keeping up the conversation.
‘She never stopped thinking of him.
Father's memory was always there.
It was there for both of us.’
Blanche was confident enough to probe deeper.
‘How did your dad get killed, by the way?
I've heard lots of different stories.
I gather you've looked into the whole thing.’
‘Who told you that?’ he flashed.
‘Dr Swod among others.’
Marek's tremble quickened, as though he were on the verge of taking a decision.
He closed his eyes and opened them again.
She could not tell whether their new dampness was the result of emotion or blinking.
‘It's a horrible story.
Not everyone has their father betrayed and then executed.’
Blanche waited for his shaking to give him the momentum to carry on.
‘You know he went back to Poland to spy for the West?’
Blanche nodded.
‘Well, he went back on the twenty-third of April 1950.
St George's Day.
The English national day.
My mother engraved it on my memory.’
‘And did you manage to find out who did betray your dad?’
Marek scratched his receding clump of hair.
The gesture was clumsy and theatrical, the policewoman considered, the pause a beat too long.
‘No.
Various people have talked about possible traitors in MI6.
You know, Philby and that bunch.
But whether it was him or someone else…or just bad luck.’
‘But Dr Swod told me there was a rumour of someone particular in MI6, possibly Mills, being the traitor.
He must have told you that, you went to see him.’
Marek blanched behind the protective layer of half-grown  beard.
‘He did suggest it.
But I never confirmed it.’
Abruptly Marek's hands stopped shaking.
He lifted the skeleton bunch of grapes — now with only a few fruit clinging on precariously — back to the metal bedside cabinet.
He clasped and unclasped his wiry hands two or three times as though wringing out a rag, pulled his legs on to the bed, sat back and replied in a raucous whisper.
Blanche knew he was concealing something but she was unsure what.
‘I found nothing out that pinned the blame on him.
There were three or four people who could have betrayed my dad.’
His voice wavered with a hint of uncertainty.
‘Just how well did you know Mills?’ asked Blanche.
He began trembling again.
‘As I told you, I hardly knew this guy Mills.
He was just a friend of my mother.’
‘Come on, Mills was really close to you when you were a kid —’
’— a kid, sure.
When I was young he did us lots of good turns.
I knew him pretty well then.’
‘You're not seriously going to tell me that a relationship like that just ends, when the guy still meets your mother every few weeks or so?’
A woman with candyfloss hair glared at them in open-mouthed amazement, for their voices had risen little by little.
She had moved quickly since learning of Marek's accident, Blanche thought with pride.
The sun stood uncertainly on the horizon, a disc of perfect orange, hovering above the smudge of suburban parks and tiled roofs, the same sun Spittals had been admiring a couple of hours before.
A jet signed an elegant loop across the eggshell sky.
The sun flooded the ward, painting a red halo round Marek's head and throwing Dexter's face, which looked down at the floor disconsolately, into purple shadow.
‘Autumn always makes me sad,’ Marek grunted.
‘You can see the year balancing.
Just waiting to tip over into the chill of winter.’
He uttered this with the finality of a poem's last line.
The conversation was over.
He stopped trembling as quickly as he had begun a moment before and seemed to withdraw down the dark passage to the daydream he was locked in when they first arrived.
The man was neurotic, if not mad, Blanche decided.
She nodded to Dexter and they walked away.
They had reached the main corridor when a hand touched  her shoulder.
It was Marek.
With a gesture he drew them to the side of the corridor.
The fever in his eyes flared.
‘You saw I was het up in there?
I just couldn't talk with the old bag next to us flapping her ears to catch every word.
Look — I've got something very important to tell you.’
It had been an exhausting day, Blanche reflected in the matter of a second: Christine Mills had unburdened her thoughts, Spittals had ordered her off the case, and now Marek Nowak had chosen that moment to reveal another fragment of the truth.
He looked at her directly.
He had done it so rarely, she almost flinched.
‘Look — before my mum died she told me Jozef Taczek had confessed to her, confessed that he'd murdered Mills because of the betrayal.
That was why I think mum must have killed herself.’
He glanced skittishly up and down the corridor.
‘One old friend had killed another.
It was more than she could bear.
I'm only telling you this because…well, it's obvious who killed Mills.
Taczek.
You've got to arrest him.
And quick.’
He trailed off breathlessly.
‘Are you sure Taczek doesn't want you dead as well?’
Marek's mouth hung open.
‘He might,’ he said unsteadily.
‘When did your mother tell you all this?’
‘The night before she committed suicide:’
‘And why are telling us this only now?’
‘I didn't believe it before.
And then this car ran at me.
It started to make sense.’
‘And Taczek confessed to her that he'd murdered Mills?’ asked Dexter earnestly to confirm what they had heard.
‘That's what Mum told me.’
The confession fitted neatly.
The sergeant preened himself.
Marek glared, challenging them to arrest Taczek.
Then a hunted look dribbled into his eyes.
‘If anything else happens to me,’ he murmured, wetting his lips, ‘look round my house.
You might find it worthwhile.’
He turned on his slippers and into the protection of an irascible nurse.
Blanche was happy as she walked out, confident at the end of the afternoon that she had at last found an explanation for Tatyana Nowak's suicide, and the first direct link between a particular human being and the murder.
Dexter was abnormally silent as he swaggered down the drive.
He spoke only when they arrived at the car.
‘You realise,’ he said, turning  the gold ring on his finger again, ‘that Nowak was doing his best to cover it up.’
‘What?’
Dexter spread his hands in mock supplication to the heavens.
‘That he's gay, for God's sake!’
The chief inspector realised his explanation accounted for the batsqueak of sexuality that had passed between them.
‘And what's more,’ said Dexter with a mocking smirk, ‘I think he fancies me.’
Chapter Seventeen
No dithering, Blanche thought.
Marek had told them Taczek had confessed to the murder.
That would be sufficient to arrest the old Lothario.
Under the gloomy strip lighting of a police interrogation cell he might be stripped of his self-possession, and confess.
Like Dexter, she had had enough of grappling with the bundles of facts she had accumulated, facts that did not slot together to form a coherent pattern; but dissolved and reformed into new patterns every time she touched them.
They reminded her of the cardboard kaleidoscope she had as a child, packed with coloured fragments, which she looked into for hours, turning and watching, turning and watching.
They drove up the ramp from the underground car park at Scotland Yard and out on to Victoria Street at 8.40 p.m.
The trees around the garden in the centre of Allen Square were spread with golden syrup under the street lamps.
The square was deserted.
A couple of streets away the traffic rumbled but here, in the heart of London, all was tranquil.
Blanche looked up and searched the sky, seeking some prophecy of success or failure, but found only a sprinkling of stars brave enough to outshine the lemon gleam of the city's lights.
Taczek stood in the hallway of the second floor outside his flat, solid arms akimbo, the smile dissolving from his face as he saw them climb the stairs.
‘I see you chose to visit me in force on this occasion.
If you had told me in advance, I would have prepared a few canapes for your arrival.’
He seemed only mildly surprised when she asked him, in the appalling police jargon that made her cringe, to accompany her to the local police station.
He said he would come only if arrested.
So she arrested him.
He chirruped with animated amusement as she explained it was on suspicion of murder.
‘This is all rather jolly,’ he gasped finally.
‘I've seen this done so often in the films but to be arrested myself…
It's pure  heaven.’
Jozef paid a theatrical farewell to his young lover, telling him not to forget to make the phone call he had promised.
He gabbled all the way to the police station about his favourite film noirs.
He said he adored hard-bitten policemen.
Blanche was irritated and entertained by his nervous chatter in equal measure.
All the time she prayed in desperation that the constables would discover something incriminating back in the flat: perhaps letters from Zbigniew or Tatyana Nowak, bloodstained gloves, she did not care.
But something.
The Voice slipped the magnetic card into the slot of the public telephone, consulted the number he had been given by Taczek, and dialled.
His breath curdled on the night air.
Cars skimmed past on the Earls Court Road, their headlights drawing his shadow again and again across the back of the booth.
‘Yes?
Can I help you?’
The enquiry was distant and neutral.
‘A friend of George with a message.’
‘Just a second, please.’
The young woman on night shift high up in a tower block near Lambeth Bridge yawned.
‘Just wait a second, please.’
She confirmed the tape recorder was working and examined her computer terminal for instructions.
‘What is the status of the message?’
‘Red.’
‘And what is the message?’
‘George needs help.
The police have arrested him.’
Taczek remained sprightly even in the interview room and treated the first half hour of questions as a party game.
He sat opposite to the chief inspector and Dexter, behind a narrow wooden table, hands gesticulating, with the face of a bridge player.
‘You have no reason to arrest me,’ he kept repeating.
‘You'll just make yourself look very foolish.
It will do you no good in the end.’
Blanche slumped back in her chair and decided to attack circuitously.
She relished the intellectual challenge of an interrogation.
‘I advise you to answer all my questions truthfully.
Last time we spoke you told me some lies.’
—‘Really?’
Taczek took oft his spectacles and a gleam twinkled in his face.
‘What is truth anyway?’
‘You told me Zbigniew Nowak was killed in a car accident.
That's untrue.’
Taczek unclasped his hands and relaxed.
‘If that's all you're worried about I can explain simply enough.’
He stood up and began to pace restlessly round the room, stopping occasionally by the door to squint out through the perspex porthole, by the table to lean across it and impale her on his eyes, or by the wall where he sent his hands into spirals of explanation.
‘You see, the last time I spoke to you, I didn't realise that all this investigation was serious.’
She spluttered and pointed out that it was a murder enquiry.
‘I didn't see the relevance of something that happened a long time ago.
An incident that was dead and buried.’
‘It was up to me to decide that.
Not you,’ she replied waspishly.
‘I beg to differ with you a bit there.
Because I knew all the surrounding circumstances.
I might as well tell you now that I have done some freelance work for Her Majesty's intelligence services.’
Blanche nodded in mock amazement.
Taczek leant forward and lowered his voice to a confidential whisper.
‘As a result I know some background to what Zbigniew Nowak was involved in.
It's still highly secret.
A careless word from someone and people could still be compromised.’
‘Nothing you've told me is new,’ she snapped.
‘And none of it gave you the right to lie to me.
If you lied over how Nowak died, you probably lied over more important things.
Mills was probably murdered because he was working for the KGB.
At one time I thought Tatyana may have done it, but now I have evidence it was someone else.’
Taczek froze by the door.
He digested what she said by twisting his head to one side and pushing his spectacles higher up his nose.
His voice moved up a register, from baritone to tenor, and it was tinged with irritation for the first time that evening.
One of his thick fingers began stabbing the air at her.
‘Young lady, you don't have the faintest idea what you're talking about.
That's all complete and unmitigated rubbish.i He waved his arms at her patronisingly.
‘I've had enough of this charade.
I've played along with you for the past  hour.
But now I want to go home.
Get back to the book I was reading.’
His arrogance made her even more determined than before.
She tightened her lips into a straight line.
‘You'll be released when I decide.’
Taczek hoisted his fist and smacked it down on the table with a hollow bang.
‘This is outrageous.
I demand my solicitor.
You just don't know what you're letting yourself in for, meddling with me.’
His cheeks were the colour of dough and his eyes sparkled with anger.
He puffed up his chest like an exotic bird engaged in a courtship dance.
The chief inspector had seen businessmen before, stopped for drunken driving or speeding offences, who adopted the same tactic.
‘How dare you,’ they puffed.
‘Do you realise who you are talking to, young woman?
The chief constable is my personal friend.’
All the time they stroked their nicotine stained moustaches and exhaled noxious fumes from their foam-flecked lips.
The door of the interview room swung open and a detective constable swaggered in.
He said nothing.
He slipped a folded piece of paper across the table.
She unfolded the first section.
‘Nothing found so far.’
It was then that her stomach began to yaw, for it occurred to her that she had no solid evidence at all with which to tackle Taczek.
She had not even thought about persuading Marek Nowak to write down what he had told her.
All she had were some notes she made in the car, witnessed by Dexter.
She thought she would take the statement tomorrow or the next day, when he was out of hospital.
She felt the blouse stick to her back as the sweat began to dribble.
Her cheeks were assailed by minute pinpricks of fire.
She unfolded the second section.
‘Man called Urquhart phoned.
Wants you to call him.
Urgent.’
The pleasure of this was almost enough to wipe away immediate fears about what to do with Taczek.
After reading the note, Blanche thought she would dispose of Taczek somehow with the same ease with which she refolded the slip of paper and slid it into her handbag.
Dexter detected her change of mood and examined her quizzically.
‘Aren't you going to ask me any more questions?’ demanded Taczek with a peremptory prod at his spectacles.
He was  thoroughly disgruntled.
His features had dried into a venomous grimace, the spade-like hands resting in his lap.
She had to appear calm and justified in arresting him.
Interrogations were like poker, an old detective inspector had once told her, they depended on bluff.
‘I know you think Mills betrayed Zbigniew Nowak.’
The Pole glanced up and gave his spectacles another prod.
‘Oh really?
And who told you that fascinating little fairy tale?’
‘A little bird.’
‘A little bird with no respect for the truth.’
‘So, it's not true?’
‘No, it's not true.
Necessarily.
I've no idea who told the KGB my friend, Zbigniew, was spying for the British.’
‘But someone did?’
‘Possibly,’ he said, checking himself.
‘I have no real idea what people have been telling you about my involvement with MI6 at the time.
It has always been pretty marginal.’
She was glad at last to have a use for information from Robert: it justified her relationship with him and her decision to press ahead with the case.
‘I know for a fact that you were as close as anyone to what was going on between us, the Americans and Poland during the Cold War.
So stop playing innocent and answer my questions, please.
Who betrayed Nowak?’
The room was silent except for the rustle of Dexter's pen and the jingle of his wrist chain on the table as he wrote.
The irregular echo of footsteps passed backwards and forwards along the corridor outside.
Taczek put his hands on his knees and studied the grain of the plastic floor tiles.
‘Look, Chief Inspector, I am finding this extremely tedious.
You are doing yourself a lot of harm by keeping me here like this interrogating me about matters which are protected by the official secrets legislation.’
Blanche paused.
She did not care a damn whether the information was protected or not.
She was investigating a murder and Taczek's prissy regard for guarding secrets irritated her.
‘I'll ask you again.
Who betrayed Zbigniew Nowak?’
He let out a tired sigh.
‘I might as well tell you — if only so that you'll let me go home.’
Taczek muttered to himself, ‘There are four or five candidates.’
‘I already know that.’
Taczek prodded his spectacles with irritation.
‘Do you want me to tell you or not?’
‘Go ahead.’
She waved her right hand in imitation of one of his patrician gestures.
‘And one of them was Mills?’
Taczek nodded.
It was time to deploy Dexter's tactic of unsubstantiated allegation.
She put no special inflection into the question but eased it out naturally.
‘Is that why you killed him?’
Taczek threw back his sculpted head and chortled: a healthy, hearty laugh that Blanche judged genuine enough.
She noticed his teeth for the first time: small and irregular, like pieces of gravel on a driveway, but sparkling white.
He slapped his chunky thighs with hilarity.
‘Oh, you are a joker, Chief Inspector.
I adore your little jumps of logic.
Your non sequiturs.’
He leant forward and wagged his finger at her again.
Blanche found the gesture patronising, symbolising the way she was treated by many of her superiors at the Metropolitan Police or creatures from the male world of spies.
‘Just because I knew Mills was suspected of betraying someone does not necessarily mean that I had anything to do with his unfortunate death.
Knowledge does not imply volition.’
The chief inspector disliked his arrogant manner, his jocularity at her expense, particularly when the only weapon she had was bluff and she was vulnerable for having pressed on with the case against Spittals' opposition.
If things went wrong, she would be blamed, and her career as a detective — the career she had fought for so tenaciously, against the depredations of her husband, against male prejudice, against policemen who drove up back alleys on patrol when she was a constable and groped for a kiss — that career might crumble to dust.
‘But a confession to me — admittedly a plain, simple person — implies guilt.
I know you've confessed to murdering Mills.’
Taczek looked with narrowed eyes from her to Dexter and then back to her.
He seemed too stunned to speak before snorting with mirth again.
‘I was mistaken in thinking that false confessions are confined to the Soviet bloc.
Now they've obviously been exported to this country.’
‘You've confessed to one person.
Now you can confess to me.’
Bluff, Blanche hoped, might just work.
Taczek took off his spectacles and polished them with a handkerchief.
‘How on earth can I confess anything to you?
No pope has yet admitted women to the priesthood,’ he said with a sarcastic smile.
‘You — and no other human being, for that matter-are competent to hear my confession.’
Dexter laid down his pen.
He took an informed interest in the sacred value of confession.
‘They say a soul feels lighter for getting rid of its burden of sin.’
Taczek turned his head to face him.
‘I do not have the sin of murdering Graham Mills on my conscience, young man.’
He whipped back to Blanche again.
‘To whom, incidentally, am I supposed to have bared my soul?’
Dexter looked at her.
Blanche nodded.
‘To Tatyana Nowak,’ explained the sergeant.
Taczek pushed at his spectacles.
It was a gesture, Blanche thought, to allow him time to absorb the information.
He propped his chin in the palm of his right hand.
‘If I said this to her before her death why are you taxing me with these preposterous allegations only now?’
She said nothing.
Dexter's notebook rustled as he turned over another page.
‘Unless…it was Marek who told you and not Tatyana.’
Taczek hoisted his spectacles again and revealed his row of cone-like teeth.
‘I had nothing to do with the murder of Graham Mills.
I never even discussed it with Tatyana.’
Dexter glanced up again, the artery on his forehead throbbing.
He was losing patience with the slow progress.
‘That's a bit weird, isn't it?
Someone both you and Mrs Nowak know gets murdered and you don't even talk about it?’
Taczek studiously ignored the question.
‘I met Tatyana only once between Graham's murder and her suicide.
She led her own, isolated sort of life.
Only listened to classical music on the radio or her beloved Chopin on the gramophone.
I waited for her to bring up the subject of Graham's murder because I knew she would have been very upset.
She'd heard nothing and so I said nothing.’
Blanche noticed that both Jozef Taczek and Marek seemed very sensitive about giving Mrs Nowak the news of Mills' death.
‘I know,’ she said.
‘I broke the news to her.’
‘Did you?
I expect she was shocked.’
‘I find it strange you didn't bring the subject up.
But if you murdered Mills it would have a certain logic, wouldn't it?’
Blanche added with a measured snideness.
His smile shattered like a glass hitting the floor.
‘I don't find that funny.
Marek's suggestion, and I assume it is Marek's, that I discussed Graham's murder-let alone confessed to it — when I was with Tatyana that night is total lunacy.
Marek's mad.
He's got hidden motives.
You shouldn't trust him.’
Before Taczek could say anything more someone tapped rapidly on the door.
Dexter eased himself across the room and spoke in a whisper.
She sensed his glistening cheek brush her hair and his breath warm the side of her face as he bent forward to murmur in her ear.
‘Spittals on the dog.
Says it's urgent.’
‘Can't he wait?’
‘No.
Says he's got to speak to you now.’
Dexter's voice was imbued with a seriousness that was unusual to Blanche.
Taczek leant back, slung his arms behind his head and stretched his chunky arms as if waking from a deep sleep.
The detective spotted a playful glint gleaming in his eye.
Although he was in repose the same energy she had noticed when she first met him oozed through his body.
A constable led her along the corridor past fluttering notices and an electric clock that had stopped.
He showed her into another bare cubicle where two hatchet-faced men were scribbling, and pointed to a phone that lay scratched and bruised on the desk.
‘Hello.’
The harsh, flat voice of Spittals was unmistakable.
He sounded calm, even distant.
A sure sign of anger, Blanche thought.
‘What the hell are you playing at, for Christ's sake?’
Spittals barked before pausing for a reply.
When she said nothing, his language degenerated into grossness.
‘I've just had a call from the commissioner's office saying you've arrested someone with security links.
They got called up by the Cabinet Office.
You've got to release him straightaway or else they'll have my balls to play snooker with.’
She remained silent.
‘Are you still there?’
She grunted.
‘For fuck's sake, and I don't care who the hell he is — release him, throw him back on the streets  and don't touch him again.
I thought I told you to keep clear of the funnies, for Christ's sake!’
All she could manage was a burbled apology.
‘See me first thing tomorrow morning.’
She gulped.
How had the commissioner become embroiled so quickly?
Let alone the Cabinet Office?
Christine Mills did not have any really influential friends but Taczek certainly did.
Her skin fried with embarrassment.
The two officers who were scribbling eyed her curiously.
She smiled at them weakly.
She hated making mistakes.
She hated even more being made to look a fool.
She was powerless.
She had to obey or be sacked.
She believed Spittals would somehow have treated a male officer differently — spoken less patronisingly, with more respect.
The chief superintendent seemed to revel in the reprimand he issued to her.
The final insult, Blanche knew, would be the smile Taczek would sport when released.
She slunk back to the interrogation room.
Dexter looked up expectantly, a loop of ash dangling from the end of the cigarette he had lit in her absence.
Taczek drummed on the table with the tips of his fingers.
‘I did try and warn you, Chief Inspector.
I did say you had made a mistake.’
She wanted to take that thick neck of his and press her fingernails, long and freshly varnished for Urquhart's benefit, deep into the flesh until the cocky smirk on his face was replaced by a grimace of pain.
He did not even wait to be told the subject of the phone call.
Taczek thrust himself up from his chair and patted his jacket and trousers to remove any creases.
‘I'm sorry I couldn't stay longer but it was getting rather boring.’
Without being asked, he strode over to the door and waited, moving his weight from one foot to the other and tugging his shirt cuffs out of his jacket sleeves.
Blanche nodded wordlessly to Dexter who, with a show of reluctance, opened the door and disappeared with Taczek to arrange the formalities of release.
She stood alone in the glimmering, grey room, hair in a squall, face drawn up in a squint of concentration.
She was thinking of a bleak room in a small block of flats in Streatham, the curtains drawn to keep in the heat, the walls weighed down with the knick-knacks of a happy life: the flat she had been  brought up in.
She was angry with herself then as well.
She had come to pick up her mother's possessions: the cracked Harrods dinner service, souvenirs of trips to Brighton and Bournemouth, the frayed and tired linen, the cooking pots, the scarlet tea cosy her mother had knitted, the family photograph albums she valued so much.
Mother's objects were the detritus of a life scraping for pennies, making things last beyond their natural span, so that her fatherless children should be happy.
Although Blanche had been sad standing there in Mother's empty flat, she had been overtaken then by the same feeling she sensed come over her in the interrogation room that night after Taczek had left.
Starting in her stomach, a warm glow suffused her body until it set her fingertips tingling and her scalp crackling.
It was an ancient emotion for Blanche, calling her home from the wasteland of tension and anger she had tramped across for the past few months.
Happiness.
A sentiment that ambushed her at the coldest moments.
Urquhart had called.
And he might have an explanation.
Chapter Eighteen
Blanche tumbled through the front door of her flat just after eleven o'clock.
The red light of the answerphone was flickering.
She expected Urquhart but found first a message from her brother inviting her down for the weekend.
She groaned with guilt at not having phoned him before.
The only other one was from her unfaithful husband.
‘Look, Blanche, I know it's all a mess.
I really, truly am sorry.’
The words sounded hollow when played back in the emptiness of the flat, like an extract from a vacuous, romantic novel.
‘It was a terrible mistake.
Let's get together again.
Please.’
The tape crackled for a few seconds and then hummed as he replaced the receiver.
The chief inspector kicked off her shoes and poured a slug of single malt whisky.
She stretched herself out on the sofa, bought in a fit of extravagance from Harrods five years before, admiring the sumptuous material.
She adored her flat, decorating it with a classical sparseness that niggled Roger, preferring a few excellent things — whether wallpaper or china — to many mediocre ones.
Urquhart's work number at MI5 rang and rang.
Blanche realised that Robert had never given her any other.
It was finally answered by a man who spoke with an artificial, lazy drawl and was suspicious when she asked for Urquhart by name.
When he demanded who Blanche was, and why she was phoning so late, she rang off.
What was Urquhart playing at?
He called her and raised her hopes.
Then he disappeared.
She prowled nervously about the flat and poured another whisky.
It had been a long, long day.
Clips of her conversations with Christine Mills, Marek Nowak and the encounter with Taczek floated before her, flickered like a silent film as she ran her manicured fingernails along the spines of her many books.
Upstairs and ajar was the door to the main bedroom.
Through it, in the ghostly light from the street lamp, she distinguished the tangled duvet, her dressing gown slung over an ebonised chair and a French Empire mirror with a sphinx carved at the apex, of which she was particularly proud.
She considered what the previous night meant to her: two acts of ‘love’ in the space of seven hours.
Urquhart was not in love with her, she was sure, and she was not in love with him.
Yet.
It was a night of physical fulfilment, a pleasing confirmation of her desirability.
Love was a different matter.
She had experienced it with Roger, for a while, that confidence and happiness in the presence of another.
Then it had faded, had been mislaid without her exactly knowing when or how — like a childhood toy that is suddenly no longer there, tossed into the rubbish bin in a moment of carelessness.
Blanche controlled her emotions well.
She committed them, like a good general, only when sure of victory.
She liked Robert Urquhart and was attracted to him, even trusted him, unlike Spittals who was no doubt gleefully stabbing her in the back at that moment.
Christine Mills, Marek Nowak and Taczek were all liars.
Robert Urquhart was her only hope, her only ally.
It was too late to phone her brother.
She dialled the number her husband had given her, which belonged to one of his old school friends, a television producer.
The friend answered and a note of panic entered his voice when he discovered who it was.
She heard Roger's name being called.
‘Blanche?’
‘Yeah.
It's me.’
‘Thanks for calling.
Sorry to keep chasing you but, well, I wanted to make sure you knew I was serious.’
Even though he was a journalist, Roger's strength was never clear communication.
‘About what?’
‘About wanting to meet you.
Look, I was sorry about what happened round at the flat.
It was…well.’
The detective waited to hear whether Roger would apologise.
He never apologised.
It was always she who made the peace overtures.
‘Just one of those things.’
‘Yes.
Your fault.
You attacked me.
I said I didn't want to talk and you attacked me.’
‘Hold on a minute, Blanche.
It was hardly all one…
’ She sensed him draw in his breath with great effort.
He was a  weak, cowardly man, she reflected, who wanted to be popular with everyone, yet whose deep insecurity drove him to self-righteous pomposity and chill cruelty.
‘There's not much point in carrying on talking really, is there?
You hardly seem in a mood of Christian charity.’
Typical Roger, she murmured to herself, trying to throw the blame on to her and make her feel guilty.
‘Why should I be?
You haven't shown any repentance.’
‘But I am repentant.
I am — look, why don't we meet for a drink soon and talk face to face?
I'm standing in Nick's hall, so everyone can hear.
Can't we meet somewhere?’
Blanche considered.
She was not a coward and she would have to meet Roger eventually.
‘OK.
How about next week?’
He sounded relieved.
‘Can't you make it earlier?’
No.
We've both got to prepare our scripts.’
‘I just hope they are better than tonight's.’
Her limbs ached and mouth tasted as though some incubus had emptied the contents of an ashtray into it while she had been asleep.
The telephone was still shrieking.
She reached out from her bed, waited for another chirrup in case the caller was going to ring off, and snatched the receiver irritably.
She heard the rapid bleep of a public call box.
It was Urquhart, telling her to meet him in half an hour outside the Dorchester Hotel in Park Lane.
She gagged with irritation and he told her, with a forced gravity weighing down his voice, that it was connected with the Mills case.
The conversation was over before it had started.
She felt she had dreamed it.
Mechanically she looked in the mirror.
She pencilled on a new crust of eyeshadow and lipstick.
Her hands shook so much that she smudged the rouge and had to start again.
She smacked her lips together, dragged a comb through her hair and marvelled once again at how even simple artifice improves the human face.
It was 1.15 a.m.
Urquhart slipped from a shadow and placed his hand under her arm without a word.
He dragged her across Park Lane, dodging a last, straggling taxi, almost threw her over the guard rails on the far side of the road into Hyde Park and strode  ahead into the looming darkness of the trees.
Urquhart's eyes were battened tight down into slits and he said nothing.
As they walked towards the centre of the park the city lights merged into a distant, phosphorescent haze and the velvety darkness closed in about them.
The undulations in the grass were heightened by the long shadows, and she tripped over.
She had forgotten to bring her gloves and so the hand that she thrust out to break her fall sank into the cold, muddy turf.
A dusting of moisture was already starting to form on the blades of grass as the temperature plummeted.
Her shoes oozed into the ground and, as the breeze sliced through her light coat, she shivered.
Urquhart stopped and turned a few yards ahead of her.
Washed in shadow he looked as mysterious as when she first met him.
He stood motionless and listened.
The traffic was no more now than a hum, an occasional pinprick of light edging along Bayswater Road and Park Lane.
Nothing else moved.
The city was dropping into its restless slumber.
‘Look, Robert, I've had enough.
Tell me what this is all about.
I thought it just might be some sort of lovers’ tryst not some bloody SAS training exercise.’
He tried to relax for the first time.
His muscles creaked as the tension began to loosen.
He was well wrapped against the cold in a navy-blue gaberdine coat, a tartan scarf thrown round the neck, and his hands were covered by heavy black gloves.
White socks winked from underneath his trousers.
His eyes had been rubbed a raw red by fatigue and cold and had a harried glitter.
His breath smelt strongly of alcohol.
‘MI5 have been watching me.
That's what's wrong.
I've been ordered not to see you again.’
His breath spumed on the night air.
She looked down and shuffled her feet inanely.
Why all this mystery?
Was he telling the truth?
Was he tired of her already?
She could read nothing from the parchment of his face.
It was turned from her and draped in shadow.
His tone had been matter-of-fact, as if he were reporting to a committee.
‘Who ordered you to stop seeing me?’
‘My boss.
A man called Capron.’
Tension crackled on the cold air.
His eyes flickered over her shoulders.
The name, Capron, tugged at her memory.
She asked  whether it was the same Capron who was in the photograph she had borrowed from Tatyana Nowak, and who Marek had been to see.
Urquhart looked at her suspiciously.
‘No idea.’
‘Don't you know?’
‘My boss is the head of K8, the MI5 sub section that looks into suspicious resignations and so on.
But the Capron you're talking about worked for MI6, not MI5.’
‘But Swod told me he transferred — from MI6 to the Security Service.
Perhaps that's why your boss wants you to stop seeing me.
He knows something about the murder he doesn't want you or me to find out about.’
Urquhart stared at her for a moment and then shattered into a hearty laugh, much too hearty to be genuine to Blanche's ears.
‘Talk about conspiracy theories!’
‘What's he like, this Capron?’ she asked angrily.
‘Very smooth.
A safe pair of hands.’
‘Is he about the right age to have worked with Mills?’
‘I don't know.
Why don't you show me this bloody photo?’ he asked with a snap of irritation.
His face was draped in shadow and unreadable.
What light there was brushed the back of his head, highlighting a few strands of blond hair.
Blanche decided Urquhart could not be trusted with the whole truth.
‘I haven't got it any more.
I gave it back to Marek Nowak.’
The detective had retained a copy of the original.
Urquhart paused.
He turned away, musing, and walked away into the gloom.
Why was she conspiring with him to talk around the subject rather than come to the point?
Relationships with other people work like a ratchet.
Time is passed together, monuments visited, meals consumed and a common stock of memory accumulated.
The wheels turn, the ratchet clicks, the two people approach.
Something ineradicable happens and assumptions are made about kindness or fidelity — based on how often the ratchet has snapped.
But in Urquhart, standing there facing him that night, she encountered a ratchet that had broken free of its retaining spring and was spinning in reverse.
She felt further away from him than ever.
The two figures stood, isolated and alone, in the depths of Hyde Park at two o'clock in the morning.
He had withdrawn behind his shield of mysterious self-possession.
What the hell  did she care about whether his boss Capron was a good operator?
Her career, her desire for physical love, had led her to devalue, and so betray, herself.
Blanche sensed the anger of outraged pride.
She was not willing to let herself be betrayed and used by Urquhart.
She would not allow him to sidle away into the night leaving her to kow-tow to an irate Spittals in the morning.
Her chest shrivelled with anger.
She could no longer support men closeting their secrets.
She would prise Urquhart's out at screaming point.
‘All I want is the truth — for once.
Not office gossip or patronising shit about trusting the Registry files.
No tales about defectors and what the Brits got up to in the Cold War.
I've had enough of that.
Just tell me the truth.
Crawl out of that little shell of yours and tell me the truth.
About what you feel for me.
And then about Mills.’
Days, hours before, that distant body had shed its casing.
She had seen it naked.
The tight, round buttocks; the blond hairs on his shoulders backlit by the bedside lamp; the curve of his back rising and falling; the bony rib cage, hard and muscled; the warmth of his breath scalding her neck.
She thought she had begun to know him in those intimate moments.
Urquhart slowed after a few steps and then stopped.
She had not moved.
His shoulders rose as he took a deep breath like a diver about to plunge.
He slowly turned to face her.
‘I'm sorry.
I should have told you at the beginning.
For a spy, I'm not very good at deception.’
Urquhart kicked at the turf with the toe of his shoe.
‘I'm married.
I have a wife and a young son.’
She was numb, frozen by surprise.
She wanted to feel some emotion straightaway but found none.
‘You bastard,’ she hissed.
She wanted, but could not bring herself, to hit him.
‘Things are never that simple.
You must know that.’
‘Things like that arc rather simple.
A man is either a faithful bastard or a faithless bastard.
You're in the second category.’
Urquhart winced.
At least she thought he did.
It may have been a trick of the light.
He said nothing.
The chilliness in Blanche's feet and hands was replaced by a pulsating warmth as her mind raced with the implications of what Urquhart had told her.
She had come to suspect that her affair with him would not be straightforward, that he was not sent by heaven  to redeem her from chastity.
But she had not consciously considered he might be married.
She had always promised herself she would never have an affair with a married man.
Yet she was in precisely that situation.
Deceived.
Betrayed.
Her betrayal probably meant little to Urquhart, she considered, when he was charged with preventing the betrayal of a nation.
The betrayal of a nation was too distant to make her care.
It was the betrayal of her trust that made her flutter with anger.
The state — like communism — was too abstract, too vague for her.
Looking into her churning heart as she stood there that night, she knew she felt an affection for the man opposite and believed he had some affection for her.
She could not say it was ‘love’ because she had always found it difficult to define the border between ‘love’and ‘friendship’.
There are no infallible guides, no accurate maps, to the territory of the heart.
You are a pioneer every time you enter that unknown land.
She was not thinking clearly and she prided herself on thinking clearly: priorities, motives, objectives.
These were her watchwords.
She wanted the truth from Urquhart if it did not bruise her, untruth if it did.
She told herself she did not care about the fact that he was already married but was equally scarred by the knowledge that he did have a wife.
His shadowy presence created an irresistible desire for her to stretch out just an arm's length away — and caress him, but that desire was counterbalanced by nausea at the prospect of his body coming into contact with hers again.
Perhaps her husband was not such a shit after all, Blanche thought, just a human being who experienced the same tangled skein of feelings as held her then.
She stood in limbo until he spoke again.
‘You know what I mean.’
She shook her head.
She could pretend no longer.
She did not know what he meant.
‘My wife and I live separately.
Most of the time.
I've been back now and again to stay for a while, hoping it would all work out.
We've stayed sort of together because of our son, for his sake if you like.
I don't know what we'll do — stay together or split up.’
‘Presumably you're going back to her now?
For another little experiment?’
A cold and neurotic performance, she told herself, as the words tumbled out.
Urquhart studied the ground intently, scouring the turf for his words.
‘As a matter of fact, I wasn't.
It's early days for us, you and me, if you like.
I think we got too involved too quickly.’
She laughed out loud, since it was he who had set the pace.
‘But I wanted to make sure that, well, I wasn't just being cynical about it all, making use of you.
I am very fond of you.’
The words were wrenched out like rotten teeth.
She could almost hear the tearing of the flesh.
‘But I'm not willing to break up with my wife and son yet.
Although I may be forced to.’
He was pensive, as if his words contained hidden meanings.
‘And how do I fit into these plans — if at all?’
Her words stung with sarcasm.
Urquhart flung his arms back and forth across his body to warm them up.
‘I'm cold.
Let's walk for a bit.’
He insinuated his right hand under her arm and tried to ease her towards the Bayswater Road.
She resisted.
‘Answer my question, for Christ's sake!
How do I fit into these plans of yours?’
‘That's precisely why I asked you to come here at such a bloody ridiculous time.
To tell you.’
They began to walk.
Blanche listened to the squelch of their feet, the-soughing trees, the swish of a distant car on the damp road and behind it all an amorphous hum.
‘I had an appointment to see Capron, this afternoon.
It was meant to be routine.
An update on various reports.
Everything went through on the nod.
His mind seemed to be somewhere else.
I was just about to put my papers away, when he said he had something ‘delicate’ to talk about.
Capron said it had come to his attention that I'd been meeting you and that it had to stop.’
‘How did he know?’
‘No idea.
I thought you might have said something to somebody.’
She glanced at him scorchingly.
‘Thanks for your trust.’
The sarcasm went unregarded.
‘Capron said he knew you were working on the Mills case and that we must have discussed it together.’
‘He couldn't prove it.’
‘That's what I told him.
But he went on to say he knew I'd spent the night at your place.
Someone must have been watching us.’
A balloon of disgust inflated within her.
A man must have lurked in a car parked between two lamp standards, noting the time of arrival, the minute the curtains had been drawn at her bedroom, the second their shadows met and intertwined behind the window.
During the long night, the car would have been joined silently by another.
The first would have slid off into the darkness.
Those men, balding men with families, would have written their reports with a knowing smile, omitting anything too indelicate, and the contents would have been passed on to Urquhart's boss, and then probably on to Spittals.
He was going to carpet her not only for arresting a part-time MI6 agent for murder without sufficient evidence, but also for fraternising with the ‘funnies’ between the sheets.
With a swell of panic, she looked round at all the wintry trees.
Each could hide a Special Branch man.
Had a car not followed her a long way along the Bayswater Road when she was coming to meet Urquhart?
Why had she not realised earlier?
‘Is there anyone here tonight?’
He shook his head.
‘Capron said he'd call them off now he had the information he wanted.’
‘Didn't you protest?
Say it was appalling that they spied on us like that?’
‘Course I did,’ rejoined Urquhart wearily but with little conviction.
‘He just looked at me and said our affair had to stop.
He mumbled about official secrets and civil service discipline.
He said you'd been sticking your nose in where it wasn't wanted, and hadn't heeded warnings from your superiors about giving up finding an espionage connection with Mills' murder.’
Blanche understood the people who must have put pressure on the commander to take her off the case: MI5 and Urquhart's boss, Capron.
‘There is a link,’ she groaned.
‘I'm convinced.’
Urquhart looked at her suspiciously.
‘Did Capron ask you straight whether you'd given me any help?’
Urquhart nodded.
‘And what did you say?’
‘I admitted it.
It would have looked a lot worse if I hadn't a proper motive for meeting you in the first place.’
‘And what did he say?’
‘He looked at me with one of those amiable stares of his, said I was overworked and I should take some time off.
Said I was talking poppycock, had signed the official report anyway and that — from his point of view — that closed the investigation.’
It occurred to her suddenly that she had forgotten to tell Urquhart what had gone on during the day, especially what Marek Nowak had told her and the disastrous arrest of Taczek.
Urquhart's face lengthened as she related the two episodes.
He was particularly fascinated by what Marek Nowak said.
He thrust his gloved hands in his pockets and trudged on, his face closed and looking inward.
Occasionally a faint glow from the city brushed the edge of his cheek and she was reminded how handsome he was, the smooth chin, his lines as clean as a lengthening shadow.
‘I reasoned with Capron.
But well-I didn't have that information you got from Nowak for a start, saying Taczek had confessed.
Capron ended up by saying I was barred from all files that have anything to do with Mills.
The Registry's been told.
I haven't got access to what we need most — written evidence.’
The MI5 man kicked the grass and dead leaves with his brogues.
‘Capron said if I met you again I'd be sacked.’
‘But he can't do that!’
He pulled his coat about him, his face dark against the city.
‘That's what you think.
There are no industrial tribunals in Her Majesty's Security Service.
A rumour circulates and someone is shuffled off to some distant department.
Why should they have to explain?
They're secret.
And this government wants it to carry on that way.’
They plodded on.
She was tongue-tied with fatigue and cold.
Urquhart glanced into the looming trees and smelt the wintry air.
In one of those swings of mood she experienced, swooping backwards and forwards like a pendulum, Blanche was frothy again.
Word loose and fancy free.
She stopped and planted her stiletto heels in a puddle of mud.
‘From what you've said I assume you didn't resign for my-sake.
After all, we do live in the real world.’
The sarcasm stung the night air.
But it was hypocritical sarcasm because she knew she would have done the same as him.
No one in their right mind sleeps with a person once and sacrifices their career on the altar of one  night's pleasure.
She would not have done it, but was disappointed that Urquhart did not make the gesture.
‘As you say, we live in the real world.’
His cold tone made her want to vomit over his white socks.
She restrained herself.
‘I've got responsibilities.
I need the salary.
Besides,’ he said, with the archest piece of self-justification, ‘what help I can offer you now, I can best give from the inside.
If I'm pushed out, I'll be just like you.
Helpless.’
‘Scurrying round to pick up the few crumbs that fall from the table?’
She looked at him, bleary-eyed and depressed.
Her feet were freezing again, sprouting chill mushrooms.
He stared back at, and through, her.
She had to hit him, dent him, somehow.
‘You like the freemasonry bit of it, don't you?
The secrecy.
The clubbiness.
Admit it.
The real reason you tugged your forelock to Capron was that you were afraid of being kicked out?’
He shrugged his shoulders.
She hated his indifference, the lack of passion, the buttoned-up calmness, that was somehow emphasised by the Scottish burr as he spoke.
‘I suppose you're right.
We're all afraid of being thrown out of the club.
Especially if you've paid or done a lot to get in — whether it's the snooker hall or the Garrick.’
He chuckled softly.
‘Whatever you belong to it always hurts when you're kicked out.
Outside the club, you go back to what you were before — being alone.
Just a human being without power or importance.’
Urquhart thrust his hands in his pockets and brooded.
He pulled his gaberdine coat closer around him.
‘I'll do whatever else I can to help you, Blanche, but you've got to realise I'm being watched all the time now.’
She wanted to go home and sleep.
Sleep for days.
Above all she wanted to slide far away from Robert Urquhart.
He sensed her disgust and hatred stinking in the air.
He wanted to dissipate it and leave her with a last impression of him that was not totally unpleasant.
He glanced across the flickering, urban horizon.
The Serpentine lay away to the west, the black slate of its surface ploughed by the chill breeze.
A tall hotel broke up the skyline of the night.
‘I'm sorry it's had to end like this.
I'll give you what help I can.’
Blanche walked away from him back towards Park Lane.
She did not care whether he followed or not.
The soles of her  shoes had turned to tongues of ice.
Her hands throbbed with the hastening October cold.
What few cars there were when she arrived had disappeared.
Park Lane was deserted.
From an open apartment window six storeys up, rock music thumped the damp night air.
She turned round as she reached the pavement to discover Urquhart a few steps behind.
He called her name.
He repeated it, but louder and more insistent.
She ignored him and did not turn again until she reached her car.
Urquhart was still with her.
He fumbled for a kiss as she unlocked the car but she twisted her cheek away.
She smelt the staleness of alcohol on his breath.
He did not try again and she drove off.
She kept sight of him in her mirror — hands in pockets, bedraggled — until she turned the corner, hoping that image would be the last she would ever have of him.
Chapter Nineteen
Spittals' hands glowed from the diligent rubbing he was applying to them as she came in through the door at ten o'clock.
He halted only for a second, enough to narrow his eyes and purse his lips into a look of utter disgust, as though a dog's turd had grown legs and scurried on to his carpet.
The rubbing resumed as vigorously as before and slowly drew the tension from his lips and cheek muscles.
The rustling of Spittals' hands, one across the other, backwards and forwards, was the only sound in the room apart from a demented fly.
It had been woken from its sleep by the central heating and in a state of despair and paranoia dive-bombed the double glazing in a vain effort to escape.
Blanche felt like doing the same.
‘So, you've really got me in the shit now, haven't you?
Arresting a former MI6 man with high-up connections.
Very high up indeed.
The Commissioner's Office got a call from some pinstriped twerp in the Cabinet Office.’
She blinked and looked demurely down at the grey and red carpet which squelched across the floor like a rabbit that had been run over by a lorry.
Spittals had insisted it should be laid when he took over the office.
‘So.
Come on then.
Give us your side of it.’
Spittals rubbed his forefinger across the stubble of his moustache as she flopped into an explanation.
While she gabbled on Spittals stopped rubbing his hands and, with his eyes on the demented fly, expressed disbelief by taking off his jacket and cradling his head in his hands.
He was more irritated than angry — irritated that the Commissioner's Office had called him direct to demand an explanation.
But melded with the annoyance was a certain satisfaction that the model graduate chief inspector, whom he thought much too clever and ambitious for her own good, had made a grave error.
‘Lack of maturity,’ he had mumbled the night before, ‘no experience of real life.
Women don't understand these things.
Promoted just a little too quickly in my opinion.’
But the chief superintendent knew he had to counterfeit genuine anger when he confronted Blanche, tear her off a strip, and put overweening ambition in its place.
So the colour in his cheeks darkened to a ruby red.
His feet began to tap more and more loudly beneath the desk and his jaw quivered more and more violently as Blanche put her side of the story and pleaded for more time to finish the investigation.
Finally he jumped up, when he thought the appropriate moment had arrived, and whipped a blast of abuse across the table.
It was accompanied by a squall of spittle.
She could do nothing but batten down the conversational hatches and wait until the storm blew itself out.
She stared at him defiantly, and after he had ranted for a minute or so, the chief superintendent felt vaguely ridiculous so he lowered his frame into a cowering chair, and resumed the final polish of his palms.
‘I warned you before, I'd have to take action if you carried on as you were.
So, from this moment, I order you off the Mills case.
There are no exceptions this time.
You stop now.
The file is closed.’
He emphasised each word with a stab of a well-fleshed finger that bore his brassy signet ring.
He remembered the call he had also had that morning from a senior man in Special Branch.
‘Words like ‘national security’ and ‘Official Secrets Act’are being bandied around in my hearing and I don't like them very much.
They make me come out in spots.
Words like that mean trouble, big trouble, and I've got enough of that in my department as it is without you importing any more.
Is that clear?’
Blanche nodded with such studied attention it verged on caricature.
The chief superintendent was pleased with himself.
He smacked his lips and stroked his moustache with surprise.
He was annoyed by Blanche's defiance yet he also admired it.
His deepest sympathies sided with her against the plum-mouthed bureaucrats of the Cabinet Office.
‘You realise of course that this Taczek character might take it further.
Sue the commissioner for unlawful arrest or something like that.’
He leant forward confidentially over the desk.
‘But we should be able to fend him off.’
He wanted her to show gratitude and deference, but she simply murmured ‘Thank you, sir’ with no conviction.
Blanche  did not like the chief superintendent glowing smugly over her mistake.
Spittals resumed his rubbing again because at times like these she made him nervous.
Blanche did not respond like the other ambitious young officers he knew.
She walked towards the closed door.
‘Take my advice this time, Blanche.
A call from the Cabinet Office means some very big people indeed risk having their noses put out of joint.
If you don't bail out now, it could well be the sack or demotion.
Just leave the funnies alone, will you?’
Spittals picked up from his desk a silver cup he had won in his youth in the Manchester Bowls League.
It was the only sport he had ever practised and he was inordinately proud of it.
He breathed lovingly on the silver and polished it with his sleeve.
‘The Force has got enough obstinate and bloodyminded men as it is, without adding any females.’
Dexter came off the phone and scribbled a line or two of notes when Blanche loped into the office.
‘I've been looking for you everywhere.
Then I discovered you were with the chief, being ticked off,’ he said mischievously.
The sergeant took a languid drag at his cigarette.
He always smoked cigarettes sensuously, as tough each one was of a special vintage and he wanted to fix its particular flavour on his palate.
‘Our friend who got knocked down by a car, Mr Nowak, has fallen into a bad coma and he's on the critical list.’
Blanche had no energy left for bad news.
She wanted to sleep.
Not for hours but for days and days.
Her arms and legs throbbed with tiredness.
The coffee she drank tasted like creosote.
‘So what?
Let the bastard die,’ she wanted to say.
It was he after all who had led her to arrest Taczek, he who had indirectly led her into the chief superintendent's office that morning to have her face sprayed with warm saliva.
‘It looks to me as if someone tried to murder him,’ whispered Dexter as an afterword.
A detective constable was working away in a corner.
Blanche winked at Dexter and nodded for him to follow her outside with his coat.
He said nothing until they were outside New Scotland Yard and had left the security men far behind, stamping their feet against the cold outside the main door.
She explained to Dexter why she could not talk about the  Mills case at work.
If news wended to Spittals that she had any more interest in the Mills murder she would be suspended immediately.
Great, round clouds rolled slowly across the sky like whales and a chill wind slapped their faces as they clattered along the pavement to Angelo's Cafe.
They collected steaming mugs of frothy coffee and sat down opposite the gleaming silver water boiler.
Beneath lay a line of glum sandwiches, a Perspex dish of an unidentifiable fish meat and a mutilated leg of ham.
Dexter explained in his nasal twang that an unknown woman had passed Nowak's bed the previous evening during visiting hours, tripped over a chair and fallen on him.
Marek was asleep at the time but as soon as the woman hit the bed Nowak woke up with a scream.
The woman apologised and hurried out of the ward before anyone could stop her.
The detective constable who was supposed to be guarding him was out of the ward at the time chatting up some nurses.
Nowak was still dazed by sleep.
He said nothing for a minute or two and told the person next to him that he was having a bad dream when the stranger woke him up.
He asked whether anyone knew who the woman was.
No one did.
An hour or so later, Marek started to rub his leg and called across a nurse because his head ached.
She found a spot on Nowak's calf that was red and swollen like a severe mosquito bite.
It seemed a minor problem.
Within another hour Nowak's temperature was high with fever, he was rolling and twisting in the sheets, his body soaked in sweat.
He uttered odd bits of English and Polish — a word here, what people took to be an odd line of poetry, names.
The nurse summoned a doctor in alarm, and just as a sedative was about to be given, Marek began to scream.
His eyelids peeled back, the eyeballs rolling wildly in their sockets.
He shouted, so the doctor told Dexter, as if he were crying to someone a great distance away.
With the sedative, Marek drifted into sleep but he did not wake up.
He was in a deep coma.
The mosquito bite on his leg had swollen into a scarlet hillock.
The patient was moved on to a life-support machine and another set of X-rays was ordered in case the first ones had not revealed internal injuries caused by the car accident.
They showed nothing.
Close examination of Marek's skin round the swelling, however, showed a minute mark, as if a needle had been inserted.
Blanche could not go to the hospital herself.
It was too foolish.
She told Dexter what had happened in the meeting with Spittals and how he had ordered her off the case, and she asked Dexter to go on helping her.
He tugged at the knees of his well-pressed trousers and watched Angelo pour out a cup of tea for a florid man with a limp.
‘Provided it doesn't get me the sack.
I'm black, remember, and jobs aren't too easy to come by, even for someone as good-looking and intelligent as me.’
Dexter agreed to go to the hospital and find out what he could.
He hoovered up the dregs of his coffee and scurried out of the cafe.
Blanche remained to think, clutching a second cup of coffee.
The owner of the sandwich bar swabbed down the counter again and whistled an aria she recognised from La Traviata .
A fragment of conversation with Urquhart bubbled up in her mind.
In a sudden panic of sadness, she pictured him the tall, thin frame, the stubby nose, the waves of golden hair tumbling over his forehead.
She closed her eyes to the image, waiting to hear only the words and shut out the pain.
She had asked whether intelligence services still commissioned murders of their enemies.
Urquhart chuckled and said ‘some’.
MI6 and the CIA were forbidden by internal guidelines to assassinate, but that did not mean, he continued, that they did not employ ‘freelancers’ to eliminate the odd opponent.
And what about the KGB?
They used, Urquhart whispered, to have a whole sub-department dedicated to murder during the Cold War.
Nowadays, and especially under the younger leaders of the Soviet Union who had not known the horrors of the Second World War, they used assassination very sparingly indeed.
He talked about the bad publicity for the Russians flowing from an incident in London a few years before, when the Bulgarian secret service murdered a political exile in London.
The publicity surrounding the death was carefully orchestrated by Western intelligence services, said Urquhart with a smirk, to cause the maximum amount of embarrassment to Russia and its allies.
Her erstwhile MI5 lover had imparted a cruel twist to his lower lip.
‘We know there were some red faces in KGB headquarters.
But their problem was being found out.
The  KGB's next victim won't be left dead with a poisoned pellet in him, like a wood pigeon that a kid takes a pot shot at with his air gun.
There'll hardly be a mark.’
She smacked her hand down on to the saucer without realising she still held the cup.
The crack of china resounded round the cafe as the saucer split in half.
A lady with a drained face wrapped in a nylon scarf and sitting at a table near by glanced up with a scowl.
Blanche blamed herself for Nowak's coma.
She should have been more suspicious.
One attempt had been made to murder Nowak the day before.
Why would the killer, especially if it was the KGB, stop after one go?
Marek Nowak was the only witness to Taczek's confession to the murder of Mills.
With the suicide of Tatyana Nowak and a successful assassination of her son, the confession would vanish from memory.
The spoken word, after all, only becomes history when it is recorded.
Nowak's attempted assassin was a woman.
If Taczek had murdered Mills, he could not have administered the poison that had thrust Marek into a coma.
Christine Mills perhaps?
Blanche was still suspicious of her decision not to tell earlier of the quarrel with her father on the night of his death.
Perhaps Nowak might recover.
Perhaps he might not.
She had to discover evidence of Taczek's confession to the murder of Mills that might survive Nowak's death.
There was one place she might come across it that she had not yet properly explored.
She had to visit it herself and risk dismissal.
Was it worthwhile?
She had never considered the possibility as likely until then.
Blanche was proud of her tenacious progress in the Metropolitan Police and had sacrificed much for it — children, so far; social life; feminine sensitivity.
But the motive behind her achievement was not self-interest alone, nor the desire to carry aloft the banner of feminism.
She wanted both of these to some extent but only in a police force whose integrity she could believe in.
When her principles and her career clashed, she had to sacrifice her career.
She could not be issued with a warrant for her visit.
The search would have to be illegal and secret — the sort of operation she knew Urquhart's organisation carried out regularly under the generous blanket of ‘national security’.
She regretted she would not be seeing Urquhart again for only one reason, or so she told herself.
She was convinced the defector he referred to vaguely was important and Urquhart was her only source of information about him.
Perhaps Marek Nowak was a KGB agent and was about to be named by the defector.
The person who recruited Nowak, or who had been recruited by him, would be trembling with anticipation.
Nowak would have been a likely target in such circumstances.
Or perhaps Graham Mills was about to be named by the defector just before his murder.
Perhaps Tatyana Nowak took her life for fear of the ignominy of exposure as a spy.
Perhaps, perhaps, perhaps.
She could invent hypotheses as often as she sipped her tepid coffee.
None of them, however, suggested a random death for Graham Mills.
His murder had to be linked to Tatyana's suicide, the poisoning of her son and the betrayal of the father.
— That family, like their beloved homeland, was a trinket of the gods.
She dropped a one-pound coin on the table to pay for the smashed saucer.
She intended it to lie flat and silent.
Instead the coin began to roll and described a series of ever smaller circles, until all movement died with a final rattle.
The Italian behind the counter beamed with a set of saffron-coloured teeth.
Outside the cafe Inspector Dickinson of Special Branch was inhaling snuff from the back of his hand.
Behind him, parked at the kerb, a red Ford Granada revved its engine.
‘Someone would like to have a chat with you, Chief Inspector,’ he stated with a sniff.
‘Someone in the car?’
He nodded.
Blanche could just make out a flabby shape in the back seat.
Dickinson opened the door to allow Blanche to get in and ordered the driver to move off.
The car pulled out into the traffic, leaving Dickinson behind.
The man sitting next to her was like a porcelain buddha, rotund and self contained, the skin without a wrinkle despite being fifty or so years old.
His mousy hair, on the other hand, had been eroded by the years.
It was thin and ragged, and folded forward to hide a growing bald patch.
The man's skin was the matchless white of a person who preferred study to sport and shadow to sunlight.
‘Sorry to just snatch you off the pavement like that, Chief Inspector, but I felt we ought to meet.’
‘Who are you?’
His thick lips chuckled but the goatee beard crushed the effect of the smile, imparting an air of superiority to the epicene face.
He reached inside his tweed jacket and passed across a Security Service pass — the sort used by MI5 officers to identify themselves when in trouble.
His name was Andrew Tait.
‘If I may, I'd like to come straight to the point.
What did Marek Nowak tell you before he went into his coma?’
Blanche told him.
Tait tried out his smile again.
He gave the impression of being perpetually amused by, and yet far above, the foibles of fellow human beings.
It showed not only in his smile but in his voice, which was gentle with a mischievousness lurking beneath, the mischievousness of a mind that loved to irk convention.
His dress was far from conventional too: a shirt of cream silk, a spotted bow tie and black brogues.
‘So who was it who got Taczek released so quickly then?
You?’ asked Blanche with a squint of concentration.
The MI5 man pondered for a moment and stroked his beard.
He looked down at the other hand neatly folded in his lap.
‘No, it wasn't me.
It was an old friend of Taczek's.
You may have come across him in your investigation into Graham Mills’ murder.
Capron.
Hugh Capron.’
He flicked up his eyes, small and blank, holes that sucked in everything around him, but gave nothing back.
Blanche stared at the back of the driver's head to win time to think.
The man who released Taczek was also the one in Tatyana Nowak's photograph.
‘Capron knew Zbigniew Nowak, didn't he?’
‘Apparently.
Have you come across Capron?’
‘Only the name.
In passing.
I know nothing about him at all.’
She decided not to tell Tait about the photograph.
The car purred on, the driver looking neither to left nor right, the picture of inscrutability.
Tait stroked his beard again with long, elegant fingers, appraising her with colourless eyes.
He looked vaguely sad.
‘I gather you've had some contact with a young MI5 officer called Robert Urquhart?’
There was no snideness in his-tone so Blanche decided to remain aloof.
‘How do you know that?’
‘Phone calls in and out of our buildings are often recorded.
Standard security.’
The MI5 man eased his bulk round in the car seat to face her better.
‘Urquhart was in charge of the Security Service investigation into Mills.
So I met him a couple of times.’
The car had stopped at some traffic lights.
The driver twisted his head round for instructions and Tait told him gently to carry on.
‘What did you make of his investigation?’
Blanche held no loyalty to Robert now.
She told the truth.
‘Not very thorough.
That's one of the reasons I've carried on with mine.’
‘Carried on regardless, some might say.’
Tait's smile was so faint it needed a microscope to detect.
‘Not very thorough, eh?
Why do you say that?’
She shrugged.
‘Just an impression.’
She did not want to be specific so that Tait could press her further.
The MI5 man turned away from her with a thoughtful sigh, as if he knew what thoughts were passing through her mind.
He rested his hands on his protruding stomach.
‘Did Urquhart mention Capron at all?’
‘Like I said, the name came up in passing.
Capron is his boss.’
Blanche did not want to mention that it was Capron who had forbidden Urquhart to meet her again.
She wanted to forget that night as soon as possible.
She scrutinised a dilapidated man on the pavement outside who was passing from rubbish bin to rubbish bin, rustling around inside and placing everything of interest in a plastic bag.
‘Nothing else?’
‘No.’
The MI5 man seemed to suddenly shake his bulk to wake himself up and remind himself that the chief inspector was still in the car with him.
‘So, tell me, Chief Inspector, why have you persisted in this investigation — into the espionage side of things, I mean?
It should have been made quite clear to you from the beginning that MI5's word on this would be final.’
She swivelled to face him.
‘No one should have the right to be investigator, judge and jury in a murder case — let alone one like this.’
‘One could argue precisely the opposite,’ continued Tait  smoothly.
‘Just because this case is like it is, it's essential that the government's secret service is both judge and jury.
And let's face it,’ he added with a malicious smile while he examined his fingernails, ‘with a government like we have at the moment we're encouraged to do so.
Without even a trace of guilty conscience.’
He glanced up at her over a pair of imaginary spectacles.
‘So have you stopped your investigation?’
‘No choice.
I've been ordered off it,’ she sighed.
Tait nodded with barely concealed satisfaction.
‘Although I'm almost certain Mills was murdered because he'd worked for the KGB.’
Tait puckered his lips and nodded slowly in a gesture of admiration.
‘You've done your homework, I'll give you that.
And it's a plausible theory.
Except there's a fundamental mistake behind it.’
‘What's that?’
‘Mills never worked for the KGB.’
The car wove through the traffic on Hyde Park Corner and purred up Park Lane, the grime-grey hotels flashing by on the right.
Blanche twisted uneasily in her seat.
‘Zbigniew Nowak was betrayed all right.
But not by Mills.’
‘Who by then?’
‘We're waiting for more evidence.
Mills was amoral and untrustworthy, but we've known for a while now that he definitely worked for us.’
‘When will you know who did do it?’ she probed, in as casual a voice as she could manage.
‘When you find the KGB agent who tried to poison Marek Nowak?’
Tait twitched, as though at the end of an invisible wire, and his dead eyes flickered into life for a moment.
He tried to cover up the flutter of surprise by leaning forward and telling the driver it was time to return to New Scotland Yard.
‘We will know in the end who betrayed Zbigniew Nowak.’
There was no point in pressing him.
Blanche leant back into her seat and glued on her most charming smile.
‘Now I'm officially off the case, I wish you'd tell me more about this mysterious Zbigniew Nowak.’
Tait seemed relieved.
He seemed to have made up his mind in advance that he could reveal a certain amount of information about the past rather than the present.
When he spoke it was as if he were dictating a letter to her, concentrating on the  correctness of his grammar and syntax.
He was obviously proud of his memory and intellect.
‘Zbigniew Nowak was just one agent who was captured and executed.
He met a particularly unpleasant death.’
Blanche recounted what Swod had told her.
‘He did not paint in the ghastly but important details then.
So I had better tell you.’
Tait ordered the driver to continue down Victoria Street and strike south towards the Thames.
‘He was an unlucky man.
But then the Poles are an unlucky people,’ he began.
Tait folded his hands, one across another, in a gesture of resignation.
He sat silent for a moment, glancing with a look of displeasure at the cars jamming them in on either side.
‘After his capture on the boat off Gdańsk, the torture began.’
He looked across to confirm Blanche was paying attention.
Like her, she reflected, Tait did not suffer fools gladly.
‘The two interrogators were drunk on vodka.
They heated up pokers until they were red hot, and branded him.
They wanted Nowak to confess.
They needed him to confess.
Probably,’ the MI5 man interjected with a thoughtful stroke of his beard, ‘to stop themselves being sent to the camps as Western agents.
They wanted names.
Of other spies.
Of the people in London.
They pulled out his fingernails.
Still he did not submit.
Finally the interrogators must have lost their patience, or perhaps it was just the heat of the vodka.
But the final horror was the same.’
The MI5 man paused for a moment to stroke his beard again and a hint of emotion, of disgust, entered his voice for the first time.
‘They castrated him.
And then shot him dead.’
Blanche felt vaguely sick.
‘How do you know this?’
‘The KGB had an enquiry.
They didn't object to the torture and the shooting.
That was standard under Stalin.
They were angry because it was carried out unofficially — without the prior approval of the Party.
The Party, you see, wanted a show trial.
They couldn't hold one with a defendant who was just a mangled lump of flesh.’
Tait yawned into a white hand, the well-disguised yawn of a man whose only knowledge of torture was confined to that inflicted by sitting through committees.
‘Presumably MI6 had their own enquiry?’ asked the chief inspector in a self-righteous tone.
Tait nodded.
‘It concluded that someone must have  betrayed Nowak and that he probably knew who it was.
Philby was discounted and everything pointed to Mills — a senior man in the Soviet bloc department.
Odd pieces of evidence about his movements and early life were all dragged up.
Eventually Mills was suspended.
Nothing was proved beyond doubt, but no one felt they could take chances.
Mills was demoted and sent to another department.’
‘But you're telling me all the suspicions about Mills are unfounded?’
The man from MI5 nodded, his aquiline nose in black profile against the car window behind him.
‘Mills was deliberately besmirched by the KGB.
And I must say,’ sniffed Tait appreciatively, tugging out a silk handkerchief from a pocket to blow his nose, ‘they were very clever about it.
They never fed information into the system that appeared conclusive against Mills, just highly suspicious.’
Tait told her that some of the information about Mills involved a KGB agent, whom he called ‘Nikolai’ for lack of anything better.
After his demotion inside SIS, Mills became a little unconventional in what Tait called his ‘fieldcraft’.
He liked to take risks.
One of the biggest was to take on the identity of a businessman and travel behind the Iron Curtain.
The Russians obviously knew who he was and kept him under surveillance all the time.
On a couple of these trips in the late fifties, Mills fell in with ‘Nikolai’ in Moscow.
‘Whether Mills knew then that he was KGB, we'll never know, but they certainly got on very well together.
The Soviets fed some disinformation back to us about the meetings with ‘Nikolai’, hinting that Mills was working for them and using the meetings to pass information across.’
The car plunged into the chaos of Trafalgar Square, taxis honking, buses spewing out black clouds of exhaust, pigeons swirling in indolent flocks around the monuments.
In silence they passed down the grandness of Whitehall, hemmed in by the blank facades of bureaucracy, ministries where men and women toiled in cold obscurity.
The gothic spires of parliament shimmered in the autumnal sunlight as they drove to the far side of Parliament Square and turned right towards Victoria.
Blanche absorbed the implication of what she had just been told: Mills had not betrayed Zbigniew Nowak and so could  not have been murdered because of it.
And Robert Urquhart had been shown to be lying to her about more than his affections.
‘So why did Urquhart keep telling me Mills probably was working for the Russians?’
Tait stroked his beard with a look of puzzlement which faded after a moment.
‘He probably doesn't know the truth.
He wasn't told.
We keep our staff in a certain amount of darkness.
And the public, of course, in complete darkness.’
He made a hollow smile, the smile of the high priest and mandarin through the ages, the smile of the keeper of secrets.
As though by an immaculately timed piece of theatre, the driver pulled up opposite the front entrance to New Scotland Yard.
‘I'm sorry you can't pursue your investigation any further, Chief Inspector,’ concluded Tait.
‘But…
’ His soft voice trailed off.
‘I'm sure you understand.
The interests of national security and all that.’
He made a final, half-hearted attempt at a smile that could have been a yawn.
Blanche's door was already being held open by the driver.
The chief inspector got out.
‘Oh, by the way,’ called Tait.
He leant across the back seat so that he could look up and see her face.
‘This conversation is confidential.
Not to be mentioned to anyone.’
‘Anyone?’
‘Anyone.
Goodbye.’
He pulled the door shut himself, discreetly so that there was the minimum noise.
The car accelerated off and disappeared into the late afternoon traffic.
Chapter Twenty
The chief inspector extinguished the lights of her car, turned off the ignition and sat motionless for five minutes.
She counted them off, one by one, on the dial of her watch up to two o'clock.
The street lay silent and deserted.
Most of the street lamps had switched off automatically but, by an irritating quirk of fate, the one that had not was almost directly in front of the Nowaks' house.
A withered tree protruding from the pavement cast a shadow across the bay window.
The wind had risen powerfully during the evening and now thumped against the side of the car, whistling through its hidden but inevitable apertures.
She sat and thought about the events of the day.
Dexter had been to the hospital where Nowak still lay in a coma.
No one had taken much notice of the woman Blanche assumed to be the attempted assassin, and Dexter garnered a description that could have fitted Christine Mills — and a hundred other women equally well.
The hospital had started a set of poison tests when Dexter arrived but as yet nothing suspicious had been found.
As she closed the car door gently, she whispered thanks to the wind for smothering any noise.
It snatched at the windows in the nearby houses and set them rattling in their frames; it whooshed over the slates and plucked at the loose ones, prising them away and sending them spinning to the ground; it scurried down through the garden gates, hoisted up handfuls of dead leaves and paper and kicked them scurrying down the pavement.
The night was full of the rasp and scrape of branches as the wind made the limbs of the trees beat against one another.
No lights were on in any of the houses and the only living thing in sight was a brindled cat who froze on the pavement, surveyed the bleak October night, and padded arrogantly across the road.
Above, a gibbous moon fought a  brave but doomed battle to be seen through the scudding cloud, occasionally emerging to spill its light like a bucket of whitewash over the slates.
She knew Marek's bedroom was at the back of the house.
The door to his room had been closed and locked when she visited the mother, and she had not bothered to come to the house when Tatyana committed suicide.
If she had searched his bedroom earlier, she thought ruefully, she would not have been shivering on the pavement in a black pullover and jeans at two o'clock in the morning, carrying a large screwdriver.
About fifty metres from the car she discovered a passageway which sliced between the terraces.
With one last glance along the empty street she plunged into the blackness, treading warily on the soles of her training shoes.
When she emerged from the tunnel, she was hemmed in on either side by wooden fences.
At the junction she turned left and skirted the walls that ran behind the houses.
One pale light shone at an upstairs window.
She watched and nothing moved: a landing light left on through forgetfulness or fear of the dark.
Lines of tiles shimmered in the slivers of moonlight.
Chimney pots stood out in black profile like squat, ebony gargoyles.
Slack linen lines whistled and whipped in the wind, tugging at their concrete posts.
A loud crash ten yards to the right made her start.
The bang came again but softer, and she made out the squeak of rusty hinges against the din of the stormy night.
The door of a garden shed had swung open.
The door banged once again.
She waited but heard no more.
It had jammed.
She tiptoed by a well-mown lawn, then a garden jumbled high with broken washing machines, bicycles, empty flowerpots and scraps of wood.
The next house was the one owned by the Nowaks.
She clambered over the mossy wall at the bottom of the garden and edged round a shed.
The shed windows were broken and stood out black and jagged by the reflected light of the moon.
The grass in the garden was uncut and came up to her calves.
The fishpond was almost overgrown.
She edged tentatively into the lee of the house to hide in a deep shadow and bumped into a broken rainwater pipe which smacked on to the concrete patio.
She swore softly but no one seemed to wake up.
Blanche  forced the screwdriver up into the crevice between the two halves of the sash window and heaved.
The lock snapped and the detective levered up the bottom section.
She pushed the curtains tentatively apart and listened.
Nothing except the wind howling in the empty night.
The chief inspector climbed in over the sill, eased down the window and found herself in the hall.
The same smell of stale tobacco hung on the air that she recalled from her only meeting with Tatyana Nowak the day before her suicide.
She switched on her torch and turned to the right.
The door to Marek's bedroom was a blank rectangle before her.
She turned the heavy, white porcelain door knob and pushed gently, then switched off the torch in case she was seen by someone at the back of the house, and entered the bedroom.
She could make out nothing in the darkness at the beginning except a jumble of bric-a-brac and the outline of a colossal eagle crucified on one wall.
She tiptoed past the hazy outline of an unmade bed to pull the curtains closed, switched on her torch again and played it round the room like a searchlight.
Marek's bedroom was unkempt, not the anarchic mess that follows the visit of burglars but the slovenly disorder of a certain type of bachelor.
The bed was a tangled pile of grey sheets and stained blankets.
Around the room, encumbering every available perch, were mugs and glasses.
She picked up one mug and by the light of the torch saw a pea-green mould on the dregs of coffee.
The floor, desk and chairs were strewn with books and papers.
Many were in Polish.
Even the ones in English had a Polish theme: the rise and fall of Solidarity, Eastern Europe, the Soviet Union.
Her nose twitched to the smell: mouldy and fetid like sweaty clothes left to stew in a plastic bag.
The eagle on the poster dominated the room, tall and black and proud on a scarlet background.
Fierce and unforgiving.
As her torch toured the room it alighted on an extraordinary sight.
On a low table in the far right-hand corner was a black and white photograph of a man: handsome, clean cut, direct in his glance.
Blanche tiptoed over and remembered the face from the photograph of Tatyana's that she had borrowed.
It was a portrait of Marek's father as a young man.
The son and the father looked very different.
Arranged around the photograph were bouquets of plastic flowers: virulent scarlet  poppies with green leaves, straggly ivy, lemon tulips, alabaster roses — all out of season and radiating out in a baroque flurry from the central shrine.
Blanche shivered with unease, as though she had stumbled into a crypt.
If anything was to be found it would not lie in the open.
She ransacked the wardrobe which was bursting with piles of unwashed clothes and unironed shirts.
One was splattered with red stains.
She could not tell in the torchlight whether it was ink or blood.
A battered desk stood beside the wardrobe.
It ached under the piles of books, papers, clothes and junk.
The torch picked out a doll in Greek costume.
As she disturbed them, a film of dust rose up like an atom cloud.
Three of the drawers in the desk were locked.
She used the screwdriver to force open the first one.
Inside were a couple of building-society account books and a few bank notes.
She pocketed them to make the break-in look authentic.
The second drawer was harder to force.
Blanche blinked with surprise.
Under a newspaper was a pile of gay magazines.
Handsome, sculpted men pinioned her with their glances: not an ounce of fat, tight buttocks ripe and ready for piercing, hands and tongues rippling up and down their bodies.
Dexter was right about one thing, Blanche thought with an indulgent smile.
She broke open the third drawer with a snap.
Inside was a brown exercise book.
The cover was unmarked except by three inkstains and the name Marek Nowak.
The writing was unkempt and messy, blotted and scrawled as Marek's fountain pen crept across the pages.
She began to read by the mooned light of the torch.
‘My guilt is so deep I can't rub it out.
For the first time in my life I could not confess all my sins to the priest.
Father Jankowski looked at me so kindly I could not tell him.
I thought he might have guessed I was not normal.
I was shaking and sweating so much in the confessional I thought I was going to faint.
I wanted him to tear it from me so that I had no excuses.
All he had to do was ask, and my guilt would have flooded out.
But he didn't.
I have to write this to get some of the weight — the choking weight — off my chest.
If I don't, I'll go mad.’
Was it a literary exercise or a true confession?
Blanche wondered.
‘I better start at the beginning for lack of anywhere else,’ Marek continued.
Blanche thought she heard a bang outside.
Perhaps a dustbin had tumbled over or another tile been flung from the roof.
For many years, Marek wrote, he had believed his mother when she said his father had been killed in a car accident.
Jozef Taczek had always substantiated the story.
When Marek went to Poland for the first time, when he was eighteen, a place of pilgrimage had been his father's grave.
He had gone there to lay a wreath on every visit since.
The headstone of the grave, in a grey cemetery on the outskirts of Warsaw, was of plain granite and gave simply the dates of birth and death.
When Marek saw the headstone for the first time no one in the neighbourhood whom he asked knew anything about the man who had been buried there.
Old women nodded their heads and chomped their false teeth, young men smiled sympathetically but no one could shed any light on the mysterious car accident that had killed his father.
‘It was then that the uncertainties began.
It was not an obsession then, only a gnawing doubt.
When I plucked up the courage to ask my mother about it she just burst into tears and I could not bring myself to question her again.
I was on my own.
‘I was alone in this new search as I was alone when I discovered I loved my own sex.
I only discovered that late as well when I became friends with John at college.
I had to keep it secret.
I found that part of me disgusting.
Disgusting but necessary.
I need it like nothing else-more than food, drink, art, everything.
I need to be loved.
Loved by another man.
I could never tell mother because she despises homosexuals.
She spits out the word like she splutters the word ‘Jew’.
She thinks we're perverts, condemned by the Church, men who've allowed their normal natures to be twisted by depraved men.
Look at Oscar Wilde, she'd say!
Read the transcripts of his trial!
Pederasts were not born pederasts, they were made into them.
She thinks a man like me learns his sexuality like someone learns to ride a bicycle or learns how to swim.
She couldn't get it into her thick skull that being gay just happens.
I wanted to confess to her once but balanced that against the need to be loved by her.
The two just could not coexist.
For her to love me, I had to carry on with my secret life.
God, I hated her vindictiveness sometimes, hated her little petty bourgeois intellectual fart-arsed snobberies!
But all that hate can't wash away the guilt.
She's dead and I caused her death.’
Blanche looked up for a moment to chew the implications of what she had just read when another alien sound impinged.
A key was rattling in the lock of the front door.
Her heart vaulted into her throat.
She thrust the exercise book into a coat pocket and scrambled to the window by which she had entered.
She yanked upwards on the two rings at the bottom of the window.
It did not move.
She heaved again.
She was aware of footsteps running through the house.
She pulled desperately, thinking the muscles in her arms would crack.
The window flew up about a foot and stuck.
It was wedged in one of its tracks.
She pushed out her right arm for protection but it was too late.
Hands fastened round her neck and threw her sprawling across the floor.
She just had time to make out a black profile against the window before a shoe slammed into her chest with the sound a beanbag makes when it hits the floor.
Blanche rolled away and started to run towards the front door.
The man, and she was convinced it was a man now, tried a rugby tackle in the dark.
She heard his body crump on to the floor behind her.
But he managed to catch one of Blanche's flying feet and as she fell her skull caught a glancing blow from a table.
Stunned, she staggered to her feet.
She heard hoarse breathing near by.
Blanche flailed her fists out towards the noise and tensed as one blow crunched into flesh and bone.
A fist sizzled into her stomach like a flaming sword, skewering her innards.
Her lungs burst into fragments of agony so infinite that her lower lip could do no more than flop open and dribble out a feeble croak.
She sank to her knees.
Then he fired the single shot.
Even though there was a silencer on the gun, the detonation and the whack of the bullet burying itself in the floorboards were unmistakable.
The chief inspector froze.
The house was suddenly silent.
A distant floorboard creaked.
The wind still howled through the chimney pots and rattled through the cracks of the window frames.
The man was still  in shadow, his hoarse respiration mingling with the chief inspector's rasping breath.
‘OK.
That's enough, Blanche.’
She didn't recognise the voice for a moment.
It was so familiarly distant.
But then, in a gasp of stifled anger, she knew.
Urquhart stepped forward out of the blackness, his profile framed by the window.
A thin splinter of moonlight caught the blond stubble of his beard and sliced like a glistening needle across the snout of a .45 revolver.
The tiny hole of the barrel was pointed at her chest and was as unnaturally black as a beauty spot on an expanse of white bosom.
Chapter Twenty one
Urquhart flicked the main switch and she blinked as the room was washed by the harsh overhead light.
He looked pale and serious as his eyes scampered round the room until they found the telephone.
Then he smiled.
‘You're obviously a bit tired.
Why don't you sit down?’
He raised his golden eyebrows and nodded towards a chair.
As she moved to obey, the black spot of the gun followed her unerringly across the sitting room.
It was the same room where Blanche had sat and talked to Tatyana Nowak so many weeks ago.
He ordered her to empty her pockets on the carpet in front of her.
Blanche obeyed.
Nothing explicit had been said but she knew her relationship with Urquhart had crossed a new frontier: he had become an enemy.
Holding the revolver in his right hand, Urquhart searched the chief inspector for a weapon and, finding none, picked up the pile of possessions from the floor.
‘So what are you doing here?’ he said finally.
‘Probably the same as you.’
‘And what's that?’
‘Looking for clues.’
‘I better look at the ones you found, then.’
He sorted through Blanche's things deliberately, one by one, and only stopped when he came to the building-society books she had purloined and Marek's exercise book.
A frown of puzzlement creased his brow when he looked at the cover.
‘Interesting?’
‘So why arc you here?’ she asked, ignoring his question.
‘Insomnia?’
He snorted out a chuckle.
‘Unfinished business rather.’
‘Yes.
It is a bit strange you only searching this place now, isn't it?
I was only telling a colleague of yours today that the investigation into Mills’ murder left a lot to be desired.’
Even though hooded by shadow, Blanche sensed Urquhart's  eyes narrow and bore into her like hungry grubs.
‘Who was that?’
‘My business.’
‘What did he want?’ he murmured with theatrical calmness.
‘A chat.’
‘What about?’
‘Early Buddhist scriptures.’
Urquhart stepped forward menacingly.
His voice rang with the irritation of the anxious.
‘What about?’ he repeated, enunciating each word carefully.
‘It's a secret.’
He smiled slowly and relaxed.
‘Everything's a secret.
That's the bloody trouble.’
Urquhart opened the exercise book and skimmed through a few pages with furious concentration before stuffing it in his coat pocket with a grunt of satisfaction.
He moved back to the chest of drawers and took down the photograph of Tatyana Nowak and her husband on Westminster Bridge.
The MI5 man picked up the telephone and pressed the digits with the forefinger of the same, left hand.
His right still held the revolver.
Blanche wanted to be clever and memorise the way his finger moved across the numbers but she could not maintain the concentration after the first four.
Instead, her eyes strayed to his gloved hand.
It was neat and elegant, with cool, long fingers.
She heard the muffled trill of the ring.
A sharp click sounded at the other end of the line and a voice muttered something.
Whoever it was must have been waiting by the telephone for the call.
‘Yes.
It's me,’ said Urquhart.
His voice was nervous and conspiratorial: he knew the person he was speaking to quite well.
‘I found more than we bargained for — including that policewoman Hampton.’
He paused as he listened.
‘God knows.
I thought she was off the case as well.’
Blanche made out the murmur of the other voice.
‘No.
Don't worry.
She won't get in the way.
And I've found what we're looking for.
I'll bring it round at seven.
Is everything fixed?’
He glanced up at her.
She thought she detected a grunt of assent from Urquhart's unknown colleague.
‘Seven o'clock then.’
The gloved hand — like a fat, black spider — delicately placed  the telephone back in its cradle.
Urquhart breathed deeply and glanced round the room.
He edged backwards to the wall.
Her fists gripped the armrests of the chair so tightly she made out the taut ligaments running from her wrists to her knuckles.
He bent down and yanked out the flex that connected a standard lamp to the mains.
He pushed over the lamp, wound the wire around his left wrist and then, with a foot on the base, tugged aggressively at the flex.
It offered no resistance and Urquhart was almost thrown off balance when it slipped free.
He stood silent beside the sofa, the black disc of the revolver trained on her, his face half in shadow from the harsh light shining down from the ceiling.
‘Get on the floor, chest down.
Hands behind your back.’
She did not respond.
‘What's this all about, Robert?’
Urquhart flicked his gun menacingly and stepped forward.
‘Get down,’ he shouted.
Never one to try and out-stare a person holding a cocked gun, Blanche jumped out of the armchair as if it were spring-loaded.
She feared Urquhart was going to kill her.
She kept repeating to herself that it was an irrational fear, but logic did nothing to quell the lurking terror.
She had no idea what the MI5 man was aiming to do, or to whom he owed his ultimate loyalty — except himself.
The only certainty was that she had a few seconds to act.
Urquhart had broken off the lamp flex for a purpose — to strangle her or tie her up, or both.
He was toting the gun for a purpose — to shoot her through the head or knock her unconscious, or both.
After either of them had happened, she was finished.
Urquhart tiptoed forward with a respectful air, as if he were approaching an altar.
He was about ten feet away.
His eyes clung to her like thirsty leeches, watching for any movement, the revolver trained on her back.
He was about four feet away when his foot caught in the electric flex he was dragging and he stumbled forward off balance.
Blanche flung herself across the floor and rolled on to his feet, at the same time throwing a punch up into his genitals.
Two dull cracks resounded as bullets bored through the ceiling.
Urquhart crumpled.
Blanche had found her target.
The gun lolled in his hand.
She jumped up and punched him in the kidneys before landing a fist on the point of his chin.
He flopped to the floor.
In her panic, and to make sure he stayed unconscious, she hit him twice over the head with the base of the standard lamp.
He groaned and lay still.
Blanche rolled her erstwhile lover on to his chest, untangled the flex from his left glove and tied him up with his hands and feet behind him.
She pulled the white cord so tight it cut red weals into the white flesh.
She hoped they hurt.
The chief inspector listened to his breathing and for a moment found it difficult to separate it from her own rasping pant.
It was steady and normal.
It looked as though she had not fractured his skull.
She ripped a cushion cover into strips and used them to make a gag.
As Blanche snatched up the telephone and listened to the reassuring hum of the dialling tone, she caught sight of herself in the mirror on the wall: the shimmer of sweat on her forehead, eyes wild, face haggard and pale, hair stormy and unkempt, knuckles bruised and sore.
The phone rang for ten minutes, or so it seemed, before Dexter answered.
His voice was distant and fogged with irritation.
‘Who's that?’
‘Me.’
‘Oh, shit,’ groaned the detective sergeant without malice, and he coughed three or four times to wake himself up.
‘What do you want at this time of night?
Psychological counselling?’
‘Shut up, Dexter.
It's not your mind I'm after.
It's your body,’ she said, amazed at her good humour.
‘I've got a man trussed up here on the floor like a Christmas turkey.’
‘I didn't know you were into bondage, Blanche.’
She smiled thinly.
‘When he wakes up he could turn nasty.
That's when I want you here to keep a watch on him.’
‘A friend of yours, is he, by the way?’
‘He's not a friend of mine.
Especially by the way.’
Dexter always irritated Blanche when he tried to be clever when she was tired.
‘Just get over here, will you?’
‘Where's here?’
‘The Nowaks’ house.’
She gave the address.
‘What the hell are you doing there?’
Blanche thought for a moment and assembled a smile.
‘I'm not quite sure.’
She hung up.
Dexter would appear in about half an hour.
She staggered over to Urquhart.
A thin trickle of blood was  darkening below his mouth where her ring had torn the skin.
With difficulty she rolled his dead weight first to one side and then the other to search his pockets.
From one she extracted the brown exercise book, more creased and folded than when she had first set eyes on it a quarter of an hour or so before.
From the other she took the photograph — now with the glass cracked — of Tatyana and Zbigniew Nowak on Westminster Bridge.
With fatigue hanging in lead weights from her shoulders, she remembered the telephone number Robert Urquhart had dialled.
To refresh her memory she picked up the telephone, closed her eyes, and recalled how his gloved finger had moved over the first four raised knobs of plastic.
He had dialled 373–7.
She could recall nothing more.
The number echoed back from the past.
It seemed familiar: 373 was an Earls Court exchange.
She took out her notebook of numbers and addresses on the Graham Mills murder case and found the number she was looking for — Jozef Taczek's ex-directory one, which began with those four numbers.
Dexter and she would deliver Urquhart there for his rendezvous at seven o'clock that morning.
She had always been suspicious of Taczek, and here was yet more evidence implicating him with people she no longer trusted.
Urquhart had come to the Nowaks' house, Blanche thought, for the same purpose as her — an illegal search for clues about Marek's past activities.
He must have managed to purloin a copy of the house key from somewhere and was obviously astounded to find someone already scouring the house, especially her.
The glass in the photo frame still held together but it was difficult to make out the five faces beneath.
Someone wanted that photograph badly.
She unfolded Marek's exercise book and began reading the spidery writing where she had been forced to stop.
Her eyelids burnt with tiredness.
‘Slowly I found out more and more about my marvellous father and though my mother — or perhaps because my mother — cherished his memory like that of nobody else, I found out she had lied to me about him.
For he was not killed in a car accident.
My father went back to spy for MI6.
But in the  British Secret Service was a Judas and that British Judas betrayed my father to the Polish Stalinists.’
Marek went on to tell the same story as Tait had narrated to Blanche the day before in the circling car — of a brave man who was betrayed, tortured, castrated and shot.
‘It was an old Pole called Poniatowski, now in exile in Paris, who told me the awful, ghastly, horrifying details.
He worked for the KGB at the time and he knew everything because he was involved in the secret inquiry that was set up into the ‘incident’, as he called it.
Then he worked for the British.’
Blanche nodded.
Poniatowski was how Tait must have known.
‘Poniatowski told me the Party decided that silence was best.
The interrogators were quietly sacked and sent to work in the coal mines.
Poniatowski said both of them were now dead.
‘I could not have my revenge on those sub-human creatures who actually killed my father, but I swore to myself that I would find the British Judas who had betrayed him and have revenge.’
The chief inspector shivered with an indefinable dread, the fear she always experienced when faced by a hatred that could only be satiated through violence.
‘I narrowed the possibilities down to five with the help of Jozef Taczek.
Two had died.
That left three.
But it wasn't Jozef who finally told me the truth — which of the three suspects had taken the pieces of silver.
Jozef put me in contact with an old acquaintance of his, who still works for MI5.
He told me to keep my links with him secret, and I have, from everyone else.
He's called Hugh Capron.’
Capron was Urquhart's boss, the head of K8, the man who had ordered Urquhart not to see her again.
Capron was also the fifth face in the photograph that Urquhart had wanted to take from the Nowaks' house.
‘We met near the Albert Memorial one afternoon in July.
I had to wheedle the information out of him, but Capron said he was the senior case officer on the investigation into Mills, and could confirm absolutely that it was Mills who was the Soviet agent who had betrayed my father.
He told me it was scandalous that Mills had gone unpunished.
Many lives had been lost because of Mills’ treachery but the government was unwilling to do anything about it.
As he walked away into the  twilight, I felt fired up.
Suddenly he walked back to me and said I ought to avenge my father's death and that he could help me.
He could even provide me with a gun if I needed one.
He gave me a phone number to ring.
I was exhilarated.
At last I knew the truth about my father's betrayal and death.
I had the conclusive evidence I needed.
I was to be an avenging angel: Justice, putting right what could not be done through the courts.
Mills had murdered more people than just my father.
Capron talked about hundreds of lives having been lost.
I was wielding the sword of justice, the son seeking revenge on behalf of the father.
‘I knew my mother was fond of Mills.
He was a kind of platonic lover, an admirer who'd come round once a month and help her live out her fantasies.
Tea at the Ritz.
Dinner at the Dorchester.
He bought her clothes and jewellery.
There was never anything between them.
Just an old, sentimental friendship.
He tried to be nice to me but something rebelled inside me.
He seemed — in a way I can't really explain — to be protective towards me and also ashamed of me, for the sake of my mother perhaps.
‘It went so smoothly.
It started with the phone call asking to meet him.
Capron had lent me the gun, and suggested the ploy of telling Graham that I had found new evidence that would clear his name of the allegations that he was a Soviet agent.
Clear him!
When the evidence that I had confirmed it all!
The suspicion in Graham's voice turned to puzzlement and then to excitement.
I was surprised by how quickly he agreed to the meeting, as though he had some sort of obligation towards me.
And he ended the conversation mysteriously, saying he had something important to tell me too.
‘I waited for Graham to arrive on Hampstead Heath — the hunched figure I knew so well tottering down the tarmac path that clings to the side of the hill in the twilight.
There was still a little colour left in the sky.
I told him to meet me inside an isolated summer house.
The seats inside face away from the path and I thought it would be safer like that.
I watched him arrive and disappear into the black shadows.
I decided not to say anything to him.
He knew he was guilty.
I just had to kill him.
I crept round the side.
His mouth dropped open when he saw me standing in front of him, carrying a gun.
I ordered  him to turn round.
He just had time to say, ‘Marek, you don't know what you're doing.’
Then the first bullet went into his head.
There was less blood than I thought.
He made a strangled groan and swayed.
I fired again, calm and yet so full of fear, so full of fear I forget how often I fired.
He whimpered no more and lay on the concrete, silent.
‘That's all the memory I have of what happened.
I can't remember what I did with the body next.
I know I took a saw with the idea of cutting his head off so that the body couldn't be identified.
The newspapers say Mills was half buried under branches and leaves.
That must have been it.
I was in some kind of trance.
The memory of him lying there doesn't worry me, nor the memory of the blood trickling out of his body.
I seemed to be watching myself acting in a film.
It was all over so quickly.
I must have buried him.
I ran off and drove away in the car.
I had to get rid of the gun as soon as possible.
When I looked I found I had not only a gun but also a kitchen knife and a saw.
They were covered in blood.
I had no idea why I had brought the knife and what I'd used it for.
I think I dumped them somewhere.
I threw the head weighted down with stones into a canal.
I was in a dream.’
Marek must have castrated the corpse to fulfil his revenge, Blanche thought.
His father had suffered the humiliation because of Mills' treachery and so the traitor should suffer in the same way.
But the memory of what he had done to the corpse was so painful Marek obliterated it from his mind.
‘I had done it,’ Marek crowed, ‘I had killed the man who had betrayed my father, and I was exhilarated.
I rushed back from Hampstead Heath, flush with a kind of triumph.
At last I had avenged the ghost of my father.
I hoped it would stop haunting me.
But as I approached home, I was filled with a sense of shame, of uncertainty about how Mum would react when I told her.
I decided, as I arrived, to keep the revenge to myself.
Mum noticed I was in a rather strange mood.
I walked on air for a couple of days.
It was euphoria.
She asked me straight out once what it was, but I did not want to tell her yet.
The secret should be kept as long as possible but, the longer I waited, the harder it was to tell her.
I thought first of all that I'd wait for the newspaper reports of the killing and use those as an excuse.
But the body wasn't found for over a  week.
I thought there might be some kind of cover-up.
I feared as well that Mills might not be dead after all, that he'd recovered miraculously and decided for some reason not to go to the police.
I didn't know.
I didn't dare return to the-place where I'd killed him because I could easily arouse suspicion.
So I had to wait in suspense.
‘The good mood evaporated.
I sank into gloom and depression.
I knew Mum rarely read a newspaper so she wouldn't hear of the killing that way.
I telephoned Jozef to tell him what I had done.
But his damned lover answered the telephone.
The little, promiscuous slut of a cheap — it's no good going on.
The number of sleepless nights I've had over that smooth bastard moving in and Jozef kicking me out of bed.’
The chief inspector paused, squinting with concentration.
Marek and Jozef must have had an affair.
Unclear mysteries came into focus.
The Voice had come between them.
Blanche understood at last why Marek, in his frenzy of desperation after the first attempt to kill him, had named Jozef Taczek as the killer of Mills.
Revenge.
His was the jealousy of the jilted lover as well as the clever move of the cornered murderer.
She heard muffled groans from the corner of the room by the television.
Urquhart was coming round.
‘I was in such a fury I hung up.
I had to ring twice more before Jozef answered the phone.
He was furious with me for ringing him.
He told me I was turning into a jealous old queen but before he slammed the phone down he agreed not to tell Mother about the death.
‘It'll hit her worse than you think,’ was what he said.
He told me he wasn't planning to see Mum straightaway but that he'd call round in a couple of days to comfort her.
When he said that, I knew the pressure was on.
I had not considered the possibility that it might be me who would have to tell her of Graham Mills' death.
But I had to.
I shied away from the prospect.
The longer I waited to tell her the harder it became.
But in the end, it was Mum who broke into the circle of silence.
I wish she hadn't.
‘When I came home that night she was still up.
Normally she would have gone to bed.
She was beside the gas fire, just staring.
She told me a policewoman had been round and announced that Graham Mills had been found murdered.
I acted very cool and saw my chance.
I had been drinking  before.
I had been trying to pick up a barman in a pub in Hammersmith.
I poured myself a huge whisky.
I swallowed it in one gulp and almost died of coughing.
Then I launched into the confession I should have told the priest — the one I have written down here.
I could not look at her while I spoke.
I told her that at last I knew what really had happened to my father, her beloved husband, the man who had laid down his life for his country.
That she had lied to me, that my father had been betrayed by Mills and that I had avenged her husband's memory.
It flowed out in a torrent.
I expected her to interrupt.
But she didn't.
I looked up.
She simply sat there, her head sunk down.
I wanted her to praise me.
Tell me I had done the right thing.
After all, I had taken vengeance on her behalf as well as mine.
She was the one who had always gone on about what a paragon my father was.
Instead she said nothing.
Her head sank on to her chin and a kind of blank look misted over her eyes.
She sat like that for what seemed like ages while I tramped round the room, nervous and on edge and blabbering with the excitement.
All of a sudden, she whined something about me not knowing what I had done and she broke down into tears.
I tried my best to comfort her but she was beyond consolation.
She rocked backwards and forwards with my head in her lap — for I was in tears as well by then — and moaning.
We sat like that for what seemed like hours until we could not cry any longer.
About midnight she suddenly got up and, without saying a word, went into her bedroom and slammed the door.
I heard her lock it.
I knocked and asked, begged, to be let in.
I heard nothing inside.
She did not seem to be moving around.
I could not hear any sobs.
I carried on knocking on the door and begging to be let in.
I thought of smashing down the door but the idea seemed ridiculous — knocking down the bedroom door of your own mother.
Finally I slumped down outside it for a while and went to bed myself.
I could not sleep.
I rolled and tossed and kept thinking of Mum, and only fell into a doze at dawn.
I woke up a couple of hours later.
I went to Mum's room.
I called out.
There was no reply.
I called again and a panic came over me.
I had to smash the lock.
‘She looked so peaceful.
Her eyes, her beautiful eyes, were wide open, staring up at the ceiling.
There was no note.
She had left me with nothing.
Nothing.
Not a word of gratefulness  and not a word of forgiveness and not a word of love.
Nothing.
And I had killed her.
I only wish I had the courage to do the same as her.
Mary, Mother of God, please forgive me.
Help me in my hour of need.’
The manuscript finished at that point.
Marek must have been interrupted or decided his confession was over.
Blanche sat slumped in the armchair, arms, legs and shoulders aching.
Marek had confessed to the murder of Mills.
He had carried out the killing.
There was no doubt of that now.
Marek had been led to Graham Mills partly by his former lover, Taczek, but the conclusive evidence was provided only by the shadowy Hugh Capron.
Capron had even provided the gun that had been fished from the pond on the heath.
People in the secret services wanted Graham Mills dead and Marek was a tool that came conveniently to hand.
If Marek was right, Tatyana had taken her own life less as a result of the news of the murder Blanche had brought, than of her son's dreadful confession.
But something still troubled the chief inspector.
Mrs Nowak had impressed her as a strong woman, a woman inclined to fantasy perhaps, but resilient and not inclined to despair.
Blanche could imagine her weeping with her son over his confession but, like Marek, she was a little puzzled that Tatyana had not shown even a spark of joy at the revenge he had taken.
A sense of betrayal was stamped on all her words and gestures when the chief inspector spoke to her, betrayal of herself, her husband and of Poland.
Yet when the vengeance was exacted she showed no joy.
An element was still missing from the equation of Tatyana's suicide and Blanche was more convinced than ever that Taczek possessed it.
He knew Marek — more intimately than she had ever imagined.
He knew Tatyana.
He knew Mills.
He knew Capron.
All four were silent.
Only he could speak.
Urquhart's muffled groans became more frantic.
She translated his grunts to mean he wanted to talk to her.
His blue eyes implored her to take off the gag.
She enjoyed watching him wriggle.
She untied the knots and removed the saliva sodden strip of cushion covering from his mouth.
Urquhart inhaled deeply and flexed his firm jaw.
Neither of them said anything.
They looked at each other warily, circling for an opening remark.
‘So Jozef Taczek will be waiting at seven o'clock for the exercise book and photo, will he?’ she asked finally.
Urquhart squirmed on the carpet, stared at her in confusion for a second, and then nodded.
She found herself enjoying the sight of his embarrassment and frantic need to buy thinking time.
‘Look, Blanche, you've got to let me go.
You don't know what you're doing.’
‘I'm getting fed up with people telling me that, because I think at last I do know what I'm doing.
That's why you're tied up on the floor and I'm aiming a gun at you.’
‘Just untie me and let me go.
Please.’
He tried to look full of rakish charm by pulling on a weak smile.
She snorted with nervous laughter.
Urquhart said nothing.
It looked as though he was sulking.
‘Why don't you tell me who you really work for?
Did someone send you to go through Marek's things, or was it you who made the decision?’
His face was pale, his forehead puckered with apprehension.
He gripped and released his fists again and again, seething with anger, frustration and despair.
It must have been like this watching a man being broken on the rack, Blanche thought.
‘I want to tell you,’ he gasped.
‘I want to tell you the truth.
But if I do, it's the end of me.
There'll be no escape.
I'll be trapped.’
; What do you mean trapped?
What the hell arc you involved
Urquhart turned his head away.
She realised she was gripping the gun with two hands and had trained it on his chest, as if she expected him to leap up at any moment and lunge at her.
She slipped the safety catch into place and deposited the gun on the coffee table beside her.
The back of her throat rasped as if someone had been scraping it with a razor blade: she needed a drink.
There was a full drinks cupboard in the corner.
As she swilled out a whisky, she caught the burning, envious eyes of her captive.
‘Please,’ he groaned.
She took the gun and sat down in the armchair at Urquhart's head.
‘You can have a swig for every secret you tell me.’
He wetted his lips in a theatrical way and a glimmer of humour flickered in his eyes.
Then the earnest, sad look returned.
‘What if I tell you the whole truth?
What do I get for that?’
She sighed.
‘I don't think you know it.
MI5 hasn't let you know it.
Besides, you have problems yourself sorting out lies from the truth.’
Urquhart smiled: a line of white teeth, as classical and regular as the white columns of a Greek temple.
The curling mane of blond hair, she noticed, had a wisp of baldness at the front, suggesting experience and gentleness.
He really was remarkably handsome, even when he was trussed up like a turkey ready for Christmas.
The smile melted into a chuckle.
‘Why did you tell me Mills was a KGB agent, when he wasn't?’ she asked.
‘Who's so sure he was not?’
She took a provocative gulp of scotch, savouring the aroma of burnt peat.
The helpless man on the floor looked up greedily.
‘A man called Tait,’ she said.
A crease of apprehension tucked itself in his forehead.
‘Is that why your boss, Capron, gave Marek Nowak a gun to murder Mills?’
‘Is that what Tait told you?’
He tried to hide his surprise by mumbling in a drawl.
‘The whole story's in that exercise book I found.’
He thought for a moment.
‘Oh God,’ Urquhart sighed and he turned his head away from her.
‘We're done for.’
‘Who?’
He lay in silence for a moment, gazing at the louring prints of eagles on the wall.
‘Me at any rate.
A traitor.
A KGB spy.’
He waited to harness his thoughts.
He looked up and sought Blanche's reaction to his confession.
She was numb.
She had guessed Robert and others were manipulating her as a chess piece in a game whose rules and ultimate aim were a mystery.
But only now did she have confirmation of the full extent of her betrayal by Urquhart.
The way he had misled her, Blanche thought, was heinous enough if his loyalty had lain with the same country.
But if Urquhart were speaking the truth at last— and she wondered whether yet another web of deception was being woven about her — he had forged her into an unwitting tool of the Soviet Union.
The numbness was inched away by a mixture of anger and sorrow.
‘Do you want that drink now?’ she asked, the sorrow pre-dominating.
He was motionless.
She poured out a generous measure of malt whisky and positioned the glass in front of his nose.
Urquhart's eyes were closed, the lashes like black feathers.
The firm lips pouted in a sulk.
His nostrils quivered when they caught the perfume of the scotch.
One blue eye opened and stared at her without blinking.
She rolled him on to his shoulder and two cornflowers stared at her.
She flushed.
‘Why did you do it?’
He sighed, as if the answer were much too complex for words.
‘Thatcher, I suppose.
God, how I hate that woman.’
She slipped her left arm behind his head to cradle it while her right hand brought the whisky to his mouth.
‘I've seen my own country laid waste and no one seeming to care.
The rich getting fatter and sleeker.
The poor getting thinner and dirtier.
No one seemed able to stand up to her, to dent her.
So I thought I would.
In my own wee way.’
He paused to think, staring at her.
‘Also, help Gorbachev a bit.
I've got more time for him than either our lot or the Americans,’ he added bitterly.
Blanche listened and said nothing.
A crackling silence tiptoed round the room.
His lips sucked eagerly at the golden liquid.
‘I lost hope, I suppose.
Lost hope in my country.
Because it's being betrayed by the people who are meant to govern it.
I became an exile in my own land.’
Urquhart smiled, his eyes chiselling into hers with hypnotic intensity.
‘I'll have a lot of time to go back over the past in the coming years, I suppose, wonder whether I made the right choices at the right time.’
He arched his neck upwards and pressed his lips against hers.
His earthy sweetness filled her nostrils.
‘I love you, Blanche.
Let me go, please.
Let me go,’ he murmured.
The front doorbell rang.
Dexter had arrived.
She scrutinised his face, as though he were a stranger.
Then Blanche — with a cool and deliberate swing-threw the remnants of the whisky over it.
‘The magic's stopped working,’ she hissed, as she retied the gag.
‘You've told so many lies, the truth isn't enough any more.’