

19
Although Anne had made up her mind to forget her dreams about John Redmond, she still listened eagerly when Sarah talked about his efforts to find a job, now that his foot was completely healed.
‘Who were the friends he was with when I was at your house?’
Anne asked carefully, avoiding looking at her.
‘Were they from that club?’
‘No.
Just a crowd who talk hot air like himself,’ Sarah said scornfully.
‘You think he's daft, don't you?’
Anne said, laughing.
‘In some ways,’ Sarah conceded.
‘But I've got to admit he works for what he believes in.
Collecting for Spanish Food Relief in all weathers, and for the Goodfellow Fund.’
Anne felt a glow of pride at Sarah's words.
But only because he's a friend, she told herself hastily.
Sarah seemed equally pleased to hear good news about Joe.
Three replies had been received to the applications he had sent, and had been opened by his father as Joe had asked.
One said it was pointless to put him on a waiting list, but letters from a grain merchant's and from Littlewood's Pools promised to file his application and interview him when he returned home.
‘I feel almost guilty that so many good things are happening to us, when such a lot of people are having a bad time,’ Sarah said.
‘We're very lucky, aren't we, Anne?’
Anne often thought of Sarah's words during the following months.
They were lucky, she felt.
Everything seemed to be going right in both families.
Her father's order book was better filled than it had been for years, her mother's health seemed good, Eileen was happy in her work as a pools clerk, and Tony and Helen were happily planning their wedding.
All the family were enjoying life, and even Maureen seemed to have forgotten whatever it was that troubled her and to be quietly happy again.
Best of all, Joe was sure of being able to stay home after his trip.
Even if nothing came of the interviews, he could work for his father.
When Pat had told them of his new orders he said to his wife, ‘You'll have your lad home again, Julia, however it goes with, these letters he's had.
Now I can fix him up without him thinking he's taking the bread from someone else's mouth.’
‘Thanks be to God,’ was all that Julia said, but Anne knew how much the news meant to her and to all the family.
The news was all good in the Redmond family too.
Mr Redmond had been looking after the woodyard where he worked while his employer was on a cruise to restore his health, and Sarah told Anne that her father had been given fifty pounds as a mark of appreciation when his employer returned.
Sarah's brother Mick was the star pupil at his College and great things were predicted for him, and John was now fully recovered and walking without a limp.
‘He still can't find a job,’ Sarah said to Anne.
‘But at least he's home and safe.’
‘'God's in His Heaven, All's right with the world’,’ Anne said gaily, and Mabel was shocked.
‘That's blasphemy, Anne!’
‘No, it isn't, Mabel, it's poetry,’ she said.
‘I never heard it,’ Mabel said doubtfully.
‘But you get all your quotations from the Bible, don't you, Mabel?
Sarah said mischievously.
Mabel often quoted lines of poetry to make her point, and whether they came from Tennyson, Keats, Wordsworth or Rupert Brooke, she always prefaced them with ‘As it says in the Bible.’
At first the girls had tried to correct her, but Mabel ignored their efforts and they accepted it as one of her little quirks.
‘Shelley was elevated to the Bible this morning,’ one of them would whisper to the other, but they were fond of Mabel and would never hurt her.
Anne had been to tea again at the Redmond house and this time John was at home.
He greeted her pleasantly, seemingly unaware of the length of time since they had last met, and her pride made her take her cue from him.
Mrs Redmond talked about Bridie's babies, whom she had seen the previous day, and asked Anne about her grandmother.
As usual after Anne and Sarah went into the parlour to play records, and soon they were joined by Mick and John, but the conversation was still general.
Anne stole a glance at John occasionally, and several times caught him looking intently at her, but each time he looked away quickly.
Sarah's young sister Kate came in and offered to do her step dancing to one of the records.
She was a pretty girl with fair curly hair and brown eyes, very self-possessed and a good dancer.
Anne thought she was vain and cheeky, quite unlike shy Sarah.
After she had been applauded and gone out again, Mick announced that he would now demonstrate his Fred Astaire number.
He swooped about, holding an imaginary partner, and John said to Anne, ‘You must think my family are cracked.’
‘You haven't met my brothers,’ she laughed.
They're mad, aren't they, Sarah?
Especially Terry.
And even our Eileen learned to drive on a two-ton milk lorry.’
‘Your sister can drive?’
Mick said, dropping down beside Anne, ‘I'm trying to persuade Dad to buy a car.
Your brother's bought one, hasn't he?’
‘Yes.
Our Tony.
He's engaged and they're saving up to get married, but Helen and him thought it'd be better to buy one now because they'll have a lot of expenses after they're married and won't have Helen's wages.’
Mick asked many questions about Tony's car, none of which Anne could answer.
‘I only know it has four wheels and it goes,’ she said, laughing.
‘That's all you need to know,’ said John.
‘Mick gets all his information off the back of cigarette cards.’
Sarah had changed the record and was winding the gramophone, and Mick asked Anne to dance.
She was surprised by how well he danced, but suspected that Mick did most things well.
‘I don't dance, I'm afraid,’ John said when the record finished and Anne sat down.
‘I've just never thought about it.’
‘Too busy putting the world to rights,’ said his brother.
Sarah had pulled out another record.
‘Harry Roy,’ she exclaimed.
‘Come on, Anne.
This is a quickstep.’
The two girls danced together, then sat talking about the caelidhes and the characters they met there.
They were all surprised when Mrs Redmond appeared with a supper tray.
‘Gosh, hasn't the time gone quickly?’
Sarah said, and Mick added, ‘And not a word about world affairs for once.’
‘That's good,’ Mrs Redmond said.
‘This is the time you should be enjoying yourselves, not bothering your heads about such things.’
She looked at John as she spoke and he looked back at her and smiled.
I wish he'd smile at me like that, Anne thought.
As the weather improved and the days lengthened Anne saw John several times, but usually she was on her bicycle and he was on foot.
They exchanged brief greetings but one day he was walking slowly past the end of Magdalen Street as she cycled up.
Suddenly bold, she stopped by the kerb and spoke to him, and they were still there half an hour later when Eileen walked through from the tram.
Anne introduced John and when Eileen moved away, Anne said goodbye to him and walked up the road with her sister, wheeling her bicycle.
‘He's a nice-looking fellow, isn't he?’ said Eileen.
‘Was he the one who was fighting in Spain?’
‘Yes, he was wounded in the foot but it's healed now.’
‘I'd love to do something like that,’ said Eileen.
‘Fellows have all the fun.’
‘You don't do so badly,’ Anne laughed, and Eileen had to agree.
After that meeting with John, Anne often met him strolling along near her home and always stopped to talk to him.
The conversation usually turned to matters that were never mentioned in Anne's home.
Her father was only interested in his family and his business and although he took the Evening Express , only read local news.
Tony's interests had been wider at one time, but now his mind was full of plans for his marriage with Helen, and his new car.
Like most young men of their age, Stephen and Terry were absorbed in sport, particularly football and Everton Football Club.
John was unlike anyone Anne knew with his views on everything that happened in the world.
On Palestine and Ireland and Hitler's plans for Germany.
He seemed to assume that she was as interested in these questions as he was, and she began to read newspapers thoroughly and listen to news broadcasts on the wireless.
Although Anne had always read voraciously it had been novels and poetry, or volumes of letters and diaries which were her particular favourites.
An Irish relative had told her that Ireland was now to be known as Eire but she knew nothing of the reasons for this, or of what was happening in Germany.
She and Sarah had been indignant and sad to see a picture of Emperor Haile Selassie of Abyssinia on the Pathe News Gazette at the cinema after Mussolini had invaded his country.
A tiny dignified man wearing a cloak and headdress, they had thought him both tragic and romantic but had known nothing  about the background of the struggle.
Now John recalled that struggle and told her that the Italians had invaded Abyssinia and taken Addis Ababa with modern weapons, including poison gas, in spite of a declaration by the League of Nations.
‘I'd call the League a toothless tiger, wouldn't you?’ he said.
Anne had to admit that she had never called the League a tiger, toothless or otherwise, and had known nothing of it until recently.
‘I never knew there was so much going on in the world,’ she said to John one day.
‘Very few people do, Anne, and there's not much information available to ordinary people.
That's why the statesmen can get away with so much,’ he said.
Anne did not allow her new interest in world affairs to interfere with her enjoyment of life, however, and although John never asked her out many other young men did.
She and Sarah tried to arrange their dates for the same evenings, so that for the rest of the week they were free to go out together.
Anne never seemed to have a free moment.
‘Slow down, child, slow down,’ her mother begged as Anne raced around.
‘Sure you'll wear yourself out.’
Tony was teaching Maureen to drive and Anne asked if he would teach her too.
‘Where would you find the time?’ he asked and she had to admit it was impossible.
‘You'll learn quickly when you do have the time,’ Helen said.
‘You won't be like me.’
Helen had been trying to learn for some time, but she found it very hard although Tony was endlessly patient with her.
‘It's that kangaroo juice he puts in the engine,’ Terry teased her after she had started from outside the house in a series of jumps.
‘Ignore him, love.
All you need is confidence, and that will come,’ Tony said protectively.
Maureen showed an unexpected aptitude for driving and learned very quickly but Helen was not  jealous.
All the family were very fond of tiny Helen, who was a gentle loving girl.
Tony thought she was very like his mother in appearance and character.
Julia had been free of pain for many months, but still she had grown weaker.
Mrs Bennet came to clean four times a week now, and another woman came for the washing, and Julia often wondered how she would have managed without them.
In the spring of 1938 the old doctor who had attended her died suddenly and a young man took over the practice.
Maureen asked him to call to see her mother, and the doctor examined her carefully.
‘You say you have been free of pain for nearly two years?’ he said, when he had finished.
‘That's so, doctor, but you know I have the strange feeling that it's still there, biding its time.
I can't seem to get back my strength,’ she said.
The doctor looked carefully at her fingernails and neck, then said abruptly, ‘I want to admit you to the Royal.
They can take an X-ray photograph of you.
It would help me to know what is wrong and how to treat you.’
Julia said nothing for a moment then she said quietly, ‘Thank you, doctor, for the offer, but I don't think I'll go in hospital if you don't mind.’
‘It would only be for investigation,’ he said.
‘I know, doctor, but you see I'm all this time without pain and I think I'll let sleeping dogs lie.
I'm grand apart from the weakness.’
The doctor shrugged.
‘I think you'd be wise to go,’ he said.
‘But if that's how you feel.
Promise me that you'll let me know if the pain returns.
I trained at the Royal and I'll be able to get you a bed immediately.’
He left after giving instructions that she was to rest as much as possible and drink plenty of milk.
Mrs Bennet showed him out and returned with a pint glass full of milk.
‘I think a glass of Guinness would do you more good,’ she said.
‘But you'd better  do as he tells you.
He seems to have more idea than the ould feller.’
The wool shop now closed on Wednesday afternoons so often Maureen drove her mother and her Aunt Carrie to visit Theresa, whose baby was due in June, while Anne stayed with Grandma Houlihan.
The old lady was becoming more confused, and often failed to recognise Anne but she allowed her to make a meal for her.
She talked at length, often about people who had died before Anne was born, but she pretended to remember them.
At other times Grandma sat silent but apparently happy with her Rosary beads slipping through her fingers.
Anne had hoped to wait outside the coal merchant's office to see Kathleen, but Wednesday was the only day she was home early enough, and now there was never an opportunity.
She was relieved when she and Sarah met Kathleen and Ella in a cinema queue one evening.
It was for a Bing Crosby film and Ella said jokingly, ‘We had to come.
Kath's got a pash on Bing.’
Kathleen blushed and said, ‘And you've got one on Ronald Colman.’
‘Sarah's mad about Hugh Williams but mine is Leslie Howard,’ Anne laughed.
She pretended to swoon and the four girls laughed and joked together until the queue moved into the cinema.
Anne was secretly delighted to see Kathleen behaving so normally, and felt that she could stop worrying about her.
Maureen had told her that the O'Neills' neighbour had been in the wool shop and had told her that she was sure they were all mad.
‘She said the scenes in the house are terrible,’ Maureen said.
‘Crashes and bangs and all of them screaming and crying.’
But Anne decided that the woman must be exaggerating.
Theresa's son was born on 28 June 1937 and christened James Frederick, and Carrie said that Fred's feet had not touched the ground since the child's birth.
The baby's christening was held at Carrie's house so that Grandma Houlihan was able to hold the baby.
She seemed to think that it was her own child and showed signs of distress when Carrie took the baby from her.
‘He's not dead, is he?’ she whimpered.
‘God help me, I can never rear a lad.’
But fortunately the baby began to cry loudly, and Grandma seemed happy again.
It was clear that she was very close to death, and Julia began to worry because Minnie had not been informed.
‘She is Ma's daughter, after all, Carrie, and she has a right to know,’ Julia said.
‘And for all we know Ma might realise that she hasn't been to see her.’
‘I doubt it,’ said Carrie, ‘but I suppose you're right, Julie.
She does have a right to know.
But when I think of the trouble she's caused!’
‘I know,’ Julia said gently, ‘but maybe she can't help her bitter nature, and God knows, Carrie, she's her own worst enemy.
Always falling out with people, and her children are no comfort to her.’
It was decided that Julia should go to see Minnie and escort her to Carrie's house if she wished to come.
Minnie wept when she heard the news and willingly accompanied Julia to see their mother.
Carrie greeted her coolly but Fred said heartily, ‘That's right, that's right.
No sense in bearing grudges at a time like this.’
No one replied and Julia took Minnie up to the dying woman.
Minnie fell on her knees beside the bed, holding her mother's hands and murmuring, ‘Oh, Ma, it's me, Minnie.’
Her mother looked at her vacantly for a moment, then she said in a weak voice, ‘My poor girl.
God help you.
You won't — won't —’ Her voice died away and she slipped into sleep again.
Minnie wept bitterly.
‘She's the only one in the world who ever cared about me,’ she said, but when Julia protested, Minnie sneered, ‘It's all right.
You don't have to lie to me.
I know the score.’
Julia ushered her out of the bedroom, afraid the sound of conflict might reach her mother.
Carrie offered Minnie a cup of tea, but she refused it.
‘I've done what I came for,’ she  declared, marching out of the house.
Grandma lay for a few days drifting in and out of sleep, unaware of everything about her, until one afternoon when Julia and Carrie were sitting with her.
She spoke rationally to them and asked about their families, but during the night she died in her sleep.
‘Don't grieve for her,’ the priest said to the family.
‘She would only have grown more confused.
Now she's had a peaceful end and she's gone to her reward.’
‘I wish I'd liked her better,’ Anne said.
But Eileen replied reasonably, ‘None of us was keen on her, Anne, but we hid it for Mum's sake and Grandma never realised it.
There's nothing to regret.
You can't make yourself like someone.’
Minnie and Dympna were in church for the Requiem Mass, but sat apart from the family.
Julia thought that Minnie showed genuine grief, and at the end of the Mass, she spoke to her and Dympna.
Fred joined them and urged them to come to the cemetery in the funeral cars.
Minnie refused, saying that Brendan had provided a car for them, and later she and Dympna appeared at the graveside, again standing apart from the family.
As the mourners left, Fred said quietly to Pat, ‘Did you notice those plainclothes coppers?’
‘Two big fellows in macs?’
Pat said.
‘I wondered who they were?’
‘They were coppers all right,’ Fred said.
‘Probably watching for the quare fellow.
I wonder what he's been up to now?’
‘God knows,’ said Pat.
‘But he'll need to be slippery all right, with coppers and criminals after him.’
They said nothing to the family and no one else had noticed the men.
Julia's soft heart had been touched by Minnie's grief, and she was prepared to be friendly with her, but Carrie was adamant.
‘I want nothing more to do with her,’ she said.
‘I tolerated her while Ma was alive to keep the peace for Ma's sake, except for the past  few months, but no more.
You do what you like, Julia, but I've had enough of her.’
‘But it's a terrible thing to be out of friends with your own flesh and blood,’ Julia mourned.
‘And it's a sin too, Carrie.
Didn't Our Lord say that he would forgive us as we forgave others?’
‘I don't think it's a sin to be at odds with Minnie,’ Carrie declared.
‘Not when I think of the trouble she's caused, and she'd cause more if she got the chance.’
‘But she'll miss Ma.
She said only Ma ever cared about her.’
‘And whose fault is that?’ said Carrie.
‘The number of times we've made it up with her after falling out because of her trouble making, and in no time she's been at it again.
Carrying tales and making nasty remarks.
No, I'm sorry, Julia, I want no more to do with her, sister or not.’
She looked flushed and angry, and Julia said no more.
She knew that despite her fury, Carrie would be the first to offer help to Minnie if she needed it.
Now that she was not restricted by nursing her mother, Carrie was free to travel to West Derby as often as she wished to see her grandchild.
Sometimes Julia accompanied her, and as they travelled home one day Carrie said thoughtfully, ‘You know I never wished Ma dead, Julie, but I've got to admit her death came at the right time for me.
I'm able to see lames every day, either at our house or Theresa's, and these first months are precious, aren't they?’
‘They are indeed,’ Julia agreed.
‘And you did your duty to Ma, and more.
You and Fred have nothing to reproach yourselves with.
You deserve the joy of your grandchild.’
Anne still met John Redmond occasionally, and tried to keep up with world affairs so that she could hold her own when talking to him.
He puzzled her.
She felt it was not just chance that they met so often near her home, yet he only talked about what was happening in other parts of the world, never of people they knew or of his feelings towards her.
Perhaps I've tried to be too clever, she thought, reading up world affairs, and he thinks that's all I want to talk about.
Often as they talked he kept his gaze on her face, looking into her eyes, and as she stood with her hands on the handlebars of her bicycle his hand often covered hers as though by accident.
At times Anne felt sure that he was attracted to her, but if so why did he never ask to meet her, and why did he conceal these chance meetings from his family?
It was obvious that Sarah knew nothing of them, and Anne was too proud to tell her.
If he's ashamed to tell his family, I'm not going to, she thought.
Sarah told her that John had secured a job in an hotel but had been sacked after a few days.
‘It was the same when he got that job on a building site and was sacked after a few days, although they said there was nothing wrong with his work.
He thinks he's on some sort of blacklist because he was in the International Brigade.’
Anne shrugged.
‘Perhaps he is,’ she said with assumed indifference.
She was hurt that John had said nothing to her about it, and decided that she would avoid him in future.
He can find someone else to lecture about Sudetenland Germans and Czechoslovakia and all that, she thought angrily.
I'll stick to fellows who talk about ordinary things.
She began to take a different route so that she approached her home from the other end of Magdalen Street and avoided a meeting with John.
It was a miserable time for Anne as she was unable to attend dances or the cinema during the period of mourning for her grandmother.
‘I feel a hypocrite,’ she told Sarah.
‘I can't really grieve for my grandma.
She was always saying she'd be glad to go to her reward so she's got what she wanted, and I was never very fond of her.
I hate this black dress too.’
Her dress had been made by a local dressmaker who had made it with a deep frill of black satin round the neck.
‘I feel like Dog Toby in it,’ Anne complained.
‘Why don't you take the frill off and have a plain round neckline?’
Sarah said.
‘My aunt in America sent us a photo of herself in a black dress after Grandad died and it was very plain.
It looked chic.’
‘Oh, Sarah, it probably cost the earth.
And then your aunt is beautiful, isn't she?’
Anne said.
‘My dress fits where it touches.’
‘Why don't you ask your mum if you can take the frill off and I'll ask mine to alter your dress if it's all right?’
Sarah suggested.
Most of the family were present when Anne asked her mother if she could have her dress altered, and after she had gone to see the Misses Dolan Tony said, ‘I think it's a shame Anne can't go out and enjoy herself.
I know it was very upsetting for you, Mum, when Grandma died, but we can't expect a kid like Anne.
to live like a hermit for six months.’
‘I don't see the point of it myself, either,’ Eileen said.
‘If it was one of us it'd be different.
The last thing you'd want to do would be enjoy yourself, but everyone says it was a happy release for Grandma.’
‘God between us and all harm!’
Julia exclaimed, crossing herself.
‘Don't even say such a thing, child.’
‘When we were young it was deep mourning for a year and half mourning for six months,’ Pat said.
‘I don't know when this six months idea came in but it's little enough to show respect for the one that's gone.’
‘Sure I knew people that were never out of black with the deaths coming the way they did,’ Julia said.
Pat sat smoking in silence for a few minutes and no one else spoke but suddenly he said, ‘How much of it was real, Julia, when you come to think of it, and how much for fear of what people would say?
We carried on the traditions but young ones want to question everything, and maybe they're right.’
‘Twill do Anne no harm to leave off the dances for a few  months out of respect for her grandma,’ Julia said.
‘There's nothing wrong with the old ways.’
She agreed that Anne should have her dress altered by Mrs Redmond though and Anne was delighted with the result.
Mrs Redmond called to see Julia one afternoon as she sometimes did now and Julia told her of the conversation about mourning.
‘My dad didn't believe in mourning.
Well, public mourning,’ Mrs Redmond said.
‘He said you could grieve without having to prove it to the neighbours by wearing black.’
‘But it's a manner of showing respect to the dead,’ Julia said, and Mrs Redmond agreed rather doubtfully.
‘That's what people are brought up to believe.’
‘Our young ones don't seem to think we should be in mourning for my mother because she was glad to go,’ said Julia.
‘My dad didn't welcome death and we were broken-hearted,’ Mrs Redmond said.
Her eyes filled with tears and she hastily wiped them away.
‘I went out to work waiting on and some of the women were such comics I couldn't help but laugh at them.
I felt guilty and then I thought of what my dad would have said.
He was such a loving man.
He'd only have wanted us to be happy.’
‘I'm sure he would, the good man, Lord rest him,’ said Julia and Mrs Redmond went on, ‘I came home one night and Sarah told me my mother had told her she should start going out and enjoying herself, and I was relieved.
I wanted to suggest it to Sarah but I didn't know how Mam would feel about it.
She said it would help Sarah to get over the loss, and it did.’
Julia was half convinced that she should tell the young people to go to the cinema and dances again but she consulted Pat.
‘Let them leave it another two weeks to make the two months,’ he advised.
‘And don't be upset because they want to, girl.
They mean no disrespect to your ma.’
‘You're right, Pat,’ she agreed.
‘Life is short and they're only young once.’
20
Anne and Sarah began to attend modern dances and were an immediate success with the young men who went there.
They still visited the cinema and the caelidhes so before long Anne's life was as hectic as ever.
Sarah told her that John was so discouraged by his failure to find work that he had decided to try elsewhere in the country.
‘He thinks the blacklist will only be for Liverpool, but he says he won't go until after Christmas.’
Anne felt a stab of pain, although she told herself that she was not interested in John Redmond any more, yet eagerly accepted an invitation to Sunday tea from Sarah.
She feared John might not be at home but he was, and was very excited because he had been promised a job.
‘I hated the thought of leaving Liverpool,’ he said, looking intently at her.
Anne blushed and said quickly, ‘And what's the job?’
‘It's labouring.
Stan Johnson, the chap my father works for, has a finger in all sorts of pies, including housing.
Dad told him I'd lost that labouring job and he said if that was what I wanted to do, he had a job repairing houses he owns.’
Anne hid her doubts and congratulated him, but later she said to Sarah, ‘It seems a bit of a waste for John to do labouring, doesn't it?
I mean, after he stayed on at the College to sixteen then worked in offices.
Do you think he'll like labouring?’
‘He says he will,’ Sarah said, and laughed.
‘You know John.
He's been going on about the dignity of labour.’
Anne smiled.
‘He practises what he preaches though, doesn't he?’ she said, and Sarah agreed.
At teatime Anne was seated next to Sarah's grandmother who talked to her about her family at first then said, ‘It's good news about John's job, isn't it?’
Anne nodded and Mrs Ward went on quietly, ‘He's been a troubled lad this last year or two, but he'll sort himself out soon.’
‘How do you mean?’
Anne asked.
‘He takes things very much to heart like his grandad did,’ the old lady said.
‘Both worrying about the troubles of the world and how to cure them, but John's been talking to his dad about this Spanish business and other things and he'll work things out soon.’
‘He knows so much about everything,’ Anne said.
‘Things that are happening in foreign countries.’
‘Too much,’ Mrs Ward said.
She smiled at Anne.
‘His heart's in the right place but he's a bit mixed up so we'll have to give him time.’
Anne felt a rush of affection for the wise old lady whom she felt was offering comfort and advice to her.
After tea Sarah and Anne and John went into the parlour to play records and John sat down beside Anne and began to talk about his job.
She felt that they were really making progress but Sarah's friend Edie Meadows, who lived nearby, came in.
She was a big, boisterous girl with a loud voice and dominated the conversation.
‘I've just come for the skirt your mum's fixed for me,’ she said.
‘Oh eh kid, I had a smashing time last night.
I went on a chara to Blackpool with the girls from work, and we never stopped singing.
We had a real good time but of course me dad had to spoil it when I got home.
Carrying on and saying I was up to no good, out till that time.
I hate him.’
Anne looked at her in amazement, not sure that she had heard aright, but Edie rattled on, ‘I'm beginning to think me Aunt Mary's right to hate fellers.’
She looked at Anne.
‘I've had a fight with my feller, haven't I, Sar?
I don't care if I never see him again.’
‘You don't mean that, Edie,’ she said, but Edie said defiantly, ‘Yes, I do.
Is that the time?
I'd better go.
I'm supposed to be meeting a feller for the pictures at eight o'clock.’
‘So you don't hate all fellows?’
John laughed.
‘They're all right to take me to the pictures,’ she said.
‘Ta, ra then.’
‘Poor Edie,’ Sarah said when she had gone.
‘She's really upset about falling out with Bert.
They've been going out on and off for years.’
‘I couldn't believe my ears when she said she hated her father,’ Anne said.
Sarah shrugged.
‘I don't like him either, but her mum's nice, isn't she, John?’
‘Yes.
She's been Mum's friend since they were kids,’ he said.
The conversation was general for a while then John excused himself, saying he had to find out more details about the job from his father.
Anne was disappointed.
She had felt that they were getting on so well until Edie appeared.
Why does he blow so hot and cold, she thought, even within the space of a few hours?
When she was leaving, John reappeared and he and Sarah accompanied her to the corner of Magdalen Street.
When Anne left them she thought of the first time she had stood on that corner saying goodnight to John.
I had such high hopes then but all this time and we're no further on, she thought.
Why don't I just forget him?
Yet although she was annoyed with herself for doing so, she was now coming home again every night by the route where she had so often met him.
It was several weeks before she realised  that now that he was working he would not be free to walk about the neighbourhood.
Sarah told her that her father and John had been discussing the possibility of war with Germany, but they had hastily changed the subject when her mother came in.
‘But they don't think we'd fight with Germany, do they?’
‘I don't think so.
Dad was saying that Herr Hitler had done wonders for Germany.
Pulled them up by their boot strings, was what he said, but then they were talking about the Treaty of Versailles and about war reparations being hard on Germany.’
‘You hear some interesting conversations in your house, don't you?’
Anne said.
‘I never hear anything like that at home.’
‘Do you really want to?’
Sarah said with a grimace.
‘I think you have great talks in your house when all the family are in.
I really enjoy them and they're not worrying like this war talk.’
‘I think it's just talk,’ said Anne.
‘I know Hitler is always falling out with foreign countries but it's got nothing to do with us, has it?’
Sarah came to tea on Sunday and when all the younger members of the family were in the parlour afterwards, Anne spoke about the talk of war.
She implied that they had heard it in the shop and Tony said reassuringly, ‘Don't worry about it.
There's always talk like this, Anne, but it's usually politicians just trying it on for some advantage.
What they call diplomacy, and some people call sabre rattling.’
Anne happily dismissed the gloomy thoughts from her mind, which was filled as usual with thoughts of young men, dancing and cycling.
But in August Sarah came into the shop one Monday morning looking worried.
‘I went to Dovecote yesterday to see Maisie,’ she said.
‘When the tram passed Springfield Park, you know, by Alder Hey Hospital, I could see trenches dug all over the park.
A woman on the tram said we'd be at war by Christmas.’
‘How would she know?’
Anne said scornfully.
‘The trenches might have been dug for anything, water pipes or sewers or something.’
‘But Maisie told me there were gas masks in some depots ready to be given out.
Even ones for babies.’
‘You always hear tales like that.
I don't know who starts them,’ Mabel said.
‘Don't be such a worrier, Sarah.’
But suddenly in September everyone was talking about war.
A customer asked Sarah if her brother had been near Guernica in Spain when bombs were dropped on it from aeroplanes.
‘Hundreds of people were killed,’ the woman said.
‘That's what'll happen to us.’
‘Don't be daft,’ Mabel said.
‘It's different with these foreign countries.
Stands to reason nobody'd dare to bomb us, because, we'd do the same to them and they know it.’
Everyone began to listen carefully to the news bulletins on the wireless and to buy newspapers as soon as they were printed, yet people found it hard to believe that war could really happen.
Except Mabel.
She had completely changed her views and now declared that she was sure war was imminent.
The Foreign Office issued a warning to Hitler on 28 September of the consequences if he attacked Czechoslovakia, and the following day the Fleet was mobilised.
‘And our Joe still at sea,’ Anne said fearfully to Sarah.
‘Mum says she wouldn't mind if only he was home and we could all be killed together.’
Everyone was frightened and worried, but on 29 September the Prime Minister flew to Munich and returned waving a document which he said meant: ‘Peace in our time.’
‘God bless Mr Chamberlain,’ Anne said.
‘I didn't realise how worried I was until I stopped worrying.
I'm really going to enjoy life now.’
Mabel had told everyone that she was sure that war was about  to start, and at first she seemed disgruntled that she had been proved wrong, but soon was as ecstatic as everyone else about the news.
Services of Thanksgiving were held in all churches and very well attended, and in cinemas when Mr Chamberlain was shown on Pathe News holding up the document, audiences stood and cheered.
He was Anne's hero, too.
Sarah told Anne that her parents were annoyed with Mick, who was now sixteen years old and appeared older.
He had gained five distinctions in his Matriculation examinations and it had been decided that he would stay on at the College until he was eighteen to take Higher School Certificate.
During the war scare he had tried to enlist in the Royal Air Force, giving his age as eighteen, but had been refused.
‘The trouble is they'll send for him when he is eighteen, and we were hoping he'd win a scholarship to go on to University.
They'll be annoyed at the College too,’ Sarah said.
‘What does Mick say?’ asked Anne.
Sarah shrugged.
‘You know Mick,’ she said.
‘He doesn't care if it snows.’
Another result of the scare was that Edie Meadows and her boyfriend made up their quarrel and became engaged, to the delight of Edie's mother.
‘I don't mind Mrs Meadows being pleased, and I can understand it because it makes things a lot easier with Mr Meadows, but she's sort of sympathising with Mum because I'm not engaged!’
Sarah said.
‘I've told her I've no intention of settling down with anyone yet.
I'm having too good a time.’
‘Same here,’ Anne said, but neither girl was being entirely truthful.
Anne felt that she would be willing to abandon the good times to settle down with John, although pride prevented her from admitting it.
Sarah's interest in her friend's brother was far more vague.
Joe Fitzgerald was so much older and moved in a different circle, and  on the few occasions that Sarah had seen him he had shown no interest in her, but she liked him and knew that he enjoyed reading and poetry as much as she did.
They were both amazed to find that because of the war scare young men who had been quite content to go out with them on their terms suddenly wanted to start serious courting.
‘I don't know what's wrong with fellows lately,’ Anne complained.
‘They know we've always gone out with more than one of them and they've always accepted it.
I don't care if they go out with a different girl every day of the week as well as me, but suddenly they want to be the one and only.’
‘I know,’ Sarah said.
‘I can't understand it.’
She had a row with a young man named Nick Owens when they were all at the caelidhe one evening and he told her that he wanted her to be his girl and not go out with anyone else.
They were a large group including the Anderson cousins and were all amused to see quiet, timid Sarah so furious.
‘He's got a cheek,’ she raged.
‘Why should I settle down with him out of all the fellows I've been out with?
I told him I'd just as soon have Bob Doyle or Jimmie Rafferty, but I'm not settling down with anyone.’
‘Never mind, alannah,’ Terry said in a mock brogue.
‘I'll be your steady feller.’
‘She's not that hard up,’ Anne retorted amid laughter, but soon she had the same experience with another young man.
‘What's got into them?’ she said to Maureen.
‘I know I went to the ice rink and the pictures with Bill O'Hagan but he knew I went out with other fellows as well.
Now he's talking as though he owns me.’
‘They probably feel they should sort out their lives because of the risk of war,’ Maureen said.
‘But don't be hustled into anything unless you really want to, Anne.’
‘I won't,’ she said, ‘and neither will Sarah.
We like these  fellows but we don't want to marry them.’
‘Then don't.
Wait until you're really sure,’ Maureen said, and Anne hugged her affectionately.
‘I suppose the war worry took people different ways,’ she said.
‘Me and Sarah just feel that life is twice as sweet.
Sarah says it's like being in the condemned cell and being let out.
The grass is greener and the flowers more beautiful just because we nearly lost them.’
Maureen laughed.
‘Very dramatic and poetical,’ she teased.
Anne giggled.
‘I suppose we are,’ she admitted, but it was true that life felt sweet to them.
She had not seen Kathleen O'Neill again, but she met Ella one day and heard news of Kathleen.
‘I was glad to see her at the pictures with you,’ Anne said.
‘I feel guilty because a teacher in school asked me to stay friends with her after we left, but somehow I never seem to have time.’
‘It's hard for her though,’ said Ella.
‘Her mother's so queer.
It's a battle every time Kathleen wants to go out with me, with that brother of hers as well as her mother.’
‘But she still goes out with you?’
‘Yes, but not often, though.
We only go to the pictures but there's a scene to face every time when she goes home.
I tell her to stick it out and they'll get used to it.
She'd have no life at all otherwise, Anne, and she's such a nice girl.
Her family are so queer.’
Anne wondered if Ella knew just how queer they were but only said, ‘I think it would be better all round if Cormac tried to get a job.
Kathleen says he isn't strong enough, but he seems strong enough to me.’
‘She told me it wouldn't be right for him to work, her mother said.
Have you ever been in the house?’
Ella asked.
Anne shook her head.
‘I've only been in once.
You should see it!
Material draped  all round the walls and swords and things hanging on them.
A couple of chairs like thrones.
Queerest place I've ever been in,’ said Ella.
‘I was only there a minute but I was glad to get out.’
‘It's a shame,’ said Anne.
‘Because Kathleen's quite different when she gets away from them, isn't she?’
‘She is,’ Ella agreed.
‘I've been trying to get her to look for a living-in job, a hotel receptionist maybe, but she won't leave her mother.
I'll stick at it, though.
I'll get her out of their clutches somehow.’
‘I hope you do then I won't feel so bad about her, but tell me if I can help, Ella,’ Anne said.
She felt happier about Kathleen now that she knew that she had a champion in Ella, but she had little time to dwell on the O'Neills.
The shop had suddenly become very busy as Christmas approached, and although the cycling was finished Anne and Sarah continued to spend every spare moment enjoying themselves.
The usual family gathering at the Andersons' was held over until late January as Theresa had invited her parents and brothers and sister to her house for Boxing Day, and Pat said he thought it was a good idea.
‘Spreads things out a bit, so we haven't got all the jollifications within a couple of days.’
‘The only drawback is the weather gets worse and the nights darker after Christmas,’ Carrie said.
Everyone began to tell her that the shortest day had been passed and Fred sat down beside Anne.
‘That reminds me, girl, be careful.
Don't come home on your own late at night.’
‘Why, Uncle Fred?’
‘A young girl got attacked last week, my mate in the police told me.
A respectable girl.
She was nearly home and someone jumped out at her and battered her with a piece of wood.
They found splinters in her.
She could have been killed, only someone disturbed him.’
‘Where was it?’
Anne asked.
‘Not far from here, near Boaler Street, so just be careful, young Anne.
If he's done it once he can do it again.’
‘I will,’ she promised, and promptly forgot about it until Sarah said during the week, ‘That girl Ella that you know, Anne.
Is her name Eleanor Hopkins?’
‘Yes.
Why?’
‘Peggy who lives next door to my grandma told us she's in hospital.
She was attacked coming home from a dance and nearly killed.’
‘Ella was?’
Anne gasped.
Cormac, she thought, or even Mrs O'Neill, remembering Kathleen's doll, but then the next moment told herself she was crazy.
Anyone could have attacked Ella Why should it be the O'Neills just because Ella had tried to befriend Kathleen?
Nevertheless she felt uneasy and was almost glad to hear that a second girl had been attacked in a different part of Liverpool.
She would have been less relieved had she known that the second girl had been attacked by an ex-boyfriend, who had been arrested.
She enquired at the hospital about Ella and was told that only family visiting was allowed, so she left some fruit there and without analysing her feeling of relief, pushed the incident to the back of her mind.
It was easier to do this because Joe was due home and all the family were happily preparing.
Julia seemed to take on a new lease of life and now that the weather was improving she often walked to Carrie's house or to see Bridie and her family.
Joe had letters ready to post to Littlewood's and the grain merchant's as soon as his ship docked, and within days was called to Littlewood's Pools for an interview.
There was great jubilation in the family when he returned home to tell them that he was to start in the Despatch Department in two weeks' time, in the huge new office in Edge Lane where Eileen worked.
‘The beauty of it is, it's permanent,’ he said.
‘And the prospects are good because Littlewood's are growing all the time.
They're good employers, too.’
All the family were delighted to have him home again, but none more than Maureen.
On Joe's previous leave he had noticed how quiet and unhappy she seemed, and persuaded her to tell him the reason.
Eventually she told him that she had fallen in love with a man who was already married and her conscience was greatly troubled.
Joe had comforted her, and told her that no one could help falling in love, and if she was not breaking up his marriage she was doing no harm.
There was no opportunity for further discussion.
Privacy was hard to achieve, especially while all the family wanted to spend as much time as possible with him.
Before he'd left he'd managed to say to her quietly, ‘Don't worry so much, Mo, and don't let religious scruples worry you either.
You're doing no harm.
We'll have a longer talk when I'm home again.’
Maureen had been comforted as much by Joe's loving concern for her as by his words.
She had looked forward to long satisfying talks with him, when she could tell all about her feelings and all the worries she had kept to herself for so long, but it was not easy for Joe to spend time alone with her.
His mother clung to him and wanted to tell him all about her mother's death as well as telling him how happy she was to welcome Helen into the family.
His father had recently had electricity installed and wanted to show Joe the fittings and switches in each room.
He even took him down to the cellars to see the lights and the point for a plug there.
‘You know we always used candles down here when we were using the workbench, Joe.
The feller that did the wiring told me it was dangerous, especially with all the wood about.’
‘I suppose he's right, Dad,’ Joe said.
‘Although I've never thought about it if I was doing a job down here.’
‘He said it was a good dry cellar,’ said Pat.
‘Sandstone foundations.
Said we were lucky being high on the hill like the new cathedral on St James's Mount.
I had lights put in the coal cellar and wash house too while he was at it.
Cost me another two quid but it was worth it.’
‘Handy for filling the coal buckets,’ Joe said.
‘And there wasn't much light in the wash house.
Good idea, Dad.’
Neither of them realised then just how handy the cellar lights would be before long.
21
Anne claimed Joe to talk to him about the books she had read and all that had happened to her since he went away, and Terry and Stephen wanted to talk to him about football and their latest craze, greyhound racing.
Even Tony was anxious for Joe to spend some time with him and Helen, and to show off his new car.
Maureen, always self-effacing, would never have demanded time with him but Joe took matters into his own hands.
‘Are you going to Benediction, Mo?’ he asked.
‘If so I'll walk down with you, and then we might do a bit of visiting afterwards or even just go for a walk.’
‘It's a grand night for a walk, and it would do you good, Joe, after being cooped up on that ship,’ his mother said.
‘Let the visiting wait.’
Joe tucked Maureen's arm under his as they left the house.
‘Now, Mo, how are things with you?
I hope you've stopped worrying.’
‘I did in a way, Joe,’ she said.
‘I felt much happier after talking to you, although nothing's really changed.’
‘Tell me about this chap,’ he said.
‘What's his name?’
‘Chris.
Chris Murray,’ Maureen told him.
‘You'd like him, Joe.
He works in Lipton's, near to our shop, but I only really met him when he came in to order baby clothes.’
‘For his own baby?’
Joe asked.
‘Well, yes,’ Maureen said, then suddenly burst out, ‘He was tricked into marriage, Joe.
His wife's a horrible woman.
Horrible!’
‘What happened?’ asked Joe.
‘He was at a party.
He had a few drinks and fell asleep and when he woke up he was in bed and Beryl was lying beside him.
She said he'd — he'd misbehaved.
He'd have remembered, wouldn't he, Joe?’
‘I'd have thought so,’ he said, and Maureen went on, ‘He didn't remember anything after falling asleep but they got married right away and Beryl just lay around like an invalid until the baby was born six months later.’
‘Six months later?’
‘Yes.
She said it was premature but she hadn't made any, provision for it, and wouldn't look at the baby.
That's why Chris came in for the baby clothes.’
‘And when did you realise how you felt about him?
Does he know by the way?’
‘Yes, and he feels the same way.
I thought he looked so lost and unhappy that I just wanted to comfort him at first, and Chris says he just thought I was kind.
Neither of us wanted to admit even to ourselves how we really felt,’ Maureen said.
‘He was a married man.’
She and Joe had walked through to West Derby Road and were approaching St Michael's Church.
He said, ‘Do you want to go to Benediction, Mo, or would you rather walk and talk?
I would.’
‘So would I,’ she agreed.
‘Sometimes I wish I hadn't been born a Catholic, Joe.
It would make things so much easier.’
‘I think you're worrying too much about the religious aspect of it,’ he said.
‘I don't think you've done anything wrong.
You can't help your feelings.’
‘Beryl wouldn't look after the baby so her sister took it temporarily, but then Beryl really was ill with poliomyelitis so  the little boy stayed with her sister.
Chris has to pay a woman to sit with Beryl during the day and he looks after her after work,’ Maureen said.
‘And when do you see him?’
‘In my lunch hour.
We take a tram to the Pier Head.
I go inside and Chris goes on the top deck and we meet on a quiet corner near the end of the Landing Stage,’ Maureen said.
Joe had slipped his arm round her waist and she suddenly turned her head into his shoulder.
‘Oh, Joe,’ she said, ‘it all sounds so furtive and nasty, but it isn't, honestly.
We never meant this to happen but we can't help ourselves.
I love him, Joe.’
She was weeping now and he guided her to a low wall in a secluded corner where they sat down.
‘I know, love,’ he said gently.
‘Don't cry, Mo.’
She wiped her eyes and sat up.
‘I'm just another worry now for my poor Chris and God knows he's got enough.
His wife hates him, I'm sure she does.
She does everything she can to make life difficult for him.’
‘Couldn't he leave her if she feels like that?
Pay someone to look after her full-time?’
Joe said.
But Maureen said sorrowfully, ‘She wants him there even though she never speaks civilly to him.
And how could he leave her, Joe?
She's his wife and a sick woman and he promised ‘In sickness and in health’.’
She tried to smile.
‘Don't worry about me, Joe.
It's not all misery.
When Chris and I are together we have some lovely happy times.’
‘But it's not much of a life for you, Mo,’ he said gently.
‘I mean, you're never going to meet anyone else unless you make the break, and this is all a bit hopeless, isn't it?’
‘I don't want anyone else,’ Maureen said.
‘Anyway, I'm not likely to meet anyone now.
I'll be thirty-one this year.’
‘How old is the child?’ he asked, and Maureen's head jerked round to look at him in amazement.
‘Didn't I tell you?’ she said.
‘The little boy died.
That's when this really started.
Oh, we'd felt like this for years but we wouldn't acknowledge it, and then we started meeting casually and standing talking for ages, but it was only when I met him and he was so upset about the baby and — and other things.
I put my arms round him and suddenly, well —it all poured out.’
‘How did he die?’ asked Joe.
‘Of diphtheria, but he'd never been strong.
Chris's sister-in-law loved the baby and when he died she was so upset she told Chris that little Tommy had never had a chance.
She said Beryl took things before he was born because she didn't want a baby and that's why he was sickly.’
‘Good God!’
Joe said.
‘And did he face her with it?
His wife, I mean?’
‘Yes, but she denied it, and then she said she didn't know why he was making such a fuss because it wasn't his child anyway.
Chris said she laughed and he had to rush out of the house or he'd have killed her….
He had to go back in the end because there was no one else to put her to bed, but he hated touching her.’
Joe said nothing and Maureen said anxiously, ‘I suppose you think he's weak, Joe, but what can he do? she said when he went back that she was only teasing about the baby not being his!
But said too that he'd married her in church and he'd promised to look after her always.’
‘I can see his difficulty,’ Joe said carefully.
‘But I'm concerned about you, love.
You deserve to be happy, Mo.’
‘I am happy, Joe, most of the time.
Especially now that I can talk to you about Chris.
It's been so hard keeping it all to myself.’
‘Does no one else know?’
Joe asked.
No.
Mum guessed there was something and in the end I told her that I was in love with a married man.
I thought she'd be shocked but she wasn't, although she said she thought I should try to forget him because it would only mean unhappiness for me.’
‘And that's all Mum wants,’ Joe said fondly.
‘For us all to be happy.’
‘I'm glad she knows.
She always turns the conversation away when Aunt Minnie starts about marriage and me being an old maid.’
‘I wouldn't expect her to be cheering for marriage,’ Joe said.
‘Not after Dympna's experience.’
‘She's like a lot of other people,’ Maureen said wryly.
‘She thinks that any husband is better than none.’
They stood up and Maureen glanced at her watch.
‘We'd better get back or they'll be sending out a search party,’ she said.
‘Thanks, Joe, for listening to me.
It's helped a lot.’
They strolled home, talking now of family matters, but as they neared Magdalen Street Maureen said suddenly, ‘There's a lot more about Chris and me, and — and other things I haven't had time to tell you, Joe.
Don't worry about me, will you, because of what I've said tonight?’
‘I'm sure there is a lot more,’ he said, giving her arm a comforting squeeze.
‘Thing is, Mo, we're going to have plenty of time to talk now I'm home for good.’
‘Yes, thank God,’ she said happily.
‘I've missed you so much, Joe.
We all have.’
Joe settled back happily into family life, enjoying the warmth of his welcome.
He had lost touch with his friends but had the company of his brothers and sisters to compensate.
Terry and Stephen attended Victor's Dancing Academy in Prescot Road and urged him to try it, but he put them off.
He went very willingly to watch Everton Football Club, and to the Parish Club where they played billiards and practised with dumbbells and a punchball, and to greyhound racing.
Anne had talked so much about the gramophone at the Redmond house that Pat had bought a cabinet gramophone for the parlour, stipulating that the family must buy the records.
Now to the  recordings of jazz, dance bands and romantic ballads Joe added his choice of light classical music and operatic arias.
Coming back to the family after being away for so long except for short periods, Joe saw them with new eyes.
Tony had always been serious, always very much the elder brother, checking Terry and Stephen, protective towards the girls, but now he seemed more relaxed.
For the first time Joe realised that Tony had really been lacking in confidence.
Now Helen, loving and admiring him, had given him the confidence he needed to be happy.
Terry and Stephen were not complex characters, but Eileen, always simply considered a tomboy, was sensitive and vulnerable.
It was only now that she was happy with the girls in Littlewood's Pools that Joe realised how much she had been hurt by the cattiness in her previous job.
He was surprised at how grown up Anne suddenly appeared although she was still as light-hearted as ever.
Her friend Sarah, although the same age, was so shy that she appeared much younger.
She often visited the Fitzgerald house and Joe enjoyed discussions about books with her and Anne.
He was pleased to find that both girls shared his taste in music, although they also liked sentimental ballads and dance music.
Terry still made extravagant gestures of devotion to Sarah but to Joe the situation seemed much as it was when he was last at home.
The more he knew Sarah, the more he liked her, but he wondered if she saw him just as Anne's sedate older brother, not part of the flirting casual crowd of her own age group as Terry was.
Anne and Sarah were attending Victor's Academy in addition to the caelidhes now.
Eileen joined with them but before long she met a young man and started courting so dropped the dances.
‘We could do the quickstep and the waltz but we thought we'd join to learn the more complicated dances like the tango  and the slow foxtrot,’ Anne told Joe.
‘And Terry and Stephen seemed to have such a good time there.
Why don't you try it, Joe?’
The system at Victor's Dancing Academy was that beginners were taught on the ground floor, then progressed to the ballroom on the first floor when they were proficient.
Anne and Sarah, Terry and Stephen had all been promoted to the ballroom and Anne said to Sarah, ‘I'm trying to persuade our Joe to come.
I'm sure he'd enjoy it but with us all upstairs he'd have to go downstairs on his own, and he's not pushy like our Terry and Stephen.’
‘I wonder if our John would go with him?’
Sarah said.
‘I was talking about some of the funny things that happen there and Mum said it was the sort of place he should be going to.’
Anne tried to hide her eagerness for the idea.
She still saw John occasionally but felt that he deliberately kept a barrier between them, although the way he looked at her belied his stilted conversation.
Her pride made her speak as formally as he did and always be the one who moved away first.
When Sarah told her that he had been offered and refused a foreman's job, Anne was bitterly angry that he had said nothing about it when they met the previous evening, but now she was unable to resist saying, ‘Yes, that would be great,’ as coolly as possible.
Anne told Joe that Dominic and Desmond had joined Victor's with Terry and Stephen.
‘They got thrown out though,’ she said.
‘You know what they're like.
They played all sorts of tricks while they were learning and then when they came upstairs Victor was doing an exhibition dance, a tango.
He takes it very seriously too.’
‘And what did they do?’
Joe asked, smiling.
‘They'd got a tail off a fox fur and pinned it on the back of Victor's coat just before he started the dance.
It looked so funny, Joe.
Victor holds his neck stiff and keeps a sort of stony expression on his face, sort of supercilious, and this tail was swinging out behind him.’
‘I'll bet he was mad,’ said Joe.
‘Everybody was roaring laughing.
They couldn't help it.
And when Victor realised what they'd done he was furious.
He said he'd had other complaints about them and barred them from the dances.
They don't care though.
They don't care if it snows, that pair.’
‘It's only when they are together, though.
Aunt Carrie said Desmond is a real good worker when he's on his own with his dad, and Dominic seems to behave himself at work,’ said Joe.
‘It's only when they're together they get up to their tricks, but there's no harm in them.’
‘It's lucky that Des showed a flair for Uncle Fred's leatherwork and Dom didn't then,’ Anne observed, and Joe agreed.
‘At least Bridie won't have that trouble with her twins,’ said Anne.
‘Aren't they lovely, Joe, and both so different?
Monica's like a little blonde doll.’
‘I liked the way the older boys each seem to have adopted one of the twins,’ Joe said.
‘Yes, Danny with Monica and Teddy with Michael,’ Anne laughed.
‘It was funny to see it when the babies started to crawl and the boys watched over them.
Always paired off the same.
Lovely to see them all so happy, isn't it, Joe?’
Joe met John Redmond and arranged to go with him to Victor's Academy and both enjoyed meeting and talking as much as the dancing instruction.
Other members of their families were upstairs dancing, and afterwards they all walked home in a group.
Anne found John Redmond beside her, gazing intently at her but only talking about dancing.
What's wrong with him? she thought crossly.
It's one step forward and one back all the time with him.
The way he looked at her made her feel that he was attracted to her, yet always he seemed to draw back.
Always optimistic, Anne felt sure that now that she would see him regularly at the dance, she would soon find out how he 268  really felt about her, but it was not to be.
At the next dance an announcement was made that Victor's would close during the summer months for alterations and re-decorating.
Although Joe had been careful not to criticise Chris to Maureen he felt indignant with him.
All right, the fellow has his troubles, Joe thought, but why has he involved Maureen in them?
If he really loves her he would have kept away from her.
He decided to try to see Chris while he was still free during the day before starting work.
It was rare for a man to shop in a grocer's but Joe could think of no other way to see Chris Murray.
He only knew that Chris worked on the grocery side of the shop, and wondered how he would know him, but his problem was soon solved.
He walked into Lipton's and stood behind a fat woman who immediately said, ‘Ee are, Chris, serve this chap.
I know you fellers don't like waiting.’
Joe saw a man with a pale lined face and thinning brown hair who said quietly, ‘Yes, sir?
Can I help you?’
Conscious that the fat woman had seated herself on a stack of biscuit tins and was listening avidly, Joe said ‘Er, I want to take some groceries to an old lady.
Can you tell me if this is right?’
He had written something on a scrap of paper and folded it over at the bottom.
Within the fold he had written, ‘I am Maureen's brother.
Can I speak to you?’
Even before Chris had unfolded the note he had looked at Joe and some colour had come into his pale face.
‘Tea and sugar's what you want, lad,’ the fat woman said, leaning forward eagerly.
‘Maybe some Bovril if you've got the money.
’ But fortunately another assistant had arrived.
‘Can I take your order, Mrs Jones?’ he said, and as she turned away Chris leaned over the counter and said quietly, ‘I finish at seven o'clock.
Can we meet outside?’
Joe agreed and to satisfy the fat woman who was watching  curiously, bought tea and sugar, a jar of Bovril and a tin of cocoa.
The fat woman said approvingly, ‘That'll be just what she wants, God luv her.
You're a good lad.’
Joe left the shop blushing and as soon as he was safely away from it, gave the brown paper parcel to an old woman who shuffled along, her worn shoes held together with a large safety pin.
She clutched a black shawl above a patched and shabby skirt, her eyes sunken in her gaunt face, and on an impulse he put half a crown in her hand and hurried away.
He was back at seven o'clock, waiting round the corner from the shop.
When Chris came out they turned away down a side street and Chris said immediately, ‘I knew you were Maureen's brother as soon as I saw you.
You're so like her.
I'm glad to meet you.’
‘Maureen doesn't know I'm here,’ said Joe, ‘but she told me all about you.
I know you're going through a bad time, but my main concern is Maureen.’
‘And so is mine,’ Chris said eagerly.
‘I'd do anything to save her from pain.’
‘Then don't you think you should break this off?’
Joe said.
‘What future is there for Maureen in this situation?
She has too much integrity, she's too scrupulous, to have any happiness with a married man.
And I'm not going to stand by and see her hurt.’
‘You're absolutely right, I know,’ Chris said.
‘But we've tried and Maureen can't bear to finish any more than I can.
God knows I tried when I realised what was happening to us, although it was like a starving man walking away from food for me.
I love her.
I never thought it was possible to love anyone as much as I love Maureen.’
In spite of himself Joe was impressed by the earnestness in Chris's voice and said less forcefully, ‘I know it's easy for me to talk, I've never been in this situation, but what's going to happen?
You say you don't want Mo to be hurt, but she's bound to be if this goes on.’
‘What did Maureen say?’
Chris asked.
‘She was very upset at first,’ Joe said.
‘She's troubled about the moral aspect of it, and she's worried about you, but she did say you were happy sometimes,’ Joe admitted.
‘We are,’ Chris said.
‘When we meet at the Landing Stage and have even half an hour together, it just makes life worth living.
It sets us up.
Makes us able to face things.’
‘I don't know much about your life,’ Joe said, feeling that they were becoming too emotional.
‘Maureen seems to think your marriage is a bit of a sham and you were tricked into it.
Is that true?’
‘I might have been,’ Chris said.
‘It's all rather complicated and I don't really know, but whatever happened in the past I have an obligation to look after Beryl.
I made a promise and she needs.
me.
She's an invalid.’
‘What is it, the illness?’
Joe asked.
‘The doctor thinks the condition is partly hysterical, nerves really, but she's not malingering.
He went into her family history and said it explained a lot.
He wants to take her into the Royal Infirmary for tests.’
‘Do you mean she inherited some disease?’
‘No, but her mother and father lived in the same house and never spoke to each other for over thirty years.’
‘Good God!’
Joe exclaimed.
‘You can imagine the sort of childhood Beryl and her sister had.
They were terrified of their father and even more of their mother.
Perhaps she did trick me but, well, I can see why she was frantic and why she's as she is.’
They walked in silence for a few moments then Chris said, ‘Maureen thinks I should hate Beryl.
I do hate her sometimes, very often in fact, but not all the time.
I can see why she's like she is.
My trouble is I can always see both sides, and I see she's what life has made her.’
‘I can understand that,’ Joe said.
‘I'm a bit like that myself.
Always seeing the other person's point of view.’
They stopped at the corner and Chris said anxiously, ‘I'm afraid I've said all the wrong things, seemed to dwell on my side of things.
Believe me, none of this was planned.
Maureen and I — we thought we were just friends.
We slipped into loving each other before we realised what was happening.’
‘I know.
I realise that.’
‘I suppose that's when we should have called a halt, but now I don't know how either of us could bear it.’
‘But it must be done,’ Joe said firmly.
‘I know it'll be hard but it'll be better for Maureen in the long run.
I think you should be the one to do it, Chris.
You might think I've got a cheek to interfere but someone's got to look after Maureen.
She never thinks, of herself.’
‘I know you're right.
I'll do my best,’ Chris said wretchedly.
Joe held out his hand, they shook hands and walked away from each other, Joe feeling that he had done what he could to save Maureen from wrecking her life and suffering years of pain but troubled by sympathy and liking for Chris.
In the excitement of his new job and other things that were happening he pushed the thought of Chris to the back of his mind until he realised that Maureen looked red-eyed and unhappy.
At the first opportunity he drew her aside.
‘What's up, Mo?’ he asked.
‘Why are you upset?’
‘Chris wants us to break up,’ she said, her eyes filling with tears.
‘I couldn't bear not seeing him again.’
‘But it's the sensible thing to do, Mo,’ he said gently.
‘Sensible!
You've never loved anyone or you couldn't say that,’ she exclaimed.
Joe was silent for a moment, holding her close, then he asked what Chris had said.
‘He'd been avoiding me, I knew he had, then I met him and  he said it was time to finish,’ Maureen wept.
‘He tried to say it was too much worry for him but I know him too well to believe that.
Then he said I was too innocent to realise how hard it was for him just to see me for half an hour and a kiss and cuddle.’
‘But, Mo, he's right.
There's no point in it.
No future for you, only pain.’
‘I don't care ,’ she said passionately.
‘Don't you understand, Joe?
I don't care about the future.
Half an hour now with Chris means more than anything in the future:
‘I'm only thinking of you,’ he said.
‘Now you're confused by your feelings, but just think.
His wife could live for years.’
Maureen's head jerked back.
‘You don't think I wish her dead?
Truly I don't.
She's gone into hospital and it might mean she'll get better but I don't wish her harm, Joe, even though she doesn't deserve to be happy.’
‘And what have you decided, you and Chris?’ he asked.
‘He admitted in the end that he was suggesting the break for my sake, and I told him how I felt about that .
We're going to meet tomorrow after he's been to the hospital and take a tram somewhere and talk.
’ She wiped her eyes.
‘I know you think I'm mad, Joe.
If it was anyone else I'd think so too.
I just can't explain how I feel, but we'll have to pray we'll be guided to do what's best.’
‘You have your talk tomorrow night,’ he said, giving her a hug.
‘Then decide to do whatever makes you happiest.
You're not taking anything from his wife that she wants.
She only wants a home.’
Maureen looked at him in surprise and he said hastily, ‘That's how it sounds to me.
And you can tell Chris that's what your brother thinks.’
He laughed and Maureen said, ‘Oh, Joe, I'm so glad you're home.’
She gave him a quick kiss before running upstairs and Joe felt guilty.
I wonder if she'd say that if she knew I was to blame? he  thought.
Talk about fools rush in.
I'll have to learn to mind my own business.
A couple of days later Maureen whispered to him that she and Chris were going to meet as before and just take every opportunity to be together.
‘It'll be the crumbs that fall from the rich man's table,’ she said gaily.
‘But who cares?’
22
Anne had saved a copy of the Daily Sketch to show Joe the photographs of the Coronation of Pope Pius XII in March.
She took it from the cupboard and as usual became engrossed in the other pages of the newspaper.
‘That girl would read tissue paper if there was nothing else,’ exclaimed Carrie who was visiting Julia.
‘Some interesting letters in it, Aunt Carrie,’ Anne said, laughing.
‘I'll take your word for it.
I haven't time to read newspapers,’ Carrie laughed.
The letter that had caught Anne's attention was from a girl who said she earned one pound seventeen shillings and sixpence a week.
She gave her mother fifteen shillings for her keep, and had more than a pound left to spend on herself.
‘Why should I marry and become the slave of a man earning four pounds a week?’ she asked.
‘I prefer to keep my dignity and freedom.’
Anne looked thoughtful.
Was that why John drew back from a closer relationship?
Did he think he should not start courting on a labourer's wage?
Yet he had been offered a foreman's job and refused it.
I give up, thought Anne.
I'll never understand him.
There were two other letters that she thought might interest John, one on the subject of salary being paid during illness, and  suggesting a code of employment, and the other about National Health Insurance.
Joe had become friendly with John Redmond, and they still met occasionally even though the dance hall was closed.
Joe was interested in John's tales of his time in Spain, but when he spoke angrily about the condition of the poor in Liverpool, Joe said mildly that he thought things were improving.
‘Look at the way some of the slums are being cleared and council houses being built in Norris Green and Huyton and other places,’ he argued.
‘Good houses too.
Well-designed.
Wide roads and gardens front and back, and bathrooms and indoor toilets.
Working hours are being reduced in some trades too.’
John disagreed.
‘I'm talking about the very poor,’ he said.
‘People at the bottom of the heap.
Kids who never have a chance, from the day they are born.
My grandad fought for them all his life, but the things you're talking about, they're only scratching the surface.’
Joe had smiled at his vehemence and John had laughed too.
‘I'm on my hobby horse again,’ he said ruefully.
Joe was thinking of John as he walked through to Everton Road one day.
He cut through Reservoir Street into Cresswell Street where on one side high railings surrounded the playground of Steer Street School.
The Pools were working summer hours so although Joe was off it was a school day.
The playground was empty but he could hear the sing-song voices of children reciting tables as he paused by the railings.
A boy ran across from the toilets to the drinking fountain in the centre of the playground from which hung an iron cup on a heavy chain.
He was a bullet-headed child whose shaven hair showed that he had recently been sent to the cleansing station as verminous.
He wore the police issue of corduroy clothes and heavy clogs, but when he saw Joe watching him he struck a pose, one hand  on his hip and the little finger of the other crooked genteelly beside the iron cup.
Joe laughed and the boy grinned back.
Then Joe called him to the railings and handed him sixpence.
‘A tanner!’ the boy said in incredulous delight, ‘Ta, Mister.’
He thrust the coin among his clothes and started to run away but turned back to say, ‘You a Yankee, Mister?’
‘No.
A Liverpudlian like you,’ Joe said, and the boy gave him a thumbs-up signal as he ran back to his classroom.
Joe walked away, smiling.
Not much to worry about there, he thought.
Maybe the lad was at the bottom of the heap, but his spirit had not been broken.
He'll fight his way up or I'm a Dutchman.
How quick the kid had been to recognise that his suit had been bought in New York.
Joe talked about the incident at home and was surprised at Anne's interest and her questions about the boy.
There was a lot of deep feeling in his little sister, Joe thought, in spite of her gaiety and light-heartedness.
Anne and Sarah were true to their pledge to enjoy every moment of their lives after their fright the previous September.
They ignored the talk of war which they heard and concentrated on their pleasures.
In August Sarah was invited to a dinner dance by a commercial traveller who came to the shop.
Anne thought often about Sarah and her sophisticated partner on the Saturday night of the dinner dance.
She knew that Sarah planned to wear a midnight blue taffeta dress, with silver sandals and her mother's diamante clips and fur cape.
Her own visit to the cinema with an inarticulate young man from the West of Ireland seemed very dull by comparison.
She went to Sarah's house on Sunday to hear details of the evening but found her friend very subdued.
She told Anne that the man, Ronald, had sent a taxi to take her to the dance and had bought her a casket of chocolates as they went in, but she had  felt uneasy several times during the evening.
‘It was the way his hands kept roaming round when we were dancing,’ she explained.
‘Then when we were sitting down he kept trying to stand on my foot.’
‘On your new sandals?’
Anne said indignantly.
‘I should have been warned, I suppose,’ Sarah said.
Then, blushing, she told Anne that when they had left Reece's and were walking up Parker Street Ronald had suddenly pushed her into a shop doorway and attacked her.
She had brought the casket of chocolates down on his head and run away.
‘And he seemed such a gentleman!’
Anne exclaimed.
‘You wouldn't have thought so if you'd heard him shouting after me as I ran away,’ Sarah said.
‘And he tried to put his tongue in my mouth and when he pulled me in the doorway he — he unfastened the front of his trousers.’
‘The dirty thing!
’ Anne gasped.
‘Wait until I tell Mabel.
He'll get no more orders in our shop.’
‘I think we should stick to the lads we know in future, Anne,’ said Sarah.
‘It was horrible.’
‘Never mind,’ Anne consoled her.
‘We've got to live and learn.
You'll be coming to the caelidhe tonight, won't you?’
‘I don't think so,’ Sarah said.
‘Nothing to do with last night.
It's just that my throat is sore and I'm aching all over.
You don't mind, Anne?
You can go with the family, can't you?’
‘Yes, of course.
Stay off tomorrow if you don't feel any better and I'll tell Mabel.’
‘I'll go to bed early with some of Grandma's jollop,’ Sarah said.
‘I'm sure I'll be all right tomorrow.’
Anne missed Sarah at the caelidhe .
Part of the fun for them came from commenting on the other dancers and inventing private nicknames for them, such as Big Feet, Sir Galahad, Merrylegs, Dreamboat, and many others.
She hoped to tell Sarah about the caelidhe on Monday, but a  message came that she was too ill for work.
Soon it became clear that Sarah was seriously ill with rheumatic fever and would not be able to work for some time, and another girl, Hetty, was engaged temporarily.
Anne visited Sarah but at first she was too feverish and in too much pain to talk.
Gradually the fever subsided and all the skin peeled from her body, but her limbs were very stiff and the doctor insisted that she should stay in bed, lying flat as far as possible.
After Anne's first visit to Sarah, John had walked home with her.
She had been shocked and upset to see her friend so ill, and suddenly John realised that she was weeping as she walked along with her face averted.
‘Don't cry, Anne,’ he said gently, putting his arm around her.
‘She'll be all right.
The doctor told Mum that Sarah had everything in her favour.
She'd always had good food and warm clothes and a comfortable house to live in.
My gran's a wonderful nurse, too, and so is Mum.’
‘So many young people die, though,’ Anne sobbed.
‘I hear of them from customers, and girls from school….’
‘That's mostly TB,’ John said gently.
‘Believe me, Anne, this is rotten for Sarah now but she will get better.’
He held her close in his arms and wiped her face gently with his handkerchief, and she became calm.
‘I'm sorry,’ she said.
‘I shouldn't be talking to you like this when you're worried about your sister and I'm only her friend.’
‘You're more like a sister to Sarah now,’ John said.
‘Perhaps —’ But he stopped, and Anne was left wondering what it was that he had nearly said.
Sarah soon began to recover, although it was clear that it would be some time before she was completely well again.
Hetty, who had taken her place in the shop, told Anne that two of her brothers who were Reservists had been called up.
Several customers had similar tales to tell although there seemed none of the panic of the previous year, only a feeling that war was inevitable and a preoccupation with details.
Many of the customers had young children and were worried about the plans for evacuation.
Mr Dyson was stocking up with sacks of flour and sugar and boxes of dried fruit, and the shelves high on the walls of the shop carried forty-eight pound jars of jam and mincemeat.
‘We'll be more likely to get killed with them falling on us than anything what the Jerrys throw down,’ Hetty said.
Anne found it difficult to like Hetty, although she had to admit honestly that it was partly because she was not Sarah.
She was a tough girl with an abrasive manner, and seemed very knowledgeable about the seamy side of life.
Anne felt that she considered her a green fool, and Mabel was indignant that Hetty was very ready to accept the ‘perks’ of the job, such as the cakes and bread given to the staff by Mrs Dyson, and the extra money from Mr Dyson, but was always on the alert for any infringement of her rights.
‘We all pull together in this shop,’ Mabel told Hetty.
‘We don't mind doing a bit extra if it's needed.’
‘You're fools then,’ she retorted.
‘No one 's not going to put on me .’
Anne had continued to visit the Misses Dolan frequently even after Margaret had moved in to look after them, and been very happy to see her old friends so well cared for and so delighted with Margaret's lively little girl.
‘It's a new lease of life for them,’ she told her mother, but just before Sarah became ill Miss Louisa suffered a stroke and was confined to bed, and two weeks later Miss Ellen had a heart attack and was also bedridden.
Anne went to offer to help Margaret with the nursing but she said that she could manage.
‘Thanks, Anne, but honestly they make  it so easy.
They'd never ask for anything if I didn't suggest it.
Your mother's been very good sitting with them, and the girl across the road takes Molly to school and brings her home.’
Anne's mother told her that she had suggested that Molly came to them while Margaret was busy with nursing, but she and Margaret had decided that the company of the little girl did the old ladies more good than doctor's medicine.
‘They count the hours until she comes home from school,’ Margaret said.
‘Molly likes having an audience for her tales and it passes the hours for them.’
When Miss Louisa had a second more severe stroke at the end of August, and Miss Ellen another heart attack, both old ladies died within a few days of each other.
Their friends could only feel that death was merciful in the circumstances, especially with war imminent, and that Molly had made the closing months of their lives very happy.
Anne had wondered what would happen now to Margaret and Molly and if they would be allowed to stay in the house, but Margaret confided that the death of the Misses Dolan had solved a problem for her.
‘Not that I wanted them to go,’ she said.
‘I loved them and was hoping they'd have many more years, but I was worried about Molly.
I didn't want her to be evacuated without me, but I'd never have left the old ladies.’
As there were no surviving relatives, Pat arranged the double funeral.
They were later surprised to find that the Misses Dolan had left wills, leaving the house and contents, except for some specific bequests, to Margaret ‘for her devoted care of us’, and a cabinet containing a doll's china tea-set and porcelain figures which she had played with ‘to our darling Molly’.
A mahogany bookcase and the books it contained was left to Anne ‘with gratitude for our long friendship’ and a Sheraton occasional table to ‘our good neighbour Mrs Fitzgerald’.
‘I'm delighted they left you the house,’ Julia told Margaret.
‘You deserve it, but I was afraid they weren't the sort of people to make wills and the house would go to the Crown or whatever they do in these cases.’
‘But I feel bad about it,’ Margaret said.
‘After all, I've only been with them a few years.’
‘Very important years,’ Julia said.
‘And wasn't it kind of them to leave the things to Anne and myself and the nice messages?’
‘At least they're spared all this war business,’ Margaret said with a sigh.
Anne was sad at the death of the Misses Dolan but too much was happening for her to dwell on it.
War now seemed inevitable and she said so to John as he walked home with her.
‘lust when things are getting better in Liverpool,’ she said.
‘More jobs and everyone happier.’
‘But that's the reason for the jobs,’ he said.
‘War's been inevitable for a long time, Anne.’
‘I know it said in the paper that Germany was prosperous because of all the armaments they make, but we don't make them in Liverpool.’
‘Don't we?’
John said.
‘We've been preparing for war for ages.
That Littlewood's Pools building in Edge Lane, and Vernon's new place at Aintree — they were subsidised by the Government and they'll be taken over if there's a war, or rather when there's a war.’
‘But Eileen and Joe work in Edge Lane,’ Anne said.
‘What about them?’
‘They'll probably have something else to do.’
‘What will you do?’
Anne asked.
‘I'll join up,’ he said.
‘I don't believe in war.
I don't think it solves anything — it's only twenty-one years since the last lot and I saw enough in Spain to make me hate it.
Still, Hitler will have to be stopped.’
To Anne it all seemed unreal.
The weather was beautiful and  side by side with the talk of war and the preparations for it, life went on as usual.
The usual scramble for the bathroom in the morning, cycling through the sunny streets to the shop, serving cakes and pies and bread all day, then cycling home and the rush to prepare for a dance or a visit to Sarah.
Mothers of young children seemed to be the people most affected.
Bridie had been in tears when Anne called to see her.
Danny and Teddy had to be evacuated with their school and Bridie had found lodgings as near as possible to where they were going for herself and Monica and Michael.
‘I'm worried about Jack,’ she told Anne.
‘How can I sit there in safety while he's in danger here and fending for himself too?’
‘Jack won't mind that,’ Anne consoled her.
‘He'll just be glad that the kids are out of danger and you ‘re there to watch over them.’
Margaret had taken a living-in job in the country where she could have Molly with her.
‘This evacuation,’ she told Julia.
‘The mothers'll only be skivvies anywhere they get billeted, so I might as well choose my own place.
I'd have taken in lodgers only for the war, but the solicitor advised me just to close the place up for the time being.
It might all be over by Christmas anyhow.’
‘Please God it will,’ Julia said fervently.
Pain had her in its grip again, but with the help of the black bottles of medicine she was able to conceal the worst of her suffering from her family.
This was easier because everyone was so preoccupied with other matters.
Even Maureen, usually so alert to anything that happened to her mother, was lost in her dreams of Chris, and Pat's mind was filled with worries about his business.
Joe watched his mother anxiously but she managed to convince him that she often had these little spells, and there was no need to worry.
On Friday 1 September the customers in the shop talked of nothing but the news that German troops had invaded Poland at five o'clock in the morning.
On Saturday the news was that France and Britain had issued an ultimatum to Germany either to withdraw their troops or face war with France and Britain.
Rain fell heavily all day to add to the misery of people who came in the shop, many of whom had lived through the Great War, and told Anne some of the horrors of that time.
She felt depressed and frightened by the time the shop closed and she was able to go home.
Her mother told her that there had been nothing on the wireless all day except music and news bulletins.
‘God forgive that man,’ she said.
‘To invade those poor people in Poland when they're only just getting over the last war.’
She told Anne that Aunt Carrie had been to see her.
‘She says Shaun and the twins will have to go, but she's more upset about Theresa and the baby.
Theresa's had to get a gas mask for little James but she can't imagine how she'd ever put it on the poor child.
He screamed when he was tried in it.’
‘Doesn't it seem awful, Mum, gas masks for babies?’
Anne exclaimed.
‘Whatever's going to happen to us.’
She was sitting on a stool beside her mother's chair and Julia laid her hand against Anne's cheek.
‘We are in God's Hands, child,’ she said gently.
‘We must just trust in Him.’
‘Oh, Mum, I wish I could believe like you,’ Anne exclaimed.
‘You're young yet, pet,’ her mother said gently, ‘and impatient.
Trust in God, Anne.
Haven't I always taken my worries to Him and found ease?’
On Sunday morning the sun was shining again and Anne felt happier.
The Fitzgerald family went together to early Mass and as they walked home everything seemed normal.
More people had attended the early services, but the day seemed as quiet and peaceful as usual with only the sound of church bells and the occasional ship's hooter breaking the silence.
In the kitchen the meat sizzled in the oven and a big pan of potatoes stood on the hob.
Anne was chopping mint at the kitchen  table and the sound of the Salvation Army band playing as usual on the corner of the street drifted through the open window.
She felt a sense of unreality until all the family except Tony gathered round the wireless set.
The ultimatum to the German Government expired at eleven o'clock and at eleven-fifteen Mr Chamberlain was to broadcast to the nation.
His sad tones prepared them for the news as he announced that German troops had not withdrawn from Poland and consequently Britain was now at war with Germany.
He concluded his speech by saying, ‘God bless you all.
I am certain that right will prevail.’
They were all silent as he finished until Julia said softly, ‘And God bless that good man.
He did all he could to stop this.’
There seemed nothing to be done except carry on with the dinner, but in the afternoon Anne went to see Sarah.
She thought of all the changes the news would make in her life as she walked to Egremont Street and wondered how soon her brothers and friends and dancing partners would be called up.
She had met John briefly on Friday night and he told her that someone had told him that men who fought with the International Brigade would not be accepted in the Forces.
Anne had been indignant but secretly glad that he would not go away until she understood how he really felt about her.
Sarah was distressed when Anne arrived.
‘All men eighteen to forty-one years of age to be called up, Anne,’ she said.
‘That's practically everyone we know.’
‘I know.
Our lads say they'll try to join the Irish Guards.
Terry and Joe and Stephen anyway.
Tony won't be allowed to go because of his job, and Stephen might be reserved too.’
‘Mick's too young and Dad's too old,’ Sarah said.
‘And John-’
‘He won't be accepted, will he?’
Anne said indignantly.
‘just because he fought in the International Brigade.
As though that makes him a traitor!’
She blushed when she realised that Sarah was trying to hide her surprise but her friend only said, ‘I wonder will the caelidhe be on tonight?
Someone said all places of amusement will be closed.’
‘I've no idea,’ Anne said.
‘I can't stay long, Sar.
I met our Tony and Helen as I was coming here and they told me not to be long.
Helen looked excited.
I wonder will they bring the wedding forward?’
‘Edie Meadows’ wedding is next Saturday,’Sarah said.
‘It was planned ages ago and it was going to be a big do, but I don't know what will happen now.’
‘They'll probably go ahead with it,’ Anne said.
‘Unless something happens first.’
The girls glanced at each other then Anne smiled cheerfully.
She picked up the string of the cardboard box containing her gas mask and slung it over her shoulder.
‘I wonder will brides have to carry these along with their bouquets, or even wear them?
I'll suggest it to Helen and Tony,’ she said.
She went out laughing, but her smile vanished as soon as she left Sarah.
Helen and Tony were in the kitchen with the rest of the family when she reached home, all excitedly planning to bring forward the wedding to the first Saturday in October.
It was decided that Eileen and Anne would be bridesmaids and that the wedding reception would be held at the Fitzgerald house, as Helen's mother was a widow and a semi-invalid, and Helen was an only child.
When Tony had left to take Helen home, Joe, Stephen and Terry decided to walk into town.
They all felt restless and unsettled, and met other young men who were walking round the town for the same reason.
Joe met a man he had sailed with, and he told him that a ship had already been sunk by a submarine.
‘Do you think it's true?’
Stephen asked when they left the man, but Joe thought it was unlikely.
‘There'll be all sorts of rumours  flying around,’ he said.
‘We won't say anything at home anyway.’
The next day they found that the rumour was only too true.
The SS Athenia left Liverpool on 2 September, bound for Montreal, carrying nearly fifteen hundred passengers.
Many of them were children being sent to safety in Canada and there were also some Americans returning home.
When the captain heard that war had been declared he told the passengers that they were protected by international law, but he blacked out his ship as a precaution.
When she was two hundred and fifty miles off the coast of Ireland the Athenia was attacked and sunk by a submarine.
Other ships converged to pick up the passengers but many were lost.
The first news said over two hundred, but as more ships brought survivors the number dropped to one hundred and twenty,’ but eighty-five of these were women and children.
The news sent a shock of horror through people who were not yet hardened by the horrors of war, and this was followed by a surge of rage.
‘What sort of people kill innocent little children?’ people asked each other, and men flocked to join up.
23
Many mothers felt the tragedy of the Athenia more keenly because they were upset at the prospect of their own children being evacuated.
For most of the children it was a big adventure, at least when they were setting off with their school friends.
Homesickness and disillusionment came later for some of them.
A teacher friend of Eileen's told her that although most of the mothers were genuinely upset, some were pleased to have their children taken off their hands.
Within a week the evacuation was complete.
Stephen had been told he was needed in the factory which had turned over to war work but Joe and Terry had applied to join the Irish Guards, and Eileen to join the WAAFs.
The Pools had closed down and Eileen and Joe were unemployed but Littlewood's had made arrangements for their staff to sign on for unemployment pay at the Edge Lane office.
‘How will all these people ever find jobs?’
Eileen said to Joe as they joined the hundreds of people streaming up Edge Lane.
‘Easily,’ he said.
‘A lot will go in the forces like us and there'll be jobs in ordnance factories and other places.
Someone said this building will be used by the Censorship people.’
Anne was surprised at how quickly all that seemed so strange became normal.
Remembering always to carry her gas mask, stumbling home through the blackout with only a narrow beam of light from her torch to help her, and going to services in churches lit  only by candles with a blackout curtain over the door.
The blackout precautions were a constant worry to Julia, and Eileen declared that they were an excuse for petty tyrants to enjoy themselves.
Mrs Morton, who had once forbidden Anne to take her daughters on days out, was the Air Raid Warden for the street, and the slightest chink of light brought her screaming and banging on the door.
‘She'll give my mum a heart attack one of these nights,’ Anne said.
‘I never liked her and now I hate her.’
‘Little Hitler,’ Sarah said.
‘Old Ashcroft in our street is the same.
Much use he'd be in an air raid anyway.’
The doctor who attended Sarah went into the forces and the elderly man who took his place discharged her as fit for work.
Sarah was delighted, but others thought she was still not well enough.
‘Silly old fool,’ Mabel said to Anne.
‘God knows what damage she'll do to herself coming back so soon.
We'll have to watch she doesn't do too much.’
It was arranged that Hetty would stay on in the shop for a while, and Sarah would work from ten o'clock until three for the first few weeks.
Helen and Tony were married on the first Saturday in October.
Minnie did not attend the wedding but everyone else thought that Helen was a beautiful bride.
She wore a long full-skirted dress of white organdie and a headdress of artificial lilies of the valley, and carried white roses and carnations.
Anne and Eileen wore blue taffeta dresses and carried pink carnations and stephanotis, and Mrs Redmond had made a suit in darker blue and a white blouse for Julia.
Anne felt her eyes fill with tears as she looked at Helen and Tony kneeling at the altar during their Nuptial Mass: Helen so tiny and ethereal and Tony proud and protective beside her, looking at each other with love.
Will John and I ever be like that?
Anne wondered.
No doubts  or misunderstandings, a courting couple who can show that we love each other?
It seemed unlikely.
Whatever the reason for John's shutting her out, it seemed he was not prepared to tell her about it.
Now that Sarah was back at work Anne was not visiting the Redmond house as frequently, and she missed her visits there.
The more she saw of the Redmonds the more she liked them, particularly Sarah's grandmother.
Mrs Ward's shrewd gaze missed very little and she longed to ask her why John behaved as he did.
Why he seemed so determined to treat her as a friend when all her instincts told her that he was in love with her.
The wedding of Helen and Tony was the last time all the Fitzgerald family would be together.
Stephen and Tony were both in reserved occupations but Joe and Terry were called up into the Irish Guards and sent to Caterham Barracks and a week later Eileen left for the WAAFs.
The air raids and gas attacks that everyone had feared did not take place but Anne and Sarah agreed that it was the small inconveniences of war that were hardest to bear.
‘I'm forever forgetting my gas mask or identity card and having to go back for them,’ Anne said.
‘And this damn’ blackout!
I tore my stockings and cut my knee when I fell over that step, and now this.’
She had misjudged her nearness to a wall, and crashed into it, scraping her cheek and bruising her face.
‘I know.
I'm fed up too but I suppose we shouldn't grumble,’ Sarah said and Anne agreed that other people had worse troubles.
Several families they knew had sons or fathers missing or drowned at sea, and men were being sent to France with the British Expeditionary Force.
Sarah had been able to attend the caelidhes again, warned by her mother that she must not do more than two dances, but she found them greatly changed.
Some of the men they knew had gone home to Ireland to  escape being called up for the forces, but many more were serving in the Army, Navy or Air Force or were at sea with the Merchant Marine.
Letters had arrived from Joe and Terry and from Eileen who was desperately homesick, although she made a brave attempt to write cheerfully.
Terry seemed to have settled in easily to Army life, but although Joe made no complaints it was clear that he missed the family.
‘Terry's all right,’ Anne told Sarah, ‘but I think our Joe feels being away more because he'd just got used to being at home.
Poor Eileen's terribly homesick.
We've all written to her and sent her parcels to cheer her up.’
‘I'll write to her,’ Sarah promised.
‘And send her some hand-cream and cigarettes.
I'm sure the first few weeks will be the worst, for her.’
Desmond and Dominic had joined the Cheshire Regiment and Shaun the Royal Air Force, so the Anderson house seemed very quiet.
‘We'd hardly got used to being without Theresa in the house,’ Carrie told Julia.
‘I don't think Carmel will be at home long either.
She wants to join the WRNS.’
Carmel had shed her puppy fat and was now very elegant.
Julia smiled.
‘She'll certainly suit the uniform,’ she said.
‘Anne and Maureen have said nothing about wanting to join anything yet.
I wish Eileen had waited and they might have gone together like the lads, although God knows, Carrie, I dread the thought of any more going.’
‘The girls are doing their bit here and that's just as important as going in the WAAFs or the WRNS.
Maureen's doing the Civil Defence driving and Anne helping at Atlantic House.
Thank God we haven't been bombed, and Theresa hasn't had to put that gas mask on the baby.’
‘A lot of people are bringing their children back home,’ said Julia.
Bridie came home bringing Teddy and Danny with her as well as the twins.
‘I've never worked so hard in my life,’ she told Anne and Julia when she called to see them.
‘I got the rooms through the billeting officer, in a big house.
The lady who owned it had a cook, a kitchenmaid, and two other maids.’
‘How did you get on with them?’
Julia asked.
‘I didn't get the chance to find out,’ said Bridie.
‘The four of them left to work in a factory that opened near the village.
I think my being there was a put up job between the lady and the billeting officer.
I helped her at first but it was a mistake.’
‘Why?’ said Anne.
‘Because she just took it for granted that I was there to wait on her.
She expected to live her life as though she still had four maids with me doing their work.’
‘What cheek!
’ Anne exclaimed, and her mother said, ‘Did you explain that you couldn't do it, Bridie?’
‘I'd have been wasting my breath, Julia.
She was so arrogant, so sure that nothing must interfere with her comfort, that she wouldn't have listened.’
‘Sarah's brother says the war will level some people down and others up and things will be a lot fairer,’ Anne said.
She blushed as she spoke but Bridie and Julia noticed nothing.
‘If I'd been there much longer she'd have been levelled down all right,’ Bridie said with a grin.
‘With a left hook.’
The weather was still bitterly cold and snow fell on 28 December.
The following day it froze as icy winds swept the country.
‘This wind's coming from Finland,’ a customer told Anne.
‘It's the coldest winter there for fifty years.’
‘It can't be any colder than here,’ a woman said as the thick snow froze ever harder on the icy roads.
‘I put my washing to soak in my dolly tub and it was frozen solid this morning — in my back kitchen!
What a start to 1940!’
‘I'm wearing as many skins as an onion and I'm still  freezing,’ Anne told Sarah.
‘It must be terrible for people in the forces who haven't got a warm house to go back to.’
‘And poor people who haven't got warm clothes,’ Sarah said.
‘Mum's routing out all our spare clothes, and John's taking them to families he knows through Grandad.
I've got layers on in case they've vanished when I get home!’
‘There was something on the wireless about the earthquake in Turkey,’ Anne said.
‘They said it was like Dante's Inferno.
We could do with some of that heat here.’
Later Anne thought over Sarah's words about clothes for people who needed them and felt ashamed that she had not thought of their plight.
What would John think of her?
When she went home she spoke to her mother about it, and she told Anne not to worry.
‘I've given all the outgrown clothes and anything spare to Mrs Bennet.
She knows people who'll make good use of them, especially in this weather,’ she said, and Anne felt even more ashamed that the thought had not occurred to her.
Maureen, who was now the manageress of the wool shop, had warned them that wool might be in short supply so they had all bought plenty of every colour, including a lot of khaki.
Anne and Maureen and their mother had all made balaclava helmets, gloves and scarves to send to Joe and Terry.
They had also sent knitted comforts to Eileen, and Anne had made a balaclava helmet for herself which she wore in bed as well as a pair of her father's socks and a cardigan over her pyjamas.
She had always shared a double bed with Eileen and now missed the warmth of her sister's body beside her.
One night when she was ready for bed she called Maureen in to see her preparations.
‘If I got married do you think this could be part of my trousseau, Mo?’
Maureen laughed.
‘Why?’ she teased.
‘Have you got someone in mind?’
Anne laughed but she blushed too as her mind turned to John.
Day after day the bitter weather continued and sliding and slipping home on the frozen snow through the blackout was a nightmare.
Even when there was a full moon in the middle of January, and bright moonlight to light the way home, the cold seemed to intensify.
Frost was so thick that it looked like newly fallen snow.
Hetty had left the shop to work in an ordnance factory soon after Sarah returned, and now to add to the misery of the two girls, Mabel went to train as an auxiliary nurse and Mrs Dyson's sister came to take charge of the shop.
The girls had always worked quickly and willingly but nothing satisfied Miss Meers and Mrs Dyson seemed afraid to stand up to her.
‘Try not to fall out with her,’ she begged the girls.
‘Albert's got so much on his plate with worries about supplies.
I don't want any rows to make it worse for him.’
Anne and Sarah tried to keep the peace but Miss Meers was a slave driver, and would never allow them to stand still for a moment.
She did nothing to help but constantly chivvied the girls and interfered when they were serving customers.
Before long the woman who cleaned the shop had a row with Miss Meers and left, and she refused to replace her.
‘The girls can do the cleaning,’ she told Mrs Dyson, and Anne and Sarah rarely left the shop before eight o'clock at night.
Anne was concerned about Sarah, who was not fully fit again and looked exhausted.
‘She'll be ill again if this goes on,’ she told John when she met him as she left the house one morning.
Both families advised the girls to complain to Mrs Dyson, and if she did nothing, to leave the shop.
They made their complaint but when Mrs Dyson timidly approached Miss Meers she was so abusive that both girls gave in their notice to leave the following week.
‘We're sorry to go like this,’ they told Mrs Dyson.
‘You've been good to us — you and Mr Dyson — but we can't stand it any longer.’
‘Albert would soon sort her out if it wasn't for his worries,’ Mrs Dyson said.
‘I'm sorry to see you go, both of you.
You've been good girls and worked hard for us, and I wish you luck.’
The girls wept as they left the shop but soon they were eagerly planning to apply to one of the factories such as the Meccano which was now on war work.
‘I don't want to go in any of the women's services after what I've heard from Eileen,’ Anne said.
‘But we'd be helping the war effort just as much in a factory wouldn't we?’
They both applied to the factory in Edge Lane; Anne passed the medical examination and Sarah failed it.
She went to the Labour Bureau and the clerk there told her that she would be passed fit for clerical work and sent her to the Ministry of Defence Office.
Both girls liked their new jobs, although they missed working together.
Anne's job involved shift work, six o'clock until two, two o'clock until ten, and ten o'clock until six in the morning so she was rarely free to go out with Sarah.
Joe and Terry had finished their training and were due to come on leave when Joe was promoted to Lance Corporal and sent on a course, and Terry came home alone.
He looked very smart as he walked down the street in battledress, his boots shining like glass and his shoulders back.
All the family, and especially his mother, were very proud of him.
‘I suppose it's the drill, son, that makes you walk so straight and hold your head back?’ she said.
‘No, Mum, it's the cap,’ he said, laughing.
‘With the peak covering my eyes like this I have to hold my head back to see where I'm going or I'd break my neck.’
‘Mother of God!
’ Julia exclaimed.
‘Could you not get one that was a better fit?’
Terry laughed even more.
‘The peak's cut like this deliberately,’ he said.
‘Wait till you see our Joe.’
Maureen was upset when she heard that his leave was postponed  but the rest of the family thought it better for their mother that she still had Joe's leave to look forward to, so Maureen said nothing.
It was easier for her to see Chris now.
His wife had been admitted to hospital for observation, and then evacuated to a hospital in Shropshire when war was declared.
Chris was now an auxiliary fireman and he and Maureen could meet only when their duties permitted.
For both of them, though, the marriage vow was binding, and although they had been tempted, their relationship was still platonic.
Terry was disappointed to find so many of his friends scattered and his family with so little free time to spend with him.
‘I know Tony's got his own house now,’ he said to his mother, ‘but what's happened to everyone else?’
‘Anne is on this shift work now, and Dad and Maureen have their duties with Civil Defence.
With Dad's being a builder he's showing fellows how to get people out if a house is demolished.
’ She crossed herself.
‘God between us and all harm, Terry, I hope it'll never be needed, but they have to be prepared.’
‘I hope he's not overdoing it, all that after a day's work,’ Terry said.
‘Although Maureen seems to be kept busy driving after work and I think she looks better than she has for ages.’
‘She does, thank God,’ his mother said quietly.
‘It's a pity that Stephen has met this girl who seems to want his every free minute or he'd be company for you.’
‘It sounds as though you don't like Claire, Mum?’
‘Well, I haven't the fondness for her I have for Helen,’ Julia said diplomatically.
‘It must be lonely for you with everyone out so much,’ he said, looking at her searchingly.
‘How do you feel now?’
‘I do very well,’ she said cheerfully.
‘Carrie is often here, and Bridie, and Sarah often comes to see me.
She works ordinary hours so Anne's not often free to go out with her now.’
‘I think I'll go down to see her tonight,’ Terry said.
‘Perhaps we could go to the pictures or something?’
‘Yes, do that, son,’ said Julia ‘That's a good idea She's a lovely girl, and good company for all she's so quiet.’
Terry went to the cinema with Sarah, and to the caelidhe with her and Anne when his sister was free to go, but he found the dance very changed with so many men away from home.
The Fitzgeralds had never known their neighbours very well, partly because Magdalen Street was wide, with houses set back behind small gardens and with steps to the front door, and partly because their big family made them self-sufficient.
Now he found a young man from a few doors away was home on leave from the Royal Engineers and spent some of his leave with him and some visiting relations, as men on leave were expected to do.
Soon it was time for him to return and it was arranged that Anne and Sarah who were both free would see him off at the station.
He walked down to the Redmond house with Anne to collect Sarah and to say goodbye to the Redmonds.
A framed photograph of Sarah, taken on her eighteenth birthday, was on the sideboard.
Terry admired it and asked Sarah if she had another copy, and she said casually, ‘Yes.
I got three.’
Her mother took a folder from the drawer of the dresser and Terry took out one of the photographs.
‘Can I have this?’ he asked.
‘I'd put it up above my bed.’
‘In the gallery?’
Sarah said sarcastically, but he dropped on one knee and put his hand on his heart.
‘Ah, no, alannah, the one and only,’ he said soulfully.
Mrs Redmond laughed but Sarah said, ‘I believe you but thousands wouldn't!’
And Anne said scornfully, ‘Get up, you fool.’
‘'He that calls his brother a fool shall be damned’,’ Terry said, and laughing and teasing they left the house and took a tramcar to Lime Street Station.
At the station he kissed each of the girls in turn, lifting them off their feet and swinging them round, cheered by a couple of other soldiers.
‘Don't be greedy, Mick,’ one of them shouted, but Terry put an arm round each of the girls and kissed them again.
When the train had gone and they left the station Sarah seemed quiet and thoughtful and Anne thought that she was more upset by Terry's leaving than she had shown while he was there.
She slipped her arm through Sarah's.
‘We'll be able to go out a bit while I'm on this early shift,’ she said consolingly.
‘It'll be like old times, won't it?’
Sarah looked startled but agreed.
24
Anne enjoyed her work in the factory.
It was light and clean, and although the parts she was working on were tiny, Anne was neat and dextrous and found the tasks easy.
A cross-section of women were employed.
Some were girls like Anne, former shop workers or clerks, and many had worked in other factories.
The woman on Anne's left at the bench, Ruby, had worked in a factory making doll's eyes, and the girl on Anne's right had never worked before.
She was the indulged only child of wealthy parents and had spent her days playing golf or tennis or riding, and her evenings at various social functions.
Her name was Penelope but she quickly became Penny in the factory.
‘Mummy didn't want me to come here,’ she told Anne in what Anne thought of as a ‘far back’voice, ‘but I didn't want to arse around playing Lady Bountiful I wanted to do real war work.
Daddy has gone in the Army and I can handle Mummy so here I am.’
Anne was surprised and fascinated by Penny's earthy language, delivered in the same plummy voice.
She could hold her own in the bawdy jokes and the double entendres, many of which meant nothing to Anne, although she laughed when the other girls did.
Anne ‘s quick wit made her popular and one of the women said admiringly, ‘You can tell you come from a big family, girl, the way you come out with the wisecracks.’
Everyone talked about boyfriends and husbands, especially those who had both, and Anne was quizzed about her boyfriends.
She talked freely about the many young men she and Sarah had been out with, and sometimes had the women in fits of laughter, but she never mentioned John.
Now that they were working different hours it was not so easy for him to contrive to meet her ‘accidentally on purpose’ as Anne privately called it.
The bitter weather was ending and everyone was feeling more cheerful when Joe was due to come on leave, but shortly before he arrived his mother had a vivid dream in which she saw him lying dead on a battlefield.
She clung to Joe when he came home, and he spent most of his leave with her, though he went with Anne one day to see Sarah and her family, and told Sarah that Terry had her photograph pinned up above his bed.
She seemed embarrassed and muttered that her mother had given Terry the photograph, but before she said any more Mrs Redmond began to ask Joe about the war news.
‘Nothing seems to be happening in France does it?’ she said.
‘Do you think it's true that the Germans are starving, Joe?’
‘No.
I think the Germans are probably being told the same about us,’ he said, smiling.
‘It does seem to be stalemate though, doesn't it?’
‘Perhaps it will all just fizzle out?’
Anne said hopefully.
When Anne and Joe left the house he said, ‘Aren't they a nice family, Anne?’
‘Yes, Terry's a lucky fellow,’ she said.
Joe said nothing for a minute then he said in a low voice, ‘It's quite settled then, Sarah and Terry?
She said her mother gave him that photograph.’
‘Well, she did, but it was when we were going to the station to see him off.
He asked Sarah for the photo and he was doing his usual stuff, you know, hand on heart.
Sarah seemed quiet and  upset when we saw him off anyway.’
Joe had several long conversations with Maureen and she told him that the war had brought happiness to her and Chris.
‘I know it's wrong, Joe, when it's been a tragedy for so many people, but it's made life easier for us.
Chris only has to go to see his wife once a week in that cottage hospital and we're able to meet quite often now.’
‘How long will they keep her there?’
‘I don't know.
I think they've tried to send her out several times but she likes it there so she's managed to discover fresh symptoms and stay on longer.
Chris and I just make the most of each day.’
‘And you don't let scruples about his being a married man trouble you, I hope?’
‘No-o,’ Maureen said doubtfully.
‘Nothing troubles me while I'm with Chris, but sometimes at night I worry.’
‘Don't,’ Joe advised her.
‘It's a sham of a marriage that should never have taken place, and you're doing no one any harm.
Except maybe yourself,’ he added.
‘I worry about your future, Mo.’
‘Don't, Joe,’ she said.
‘Who knows what's in the future for any of us?
It's best to live for the day.’
Joe saw Tony only briefly as he was working long hours.
He and Helen were blissfully happy, alone now in the house where they had lived with Helen's mother for the first few weeks of their marriage.
With the threat of bombing it seemed sensible for Mrs Daly to go to stay with a widowed friend in Rainford, and she seemed to have settled there very happily.
Julia tried to smile as she said goodbye to Joe but she hugged him fiercely.
‘Be careful, son,’ she begged him.
‘I'll be praying for you.’
‘Don't worry, Mum,’ he said, kissing her.
‘The Army aren't going to waste all this training.’
Only a short time after Joe left, the ‘phoney war’ as it was called seemed to be over when Hitler invaded Norway and Denmark.
Later in the month Terry arrived home again on a short embarkation leave, full of stories of the Irish Guards leaving for, he thought, Norway.
‘You should have seen what they took with them,’ he laughed.
‘Any amount of cases of champagne for the officers and crates of beer for the other ranks.’
‘They'll never be able to fight with that inside them,’ his mother said, but Terry only laughed.
‘Take more than that to affect our fellows.’
Terry arrived late on Friday night so on Saturday he went to see Sarah with an invitation to tea from his mother.
Anne had to, leave for work, but Helen and Tony arrived and Stephen's girlfriend Claire.
After tea Sarah and Terry, Stephen and Claire, and Tony and Helen went to the caelidhe and all enjoyed it.
Helen whispered to Sarah that it had been confirmed that she was pregnant and the baby was due in late November.
‘We'll tell Tony's mum after Terry goes back, to cheer her up,’ she said.
‘But we'll keep the news in the family for now.’
Terry had to go back on Sunday night and before he left for the station hugged his mother and looked fearfully into her drawn face.
‘You'll have to eat more, Mum,’ he said urgently.
‘You're only skin and bone.’
‘I'm grand, son,’ she said gently.
‘Godbless you now and guard you always.’
A shadow seemed to have fallen over them, perhaps a premonition that they would never see each other again, and they stared at each other as though trying to commit each other 's features to memory.
Anne and Sarah saw Terry off at the station, and Anne tactfully went to the station bookstall while Sarah and Terry said  goodbye.
Terry was still feeling the sadness of leaving his mother and was more subdued than on their last leavetaking.
Anne came back with cigarettes and chocolate and magazines and said goodbye to Terry, then she said she would wait for Sarah at the entrance and left them together.
‘I'll be going abroad soon,’ he told Sarah.
‘But we'll write often, won't we?
You're my girl now, aren't you?’
Sarah kissed him and nodded, her eyes filling with tears, more in sympathy with the stricken couples around her than on her own account.
The news bulletins were confusing, giving different versions of what was happening in Norway, and the accounts of a debate on the situation in the Commons only confused people still more.
There had been noisy, angry scenes and in the end a member of Chamberlain's own party stood up and said to him, ‘Depart, I say, and let us have done with you.
In the name of God, go.’
Anne was angry and upset when she heard the news, and found that many of the women at work agreed with her.
‘What a way to treat a man who saved us like Chamberlain did,’ Anne said.
‘Leo Amery….
I've never heard of him.
What gives him the right to talk like that to a man like Mr Chamberlain?’
‘Trying to get himself noticed, I suppose,’ said one of the other girls, and an older woman said angrily, ‘Churchill in charge!
Look at the men who got killed in the Dardanelles because of him.’
Less than a week later Churchill made a speech telling the British people that ‘All he could offer was blood, toil, tears and sweat’, and strangely this united the country behind him.
‘I think we might be safer with him,’ Anne said, ‘but I still think that fellow shouldn't have spoken like that to Mr Chamberlain.’
Eileen was home on leave when a letter came from Terry to tell them that he was off to France.
‘He'll soon be home again,’ she comforted her mother.
‘The German Army must be too  spread out, with going into Belgium and Holland as well as Norway and all the other places.’
‘I'm sure you're right, love,’ her mother agreed.
‘Terry seems in good spirits anyway.
You mustn't let this spoil your leave.’
A letter card came from France, but it told them little except that he was well and a letter followed.
The news from France was that the French Army was withdrawing into prepared positions to lure the German Army into a trap, but soon everyone realised that the Germans must be sweeping all before them.
‘If only we knew what was happening,’ women said to each other as news came that Holland had been flooded and then that Rotterdam had been blitzed and the Dutch had surrendered.
‘What in God's name is happening to our lads in France?’ said Ruby whose son was with the British Expeditionary Force like Terry.
But they could only wait and listen for any scrap of news.
Soon it was clear that France was overrun and men began arriving home from the evacuation at Dunkirk.
Desmond and Dominic were among them.
They had managed to stay together although they had lost all their kit and most of their clothes.
‘Did you see anything of Terry?’
Carrie asked them anxiously, and they only said that they had not seen him without saying how ridiculous the question was.
They had both been asked about other men who were in France and answered patiently, knowing that the distraught women who asked them were only clutching at straws.
Sarah had been surprised at Mrs Fitzgerald's calmness but Anne told her that her mother and Maureen spent every possible moment in church and it seemed to comfort them.
Joe came home on leave and this brought even more comfort to his mother.
He told her that he thought Terry was a prisoner of war because he had spoken to men who had returned from his Company.
‘Most of them were accounted for,’ he said.
‘The wounded men were taken off and other fellows saw what happened to the men who were killed.
The ones not accounted for were in  little pockets that were cut off and taken prisoner and I think that's what happened to Terry.’
‘But will the Germans ill treat him?’
Julia said anxiously.
‘No, Mum, they're not allowed to by the Geneva Convention,’ he said gently.
Soon after Joe went back the family were notified that Terry was a prisoner of war, and given the address of the Stalag in which he was held.
Anne ran down to tell Sarah before she left for work, and was surprised by how calmly her friend took the news.
All her concern seemed to be for Terry's family, especially his mother, and Anne was even more surprised when Sarah refused to go back to the house with her.
‘I have an important document I have to finish,’ she said, and insisted on going in to work.
‘After all, it's your celebration.’
Sarah's mother and grandmother had followed her so they stood in a group on the step with several neighbours adding their congratulations.
‘Come in, Anne,’ Mrs Redmond urged, but she said she must get back to her mother.
She was running back home when she turned a corner and met John pushing a handcart full of building materials.
He stopped and Anne excitedly thrust the official letter at him.
‘Our Terry's alive!
He's a prisoner,’ she said joyfully.
‘Good!’ he exclaimed, impulsively flinging his arms round her.
‘That's smashing news.’
Anne hugged him in return, her face bright with happiness.
At last! she thought, looking up at John.
He kissed her and held her close.
‘Oh, Anne, I love you.
I've wanted to do this for ages,’ he murmured.
‘And I love you,’ she whispered, drawing his head down to her and kissing him.
He still held her close, but several people passed and he raised his head and drew away from her.
‘This is too public,’ he said.
‘Can I meet you later and have a talk?’
‘Of course,’ Anne said immediately, ‘I can meet you tonight after work.’
‘We could go in the park,’ he said.
‘I'll meet you where the gates used to be if that's all right with you.’
Anne agreed, disappointed that he had not suggested meeting her outside the factory where her friends could see him, but happy to meet him anywhere.
He looked lovingly into her face, but made no attempt to kiss her again.
Anne could see, though, that he was trembling as he picked up the handles of the handcart and moved away.
She almost skipped home.
Some of her joy was because of the news about Terry, but most was because John had at last told her that he loved her.
After all this time of wondering, when her instincts told her that he was in love with her yet he seemed to draw down a shutter between them so often, it seemed almost too good to be true.
Her mind was filled with memories of his words and his kisses, and thoughts of their coming meeting.
Her mother was surprised that Sarah was not with her but Anne explained that she had important work to finish.
‘She seemed more glad for us than for herself,’ she said.
‘And not very excited at all.’
‘Everyone's different, child,’ her mother said.
‘Sarah's not one for showing her feelings, that's all.
’ She looked fondly at Anne ‘s bright eyes and happy face.
‘Your joy is plain to see, anyway, pet.’
The day dragged for Anne but at last she was free to hurry to meet John.
He was standing by the bushes near to where the gates had once been, and he took her in his arms and kissed her passionately.
‘Thank God for the blackout,’ he said.
‘I don't want us to be seen together, Anne.’
‘Why ever not?’ she exclaimed in surprise and indignation.
‘I'm a bit of an outcast, love,’ he said, ‘and I don't want you to be involved with all that.’
He slipped his arm around her and they walked through the park to sit on a secluded seat there.
‘What do you mean — an outcast?’
Anne asked in bewilderment.
‘Because of my time in Spain.
Ever since I started this job for Stan I've had wisecracks about being an Anarchist, Anti-Christ, the lot.
And it's not only the fellows I work with either.
Other people think that about me too.’
‘But you go to church!’
Anne exclaimed, then blushed.
‘Sarah told me you went to Confession and Holy Communion at Easter.’
‘That doesn't mean anything to those fellows,’ John said.
‘I've told them that I was fighting Franco and he's a Fascist the same as Hitler, but once these fellows get an idea in their heads they just don't listen.’
Anne slipped her hand into his.
‘They're probably jealous too because you got the job through your dad, and then you were offered the foreman's job.’
‘You're probably right,’ he said with a look of surprise.
‘You know, Anne, you can get too close to a problem and not see it properly.
You're very wise.’
‘I'm not often accused of that,’ she said, laughing, and John smiled at her.
‘I know the sly digs are worse after Stan's been at the job.
He has a habit of giving me messages for my dad or asking about the family that doesn't go down well.
Mind you, I earned that foreman's job, but I didn't take it because I knew the problems I'd have had with the men.’
‘You should disregard them.
They're just ignorant,’ Anne urged, but John said stubbornly, ‘Yes, but the fact remains I'm an outcast.
Look at the times I've been refused for the forces.
They don't say it's that, but I know it is.’
‘You'd think they'd be glad to have you because you've got experience in fighting,’ Anne said indignantly.
‘Exactly, but I'm afraid it's the old class system again, Anne.
Fellows from universities who fought in Spain are being given jobs in Intelligence or Censorship where they could do a lot more damage as traitors than a squaddy like I'd be.
They're  appointed by fellows from the same public school or university or club, I suppose.’
‘It's not fair,’ Anne said passionately.
‘I didn't know you had all this to put up with, John.’
‘So now you know why I didn't want you to be known as my girlfriend, Anne.
I didn't want this stigma on you too.
But you knew how I felt about you, didn't you?’
‘I'm not a mind reader,’ she flashed, but then she said more gently, ‘I'm not worried.
I don't see any stigma, as you call it.’
John put his arms round her and kissed her passionately.
‘I love you, Anne.’
‘And I love you,’ she whispered.
They kissed again and John held her so close that she could feel the beat of his heart, but then he said stubbornly, ‘I wanted you to know, love, but I don't want us to be known as a courting couple, not by our families or anyone, until I get this cleared up.’
‘That's ridiculous!
You don't think our families think that about you?’
‘No, but then other people would know.
This must just be between us.
Promise me.’
Anne promised, too proud to plead for others to be told, yet at the heart of her joy there was a small core of resentment that John was dictating terms to her.
Now though she stifled that feeling and gave herself up to the joy of being in his arms and hearing how long and how deeply he had loved her.
It was difficult for Anne to hide her feelings but she said nothing, even to Sarah although she knew that her friend was puzzled by the situation.
They both avoided mentioning John though Anne longed to talk about him.
She met John frequently now by arrangement but always they spent the time where they were not likely to be seen.
Sometimes Anne was annoyed by this unnecessary furtiveness and sometimes  wondered why John had not explained the situation to her sooner and let her decide whether she wished to be involved with him, but she pushed these doubts aside.
Fortunately she was unaware how often in future years she would resent John's making decisions which involved both of them without consulting her.
These were small details now, swallowed up in the joy of knowing that she was loved by the man she had loved silently for so long.
It would have been harder to conceal their happiness at another time, but now everyone was engrossed in weightier matters.
Now that France and the Low Countries were overrun the Germans were bombing shipping in the North Sea and threatening to invade England on 18 July.
Churchill had made a speech after the surrender of France in which he said, ‘We shall fight them in the fields and in the streets, we shall fight them in the hills, we shall never surrender’, and his belligerence was echoed everywhere, not least in the factory where Anne worked.
The news that Hitler was planning to invade Britain was greeted with derision.
Queenie, a woman who worked opposite Anne, had her own theory.
With a fine disregard for geography she decided that if the Germans came by sea they would land at the Pier Head.
‘They'd have to come through Liverpool and they wouldn't get very far, I can tell you.
I'd batter any German who came down our street, and all me neighbours say the same.’
Other women joined in saying, some in detail, what they would do to the German soldiers, and one woman, generally considered to be a part-time prostitute, boasted that she could see off any German.
‘What would you do, girl, give them VD?’
Queenie said, and  there was a general laugh.
Anne was unaware what was meant by VD until Penny enlightened her.
John told her that Mick, who had finished his examinations for Higher School Certificate, had been called up for the Royal Air Force.
‘He says it's because he volunteered when he was too young and now he's been pestering them, but I've been pestering all three services and got nowhere.’
‘It's a pity you can't pull strings,’ Anne said.
‘A fellow at work said the class system here is as bad as the caste system in India.’
‘Yes, and at the moment I'm an Untouchable,’ said John.
‘Some fellows I knew in Spain see this as a capitalist war and don't want to fight.
I don't believe in war myself unless everything else fails but I want to fight now, Anne.
England's my country and I want to fight for it.’
‘You might get your chance if the Germans come here,’ she said.
‘'If the mountain won't come to Mahomet, Mahomet must go to the mountain’,’ said John, laughing heartily.
‘I'll just have to keep pestering and hope for the best.’
25
The eighteenth of July 1940 arrived and passed without any sign of the invasion threatened by Hitler.
There were several air raid warnings in late July but little damage.
In August Maureen's friend Mary Mullen was married and a girl who worked with Anne was married on the same day.
All the talk of weddings made Anne feel downhearted and impatient with the secrecy that John insisted on.
When would they ever marry? she wondered.
When would they even be known as a courting couple?
She knew that John truly believed that he was protecting her by keeping their love secret, but she was becoming frustrated and annoyed about the situation.
She went to watch Mary Mullen's wedding on Saturday as Maureen expected her to be interested, but the sight of their happiness made Anne feel even more miserable.
She felt even worse when she saw Stephen's girlfriend in church, flourishing the engagement ring she had persuaded him to give her before he left to organise a factory in Newcastle for his firm.
Anne tried to appear cheerful when she said goodnight to her mother but she was glad to go to bed to try to sort out her thoughts.
She tried to decide whether she should swallow her pride and tell John how she felt or whether to just go on and hope for the best.
She slept badly and felt tired and depressed all day on Sunday even though she saw John briefly late in the evening.
She was working on the two o'clock to ten o'clock shift at the factory and on the Tuesday morning was up early to do some ironing, then she began to prepare the midday meal for herself and her mother and father, and Aunt Carrie who was visiting them.
She went listlessly to answer a knock on the door and was amazed to see John there and to be swept into his arms.
‘They've come, love,’ he said jubilantly.
‘Two letters.
One from the ordnance factory and one from the Army.
Both on the same day.
Isn't that typical?’
‘What — what will you do?’
Anne stammered.
‘Which-?’
‘Oh, the Army.
I'm sure they have priority and it's what I want anyway.
I'll have to notify the factory,’ John said excitedly.
‘Oh, Anne, I feel free now, free to ask you to marry me.
Will you, Anne, will you marry me, love?’
‘Yes, I will,’ she said quietly and John held her even closer and kissed her passionately.
‘Gosh, I feel so happy,’ he said.
‘I love you, Anne.
I've waited so long for this.’
It's too much, too much, she thought, pressing her face against John's.
The change from misery to this singing happiness was almost more than she could bear.
‘Can we get engaged then?’ he was asking, and she nodded, unable to speak.
‘Can we go right away now for the ring?’ he said, but there was a sound upstairs and Anne lifted her head.
‘Dad's home for his dinner.
You'll have to ask him,’ she said, looking at him with delight.
Pat Fitzgerald appeared and began to walk down the stairs and John met him halfway down.
‘I've got my papers for the Army, Mr Fitz.
Can Anne and I get married?’ he said eagerly.
‘Can we get engaged today?
‘Aye, if you want to, lad,’ Pat said, his calmness such a contrast to John's excitement that Anne began to laugh.
She felt as though she was floating on air.
They went into the kitchen and John said to Julia, ‘I've asked Anne to marry me.
Will you give us your blessing, Mrs Fitz?’
‘Indeed I will, and gladly,’ she said.
‘Sure I couldn't wish for a better husband for her.’
John bent and kissed her, and Carrie kissed and congratulated Anne, saying, ‘You never know the minute!’
‘There's nothing sudden about it,’ John said.
‘I've been getting a lot of flak about fighting in Spain and I didn't want Anne to get any.
We've been in love for a long time — well, I have anyway.’
‘And so have I,’ she said.
‘I suppose that's why the other lads got the brush-off then?’
Carrie said, laughing, and Julia smiled at them.
‘Ah, yes.
Anne was a good child but terrible stubborn.
If she once got an idea in her head you'd never move it,’ she said.
‘The blessing of God on you both anyway.’
Anne and John went immediately into town, and chose a three-stone diamond engagement ring, then went to see John's mother and grandmother who were delighted at their news.
Anne had to leave for work for two o'clock but she proudly displayed her ring to her friends and they all sincerely wished her happiness.
Anne managed to change to the early shift, six until two o'clock, so she had the rest of the day and evening to spend with John.
He was due to report a week later, but he left work immediately and they spent every possible moment together.
John told Anne something of the abuse he had suffered.
‘It wasn't just the fellows at work, although they were the worst, but the word had gone round.
I was refused for the Rescue Service, you know.’
‘But why, John?’
‘Because they're fools,’ he said.
‘Some of them are so thick they thought I was fighting against England in Spain.
’ He laughed ruefully.
‘And of course I always had to argue instead and make things worse.’
‘Never mind.
It's all over now,’ she said.
She wondered why John had not been more open with her but now she felt that she understood his situation better and they spent a blissful week together before he left.
The air raids were becoming heavier and more frequent.
Eileen came on leave on 28 August and it was fortunate that she was with her mother.
There was the heaviest raid so far, lasting four hours.
Anne was on night shift, Maureen was now driving an ambulance at night, and Pat was using his skill as a builder to rescue people from bombed houses.
Mill Road Hospital was one of the many places hit and Maureen was injured there, fortunately only slightly, and taken to another hospital.
Later Sarah and her mother came to see Julia, and she told them that Joe was at Dover and Anne had written to reassure him about them.
‘He's worried about us,’ she said.
‘Lord Haw Haw said nearly everyone in Liverpool was dead and the few left were starving.
Not that anyone believes that man.’
‘He's a fool,’ Mrs Redmond said.
‘I believe he said weeks ago that Hitler would be in Buckingham Palace and he'd be in Knowsly Hall.
I hope it keeps fine for them.’
‘Joe won't hear anything from the BBC News,’ Anne said.
‘Everyone gets annoyed at work because there's always a lot about the raids on London but when Liverpool gets it they say ‘the North West’.’
‘Isn't that a good thing for people far from home, love?’
Mrs Fitzgerald said in her gentle voice and Anne smiled and agreed.
Sarah had told Anne that her grandmother's lodger Josh Adamson had died of a heart attack at the start of the raid, but  they said nothing of this to Julia nor of the casualty lists which were posted up containing many names of people they knew.
Maureen soon recovered and returned home, and letters came from Terry who seemed less downhearted than they expected.
Stephen and Claire had become engaged before he went to Newcastle, but the engagement was short-lived.
All the family felt that Stephen had been hustled into the engagement by Claire, who was a hard, devious girl, and were relieved when it was broken when he returned from Newcastle.
Helen and Tony had been delighted when Helen became pregnant, but she had suffered a miscarriage in June and although always hopeful, had not become pregnant again.
‘Perhaps it was all for the best you lost the baby, Helen,’ her mother said when Helen went to visit her.
‘But I don't think you should stay in Liverpool, with or without a baby.’
Helen pressed her lips together for a moment then said quietly, ‘My place is with Tony, Mother,’ and left as soon as she could.
The feeling of comradeship now in Liverpool, the feeling that everyone was in it together and helping each other, was something that her mother would never understand, she felt, nor her grief for the baby.
The raids were increasing in number and volume.
Maureen had returned to the wool shop and told Anne that her customer who knew the O'Neills had said that Kathleen had been injured on her head and shoulder by shrapnel and been taken to hospital in Winwick several miles outside Liverpool.
‘What about her mother and Cormac?’
Anne asked, but Maureen said she thought Kathleen had been hit returning from work.
Anne felt guilty that she had not attempted to see Kathleen after Ella's injury.
I was daft to think that was Cormac's doing, she thought, but it was partly the reason why she had not tried to see her friend.
‘Are they sure it was shrapnel?’ she asked Maureen who looked surprised.
‘Of course.
I was nearly hit by some myself one night.’
And Anne felt foolish.
In October and November the raids were taking place nearly every night, but in spite of the disturbed nights almost everyone turned up for work next day.
‘It's worse than having a teething baby,’ Ruby grumbled.
‘I'm up and down the stairs and in and out of the bloody shelter like a hen on a hot griddle.
I think I'll stop going to the shelter.
After all, if it's got your name on it you'll get it anyway.’
After the night of 28 November even Ruby changed her mind.
She had gone into a street shelter soon after the raid started at seven o'clock, and incendiaries, heavy bombs and parachute mines had fallen on the city and suburbs.
The street shelter had been hit and Ruby had been dug out to see a crater where her house had been and fires burning fiercely everywhere she looked.
‘It was like them pictures of Hell we used to get in Sunday school,’ she told the other women when she returned to work two days later.
She wore a large dressing over one eye and her hands were daubed with gentian violet, but she insisted that she had been lucky.
‘Nineteen people in our street killed and them poor souls in Durning Road School.
Three hundred, I got told.’
A parachute mine had fallen on the shelter beneath the school, and various figures were given for the number killed there.
In addition to those who usually sheltered there were the passengers from two tramcars, and people from a shelter that had already been hit.
It was the worst raid so far but Maureen who had not yet returned to driving was with her mother in the shelter and Anne, who finished work at ten o'clock, had reached home, dodging from shelter to shelter.
Wardens had yelled at her, she had stumbled over rubble and hosepipes, her path lit by the glare of hundreds of fires, she had been terrified by the throbbing of the engines of the bombers overhead and the crump of bombs, but she had run on.
She felt sure that one of those burning houses was her own and fear for her mother drove her on.
‘Oh,Mum ,’ she said, stumbling down the cellar steps and falling to her knees beside her mother.
‘I thought our house had been hit.’
‘We're quite safe, Anne,’ Maureen said, looking at her warningly.
‘Dad reinforced all this cellar.’
‘Indeed you wouldn't find better anywhere,’ said Mrs Bennet who had joined them in the cellar with her daughter.
‘Even a flush WC in the old washhouse an ‘all.
He done a good job.’
Julia lay on her bed smiling at them, seeming unconcerned about the tumult outside, with her Rosary beads slipping through her fingers.
But she welcomed Pat with tears of relief when he returned home after the eight-hour raid.
‘How was it, Dad?’
Anne whispered as she took his dust-covered clothes to shake in the yard.
‘Awful, girl, awful,’ he said.
‘But we tunnelled through and got two little kids out alive.
Saved by a piano falling and holding up a beam, thank God.’
A few days later before Anne went to work her mother asked her to go for bread.
Anne took a tea-towel from the dresser drawer.
She paused with it in her hand.
How quickly what had seemed strange had become normal, she thought.
Taking a cloth to wrap bread because of the shortage of paper, and queuing for things bought so casually before the war, like hairgrips and torch batteries.
Ruby had told of buying a pair of corsets and having to carry them along Church Street unwrapped.
‘I tried every way to hide  them,’ she said.
‘In the end I held them against my side under my arm with the suspenders dangling down and some woman said, ‘Eh, girl them suspenders look as if you should be milking them.’
And me thinking I was hiding them!
I felt ashamed.’
It was strange, too, Anne thought, that everyone got on with their normal lives, in spite of the constant raids and disturbed nights, and had become used to seeing servicemen in so many different uniforms thronging the streets and the cinemas, and in the public houses she was sure, although she had never been in one.
She and Sarah had been to the cinema the previous night and when the air raid warning sounded some people had left but most stayed.
She and Sarah had been sitting under the balcony and when the warning was given they moved forward but continued to enjoy the film in which John McCormack sang Believe Me If All Those Endearing Young Charms and The Dawning of the Day.
When the All Clear was given they walked home, recalling the dances and parties at which those songs had been sung and Anne thought Sarah was near to tears.
I suppose she's thinking of Terry, she thought, and squeezed Sarah's arm, although Believe Me If All had been Joe's favourite rather than Terry's.
Eileen came home on leave at Christmas and Stephen who had returned to Newcastle also came home.
Their mother seemed to rally as she always did for her children but no matter how she tried to conceal it, it was clear to all of them that she was near the end of her strength.
Maureen decided that while Eileen and Stephen were home, the family should decide whether to tell Terry how ill his mother was.
Helen and Tony came and Sarah was asked to come to a family conference.
The young people gathered in the parlour.
For a few moments there was a general discussion then Tony  turned to Sarah.
‘What do you think?
Would it be better to warn Terry so it's not too much of a shock to him if anything happens to Mum?’
Everyone waited for her opinion but Sarah said hastily, ‘I don't know.
I think you all know him better than I do.’
They all looked surprised but Helen said firmly, ‘It's not fair to put the decision on Sarah.
I think we should vote on it and ask Joe's opinion too.’
‘I have written to Joe about it,’ Maureen said, ‘but there hasn't been time for a reply yet.’
Anne thought Helen was right and Maureen said that she had been told when in hospital that patients often had remission in the disease their mother suffered.
‘Sometimes months or even years when they're not cured but don't get any worse.’
‘And Terry wouldn't believe it if we did warn him,’ Tony said.
‘He'd pretend it wasn't happening and it would still be a shock to him.’
They decided not to warn Terry when they wrote to him, and later Tony said quietly to Sarah, ‘I wasn't criticising Terry when I said that, Sar.
It's just the way he is.’
‘I'm sure you're right,’ she said.
‘Anyway, we couldn't decide without Joe.’
‘That's true,’ he agreed, and Anne who had joined them said consolingly to Sarah, ‘Maybe the war will be over soon anyway, and Terry will see Mum.’
‘Let's hope so,’ she said, and told them that her parents were furious because Josh, her grandmother's lodger, had left all his money and possessions to Kate and not even mentioned her grandmother who had looked after him for years.
‘What does your grandma say?’
Anne asked.
‘She said she doesn't want his money but she hopes it won't be the ruination of Kate,’ said Sarah.
‘It's about a thousand pounds.’
‘Whew,’ Anne said.
‘I wish someone would ruin me with that sort of money.’
Afterwards she felt that Sarah had deliberately steered the conversation away from Terry, and recalling her remark that they knew him better than she did, Anne felt uneasy without quite knowing why.
Joe came on leave in January, but Anne remembered little of it when he went back.
She had been moved to a different room in the factory and was doing more intricate work which involved the use of a micrometer and much greater concentration.
She was on day work now but working very long hours, often increased by overtime, and was very tired.
The work was satisfying but Anne missed the friends she had made and the free and easy atmosphere of the large room, and the jokes and the singing.
Her present working environment was very quiet.
She felt downhearted for another reason too.
She had been unable to visit Kathleen O'Neill but had heard that she was still in hospital and receiving treatment for the wound on her head.
The day before Joe came home Anne heard the shocking news that Cormac O'Neill had hanged himself and his mother had found his dead body.
The shock had been too much for her precarious hold on sanity and she had been removed to Rainhill Asylum in a strait jacket.
It was just one horror in the midst of many taking place daily but it affected Anne deeply.
She had always pitied Kathleen and never liked Cormac, who had not tried to protect his sister, but now as she lay awake at night she saw him for what he was: a pitiable victim of his mother's obsession.
How long had Mrs O'Neill been mad?
Surely this was something that had been threatening for years?
Could nothing have been done?
Why had that doctor and priest not forcibly removed Cormac and Kathleen?
What had finally driven him to do this dreadful thing?
Anne wept for him and for Kathleen, who must be told the news, and decided that she must definitely find out where Kathleen was and visit her.
Anne managed to discover that Kathleen O'Neill had been moved to a small hospital near St Helens in Lancashire and she travelled there to visit her on Sunday.
She expected to find Kathleen prostrated by the tragedy in her family, but although she spoke sadly of Cormac's wasted life and her mother's collapse, Kathleen seemed remarkably untouched by the tragedy.
She gave Anne potted biographies of all the other patients and told her about her own treatment.
‘A tiny fraction deeper and I'd have been dead,’ she said.
‘I was very lucky, Doctor Boland said.’
‘Gosh, and that was shrapnel?’
Anne said.
‘I've often seen it falling when I've come home through a raid, from that Anti Aircraft gun.
So you could have been killed by one of our own guns?
Red hot too, isn't it?’
‘I don't remember anything about it,’ said Kathleen.
‘Not until I woke up in hospital.’
They said no more about her family, but Doctor Boland dominated Kathleen's conversation and when Anne left she felt much happier about her friend.
When Anne had tentatively broached the subject of where Kathleen was to go when she left hospital, she said, ‘Doctor Boland says I've not got to worry about that.
I may train as a nurse.’
Anne was never miserable for long, and the visit to Kathleen, added to an apparent halt in her mother's disease and long loving letters from John, soon made her feel happy again.
John was stationed near Cambridge and said in his letters that he liked the men he was with.
‘We have good discussions,’ he wrote, ‘but there are none of the snide comments about ‘my Russian mates carving up Poland’or ‘my Commie friends getting more than they bargained for’when Russia invaded  Finland, that I had on the building job.’
Mrs Bennet came every day to look after Julia now and Bridie and Carrie came nearly every day to visit her.
Bridie's husband Jack was now in the Merchant Navy and she and Carrie exchanged news about their families as they sat with Julia who lay quietly letting her Rosary beads slip through her fingers.
Finally Carrie said guiltily, ‘Here we are, Julie, going on about all our worries and you never say a word about yours.’
‘I'm very lucky,’ she said gently.
‘Tony and Stephen are still at home and Terry's safe out of it all in Germany, Joe's safe too training the young lads, and so is Eileen.
I'm well blessed.
I have Maureen and Anne with me still.’
‘Maureen's doing a grand job driving that ambulance,’ Carrie said.
‘And Anne firewatching now on top of that hard job.
They're all doing their bit.’
‘And you in the WVS and Bridie helping in that canteen,’ Julia said with a sigh.
‘Sure there's only me that can do nothing but lie here and pray for all of you.’
‘And that's the best of all, Julie,’ Bridie exclaimed.
And Carrie said, ‘Yes, it's a comfort to everybody to know they have your prayers.’
Julia smiled at them and Carrie said suddenly, ‘I didn't want to upset you, Julie, but I've been dying to tell you.
Our Minnie and Dympna have flitted!’
‘Flitted!’
Julia and Bridie exclaimed in unison.
‘Yes.
I went to the house and got no answer then the woman next door told me that Brendan came in a posh motor car.
He put four big suitcases in the car then Minnie and Dympna got in and he drove off.’
‘Perhaps he's taken them for a holiday?’
Julia suggested.
‘No, the neighbour said she heard a noise and thought Minnie was being burgled so her son got through the window and let her in.
I think she just wanted a good nose round.
The house was  stripped bare except for the furniture, and I suppose Lord Muck will provide that wherever he's taken them.
They've scarpered all right, Julie.’
‘Surely to God she wouldn't go without a word to her own family!’
Julia exclaimed.
‘She's always been deep,’ Bridie said.
‘And for all the way she bullied other people, she's always been under that fellow's thumb and so has Dympna.’
‘Perhaps she'll write to us,’ Julia said, still unable to believe that her sister would just disappear.
‘I wouldn't like to be hanging until she does,’ Carrie said grimly, then noticed that Julia looked upset and said quickly, ‘No, I think you're right, Julia.
I'm sure she'll write and explain why they went off like that.’
‘And whatever kind of a rogue the quare fella is, he's a good son to Minnie, isn't he?’
Bridie said, and Julia looked happier.
The air raids continued, increasing in number and intensity.
Maureen's friend Chris was now a full-time fireman and she worried about him constantly.
She was still working in the wool shop by day and driving an ambulance at night.
During a raid in March she heard that a bomb had dropped on a burning building, killing six firemen and injuring others.
She was frantic to know more but her own ambulance was involved in an accident and she could do nothing until the end of her duty to learn whether or not Chris was involved.
Fortunately he was safe on that occasion, but Maureen's fears for him increased.
Their duties made it difficult for them to meet frequently but they seized every opportunity to be together and their love grew stronger every day.
Chris's wife was now in a different hospital in Shropshire, and seemed content to stay there.
He and Maureen decided to live for the day and not worry about what the future would bring for them, good or bad.
All the family thought that in spite of Maureen's arduous lifestyle, she looked better and happier than she had for several years.
26
John came on leave in April.
In contrast to the previous month there were few air raids on Liverpool in April and although the warning sounded several times, no bombs were dropped until the twenty-sixth of the month.
‘Perhaps this is the end of it?’
Anne said.
‘I know Belfast has just been bombed, and London, but maybe Hitler's coming to the end of his resources.
This might be the answer to the Day of Prayer.’
John smiled at her.
‘We'll hope so anyway,’ he said.
He had evidently made up his mind not to argue with anyone while on leave, and Sarah told Anne that his family thought that she was a good influence on him.
Anne managed to get a few days off work during his ten-day leave, and as he had few relatives to visit, they were able to spend blissful hours alone.
They went to Chester and wandered round the medieval Rows, then took a rowing boat on the River Dee.
Trees were bursting into leaf and birds singing as they wandered along the banks of the river, their arms entwined round each other.
‘'Sweet lovers love the Spring’,’ John murmured, and Anne looked at him with surprise and delight.
She had been disappointed that he showed no love of the poetry and books which meant so much to her, only reading about industrial history and dry facts and figures.
‘That's the first time I've heard you quote poetry,’ she exclaimed, and he laughed.
‘We sang it as a song in Junior School,’ he admitted, but Anne was still happy that he had thought of it.
Another day they went to take flowers to the grave of John's grandfather, Lawrie Ward.
‘I wish you had known him, Anne, and he'd known you,’ John said.
‘You'd both have got on like a house on fire.
He was a lovely man.’
‘I feel I do know him,’ she said.
‘I've heard so many stories about him and all the good he did, and my dad was delighted when he found I was working with Sarah because she was his granddaughter.’
‘I know there were crowds at his funeral,’ said John.
‘I just couldn't stand it.
I went off.
I realise now it was very selfish of me.
It wasn't fair to my mum or my grandma.’
‘I'm sure they understood,’ she comforted him.
‘Sometimes I think they were too understanding,’ he said.
‘I got away with far too much.
Dad wouldn't have let me, but he held back because he didn't want to upset Mum and I took advantage.’
‘They're pleased with the way you've turned out now anyway,’ Anne said.
‘They're all very proud of you.’
‘Oh, Anne, I don't deserve you,’ he said impulsively, flinging his arms round her and kissing her.
‘I wish we were married now.’
‘So do I,’ she said, drawing his head down and kissing him.
‘Do you think we could get married on my next leave in September?’ he said.
‘We don't need a big fuss, do we?
Or if I go abroad before then will you marry me on my embarkation leave?’
‘Of course,’ she said, and John asked if her parents would object.
‘No.
Things are different now,’ she said.
‘Before the war people were engaged for years to have time to get a home together, but nobody waits for that now.’
‘When this is over we'll have a nice home, Anne, I promise,’ he said, as she slipped her arms round his neck and kissed him again.
‘I don't care, John, as long as we're together,’ she said, and he kissed her passionately.
Both their families were pleased about their plans to marry in September, but John had to go back before any details were discussed.
He left on Thursday 1 May and there was a comparatively light raid that night, but it was the start of eight days and nights which would never be forgotten in Liverpool.
For Anne it was not only the ordeal of the air raids but even more the terror that her mother would die on the bed in the cellar, with only Anne of all her family with her.
Julia's illness had suddenly become worse and she was in great pain.
Maureen as an ambulance driver and Pat as a rescue man were badly needed, but Anne's firewatching at a large store was less essential and it was decided that she would stay with her mother.
‘Let them that owns the shop watch over it,’ Mrs Bennet said, ‘instead of skulking in Southport while the likes of youse risk yer lives for it.’
Many people who were not needed were leaving Liverpool each evening to sleep in the woods at Huyton or at various halls and cinemas on the outskirts of the city, but Julia was too frail to be moved.
On the Friday night Pat carried his wife to the cellar when the raid started, then he and Maureen went on duty.
Mrs Bennet and her daughter Jinny arrived a little later.
‘I feel safer here than anywhere,’ Mrs Bennet said, ‘and more comfortable.’
Her words scarcely registered with Anne as she knelt beside the bed where her mother lay, perspiration running down her white face and small moans escaping her as she was fiercely gripped by pain.
Anne felt helpless, only able to wipe her mother's face and grip  her hands, praying for some relief for her.
Her doctor was busy ministering to the injured and dying victims of the bombers and could not be called to help Julia.
At some stage during the night an ARP man brought some of the neighbours to the shelter.
‘They were in a street shelter and it got flattened,’ he said.
‘Three dead but these were just shocked.
Will you look after them?’
Mrs Bennet and Jinny took charge of the two women and two small girls, making tea for them and wrapping them in blankets.
While Jinny served the tea Mrs Bennet brought a tall clothes maiden from the wash house and draped a sheet over it to give Anne and her mother some privacy.
The following day Maureen brought out a black bottle of medicine from the cupboard in her mother's room.
‘I was saving this until Mum was desperate,’ she said.
‘But I think she needs it now.’
‘What is it?’
Anne asked, looking curiously at the tall black ribbed bottle.
‘It's some stuff Mum used to get in the market, but this is the last bottle,’ said Maureen.
‘I think there's opium in it, Anne, and if she took it too often it wouldn't help when she really needed it.
I'll give her a dose now, a small dose, and if you have to give her some tonight make sure it's a very small amount.’
‘I'll be glad to have something to give her,’ Anne said.
‘I felt so helpless last night.’
The air raid began at six-thirty and continued until about five o'clock on Sunday morning.
The throbbing of the engines of hundreds of bombers overhead, the clatter of the Anti Aircraft guns, the crump as thousands of high explosive bombs, land mines and parachute bombs found their targets and buildings collapsed, were a background to the terror Anne felt that her mother was about to die.
At about two o'clock there was an explosion so close that Anne  threw herself across her mother to protect her.
The house seemed to be sucked in then out again and the foundations shook, but it was solid and well-built and it stood firm, although there were crashes and roars from immediately overhead.
Julia managed to raise her hand and weakly pat Anne's face.
‘Don't be frightened, child.
Trust in God,’ she whispered through bloodless lips, and Anne wept that even now her mother was trying to comfort her.
She had given her a tiny dose of medicine just before the explosion, and now Julia closed her eyes.
Anne watched her anxiously, not sure whether she was asleep or unconscious.
Her mother seemed scarcely to breathe as she lay immobile, and Anne felt a tremendous surge of relief when the cellar door opened and Helen came down the steps.
‘Helen, what happened?’
Anne exclaimed as she came into the.
light and they saw that her head was bandaged and her right arm strapped across her chest.
Her WVS overall was torn and bloodstained but she smiled reassuringly at Anne.
‘The rest centre was hit,’ she said.
‘And I couldn't do any more to help so I came here.’
‘Oh, Helen, I'm so glad to see you!’
Anne exclaimed.
‘I don't know whether Mum's asleep or….’
Helen bent over her mother-in-law.
‘Don't worry, love,’ she said to Anne.
‘It's a kind of sleep, and she doesn't feel pain while she's like that.
Has she had anything to ease her?’
Anne showed her the black bottle.
‘Maureen told me to give her just a small dose, and I did,’ she said.
‘And, oh Helen, Mum said:
‘Don't be frightened….’
She could say no more and wept bitterly.
Helen comforted her and Anne wiped her eyes.
‘I'm ashamed carrying on like this after what you've been through,’ she began, but suddenly there was another tremendous crash and roar.
The lights went out and Mrs Bennet said, ‘Bloody hell.
I was just going to make a cup of tea, and now the lecky's gone.’
There were candles in readiness and Anne quickly found some  and lit them.
Her mother's eyes were open and Helen bent over her and reassured her.
One of the children was crying loudly and Mrs Bennet said, ‘Ee are, queen, here's a biscuit I just found in me pinny pocket.’
She held a candle aloft and saw the other child looking at her with eyes like saucers.
‘And here's one in me other pocket, girl.
She got one for crying and you can have this one for not crying.’
‘Isn't it exciting, just having candles?’
Helen said gently to the little girls.
‘I wish I'd had time to make that tea,’ Mrs Bennet said.
‘We could do with a cup, especially you, girl.’
Helen smiled.
‘I'm all right,’ she said.
‘Someone gave me one at the First Aid Post.
I wish Tony was here.
He's working a double shift though.’
‘He'll be all right in Edge Lane,’ said Anne.
‘It seems to be mostly round here, doesn't it?’
‘It's everywhere, Anne,’ Helen said.
‘The whole city seems to be on fire, and across the river too.
The ships and the docks.’
Then as she saw their startled eyes in the light of the candles, she added hastily, ‘Of course it's hard to tell.
It's probably scattered incendiaries.’
‘Jeez, I could do with that cup of tea,’ Mrs Bennet said, putting her hands over her ears to shut out the tumult above, and Anne decided to go upstairs to see if the gas was still on.
She picked up a candle and ran nimbly up the steps and into the kitchen.
There was no need for the candle.
The room was lit by a red light from the burning houses behind it as Anne crunched over broken crockery and plaster.
The window frame hung drunkenly across the cupboard in the corner with a piece of glass held together by the criss-crossed brown paper hanging down from it like a flag.
She looked for Patrick's photograph and saw it under the sofa.
The glass was cracked, but it was otherwise intact and Anne looked .
at the smiling face of her dead brother.
‘Oh, Patrick, pray for us,’ she whispered, holding the photograph close.
She shivered.
Would her mother soon be with Patrick, the child she had never ceased to mourn?
She looked round the disordered kitchen.
The dresser drawers fallen out and spilled, the dishes from the shelves above in fragments on the floor, the chairs thrown about as though by a madman, the table upended and even the black kettle from the hob lying among the debris.
Suddenly Anne thought of the kitchen as it had been throughout her childhood, a warm, secure and loving haven.
She remembered when she was the only child at home, playing with her dolls on the rag rug before the fire and listening to the purring of the kettle on the hob, her mother singing as she worked in the back kitchen, waiting for the others to come home.
Her father and Maureen!
A stab of fear went through Anne as she thought of them out there in that inferno.
What was happening to Aunt Carrie and to John's family?
Bridie, she knew, had taken the children out to sleep in a church hall in Ormskirk so they would be safe.
What would John and Eileen and Joe think when they heard of this?
She must write a note to each of them to tell them the families were safe as soon as they were all accounted for.
She peeped into the hall and drew back in shock.
The front door and the vestibule door had been blown off and the heavy mahogany coat stand lay across the foot of the stairs.
Anne went through to the yard.
The heavy drone of the bombers still filled the air as they came in wave after wave, but the searchlights which criss-crossed the sky were almost lost against the fierce orange glow as Liverpool burned.
There was an ominous whooshing sound and a loud crash nearby and Anne hastily dashed back to the scullery.
She was able to light the gas and make tea in the big brown family teapot.
The  tea was much appreciated but everyone urged her not to leave the cellar again.
It was the longest night she had ever known.
Her mind was divided between fear for her mother and worry about her father and Maureen and Tony, and she was immensely grateful that Helen was with her.
When at last the All Clear sounded her mother was undisturbed by it, and so were the two little girls asleep on a bunk bed.
Helen advised the women to leave the children asleep while they checked on their houses, and Jinny Bennet offered to stay with them and bring them home when they woke.
‘I hope they've still got a home,’ Helen whispered.
‘I couldn't believe it when I was walking here, Anne.
The damage all the way.
London Road, Shaw Street, Westbourne Street.
I couldn't even get up Plumpton Street so I came up Fitzclarence but there were fires and damage there too.’
Mrs Bennet had hurried away to check on her house but was soon back.
‘My place isn't bad,’ she said.
‘Bit knocked about like but the end of our street on the other side is flat, God help them.
I didn't wait to find out about them.
I've come back to get your ma's room straight so she can come upstairs.’
Anne found a bottle of sherry in the cupboard and poured a glassful for each of them.
It seemed to revive them and Helen carried a glassful down to the cellar for Jinny then stayed sitting beside Julia at Anne's insistence.
Anne and Mrs Bennet quickly cleared the thick layer of gritty dust which lay over everything in Julia's room and remade her bed.
The shutters had been closed so there was little damage.
Just as they finished Tony appeared.
His red-rimmed eyes peered from his grimy face anxiously and Anne said swiftly, ‘It's all right, Tony.
Helen's sitting with Mum and they're safe.’
‘Thank God!’ he said.
‘You'd think there'd be no one left when you look at the city.
The end of our place has gone, the canteen  and the office part luckily.
About twenty injured but no one killed, and the main works aren't damaged.’
Shortly afterwards Maureen arrived, but only to check the family was safe.
Her mother was still sleeping and Maureen hastily drank a cup of tea then returned to her ambulance.
She looked exhausted and Anne said anxiously, ‘Oh, Maureen, haven't you done enough?’
Maureen turned on her.
‘Done enough?’ she snarled.
‘Do you know what it's like out there?
Mill Road has got it again.
Most of the hospital wrecked and ambulances on fire.
More than a dozen of our drivers killed and more injured, the same for the staff and patients.’
Anne stood in stunned silence as tears filled Maureen's eyes and she dashed them away.
‘We've been moving patients to other hospitals.
I'll have to go.’
She ran down the steps but turned back for a moment to say, ‘Uncle Fred's injured but he'll be all right.
I saw him lying in a hospital corridor.’
The next moment she was gone and when Anne learnt of the devastation of the city she could understand Maureen's rage at her innocent question.
The whole line of docks seemed to be ablaze and ships in the river, shops, offices, streets of terraced houses and mansions, as well as beautiful and historic buildings like the Walker Art Gallery, the Museum and Central Library, had all suffered as high explosive bombs, land mines and incendiary bombs had rained down upon the city from hundreds of aircraft.
Anne and Mrs Bennet did what they could to clear up the house.
The damage seemed to be mostly at the back.
The blast which had flung down the doors at the front had strangely left the windows intact, but when Pat arrived home it was decided that it would be better to leave Julia in the bed in the cellar.
‘Those bastards'll be back,’ he said.
‘They use the fires from the night before as markers for their bombs.
Blackout is no good while  fires are still burning to show them the way, the bloody swines.’
Anne had never heard her father swear before.
It seemed to be part of this dreadful time, with the responsibility for her mother like a crushing weight on her.
Julia's pain seemed to have left her, and she lay seeming to drift in and out of sleep or unconsciousness, Anne could never be sure which, as she sat beside her, wiping her face, or tried to feed her with beef tea from a feeding cup.
Mrs Bennet had been into town and brought back details of the damage.
Anne asked her to check on Egremont Street but before Mrs Bennet returned Sarah appeared on the cellar steps.
Anne's mother seemed asleep so Anne left her and went quickly to meet her friend.
‘I came to see if you were all safe,’ Sarah whispered, and Anne, said eagerly, ‘Yes, except Uncle Fred's injured, I think.
What about all of you?’
‘All safe,’ Sarah said.
‘But Grandma's and Peggy Burns’ houses have gone.’
‘Gone?’
Anne echoed.
‘Yes, bombed,’ Sarah said.
‘A high explosive, I think, Grandma's and Peggy's and about four houses in the street behind.
Thank God Grandma and our Kate had gone out to Huyton in the lorries and Peggy had gone to their Meg's shelter.
The Major who lodged with Peggy stayed in the house and he was killed and his wife blown through the window, but she's all right.’
‘I hope John doesn't hear about the bombing, or our Eileen or Joe before we can tell them we're all safe,’ Anne said.
‘I've written short notes to all of them.
I hope they get through but the Post Office got it last night, didn't it?’
‘Yes, but they just work from somewhere else,’ Sarah said.
The next moment Mrs Bennet arrived and Anne was glad that Sarah had come before her as Mrs Bennet gave a graphic description of the damage in Egremont Street.
Sarah said quietly, ‘Yes, but as my mother said, Mrs Bennet, at least we're all alive.
That's not true of a lot of people this morning.’
‘No, it's not.
Seventeen killed in them houses at the top of our street.
You should just see the town, Anne.
Lewis's and Blackler's burnt out, and Lime Street — you can't hardly move for the hosepipes all over the ground.’
Anne seemed to be scarcely listening and at a sound from her mother dashed back to her side, followed by Sarah and Mrs Bennet.
‘It's all right,’ Helen whispered.
‘She's just settling down.
I think she'll sleep naturally now.’
Jinny had taken the little girls home and Sarah and Mrs Bennet left.
Soon afterwards Tony took Helen away.
‘I think she should be in bed,’ he said, and Anne agreed.
Helen, who had been so calm during the night, was now cold and shaking with delayed shock, and Anne told her how glad she had been of her company.
When Maureen and her father eventually returned they both fell into an exhausted sleep after seeing Julia resting peacefully, her breathing shallow but regular.
When they woke Maureen told Anne that she was sorry she had snapped at her.
‘I was just worked up,’ she said.
‘A friend of mine, a fireman, had been injured and burned.’
‘Oh, Lord, is he bad?’
Anne exclaimed.
‘He'll live,’ Maureen said, ‘but his injuries are very painful.
Two of his mates were killed, though, at the same incident.’
Anne put a cup of tea down beside her.
‘I didn't realise all this was happening,’ she said.
‘I was so frightened about Mum.
I was glad to have that black bottle.’
She put her arm round Maureen's neck and kissed her cheek.
‘Don't worry about your friend, Mo.
At least he's out of it for a while,’ she said, unaware of how much Chris meant to Maureen.
There was only a large crater where the wool shop had stood so Maureen was free to stay with her mother and Anne went to work on Monday.
There had been another bad raid on Sunday night but soldiers and gangs of workmen were clearing the roads of the debris from shattered buildings and fire crews from all the surrounding districts had come to help fight the numerous fires.
Anne had to make many detours to reach the factory and felt triumphant when she arrived there, but she found that most of the women had come in.
Some, though, would never come again.
Ruby, who had said that she was safe, that lightning never struck twice, had been killed with her daughter and two of her grandsons by a direct hit on their shelter.
Doris, the girl who worked next to Anne, had been killed and her parents injured after they had been taken to a rest centre from their bombed house.
Anne wept at the news.
Doris's husband was due home on leave.
She had told Anne on Saturday that she had received her last letter before the leave.
‘Every leave I tie up all the letters I've had since Stan's last, then start again when he goes back,’ she said.
Anne remembered envying her because her husband was coming on leave just as John went back.
What had happened to those carefully hoarded letters, she wondered, and who would tell Stan when he arrived?
The supervisor put her hand on Anne's shoulder.
‘Sad about poor Doris,’ she said.
‘But — life has to go on.
The harder we work, the more our lads will have to throw at the bastards.’
Sarah's grandmother and her friend and neighbour Mrs Burns seemed to accept the loss of their homes calmly, in public at least.
Sally Ward moved in to live with her daughter's family, on the opposite side of Egremont Street, and Peggy Burns went to live with her daughter Meg and her husband.
Anne's mother was still free from pain but almost too weak to move.
Mrs Ward came every day to help Maureen to make her mother comfortable until the doctor could arrange for nursing help.
He appeared one morning looking haggard and after a quick examination of her mother gave Maureen a prescription for medicine for her.
‘This should help her but give it as sparingly as possible at first,’ he said.
Maureen said that her mother seemed free of pain but he warned her it could return at any moment.
‘We don't know why there are these remissions or why it strikes again.
You're a sensible girl.
Use your own judgement.’
Fred had been helping to rescue a family trapped in a cellar when a collapsing beam held him trapped by his left arm and leg for several hours, but he made a good recovery.
‘I'm the most well blessed man in Liverpool,’ he joked.
‘Four different priests gave me conditional absolution before they got me out.
I couldn't tell them they weren't the first.’
Carrie was able to come every day to sit with Julia, and Maureen was able to travel to Whiston Hospital where Chris had been taken.
She told Carrie only that she was visiting a friend.
There were still occasional air raids but none with the ferocity of the ‘May Blitz’ as it was being called and now Julia was back in her own bed in the bright and sunny back parlour.
The doctor and the Sisters of Charity who came to help with the nursing were amazed at her tenacious hold on life, but Julia had told Mrs Ward that she was determined to live until Anne's marriage.
‘I won't spoil the child's wedding day,’ she whispered, and although her pain had returned she held on.
Sarah's mother also came often to see Julia, and to discuss the wedding.
She suggested that the wedding reception should be held at the Redmond house, telling Julia that it would help her mother to get over the loss of her house if she could organise the wedding.
Julia smiled and pressed her hand, recognising the tact and  kindness of the suggestion.
Clothes rationing had suddenly been introduced, much to Anne's dismay.
‘If only I'd got my clothes for the wedding,’ she mourned.
‘I'm mad because I had the money for them but I just couldn't get time to shop with the hours we've been working.’
Fortunately the material for her wedding dress had already been bought.
Eileen, Sarah and Kate were to be the bridesmaids, and Kate produced a bolt of pale pink taffeta for their dresses telling her mother that it came from a fire damage sale.
Sarah's aunt who lived in America sent food parcels so Mrs Redmond also made the wedding cake and provided much of the food for the wedding breakfast.
Julia's bedroom was now the heart of the house with the family spending every possible moment with her, and although her face was almost fleshless she could always manage a smile to greet them.
For Anne it was a happy time in spite of her mother's illness.
Always ready to look on the bright side she expected that the remission would last for a long time, and there was a conspiracy between Maureen and her mother to conceal Julia's suffering from her.
Letters carne almost every day from John and although he talked about Hitler's invasion of Russia and other war news, he always remembered to tell Anne that he loved her.
Her letters to him gave news of all the preparations for the wedding, but were tender and loving too.
John's brother Mick who was in the RAF was to be best man, and had a week's leave in September before moving to Manchester.
Eileen and Joe both obtained a week's leave for the wedding and Stephen came on a week's holiday so all the family except Terry were together.
Anne worried that Sarah would be upset, but she assured her that she was perfectly happy, and certainly seemed so.
27
The wedding day was typical September weather, with clear blue skies and mild sunshine falling through the church window, to shine on Anne and John as they stood at the altar.
Anne looked beautiful in a dress of white organdie with a wreath of orange blossom on her dark hair.
She carried a large bouquet of white roses and pink carnations and her bridesmaids Eileen, Sarah and Kate, wore their pink taffeta dresses and carried white and pink chrysanthemums.
It was a Service wedding, with John and Joe in khaki battledress and Mick in Air Force uniform.
Maureen had borrowed a wheelchair for her mother and wheeled her close to the altar to see Anne and John married, then drove her home until the Nuptial Mass was over.
Later she took Julia to the Redmond house where the wedding reception was taking place.
She could only stay a short time, but long enough to hear John thank her for the gift of her daughter.
Anne and John came to kiss her and she blessed them.
‘I'm so glad to have you as a son, John.
I know you'll both be happy.
God bless you.’
The effort exhausted her and Pat wrapped her in a blanket and carried her to Maureen's car.
Sarah had come to the car with them and Julia asked Pat to go back to the reception.
‘Sarah will come with us, won't you, love?’ she said in her weak voice, and Sarah gladly agreed.
‘Aye, not much fun for you, love, with our Terry away,’ Pat said.
‘But your turn will come, pet.’
She mumbled something and blushed as she hastily climbed into the car.
When Sarah had helped Maureen to put her mother to bed, the sick woman took Sarah's hand.
‘I won't be here for your wedding, love,’ she whispered.
‘Whichever one you marry.’
Sarah's eyes opened wide in surprise and Julia smiled weakly at her.
‘I know, love.
I saw the way you and Joe — but don't hurt Terry.’
Sarah bent close to her.
‘We won't, I promise.
We'll wait until he comes home and sort it out,’ she said quietly.
‘That's good children,’ Julia whispered.
‘Terry'll be all right, but look after Joe.
Don't make a mistake.’
She closed her eyes for a moment then said faintly, ‘Marriage is for life, love.’
Tears were running down Sarah's face and Julia lifted her hand to touch her cheek, then her hand fell back.
‘Be happy.
You and Maureen help each other,’ she said.
Maureen bent and kissed her.
‘Rest now, Mum,’ she said gently.
She poured out a dose of medicine for her mother and soon she fell asleep.
Like Anne, Maureen had often felt uneasy about Sarah's relationship with Terry and thought that she seemed to regard him more as a brother than a lover.
Partly because of her own dilemma, and partly because she was so close to Joe, Maureen had gradually realised that Sarah and he were in love.
‘Did you know?’
Sarah asked her.
‘About me and Joe?’
‘I guessed,’ she said.
‘But I didn't know that Mum had guessed too.
I'm sure no one else has and Mum won't have said anything about it, even to Dad.
What will you do, Sar?’
‘What can we do?’
Sarah said.
‘Only try to hide how we feel and wait until Terry comes home to sort it out.
I couldn't tell him while he's there.
My dad guessed too but no one else knows.’
In turn, Maureen confided her hopeless love for Chris.
‘That's why Mum said we can help each other,’ she said.
‘Just to be able to talk to someone means so much.
I can talk to Joe but there's no one else.
Nine years and two months I've been in love with Chris.’
Later Joe came to see his mother and they were able to tell him that his and Sarah's secret was known to them.
Julia was awake and Joe and Maureen tenderly lifted her higher on her pillows.
She took Sarah's and Joe's hands in hers.
‘God bless you both,’ she whispered.
Maureen stayed with her mother but Sarah and Joe walked back to the Redmond house together.
Sarah told Joe what his mother had said, and they spoke about Chris and Maureen.
At the reception numerous people said to Sarah, ‘Never mind Your turn next,’ and she said to Mick, ‘I wish they wouldn't.
I'm not jealous of Anne or in any hurry to get married.
I feel a hypocrite.’
‘You and me both,’ he said cheerfully.
‘I've only had twelve hours’ flying instruction and flown one solo — never even frightened a German — but people keep telling me I've saved Britain.
They think I'm a fighter pilot.’
‘It's the uniform,’ Sarah said.
‘And Churchill's speech.’
‘I know.
I tried to tell them at first, but now I just smile and say nuffin', like Brer Rabbit.’
Anne changed into a wine-coloured suit made by Mrs Redmond to go away.
She and John went first to see her mother, then to a hotel in Chester overnight, and then to spend a week in North Wales.
For Anne it was a magical time.
The war seemed remote as she and John wandered through woods, scuffling their feet through crisp fallen leaves, or lay in the deep feather bed in the farmhouse bedroom.
He was a gentle lover, and for Anne it was all strange and  wonderful.
‘I didn't know it'd be like that,’ she said, as she lay in his arms.
‘I enjoyed it.’
‘Don't sound so surprised,’ he teased her, kissing the tip of her nose.
‘You're supposed to.’
‘Not from what I've heard,’ she said, and John asked in surprise, ‘Why?
What have you heard — and where, for that matter?’
‘At work,’ she said.
‘I didn't understand half some of the women said, but they gave the impression they didn't like it.
You remember Penny I told you about?
She wasn't married but went with a chap after a big dance, and Ruby said, ‘What did you think, chuck?’
Penny just said, ‘Frankly, I think it's very overrated.’
John threw back his head and laughed and Anne laughed with him.
‘Very overrated,’ he kept saying, and soon they were laughing so much that they had to put their heads beneath the blankets to stifle the noise, in case the farmer and his wife wondered at their hilarity.
When they returned to Liverpool Joe, Eileen and Stephen, and John's brother Mick, had already gone back, but at a family gathering John was soon involved in an argument.
Bombers were still going over Germany and he argued that it was indefensible to bomb cities where women and children could be killed.
After the recent events in Liverpool few people agreed with him and Kate said pertly, ‘Our John's always out of step with everyone else.’
‘So was his grandfather,’ Sally Ward said.
‘And he was usually proved right in the end.’
Anne smiled at her gratefully.
It seemed that although sheer determination had kept Julia alive until the wedding, suddenly she could fight no longer.
The tearing pain returned and the doctor prescribed large doses of morphia which he had kept for this time.
For the last few days of her life Julia lay in a drugged sleep, free from pain and still managing a faint smile for Pat as he hung over her, gripping her hand.
As quietly and uncomplainingly as she had lived she slipped away in her sleep at two o'clock in the morning of 21 October.
Pat Fitzgerald was devastated.
‘What'll we do without her?’ he asked pitifully, and repeated it to all those who came to offer sympathy.
Sally Ward was better able to comfort him than anyone else, yet it seemed to the family that she did little but simply hold his hand.
From her he seemed to draw sufficient strength to get through the days until the simple funeral was over.
Tony attended to all the arrangements and Maureen wrote to Terry with the sad news.
Joe and Eileen were given short compassionate leave and Stephen came home for the funeral.
The family drew together to help each other, and most of them had additional sources of comfort.
Sarah seemed to be closer to Maureen at this time than to Anne, as she and Maureen could speak freely to each other about the love they had to conceal from others.
Maureen could see Chris more often now.
He was living alone as Beryl was now in a private nursing home in Llandudno, and Maureen was working in the Co-operative Stores.
‘I feel closer to Chris, doing the sort of work he used to do,’ she said to Sarah.
Anne seemed uneasy now with Sarah, anxious not to show her happiness with John too clearly while there seemed no prospect of the end of the war and Terry's return.
Sarah too was uneasy about concealing her love for Joe.
Anne was more comfortable with the married women she worked with, many of them with husbands in the Forces and with the same problems and hopes as herself.
John had been moved to Norfolk and promoted to Corporal and he wrote to Anne nearly every day, loving letters which helped to make her grief for her mother more bearable.
All the family found their grief for Julia hard to bear and to  see how their father suffered grieved them still more.
Only when Helen and Tony told him that Helen expected a baby before Christmas did he seem to come out of his stupor of misery.
Later Helen told Maureen that they had intended to wait until nearer the time to announce their news, but that seemed the right moment.
‘We were only being cautious anyway, thinking of waiting to tell people, but everything seems to be going smoothly this time.’
In May Maureen registered for war work and was directed to a clerical job in an office near Sarah's.
Her left elbow was still stiff since her injury in the air raid and she failed a medical for heavier work.
Joe wrote nearly every day to Sarah, enclosing the letters in an envelope addressed to Maureen, and now it was easy for her to deliver them.
John was due for leave in June and Maureen suggested that Anne and John should make two rooms in the Fitzgerald house into a flat.
Pat had agreed and Anne and John spent a blissful leave fitting it up as their first home.
Pat told them to take what they liked and Carrie gave them linen and other items which were now impossible to buy.
In November church bells were rung to celebrate the victory at El Alamein, and everyone felt that at last the war might be near the end, although Churchill told them they were wrong.
‘It is not the end, not even the beginning of the end,’ he warned.
‘It is the end of the beginning.’
‘The old misery!’
Anne said indignantly to Sarah when they met.
‘He's worse than Lord Haw Haw.’
Sarah smiled.
‘Yes, but Winnie does tell us the truth, doesn't he, even if we don't like it?
I'm not going to worry, though.
Anything can happen, can't it?
No one really knows for sure.’
Anne was glad that Sarah could be so philosophical about the  war.
She felt that she was longing more than ever for it to end so that she and John could spend all their time together.
She spoke about it to Helen, who said gently, ‘It's a shame, Anne.
You and Sarah are missing so much.
I feel almost ashamed that Tony and I are so lucky.
Not just that he's home with me but we had our courting days and you and Sarah missed even those.
It doesn't seem fair.’
Later Anne thought about Helen's words and began to feel angry with John.
Sarah and Terry had no alternative but she and John could have had months of courtship before he went away if it had not been for his stubbornness.
I should have been consulted because it affected me too, she thought, and wrote a terse letter to him.
She read it through the following morning and decided not to send it, but a small niggle of grievance stayed in her mind.
On 15 December Helen's baby, a tiny perfect girl, was born, but her labour was long and difficult and she was very ill for a few days after it.
Now that Anne was a married woman Carrie spoke more freely to her, and told Anne that the midwife was to blame.
‘She should never have suffered like that,’ Carrie said.
‘That flaming midwife hates calling the doctor in but Helen needed him long before he came.’
By Christmas Helen was well again and the baby, Moira, was a delight to her proud parents and to all the family, especially her grandfather.
In January Joe came home on embarkation leave and was more free to see Sarah because his father was so engrossed in the baby.
Joe was still careful to keep their meetings secret lest some kind friend wrote about them to Terry, but Maureen and Sarah's father made the meetings easier for them.
Sarah had a few days' leave while Joe was home and Maureen suggested, while Anne and her father were present, that Joe took Sarah out sometimes.
‘Aye, she doesn't have much fun, poor lass,’ said Pat, ‘with our Terry so far away.’
Joe coloured and felt guilty at deceiving the family, but no one seemed to see anything strange in the arrangement.
In March Joe wrote from North Africa where the Irish Guards were engaged in heavy fighting, but he seemed cheerful, and hopeful that the end of the war was coming closer.
Anne was afraid that John would soon be sent abroad but the months went by and he was still in England.
When the campaign in North Africa ended in success for the Allies in May everyone expected Joe to come home, but his company went straight to Italy.
He wrote that it was not as he had pictured it as the weather was bitterly cold and wet with some snow.
To Sarah he wrote that he would take her to Italy some day when the sun was shining.
Late in January news bulletins mentioned the Anzio landing in which they knew the Irish Guards were taking part and in February the dreaded news came that Joe had been wounded.
No details were given, except that he was now in hospital in Naples.
Pat had left for work when the news came and Anne and Maureen decided to telephone Tony at the factory.
He was calm and decisive.
‘Don't start guessing about Joe's injuries,’ he said.
‘It could be something quite slight and they'd still let us know officially.
I don't think we should say anything to Stephen or Eileen or of course Terry until we know more.
I'll tell Dad though because he has a right to know.’
‘Thank God for Tony,’ Anne said.
They decided that they should go to work as no more news could be expected yet and Maureen hurried first to see Sarah.
They clung together in the waiting room outside Sarah's office and Maureen told her what Tony had said.
‘I can't help thinking though — as long as it's not his eyes, Sar.’
‘Or a very bad wound,’ Sarah said fearfully.
Two days later the family received a letter from Joe written in a field dressing station before he was taken by boat to Naples.
Sarah told Maureen that she had received one by the same post.
He wrote that he was only slightly wounded in the left arm and leg, and was scribbling this note in case some officious nerk notified them.
Suddenly it seemed that all the news was good.
The German Army was in retreat in Russia, and the Italian campaign was over.
Joe recovered enough to rejoin his battalion and sailed for home on 7 March.
He was given leave almost immediately.
Very few of the battalion returned home as their losses had been so heavy, and Joe told the family he was now in a holding battalion.
‘Mainly cooks and cripples,’ he said cheerfully, and the family hoped that this would mean that he stayed in England, but when he returned to London after his leave the battalion was made up to strength and moved to Howick in Scotland.
‘I think they're getting ready for the Second Front,’ Sarah told Maureen, ‘although Joe didn't say so.’
All the talk now was of the Second Front, and everyone thought that the Army would have to land in France to finish off the war.
‘It won't be like Dunkirk this time,’ Mr Redmond said to Anne when he saw her worried expression.
‘We are well prepared this time, and Hitler is much weaker.’
She smiled at him gratefully.
Sarah had told her that John had always argued with his father and defied him, and she wondered why he could ever have behaved like that with this gentle man.
Greg Redmond was a quiet diffident type, tall with grey eyes and dark hair like John, and Anne felt liking and respect for him.
She could see that, although never aggressive, he was the strong rock on which his family relied.
Much stronger than John for all his carry on, she thought, and then was shocked by her  disloyal thought.
It's because of that talk with Helen, she mused, and decided that she must tell John about her grievance when he came home.
Mick Redmond had finished a tour of operations and was on leave when John came on leave so the brothers were able to spend some time together for the first time for years.
John told Anne that this was embarkation leave and he would soon be going to France but warned her not to mention it to anyone.
‘Careless talk costs lives,’ he joked.
He had been promoted to sergeant and sometimes spoke very masterfully to Anne, until she reminded him, half in fun and half in earnest, that she was not one of his soldiers.
In spite of these small brushes, they spent a very happy leave, planning all that they would do when peace came, and making love passionately every night.
Kate Redmond was now engaged to a quiet American, Gene Romero, and he had been moved to the South Coast in readiness for the invasion.
Soon after John's return from leave he was moved to Eastbourne.
In June the Second Front began and John was in the first wave of troops to cross the Channel.
Gene landed a few days later and in July Joe went out with reinforcements.
Just before John left England, the doctor had confirmed that Anne was pregnant and that the baby would be born in January.
‘I'm not surprised, are you, love?’
John wrote.
‘After that wonderful leave.
I'm absolutely walking on air.’
Anne was excited and happy about the baby, but she began to worry that John might be killed before the child was born.
Maureen scolded her gently.
‘This is not like you, Anne,’ she said.
‘Looking on the black side.
You usually expect everything to go well.’
‘Because it always has for me,’ she said.
‘Except for losing Mum I've always been lucky, but it's bound to change sometime.’
‘Don't be daft,’ Maureen said.
‘These are just baby nerves, love.
John will be fine, you'll see.’
Anne hugged her sister and smiled again.
‘What would I do without you, Mo?’ she said.
‘It's just that the news is like a seesaw.
One night they say everything is going well, and the next that the troops are boxed in somewhere.’
‘Don't worry.
I'm sure we're near the end now,’ Maureen comforted her.
28
In August Eileen wrote to Maureen that she had met a marvellous man.
‘His name is Robert White, always known as Whitey.
He's six foot two, blue eyes and curly hair, and all the girls are mad jealous because we've fallen for each other.
I sound like a soppy young kid, don't I?
But honestly, Mo, if you saw him even you would fall for him.
He's like a film star only nicer.
He's just joined the Squadron but he's been flying for two years.’
‘Gosh, she has got it bad,’ Anne said when Maureen showed her the letter.
‘Yes, even I would fall for him,’ Maureen said.
Something in her voice made Anne look searchingly at her, and after a moment she folded the letter and took her sister's hand.
‘I'm very selfish,’ she said.
‘Always wrapped up in my own concerns.
I never ask about yours.
That friend from the Fire Service you visited, Mo?
What happened to him?’
Maureen shrugged.
‘He got better — went back to the Fire Service,’ she said, but Eileen's innocent remark seemed to have touched some nerve which made her say bitterly, ‘He went back to scrimping and saving to keep his horrible wife in comfort in a nursing home.
Had to give up his house and live in one room and starve himself.’
Anne squeezed her hand.
‘What's his name?’
‘Chris.
Chris Murray.
He used to work in Lipton's near the wool shop.’
Anne was silent for a moment as she realised the implications.
So Maureen had known him all that time.
Aloud she said quietly,
‘And where's his room, Mo?’
‘In a tatty house off Prescot Street,’ Maureen said bitterly.
‘It's damp and miserable but it's cheap.’
‘It's a pity Margaret decided to stay in the country,’ Anne said.
‘He could have had a room next door.’
Then she suddenly jumped up.
‘Mo, why don't you ask him to stay here?
There's plenty of room.’
‘But — what would people say?’
Maureen said, looking bewildered.
‘Who cares?’ said Anne.
‘There's only Dad who matters and I'm sure he'd agree.
He's out a lot anyway at Tony's or Aunt Carrie's.
The rest of us'll just be glad you've got company.
Ask Dad when he comes in and then fix it up.’
With Anne, to think was to act and when her father appeared a few minutes later she said immediately, ‘Dad, Maureen has a friend who's had to give up his house and live in a crummy room.
I've suggested he lives here.
What do you think?’
‘Whatever you like, girls,’ said Pat.
‘Any tea in the pot?’
Anne was reminded of the day that John asked her father's permission for their engagement, and his calm response then.
Although still doubtful of the wisdom of asking Chris to live in the house, Maureen suggested the move to him.
She was not really surprised when he refused.
‘No, we've got to think of your good name, Maureen,’ he said.
‘It was kind of Anne to think of it and not condemn us, but — well, we've managed so far being discreet about it, and I don't think we should change things now.’
‘I was doubtful myself,’ Maureen admitted, ‘but I hate to think of you in that awful room.
And Anne — she's so impulsive.
She asked Dad right away.’
‘I'm surprised he agreed so easily,’ said Chris.
‘I think Mum really made all the decisions,’ Maureen said.
‘Dad was only concerned about how things affected her, and now he doesn't really care.’
‘Don't worry about that room, Mo,’ said Chris.
‘I've heard of a better one in Hall Road, just as cheap.’
Maureen told Joe about it when she wrote and he wrote back that he agreed with Chris.
‘I know people have a different attitude to things now than we had before the war, but you and Chris are still the same sort of people.
I think he realises that living in the same house would be very hard for both of you, and might lead to something that would worry your tender conscience no end.
‘I'm glad though that Anne knows how things stand.
She won't talk about it to anyone but I'm sure she'll find ways of making things easier for you, Mo.’
Anne was disappointed that her plan was dismissed but suggested inviting Chris for meals.
Mrs Redmond often gave her food from the parcels she received from her sister in America and the parcels sent by Gene's family, and she produced a tinned ham and a tin of peaches for the meal.
Helen and Tony came bringing two plate tarts made by Helen and all the attention was focussed on Moira, giving Chris time to overcome his nervousness, helped by Helen's tact.
After the meal they went into the parlour where Anne had lit the fire.
‘We used to have great parties here before the war,’ Tony said.
‘When we were all kids the man who used to teach Joe the violin said we were like a nest of singing birds.
How about a song now, Dad?’
‘No, not me,’ said Pat, shaking his head, and Maureen said quickly, ‘I'll try to accompany you if you'll sing, Tony, although I'm not as good as Eileen.’
Tony stood up immediately, realising that it would be difficult  for his father to sing the Irish songs he sang at parties, usually sad songs of loss and parting.
‘I'll try The Drinking Song from The Student Prince,’he said.
He had a pleasant baritone voice and they all joined in the chorus, even Moira piping up, ‘Dwink, dwink’.
Pat was delighted.
‘Fred's talking about starting his Easter parties again now there are children in the family once more,’ he said.
He took Moira on his knee.
‘You'll be the star of the show, pet.’
‘Let's hope all the family will be home by then,’ Maureen said.
‘They'll all have tales to tell.’
‘Yes.
The twins were in the raid on the Lofoten Islands, you know,’ Tony said to Chris.
‘God, what a pair!
Des was telling me about when they were in training for the Commandos.
No one better suited for them, believe me.
Des said they had to climb sheer cliffs with their faces blacked and a knife between their teeth.
‘It was the gear,’ he said.
They're mad, both of them.’
It was a pleasant evening but when Anne wrote to Joe about it, telling him that she had asked Helen and Tony to come, he replied immediately, warning her not to rush things.
‘I know you mean well, love,’ he wrote, ‘but Maureen and Chris have managed for so long because they have kept it so low key.
Maureen's principles give her strength.
Don't make it harder for them, Anne.’
At first Anne felt indignant with Joe, but when she thought it over, realised the good sense of his warning.
A few nights later she went with Maureen to Benediction, and as she glanced at her sister, deep in prayer, Anne was conscious of how much Maureen's faith meant to her, and how her own well-meant interference might have severed that lifeline for her beloved sister.
Helen asked no questions about Chris, only saying that it had been a lovely evening and Moira was still talking about the tinned peaches and jelly.
To Maureen Anne said ruefully, ‘I think that was a case of ‘fools rush in’.
Sorry, Mo.’
‘Nothing to be sorry for,’ she said.
‘Chris and I appreciated it and we enjoyed the evening, but I think it'd be better if we didn't do it again.
But I'm glad you know about us, love.
I didn't like deceiving you.
And don't be hurt, Anne.
I said that Joe knew, but — well, Sarah knows too.
Mum knew about us and mentioned it to Sarah when we came back here after your wedding.’
Anne was silent for a moment, thinking, then she said, ‘Joe came back here too, didn't he?
Do you mean Mum spoke about it to you and Joe and Sarah heard her?’
‘No.
It was — oh, God, Anne, I can't tell you,’ she said.
‘Oh, if only this damn’ war was over!’
She began to cry and Anne put her arms round her.
‘Don't, Mo,’ she said gently.
‘I won't ask any more questions, and I'm not hurt that Sarah knows, honestly.’
The next day all this was swept from their minds when a letter arrived from Eileen, saying that she was to be married by special licence.
Eileen wrote first to her father asking for his blessing.
‘I hope you won't be hurt, Dad.
I know you were proud to give Anne away, and I'd love to be with you and all the family, but we only have two days’ leave.
I'll bring Whitey to meet you just as soon as I can and I know you'll love him.’
Pat was bewildered, unable to understand why Eileen could not wait to be married from home, but by the next post Maureen and Anne received ecstatic letters from her and tried to reconcile their father to the idea of the wedding.
‘She's very much in love with him, Dad,’ Anne said.
‘And it's quite usual for people in the Services to get married on the station.
Especially in the Air Force.’
‘But a lad we've never even met?’ he said.
‘Yes, Dad, but Eileen must know what she's doing.
She's  been out with enough lads to know he's the right one for her,’ Maureen said.
Pat shook his head and blew out his lips.
‘I don't know.
Everything's different.
Your mum wouldn't have liked it.’
‘She would, Dad,’ Anne said.
‘If it meant Eileen was happy.
I know.
The three of us could go to seven o'clock Mass on Friday morning then it would be like being at Nuptial Mass for her.’
‘Aye, and I'll send her a few quid to get some nice things,’ Pat said, brightening.
The girls knew that the ‘few quid’ would be a generous sum, and even if she was unable to buy nice things, it would show Eileen that her father approved of the marriage, though he was unable to express his feelings in the letter sent with it.
When Carrie was told she said she was not surprised.
‘Eileen was never one for fuss, was she?’ she said.
‘Not very romantic.
I'll have to find something nice for a wedding present.’
‘Not romantic!
’ Anne said to Maureen.
‘Aunt Carrie didn't see our letters!’
Theresa was excited by the news and told Maureen that she had sent Eileen two tablets of scented soap and a box of dusting powder with a swansdown puff.
‘Not a wedding present,’ she said.
‘I'll get her something when she comes home for that.’
Anne had convinced herself that no harm would come to John, and now moved through her days in a happy dream.
She had left work and spent her time preparing for her baby, and reading and re-reading John's letters.
She went often to see his family.
Mrs Redmond worked part-time in Mill Road Hospital, but John's grandmother was always there and delighted to see Anne.
She told her many tales of the days during the Great War when John was a baby and he and his mother had lived with her and Lawrie, as they sat together, Sally holding a skein of white wool while Anne wound it into a ball.
After the long drawn-out years of waiting suddenly the war  was going well on all fronts and the end was in sight.
Joe wrote of the scenes when Brussels was liberated, of the joy of the population and their wonderful welcome to the troops.
Joe was in the spearhead but John also wrote of amazing scenes he witnessed as his company moved through the countryside.
‘Some of the fellows talk of coming back here in peacetime, but it will be England for us, Anne, once I'm safely home.’
She might have resented his calm assumption that she would prefer to holiday in England at another time, but now it seemed nothing would affect her serenity.
Anne was shaken awake by the dreadful news that Eileen's husband had been killed when his aircraft crashed in flames returning from a bombing raid.
She wrote that she would prefer not to come home, but Tony and Maureen got a few days' leave and travelled to Kent to see her.
It was a long and tiring journey across country and out to the remote airfield, and a wasted one it seemed.
Eileen was dry-eyed and controlled, standing stiffly within Maureen's arms as she held her and wept, and reiterating her intention to stay at her job.
Her lip trembled briefly as Tony hugged her and Maureen kissed her again before they left, but she quickly recovered and told them unsmilingly to give her love to her father and the family.
Eileen's commanding officer took them to a room and gave them tea, and tried to explain to them that it was better for her to remain.
‘She's with girls who understand,’ she said.
‘Some of them have had the same experience, and here she's in a familiar place doing familiar work and I think feeling closer to Whitey.’
Maureen and Tony appreciated her kindness although they could not agree with her.
They were sure that it would be better for Eileen to be back among her loving family who could help her to bear her loss.
The commanding officer had given them more details of the crash and assured them that Whitey would have died quickly, although his body was badly burned.
His parents emigrated to Canada before the war, she said, and he had been buried in the graveyard of the nearest small village.
They also saw the Catholic padre attached to the station and he took them to see Whitey's grave.
They had bought flowers in the village and they laid them on the new grave.
‘She could have had his body taken back to Liverpool and buried at home,’ Maureen said.
‘Then she would have been able to visit his grave.’
Tony said nothing.
He wondered if Eileen would ever again come back to live in Liverpool.
The padre told them that they must not think that theirs was a wasted journey.
‘Eileen is stunned now, poor child,’ he said.
‘Later she will remember how you came to her and it will comfort her.
Try to realise that this is the best solution for her, to stay here.
She's like a wounded animal that knows instinctively how it can be cured.’
He drove them to the station and they returned, sad for their sister and still not convinced that it was better for her not to come home.
It was a relief to both of them to reach home and find Helen and Anne waiting for them in Magdalen Street, with a hot meal prepared and a warm welcome from them and Moira.
‘Fred's been to take Dad out for a drink,’ they explained.
‘He wasn't sure what time you'd come.’
‘We'll have to convince him it's the usual thing for girls to stay there in cases like this,’ Tony said.
‘Although I haven't been able to convince myself.’
‘Well, you can't do more than you've done, love, you and Maureen,’ Helen said gently.
‘Perhaps the priest was right, and instinct is telling Eileen what to do.’
It seemed in keeping with their mood when bitter fighting broke out in the Ardennes, and hopes of peace were dashed again.
Stephen came home for Christmas, but it was a quiet, sad time for the family.
Their only joy came from Moira, who was just old enough to appreciate Christmas, and from the visits of Bridie's children and Theresa's two little ones.
On 19 January Anne's son was born.
After Helen's experience the family had insisted that Anne was booked into a hospital and she entered Mill Road a day before the birth.
It was an easy birth and Gerald John, as he was christened, was a large healthy baby with a happy disposition.
He was fair and blue-eyed with a strong resemblance to Mick Redmond.
‘God help you, Anne,’ Mrs Redmond said.
‘If he gets up to half the tricks that Mick did.’
But she was smiling as she hung over the cot, gazing with delight at the baby.
She told Anne that she could understand how she felt as John had been born when his father was in France during the First World War.
‘Please God you won't have to wait so long for John to come home,’ she said.
‘I'm sure we're on the last lap now.’
It seemed that she was right as the Allies crossed the Rhine and swept through Germany.
On 29 April Mussolini and his mistress were shot and their bodies hung upside down in Milan.
People in Britain were shocked but relieved to hear it, and two days later Hitler killed himself and Eva Braun whom he had married the previous day.
‘The coward!’
Anne said indignantly to Sarah who had come to see her, but Sarah thought the world was well rid of him.
‘That's true,’ Anne agreed, ‘but I think he should have been made to suffer for the way others suffered through him.
People like our Eileen, and those poor people in places he overran.’
She felt this even more strongly when the news began to come to England of the concentration camps that were discovered when the troops swept through Germany.
Sarah and Maureen were now close friends and spent a lot of time together, and now that Anne was at home, the friendship  between her and Sarah was resumed as strongly as ever.
Sarah and Maureen were godmothers to Gerald John, and Mick, who was on leave, was his godfather.
There were no other babies in the Redmond family and to Sarah Gerry was a constant delight and source of amazement.
She spent as much time as possible with him and Anne.
Suddenly, it seemed, the war was over at last, and Churchill announced on the wireless that 8 May would be Victory in Europe Day.
He reminded people that the Japanese had not yet been defeated, but only people like Peggy Burns, whose son was a Japanese prisoner of war, dwelt on that fact.
Anne was wildly excited at the prospect of peace and of John coming home.
‘He'll see Gerry while he's still a baby anyway, although he's missed his first few months,’ she said.
‘Not like when he was a baby and his father was in France until he was about three.’
She glanced at Sarah and said impulsively, ‘Here I am going on, and it's even more exciting for you, isn't it, Sar?
It must have been terrible for you all these years, but what a day it'll be when Terry comes home, won't it?’
Sarah nodded, but she looked self-conscious and guilty.
She was just about to speak, to tell Anne how she really felt, when Gerry gave a loud cry and the moment passed.
Many prisoners of war were now arriving in Liverpool and the girls in Sarah's office made a large Welcome Home banner.
The truckloads of returned prisoners drove past the office and the girls draped the banner between two windows and hung from the window ringing a handbell so that the men would look up and see the banner and hear them cheering.
‘Wouldn't it be lovely if Terry was one of them?’ a colleague said, but Sarah said quietly that she had received a letter from him and knew when he would arrive.
The family were surprised to hear that he had written to his  father asking if he could bring a friend to stay.
The friend, Frank, had no home to return to as his only relative, his father, had been killed and his home destroyed by a landmine during the ‘May Blitz’.
Eileen had been demobilised and had returned home but was very sad and subdued, still grieving for Whitey.
Stephen arrived home on holiday, and Tony and Helen came with their young daughter on the day that Terry was due.
Anne and Maureen were already at home.
Only Joe was absent, still in Germany.
Sarah said she would go to the Fitzgerald house in the evening of Terry's first day at home, and his father was pleased.
‘Sarah's a kind thoughtful girl,’ he told Maureen and Anne.
‘She knows we're anxious to see him, and doesn't expect him to go rushing off to see her the minute he arrives.’
Terry had asked the family to wait at home for him and they all rushed into the hall when he rang the bell with Pat pushed forward to open the door.
Terry hugged his father and Frank followed him in, then without waiting for introductions, advanced on the family.
‘Hi, folks,’ he said breezily.
‘I'm Frank.’
He gripped Helen's hand.
‘You must be our Maureen.’
‘No — no,’ she stammered, taken aback, then recovered.
‘I'm Helen, Tony's wife,’ she said.
‘And this is — this is Tony.’
Tony and Stephen had stood back to let their sisters greet Terry, but they were looking at him and waiting eagerly to greet him, oblivious of Frank.
Helen touched Tony's arm and looked pleadingly at him so he turned and shook hands with Frank then turned back immediately to Terry.
Maureen was torn between her longing to hug Terry and gaze her fill on the young brother who had been lost to them for so long and pity for Frank who had no family to welcome him home.
When eventually they were all in the parlour she said quietly to Frank, ‘I'm so sorry about your father.
It must be a sad homecoming for you.’
To her amazement he guffawed.
‘I'm glad to get away from the camp,’ he said.
‘But me and the old fellow never got on.
Ted knows that, don't you, Ted?’
Terry looked over and grinned.
‘I've heard you say it often enough,’ he said.
‘Yes, the old man battered me when I was a kid,’ Frank said, and laughed again.
‘We went a few rounds when I was big enough to stand up to him.’
Maureen hid her feelings and plied him with tea and food from the trolley which Helen had wheeled in.
Frank went on, ‘I cleared off to Canada as soon as I could.
God's own country.
I'd never have come back to Liverpool only the firm sent me here to fix something up on the docks twelve months before this lot started, so I was just unlucky.’
All the family grew more and more irritated as Frank interrupted every conversation they tried to have with Terry, saying, ‘You're not telling that right, Ted,’ or ‘I could tell them more about that, Ted’.
‘I've never heard Terence abbreviated to Ted before,’ Anne whispered to Eileen, but she seemed indifferent.
It seemed that nothing mattered to her now.
Pat was sitting with his arm about Terry's shoulders as though he wanted to reassure himself that his son had really returned, but even his low-voiced conversation with Terry was interrupted by Frank.
Finally Anne said firmly, ‘Why don't you show Terry the good job you made of the cellar, Dad?
It was a really safe spot for us during the raids, Terry.’
He and his father stood up and Frank rose to follow them but Tony said quickly, ‘Tell us about the prison camp, Frank.
Terry  couldn't say much in his letters.’
Frank sat down again and launched into a tale of how he had outwitted the guards at every turn and been the mainstay of the prisoners.
‘Ted would've been lost without me,’ he boasted.
‘He was too soft, y'see.
Didn't know his way round at all.
I suppose you'd all spoiled him, kept him wrapped in cotton wool.’
‘Don't be ridiculous,’ Anne flared.
‘Our Terry was never wrapped in cotton wool, as you call it, and he wasn't soft either.
He wasn't a hard knock, just a normal decent lad.’
Tony signalled her not to annoy Frank in case he used it as an excuse to follow Terry, but he only seemed amused.
He gave another loud guffaw and said condescendingly, ‘Shows how much you know, young Anne.
Terry knew nothing.
He'd have been a mark for all the wise guys without me to look out for him.’
Anne's face was red and she felt ready to burst with anger but she picked up the baby and escaped to the bathroom.
‘Your Uncle Terry's got an odd friend, Gerry,’ she told the baby.
‘The cheek of him, calling me young Anne when I'm a wife and mother!’
But the baby just gave her his toothless grin.
Terry and his father had returned when she went downstairs and the meal was ready.
It was a special meal and everyone had contributed to it, either with points, coupons or hoarded treats.
Mrs Redmond had sent sugar and tinned meat and jam from the food parcels sent from America by her sister, and the girls were proud of the meal that they had been able to provide.
‘Gosh, this is the gear,’ Terry said, but Frank seemed unimpressed.
Throughout the meal he told them of his success at bartering with the guards, or stealing from the farmers when they were sent to work on farms.
‘We'd be a lot thinner than this if it wasn't for me, wouldn't we, Ted?’ he said.
As soon as the meal was over Tony said he would go for Sarah.
‘No point in her staying away to be tactful and give us  time with Terry now this fellow's here,’ he said to Helen.
He set off after arranging with the girls that Terry would be sent off to meet them, alone, and Frank prevented from accompanying him.
Tony called at the Redmond house and as Sarah was ready they left almost immediately.
‘I'm afraid this fellow he's brought home with him, Frank, hasn't left Terry alone for a minute,’ Tony said ruefully.
‘He's so thick-skinned, I don't know how Terry can stand him.’
‘How is he?’
Sarah asked.
‘He looks better than we expected — Frank says that's all due to him — and he's quite tanned.
They've been working on farms, it seems.’
They walked in silence for a moment then Tony said quietly, ‘You may find Terry changed, Sar.
Older, of course, and more grown up is the only way I can describe it.’
He squeezed her arm affectionately.
‘Of course you're not the quiet little girl you were, are you?’
Sarah smiled and as they drew near the house, Terry approached them.
Tony released her arm, clapping Terry on the shoulder as he passed him, and Terry and Sarah moved self-consciously towards each other.