

The controlling institutions
SETTING THE LIMITS AT THE CENTRE
There are three separate but interacting processes which determine how much we pay for welfare from the public purse.
First, discussed in this chapter, is the procedure by which central government decides upon the total level of public expenditure it believes should be financed out of taxation.
This not only determines what central government will spend itself, but also influences what other public agencies, including local authorities, will spend.
Second, there is allocation of central funds to local authorities and the interaction between central government and local councils which provide services.
Third, there is the budget process within those local authorities.
Before tracing the developments of public spending control at the centre, it is worth briefly setting out the contrasting ways in which other academics have sought to analyse it in order to make my own theoretical framework explicit.
Alternative views of spending control
The pluralist tradition is probably dominant in political science writing on budgeting.
It is best exemplified in Wildavsky's work (Wildavsky, 1975, 1979; Heclo and Wildavsky, 1981).
It sees public expenditure and taxing decisions as the outcome of competition between interest groups.
Some represent users and providers of services.
They exert leverage where their pressures can  be most effective.
In the United States, Congressional Committees are important.
In the United Kingdom, users and providers focus their attention on the spending departments in Whitehall.
Parliament itself is relatively passive.
Other economic interests wish to restrain public spending.
These are articulated, in particular, through finance and economic affairs departments — in the United Kingdom, the Treasury.
In Whitehall the contest between the spenders and the controllers is largely played out behind closed doors (Heclo and Wildavsky, 1981).
These writers scorn attempts to make budgeting into a ‘rational’ process.
Budgets shift forwards or backwards by small ‘increments’ reflecting the balance of interests.
The managerialist tradition has produced numerous attempts at budgetary reform designed to encourage a more technical appraisal of spending choices, in order to produce longer-term spending plans and management systems that link the goals of departments to outcomes or success (Novick, 1965; Schick, 1966; Goldman, 1973; Cmnd 9058, 1983; Likierman, 1988; OECD, 1987a).
It sees government as faced with the same task of managing and controlling spending as any large business.
The techniques used by business can therefore be adapted to government.
The Marxist tradition emphasises the dominance of capital in the economy of western nations.
Government spending and taxing strategies are therefore subservient to economic interests, but the state is also trying to contain pressures from the working class for more services and benefits.
It is this conflict that is reflected in the Whitehall spending battle.
Parts of the economy need more spending in order to sustain profits, but all need to be taxed less.
These contradictions explain the recurrent expenditure crises.
The control of public spending therefore becomes central to the sustenance of the capitalist system (Gough, 1979).
Faced with unpopular cuts, the government increased central control while leaving much of the responsibility for making the cuts to local government, thus fragmenting opposition (Flynn, 1988).
In what follows, we adopt what might be called a modified pluralist approach (Hall et al .,
1975; Glennerster, 1975,1979).
The process of expenditure control can be seen as a competitive game between spending departments and the Treasury, but as the economic crisis has grown worse, the rules have shifted increasingly  in the Treasury's favour and the centre's power to contain local spending has grown.
The nature of the economic system and the conflicts within it influence the changing rules of the game.
Decentralisation has been both a means of controlling public sector growth and a way to make public services more politically attractive, responsive and effective.
(For an international perspective see Bennett, 1990.)
The institutions of control
In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries it was the crown's desire to spend, and Parliament's desire to limit the tax burden, which led to regular conflicts between the king and Parliament.
The House of Lords lost its powers of financial scrutiny in the 1911 Parliament Act, but the House of Commons continued to be jealous of its power to scrutinise ministers' proposals for expenditure.
In theory that role persists.
A government department can only spend money specifically approved by the House of Commons.
The government's taxing agents, the Inland Revenue or Customs and Excise officials, levy taxes only with the House of Commons' approval.
Local authorities may levy taxes only with Parliament's approval.
The House of Commons Public Accounts Committee and its ‘spies’(officials of the National Audit Office) make sure that money is not spent on purposes and in amounts that Parliament has not authorised.
They also seek to ensure that it is spent with due ‘economy, efficiency and effectiveness’.
The Audit Commission performs the same functions as far as local authorities and the National Health Service are concerned, in England and Wales.
It has a Scottish equivalent: the Commission for Local Authority Accounts.
In practice, however, as party discipline grew, the institutional battle over the level of spending and taxing took place more and more within the government machine.
In the end the choices rest with the Cabinet and lie at the heart of modern politics.
The Cabinet has as members ministers who are running major departments, wanting to see the service for which they are responsible improved, but aware that collectively their joint demands could ruin their party's chances in the next election.
Too large an increase in personal taxation could lose them votes and deny them  further ministerial office.
The Chancellor, the Financial Secretary to the Treasury, and the Prime Minister have the task of pointing out the financial realities of life to their colleagues.
The detailed battles go on between Her Majesty's Treasury, whose constitutional role is to contain spending, and the spending departments that are responsible for the individual services and aware of the demands they are under and of the nature of the rising costs to which they are subject.
To a large extent the spending authorisations that emerge are the result of the interplay between the Treasury and the ‘spending’ ministries.
The complex rules of this game that have grown, been discarded and developed in another form are all part of a continuous struggle between the spenders and the controllers.
The Treasury will develop a system of control that temporarily contains the pressures: the spending departments will adapt.
They may actually turn the new rules to their advantage.
The Treasury responds with another, more effective weapon.
The present system of bargaining and control is therefore best understood by tracing its origins and developments.
From Gladstone's period as Chancellor in the middle of the last century onwards, a set of rules or constitutional conventions evolved that gave the Treasury its central position as guardian of the public purse, as follows:
1.
No individual MP can make a proposal to spend public money or raise taxes.
Under standing orders of the House of Commons no proposal to spend money can be tabled for discussion unless it is countersigned by a Treasury minister.
This is in contrast to the case in the United States for example, where individual Congressmen can initiate spending proposals.
2.
No proposal involving additional spending can be discussed by ministers in Cabinet or Cabinet subcommittee unless it is accompanied by a Treasury paper on the cost consequences.
3.
No spending proposals may be developed by a department from the earliest stages without consultation with the Treasury.
4.
No department can spend money without Treasury approval.
The Treasury has staff to keep a continual watch over each department's spending.
It is their business to know the strengths and weaknesses of each department's case.
They are the individuals who must be given early warning if a new spending  proposal is in the pipe-line.
Their opposite numbers in the spending departments are the principal finance officers.
They act as go-betweens, representing their department's best case but also educating their own administrators and professional staff in the realities of a confined budget.
As Heclo and Wildavsky (1981) emphasise in their account of the ‘Whitehall village’, there must be a strong element of trust.
Each must respect the other's role and be as open as possible — not with the public but with each other.
Even given good behaviour between ladies and gentlemen, spending departments have evolved some relatively effective tactics and strategies in pressing their cause with the Treasury or Cabinet (Glennerster, 1975), as follows:
1.
Use the ‘thin edge of the wedge’— press a proposal that has small short-term financial consequences but bigger long-term ones.
2.
Appoint a committee of specialists to report on an aspect of a service.
Its members, all interested in improving the service, are likely to produce an impressive case for expansion.
The Ministry of Education and its successor, the Department of Education and Science, did this with great effect in the 1950s and 1960s.
3.
Use a crisis or scandal constructively.
Damaging revelations about conditions in mental subnormality hospitals were used by the minister, Richard Crossman, to gain funds to improve conditions in mental hospitals in the late 1960s.
4.
Work with pressure groups in your field.
The poverty lobby may be critical, but they may also be helpful in creating a constituency for your department's proposals.
If the climate of opinion is sympathetic and the Cabinet favourable, these tactics and strategies may be successful.
At the end of the 1950s, the Treasury and its ministers came to believe that they were losing too many of the battles.
The Chancellor and his team resigned.
The House of Commons Select Committee on the Estimates (1958) argued that the whole system of Treasury control was breaking down and advocated a committee of inquiry.
The result was an internal committee with an external chairman Lord Plowden.
His report (Cmnd 1432, 1961) resulted in major reforms in the system of Treasury control, many of which remain  in place today, though substantially modified in the intervening years.
The report's diagnosis, as well as its proposals, are important for understanding the procedures that followed.
Plowden's diagnosis and remedy
The system of setting limits to public spending had broken down because of the following:
1.
The old climate of political opinion that was broadly hostile to the public sector had changed.
The Treasury was swimming against the tide.
2.
Proposals for new projects tended to ‘bubble up’ to Cabinet one at a time.
Each on its own seemed admirable and only a small addition to the government's total expenditure.
No total view of the consequences of all the commitments emerged until it was too late.
3.
Policies were embarked upon with little notion of the long-term consequences on spending.
4.
The overall effect was that total spending and hence taxation tended to rise faster than the Cabinet really wanted in the long term.
This led to sudden and wasteful cuts in spending and cancellation of capital programmes.
To put this right, Plowden proposed a new system of control that would force the Cabinet collectively to set limits to its ambitions, as follows:
1.
There should be regular surveys of the long-term expenditure implications of current and proposed policies.
The aim would be ‘to ensure that the long-term rate of expansion in public expenditure was properly aligned with prospective resources’.
Cabinet was to be asked to look at the probable growth in the economy, and the amount of tax revenue it wished to generate, and then decide what in total it could afford to spend.
Within that total ministers would bid for funds, but that total to which they had collectively agreed should not be breached.
We can call this the control function of the new system.
It was to extend beyond controlling central government's direct spending and  was to embrace the capital spending of nationalised industries and local authority spending too.
2.
The second goal was ‘to achieve greater stability in public spending decisions’.
The limits to spending would be set out with a long-term perspective.
Spending departments would be told how much they could spend in real terms in the next four years.
This was a kind of quid pro quo for the spending departments.
They could expect to receive a given level of real resources and plan accordingly for the medium term.
We can call this the planning function of the new system.
3.
The Treasury was ‘to improve the tools for making choices’.
At the time this was barely spelt out, but as the 1960s progressed, the Treasury began to introduce from America a range of new budgeting and cost benefit techniques that can be seen as the means of implementing this objective.
It could be called the efficiency function of the new system.
It has become fashionable to argue that the post-Plowden, long-term planning of public spending proved a disaster and actually helped to increase the growth of public spending, though in the early 1970s an American observer thought the system one of the most sophisticated and successful in the world (Wildavsky, 1975).
It was, in fact, the rapid inflation of the early 1970s that gave the system its bad reputation.
It had been designed in a period of relative economic stability and was not fitted for such tumultuous times.
The economic crisis of 1976 and the advent of Mrs Thatcher's Conservative government in 1979 was to change all that.
The changing rules of the game — Plowden's legacy
During the early 1960s government departments were asked to produce fairly crude estimates of their spending four years ahead in constant prices.
A new expenditure division in the Treasury was created to co-ordinate and develop these forecasts.
Total claims from spending departments were set against expected growth targets in the economy to check their feasibility.
A new minister, the Chief Secretary to the Treasury, was appointed, and a new system was created to oversee the whole exercise.
Called the  Public Expenditure Survey, it gave its name to the whole process PES.
By the time of the economic crisis of 1967 it was clear the system had failed to prevent an even more rapid rise in public spending than before 1961.
The plans had been based on over-optimistic assumptions of the potential growth of the economy and hence of revenue.
From 1968 onwards, the growth targets became somewhat lower but continued to be too optimistic.
The estimates from each department became more detailed and were spelt out for each of the future years.
The results of the whole exercise were published in an annual White Paper and have been published every year since.
In 1970 the Heath government sought to fit in the third piece of the Plowden jigsaw — the efficiency function.
In a White Paper issued shortly after it came to office, the new Conservative administration reviewed the development of the PES system to date and argued that there should be regular in-depth reviews of spending programmes, on both a departmental and an interdepartmental basis.
What emerged was a system that also became known by its initials, PAR — programme analysis and review.
To help administer it, there was a body called the Central Policy Review Staff (CPRS) which reviewed policies interdepartmentally.
It was a small group attached to the Cabinet Office, comprising mainly younger civil servants, academics and other outsiders seconded for brief periods.
Some important issues were explored, from race relations and pre-school policy to issues of population change and the family, and the CPRS sought to establish a formal regular examination by Cabinet of social policy issues.
It was called the Joint Framework for Social Policy (CPRS, 1975; Klein, 1988).
It was not to last for long.
Thatcher's administration eventually wound up both the PAR system and CPRS.
(For an account and evaluation of the work of the CPRS by two people involved see Blackstone and Plowden, 1988.)
Individual departments also developed a series of service planning systems.
The aim was to ensure that local authorities developed plans that were consistent with the government's spending target (Glennerster, 1981b).
By the mid-1970s, therefore, the major elements of the Plowden reforms were in place and had developed in sophistication; yet they failed, at that point, to prevent the fastest ever growth in public spending outside war-time.
The reason lay in the large  economic changes that were affecting the world economy, the government's own responses and the particular nature of the new machinery of control.
In a turbulent economy, the planning and control functions turned out to be mutually incompatible.
Departments' spending plans, which were bargained over and eventually published in the annual public expenditure White Papers, were expressed in constant prices or ‘volume terms’.
They excluded the effect of any general rise in prices or any rises specific to that service.
Thus, if education were promised a rise in its allocation at 2 per cent a year, this would mean a real increase in its capacity to employ teachers or build schools of 2 per cent a year.
Having fixed these ‘volume’ targets at the beginning of its period of office, a government would seek to hold to them even if the economy expanded faster or more slowly than expected, or if prices or wages rose.
In these circumstances it was necessary for central government to pass supplementary estimates asking Parliament to vote more money to the Health Service or to local authorities.
Public spending came to take a larger share of the nation's resources even though each service was keeping to its real volume target.
It gave a degree of certainty to public sector managers in the short run, but when the tax costs began to mount governments resumed their sudden cuts — just the situation Plowden had hoped to avoid.
The planning function, as the Treasury saw it, had been performed too well to the detriment of its control function.
Growing criticism was once more reflected in a report by a House of Commons committee, this time the General Subcommittee of the Expenditure Committee (HC 718,1975–6), and the economic crisis of 1976 brought another set of important changes.
The 1976 adaptions
The changes which the Treasury introduced in this period reasserted the primacy of the control function (Wright, 1980; Else and Marshall, 1981).
The first and most important change was the general introduction of cash limits .
This was a figure of actual spending that a department was not to overshoot in the coming year whatever happened to prices or the wages and salaries of its employees in the interim.
In translating the original constant price figure for the department that had appeared in the public expenditure  White Paper into the new cash limit figure, the Treasury estimated the likely price and wage increases for the year ahead.
However, if these pay norms were breached or prices rose more than expected, the level of service was to be cut back to meet the cash limit.
In 1976–7 this is precisely what happened.
Prices rose more than expected, departments even so kept well inside their new limits, and the result was a cut in real spending of 2.5 per cent.
This was a much larger cut than the government had planned, larger indeed than the announced cuts that had caused so much controversy in 1976.
Not all departments' spending could be cash limited.
Some items of expenditure like supplementary benefit or sickness benefit are demand-led commitments.
The DSS has a statutory duty to pay benefits of a given level approved by Parliament regardless of the level of sickness or unemployment that may arise in any one year.
Altogether about 40 per cent of public spending was directly cash limited.
Local authority spending per se is not included but grants to local authorities and their total capital spending are.
Thus, directly and indirectly, over half of public spending was covered by cash limits.
The second innovation that flowed from the 1976 crisis was complementary to the first — a new financial information system (FIS).
This is a regular return of departmental spending which gives the Treasury early warning of the possibility that a department may overshoot its cash limit.
The third innovation was to limit the length of the planning cycle — to reduce the period over which government published spending targets, at least in any detail.
That period now covers the year ahead and two succeeding years in broader outline.
The present system of control: cash planning
When the Conservatives returned to power in 1979 they further revised the PES system.
From 1982 the two separate sets of targets used by the Labour government — volume and cash limit — were abolished.
From then on the figures used in the White Paper to set targets for future spending were set in ‘cash terms’.
That is, they were the actual amount of money that health authorities, for example , would get regardless of actual price or pay movements in the interim.
The cash target includes a modest estimate for future pay and inflation, but this is usually too low.
Moreover, instead of these cash limits being set one year ahead they are now to cover the whole planning period; that is, three years ahead.
The Treasury set out what it saw as the advantages in the following way:
1.
Ministers discuss the cash that will actually be spent, and therefore what will have to be financed by taxation or borrowing, instead of talking about ‘funny money’— numbers which could be misleadingly different from the resultant cash spent.
2.
Expenditure figures can be related more readily to the revenue projection, so that‘finance [can]determine expenditure and not expenditure finance’.
3.
Changes in public sector costs are brought into the discussion.
The previous constant price system did not bring out the effect of, for example, the rapid relative rise in public service pay in 1979–80 resulting from the Clegg Commission and other comparability awards.
4.
Previously, the ‘volume’ plans — that is, plans in constant prices — were regarded by spending managers as entitlements, carried forward from year to year regardless of what was happening to costs.
This meant that programme managers had little incentive to adapt their expenditures in response to increasing relative costs, except in the short term in response to the annual cash limits.
5.
The decisions in the annual survey, as they relate to the year ahead, can be translated directly into the cash limits and estimates presented to Parliament, without revaluation from one price basis to another (HM Treasury, 1981).
By 1990–1 about 46 per cent of planned public expenditure was covered by cash limits.
The system of cash planning introduced in 1982 remained fundamentally unchanged for the next decade, but see below.
Spending departments suffered a concomitant set of disadvantages.
For the system to work at all smoothly from their point of view, the estimates of inflation built into the Treasury's cash target for their department must be accurate.
If the Treasury underestimates  the level of inflation, as it has every incentive to do, departments will be forced to cut their spending further in real terms to keep within the limits.
No spending department can be sure what the figures in the White Paper will mean for its capacity to pay school teachers or run hospitals.
The spending targets in the White Paper thus turn out to be unhelpful for long-term planning purposes.
Once more the rules of the game had swung the Treasury's way.
Not only is it impossible now to tell what the figures for the future will actually mean for the service, but even the informed observer or MP cannot tell what has been happening.
Past detailed service expenditure figures merely show the actual cash sums paid, uncorrected for price changes.
A summary table in one of the appendices to the White Paper does show past overall spending department by department, deflated by an average price index the GDP deflator.
The Treasury call this ‘real terms’ spending.
This shows how far general price inflation has eroded the level of spending shown in the detailed cash figures.
It does not show how far price increases specific to the service have affected the service's capacity to sustain the volume of services provided.
The difference between cash, real and volume terms is illustrated in Figure 4.1.
The top line shows the increase in the cash sums spent on the NHS.
The much slower rise in the middle graph line shows what happens if you deflate this first figure by the general rise in prices in the economy.
The lowest line shows what happens if you deflate by the rise in NHS salaries and prices.
The control cycle
Prior to 1993 the cycle began each spring (see Table 4.1).
At the beginning of the year the Treasury set out the basis upon which departments were to roll forward and revise the last round of spending plans.
The spending departments sent in their revisions, which were examined, pared down in discussions and presented to ministers in June and July.
At the same time ministers received the Treasury's best guess about the country's economic prospects.
Looking at the total expenditure and the economic projections, ministers decided broadly and in a preliminary way what limits had to be set for spending in the next financial year (then about nine months away).
During the summer and into September and  
October officials from spending departments and the Treasury, with ministers when the going got tough, tried to limit their spending within the overall cash target.
These negotiations are called ‘bilaterals’.
Then the ministers were faced with the Treasury's ‘autumn forecast’.
With this and a preliminary draft of the expenditure plans, ministers had to go on arguing until they reach an agreed compromise.
Finally, ministers who could not agree were sent before a ‘Star Chamber’ of non-spending ministers or ministers who have ‘settled’.
The result — an outline of public spending limits for the next financial year — was published by the Chancellor, together with the economic forecast, as an ‘Autumn Statement’.
Departments could then begin work on putting detailed estimates to Parliament.
The Department of the Environment could set the total grant for local authorities, and announce it.
NHS treasurers or finance officers could be told how much they were likely to get.
Prior to 1991 the details were published in a single Public Expenditure White Paper, albeit in different sections.
Since then individual departments have each published their own spending plans for the next three years, approved by the Treasury.
About the middle of March came the Budget with proposals to raise the taxes needed to finance this spending.
From 1993 the budget will be moved back to December and combined with the expenditure plans (see below).
The spending control cycle will remain largely unchanged.
Adaptations to cash planning 1982–92
Though the fundamentals of cash planning remained, the Treasury had to adapt and refine its strategy through the 1980s in response to the pressure it was under to remain ahead of the game (Thain and Wright, 1990).
Public sector pay and the unpredictability of pay settlements have always posed a major threat to public expenditure control.
Pay constitutes two-thirds of all current expenditure.
The move to cash planning meant that even if health service or teachers' unions succeeded in reaching a pay settlement, there was no likelihood it would be funded in full, except by the NHS or local authorities making cuts in their non-salary budgets or employing fewer staff.
For the first five years of cash planning the Treasury put a ‘pay factor’ in its cash target.
Public sector negotiators knew the consequences if they went over that limit, though in practice the Treasury might relent a little with groups like nurses and fund part of the extra settlement.
The ‘pay factor’ was always set unrealistically low as an opening gambit by the Treasury to keep pay expectations down and to put a further squeeze on public services.
Then, after five years, the Treasury tightened the rules again.
It set separate cash limits for each central government department for pay and allied costs.
It thus prevented settlements over the norm which could be financed by savings elsewhere.
The Contingency Reserve has always existed as a cushion to meet unexpected demands for spending without breaking the overall planning target for public spending set in the White Papers.
In the early years this had always been kept small, but in the 1980s the Treasury increased it from the traditional 2 per cent of planned public spending in the 1976–9 period to over 6 per cent in 1990–1.
This squeezed individual planned targets even more and came to be used to finance items like pay or local authority overspend.
Central government knew this would happen but did not want to admit to it in its plans.
Local authorities have presented the Treasury with a particular problem from the outset.
Though having no statutory power to control local authority spending in total, the Plowden reforms included local authority spending as part of public expenditure.
It was, therefore, in theory, subject to PES overall limits.
We describe in detail in the next chapter the consequent growing controls on local spending.
However, from the 1990 White Paper (Cm 1021, 1990) the Treasury gave up including in the total of planned public expenditure that part of local authority expenditure which is locally financed through local taxes and charges.
The logic — that the Treasury could not be expected to control something that was for local councils' electorates to decide  finally sank in, not least because the Treasury had so regularly failed to keep them to their limits.
This was not before other constraints on local revenue raising and spending had been put in place (see Chapter 5).
It is important to realise, however, that the planning totals in the Public Expenditure White Paper from 1990 onwards exclude an element of local spending which they used to include.
Central government grants to local authorities are part of the published totals.
Cuts and controls — did they succeed?
Cuts in services
It was the Labour government of 1976 that first broke the trend of public spending taking a regularly higher share of total national income.
The tight hold was maintained by Thatcher's government.
As in previous economic crises, capital expenditure was hit hardest, but on a scale not experienced before — cut to a half or to a third of previous levels in some cases.
Local authority housing expenditure suffered most.
On current spending education was essentially stabilised in real volume terms for over a decade, and the rates of growth in health and personal social services slowed down or ceased for some periods.
It was social security expenditure that increased, un-cash limited and driven by unemployment.
The break with the past is most clearly seen in Figure 4.2.
The year in which social welfare spending's rising share of the national income stopped rising was 1976.
Figure 4.3 shows the recent story in more detail.
It was not until 1990 that the share of the GDP going to the welfare state began to show a small rise.
Figure 4.4 shows how the absolute amounts spent on the services covered in this book stagnated in real terms after 1974.
Only cash benefits grew.
After decades of regular service growth this was a traumatic change.
The changes in public spending on welfare services since 1974 are examined in detail, with the outcomes for each service, in Hills (1990) and summarised in subsequent chapters in this book.
Less than Thatcher hoped
While the Callaghan Labour government broke the pattern of growth in 1976, by the end of its term, in 1978/9, it was planning to expand public expenditure again in line with economic growth.
The first Conservative Public Expenditure White Paper in November 1979 (Cmnd 7746,1979) set its sights on a really radical change.
It opened with a diagnosis of the United Kingdom's economic ills which put public expenditure ‘at the heart of Britain's present economic difficulties’(p. 1).
In the new government's first full review, presented in the 1980 Public Expenditure White Paper (Cmnd 7866, 1980), the stated intention was to reduce real term spending by 4 per cent in four years.
The aim was ‘not merely to halt the growth of public expenditure but to progressively reduce it’(p. 5).
It was to fail, partly because defence and law and order spending were committed to grow, but also because social security spending rose so rapidly, despite cuts in benefit levels.
The other side of the government's economic policy, monetary restraint and unemployment, made its public spending goal difficult to achieve, so the goal was modified.
The aim, after 1984, was to keep spending ‘broadly  at its present levels’ in real terms and reduce it as a percentage of the gross domestic product (Cmnd 9428, 1985).
As the economy grew that happened, although the goal of stable real spending can only be said to have been achieved up to 1990 if the returns from privatisation are included to reduce the total — essentially a cheat.
According to the government's figures (Cm 1021, 1990) public expenditure as a share of the GDP was 43.5 per cent in 1979/80.
It rose to 46.75 per cent in 1982/3.
It then fell to 39 per cent in 1990/1 (excluding privatisation proceeds in each case).
The 1990 White Paper (Cm 1021, 1990) contained another shift of the goal posts.
Now, the figures reveal, the aim was to keep public spending roughly constant as a percentage of GDP.
In short, public spending was to rise in real terms but no faster than the GDP.
That was before John Major replaced Margaret Thatcher.
The 1992 Budget Statement suggested that the government was contemplating an increase in the percentage of the GDP public expenditure would take — from 40 per cent in 1990/1 to 43 per cent in 1992/3 and 1993/4.
The ambitious goal of reducing real total public expenditure in absolute terms was never achieved.
In 1991 total spending in real terms was about 18 per cent higher than in 1979.
However, in breaking the presumption of growth and in forcing services to keep within a barely increased volume of resources, the Treasury had succeeded.
It was no mean achievement, even if part of the success has been achieved by an almost continuous redefinition of the basis of the figures on which the White Papers are based (Thain and Wright, 1990).
Some criticisms and alternatives
Reforming PES again
Critics of the PES system in its latest form vary according to political persuasion.
Those on the right believe it has been insufficiently successful in its control function.
They argue that the main culprits have been local authorities and that their spending must be further curtailed.
I shall discuss this position further in the next chapter.
There are also those who would like to see changes  that would redress the balance towards the Plowden objective of social planning (Walker, 1984).
The control function.
The complete dominance of the control function over the planning function in the 1980s made service planning and efficient management extremely difficult.
Cash limits are a healthy discipline for departments so long as they are realistic and are not used as a form of clandestine cuts in services.
Since cash limits are set in advance of wage agreements and since wages and salaries are the largest element in social service costs, it is not easy to achieve ‘realism’ in the cash limits without some long-term understanding with the fairly cowed public sector unions about the scale of pay awards.
If the latter is not likely to be a permanent feature, machinery for achieving some long-term pay agreements in the public sector becomes important for achieving efficient control (Heald, 1983).
The planning function
The publication of volume terms figures for past spending would make public discussion better informed.
We tried to do this in Hills (1990).
Some longer-term, less detailed targets and stabler financial regimes for services are as necessary as Plowden recognised them to be.
The continual changing of public expenditure targets in real terms, and the confusing changes in grant systems, have played havoc with local authorities' and services' capacity to plan.
The efficiency function
Blackstone and Plowden (1988) argue that the government was wrong to abandon CPRS and the PAR procedures, which provided the means to reassess programmes in depth from time to time.
Heald (1983) argues that the PES system should be ‘rescued from despair and cynicism’ by adopting some of these reforms and others.
(Students should read especially Chapter 8 in his book.)
Two more far-reaching reforms are now discussed.
Budget reform in 1993
The UK Parliament is unusual in considering expenditure separately from taxation.
Public expenditure in Whitehall and the  consideration of the public spending White Paper by Parliament were quite separate from the Budget discussions on taxation.
This procedure made it impossible to discuss the government's income and expenditure in relation to one another, as any firm or household would do.
In other countries the ‘Budget’ means a combination of income (that is, tax) and expenditure decisions.
In a white paper on Budgetary Reform (Cm 1867,1992) the Government proposed to combine the publication of expenditure plans with tax proposals as a new combined Budget in December.
This will be done from December 1993.
Including tax expenditure
None of these changes fully gets to grips with the central weakness of the PES system as far as social policy is concerned — the failure to integrate tax expenditures into the system in an explicit way.
It is the ‘hidden face of public expenditure’(Hogwood, 1989).
The consequences have been as follows:
1.
The progressivity of the tax structure has been largely undermined so that the poor pay a very high price for their welfare.
2.
More resources are devoted to aspects of fiscal welfare than to cash benefits or service delivery and they are allocated in ways that pervert what individual service policies are seeking to achieve.
The decisions that the Chancellor takes, to extend or limit the tax advantages people derive from certain life styles, amount to specific social policies.
They may encourage home ownership, or private health insurance or personal pensions.
They are not, however, part of the PES process.
Indeed, even Cabinet ministers may not hear of them until they are told on the morning of Budget day by the Chancellor.
The consequences are, firstly, poorly debated and largely hidden.
There is no capacity to discuss a trade-off of 1,000 million between tax relief on pensions and higher cash old age pensions.
Yet the tax consequences are essentially the same.
Secondly, because a tax allowance reduces the total income on which a person pays tax, it has a greater value to a high-income person on a high marginal rate of tax than to a low-income one who may, if he or she pays no tax, not gain at all.
During the 1980s social policy-related tax expenditures tilted even more sharply in the direction of the non-poor.
Housing expenditure on council tenants was cut but owner occupiers gained substantially, despite the limit imposed on the value of mortgage interest that could be claimed against tax (see Chapter 13).
The main reason lay in the rising level of interest repayments home owners had to make.
Private pension scheme tax concessions grew as part of deliberate policy.
At the other end of the income spectrum, various social security benefits that were once relieved of taxation ceased to be so in the mid-1980s.
Despite the fact that Titmuss (1958) was one of the first commentators to appreciate the significance of tax expenditure, the United Kingdom has done little to tackle the problem.
Other countries have been more enterprising.
In what was West Germany some integration of tax expenditures into the Budget cycle was introduced in 1967.
Budget estimates have to include their purpose and cost alongside the traditional expenditure items devoted to like functions-pension tax relief alongside pension expenditure.
The US Federal Budget does something similar.
Canada has gone further and the US Congressional Budget Office (1983) has been urging the US Congress to go in the same direction.
The Canadian Parliament from 1980 on has discussed and voted on an estimates figure (an ‘envelope’) that includes both tax expenditures and traditional spending authorisation.
This forces Parliament to consider, for example, the balance between housing subsidies and housing tax allowances, and a ceiling is put on the value of the total — tax relief cannot just grow without anyone noticing.
France has gone some way towards the Canadian pattern.
Separate votes are required for each item of spending and tax relief and they are published together.
A reform of the PES system on the same lines is perfectly feasible.
Further reading
The following texts discuss the public expenditure control process and its reform in more detail:
CONTAINING THE LOCALS
Political scientists and economists differ in the views they hold about the extent to which central government ought to control the activities of local government.
Actual practice changed fast in the 1980s as central government's desire to cut public spending overwhelmed all other considerations.
The overall effect of these changes was largely to remove local authorities' financial independence.
Alternative theories of central–local relations
Four ways of thinking about the relationship between central and local government in Britain have been distinguished (Rhodes, 1979).
Local councils are the creatures of Parliament and they gain their powers only from Parliament.
Nevertheless, historically, local authorities have had considerable independence, more at some times than others (Foster et al .,
1980).
The partnership model reflected this tradition.
It is still to be found in the rhetoric of ministers' speeches and circulars.
Central government is there to set the boundaries to local government activity, to give advice, to set minimum standards and give financial assistance, especially to poorer areas, but local authorities have a distinct responsibility to develop services in their own way, setting their own priorities.
Partnership theory stresses the following beliefs:
1.
That a plurality of political authority is desirable, especially for such services as police and education.
2.
That it is important to use local knowledge and reflect local preferences.
3.
That to make these virtues real, local authorities must have significant independent sources of local revenue.
This point was authoritatively argued by the Layfield Committee on local government finance (1976).
4.
That there is, in practice, a large measure of consensus about the goals of social policy, so a degree of genuine independence can be tolerated by central government.
Proponents of the agency model argue that the partnership view is no more than rhetoric, for the following reasons:
1.
The United Kingdom is a unitary and not a federal state, thus if central government is really serious about any policy it will get its way (Griffith, 1965).
2.
Politicians are elected on party manifestos which have, increasingly since the Second World War, contained social policy commitments that must be carried out by local authorities but are often contentious.
No minister can afford to fail to carry through his or her party's pledges even if this means forcing local authorities to comply — by creating comprehensive schools or selling council houses.
Hence it is appropriate that local councils are dependent on central funds.
3.
Since local authorities account for a quarter of all public expenditure, central government must control their spending.
The more it wants to limit spending, the less freedom local councils can have to raise their own revenue.
Rejecting both views as over-simple, Rhodes (1979) produced a competitors ’ model.
Central and local government compete for maximum advantage and possess different resources.
While central government holds some of the cards, local authorities hold others, more in some areas of responsibility than others.
Statu tory power and financial leverage lie with the centre, but local political legitimacy, accepted ‘rules of the game’ and professional knowledge lie locally.
This model accepts the virtues of plurality and local independence, and argues that a competitive local  government is in the end a more efficient system; nevertheless, it does not believe consensus on policy is realistic or desirable.
Again, financial independence is crucial (Jones and Stewart, 1983).
The Marxist conflict model saw central government as the agent of capital class interests.
It therefore sought to cut spending by forcing local authorities to reduce services.
This would produce local protest and push more responsibilities to the centre, thus increasing government ‘overload’(Gough, 1979; Offe, 1984).
In the 1980s the open conflict predicted by Marxists did result, but it did not end as they hoped.
It was followed by a series of statutes that reduced local authorities to a minimalist role (Glennerster et al .,
1991).
The essence of the Conservative government's case, as it evolved, was as follows:
1.
Central government has a duty to contain local public expenditure and to determine what are the limits to any individual council's spending.
2.
Only by centralising power can the role of the state be diminished.
3.
Many services do not need to be provided by local authorities; they could and should be put out to competitive tender to be provided by private contractors — from refuse collection to school meals provision and old people's homes.
Increasing financial control
The years of growth
In the period broadly spanning the years 1948 to 1975, central governments of both parties gradually extended local authorities' social service powers, or encouraged them to use to the full powers they had already been given — achieving secondary education for all, creating a national pattern of further education, developing services for the elderly, sustaining a substantial housing programme.
The emphasis differed between parties but the broad expansionary thrust held.
Central government not only mapped out extended statutory territory for local councils to develop, but also provided a large financial incentive for them to cultivate the new territory.
In the early post-war years,matching or percentage grants by the centre met a share of approved local spending.
Unit grants were given for housing — so much per house built.
Even after many of the separate grants were amalgamated in 1958 into a single general grant, government continued to expand its financial support quite rapidly to make it possible for local councils to fulfil the pledges which national parties frequently gave in general elections — to replace slums or old schools, to reduce the size of classes, and much else.
Indeed, national politicians actually took much credit for the houses and schools built ‘under the Conservatives’ or ‘by the Labour government’.
It was in local politicians' interests to take these grants and develop services too.
(For an account of this period of expansion, see Foster et al .,
1980, Chapter 4.)
Yet the growth of local services promoted by central government in this way was not accompanied by any reform of local finance.
The rates continued to be, in the words of the Layfield Committee (1976), ‘an inflexible and politically sensitive local tax base’.
The central government thus came to fund an increasing share of local services (see Layfield Committee, 1976, Chapter 5).
This expansionist financial relationship made it possible for central government ministers to use the rhetoric of partnership, while actually bribing local authorities to act as their agents.
Layfield (1976) criticised this confusion and said that the centre must make up its mind whether it wanted to adopt a centralist or localist view.
It must either be accountable for the consequences of its growing financial involvement, or give local authorities a larger independent source of finance — a local income tax or sales tax and give local councils genuine financial accountability.
The party's over
The financial crisis of 1976 changed all this.
Central government now sought to reduce local spending as part of its general public expenditure strategy.
The Treasury saw local councils as part of that strategy just as much as spending departments in Whitehall or the nationalised industries — a very clear ‘agency’ view.
Local authorities did not see things that way.
The Labour government between 1974 and 1979 took a number of steps that strengthened the centre's financial control, as follows:
1.
It applied its new cash limits to approvals of local capital spending and to local grants.
Instead of increasing grants during the year if prices rose or wage settlements reached were over the original target, the grant was fixed whatever happened.
2.
The total share of local spending met by the centre was allowed to fall, putting more of the burden on the local ratepayer and giving local councils a financial and political incentive to economise.
The share of relevant expenditure to be covered by central rate support grant fell from 66.5 per cent in 1975/6 to 61 per cent in 1979/80.
The proportion of actual spending met was even lower.
3.
A formal means of reaching ‘gentlemen's agreements’ between central and local government was created through the agency of consultative councils on local government finance.
The new Conservative administration in 1979 wished to go further.
The Local Government Planning Act of 1980 introduced major changes in the structure of the rate support grant, as follows:
1.
The grant was to be distributed between authorities on the basis of a set of detailed standard expenditure figures, set by central government for each service after discussion with local authorities on the consultative council.
2.
Local authorities would get a lower rate of grant the more they let spending rise above these levels.
3.
On top of this disincentive a second system of rougher targets and penalties was introduced, based on a council's previous spending.
It aimed to fine or penalise authorities which did not actually cut their spending.
When this last measure failed to force some authorities sufficiently into line, the Conservative government, in 1984, introduced a measure called rate capping that made it illegal for authorities designated by the Secretary of State to levy more than a certain amount in rates, their only form of independent finance.
When both the systems of targets and rate capping were enforced, a local authority was effectively told by central government the maximum it could spend.
This amounted to the most profound change in the constitutional and financial relationship between central and local  government since local government was introduced in the nineteenth century.
Central government loses patience
Local authorities did not respond in the way the government had hoped.
Those, mainly Conservative councils, that were spending below the standard spending levels were tempted to spend more and gain more grant; those that were spending so much that government was giving them no grant could suffer no more penalties; and all kinds of ingenious methods were used to avoid the penalties through creative accounting.
There were a series of confrontations with authorities, like Liverpool, faced with threats of central government taking over direct control of services.
The government finally decided that the only solution was to introduce a form of local taxation that was very visible and unpopular to levy.
So the poll tax was born (see below).
The central levers of power today
The legacy of decades of growing central financial control can be seen in the central levers of power that now exist (see Figure 5.1).
Statute
Local authorities can do nothing that is not expressly set out in some Act of Parliament.
In this they differ from local authorities in many other countries, which have power to do anything which is not forbidden by the constitution or the national law.
Every action of a social worker must be justifiable under some section of an Act of Parliament.
In fact no recent government has reduced local authorities' statutory duties, only the money to perform them.
Legal action can be taken against an authority if it either goes beyond its powers — that is, acts ultra vires — or does not fulfil its duties — its mandamus .
If a local authority persistently refuses to fulfil its statutory obligations, its powers can be taken over by   officers of central government.
This has happened in the case of civil defence powers on a number of occasions, and with the implementation of the Conservative Housing Finance Act at Clay Cross in the early 197()s.
The Greater London Council (GLC) was ruled by the courts and finally by the House of Lords to be acting beyond its powers in lowering its public transport fares in the Fares fair' campaign of the early 1980s.
Local authorities were not always subject to such legal control.
During part of the Middle Ages, and certainly between 1688 and 1835, local boroughs and justices of the peace had considerable freedom.
The strict limitation of local authorities' powers to specific parliamentary approval grew up almost by accident in the nineteenth century as a result of Railway Companies and other private organisations abusing their powers under private Acts of Parliament.
The crucial decision, indeed, concerned the National Manure Company (Robson, 1954).
The courts ruled that such companies only had the powers specifically granted to them by Parliament, and the ruling was extended to local authorities despite the fact that they were independently elected, not mere private corporations.
At various times proposals have been made to give local authorities general enabling powers akin to those of  continental authorities — power to do anything not forbidden them.
Audit
Auditors are normally concerned with ensuring that the accounts of a firm are an accurate record of its financial position and that employers or directors have not been absconding with the funds or ‘fiddling the books’.
Local authorities must have their accounts vetted in the same way, but district auditors — appointed by central government — have additional functions.
It has been their job to see that local councils do not spend money on activities which cannot be justified by statute.
The functions of the district auditor were reviewed by the Layfield Committee (1976) and revised by the Local Government Finance Act, 1982.
This set up an Audit Commission for local authorities in England and Wales.
It appoints auditors whose powers have been extended significantly.
Section 15 of the Act sets out these powers.
The first two incorporate existing practice, the third extends it.
(Similar functions are performed in Scotland.)
1.
Auditors must ensure that a local authority's spending falls within its statutory powers.
2.
They must ensure that ‘proper practices’ are observed in drawing up their accounts.
3.
They must assure themselves that the authority has made ‘proper arrangements for securing economy, efficiency and effectiveness’ in the use of resources.
Section 26 gives the Commission power to undertake studies designed to enable it to make recommendations for improving authorities' ‘economy, efficiency and effectiveness’.
Such investigations have given rise to wide-ranging reports like those on housing management (Audit Commission, 1986a) and community care (Audit Commission, 1986b).
Guidance by circular
Every year all government departments send a score or more of circular letters to local authorities.
The contents may vary from  technical advice to general policy pronouncements.
For example, the Department of Education has circulated local education authorities with technical scientific advice to beware of roofs containing a certain kind of cement in schools built in the 1950s.
Inspection
The Victorians invented an extremely effective system of central ‘quality control’ and ‘information feedback’.
The Poor Law inspectorate and the inspectors of schools were followed by others (Griffith, 1965).
They inspected standards in schools and decided whether the schools were fit to receive grants, and they reported in detail on the activities of local Poor Law Guardians.
In this century, and especially in the 1950s, the inspectors' functions became more concerned with giving professional advice and spreading good practice.
In the 1970s, following growing public interest in the standards of education, Her Majesty's Inspectors of Schools (HMI) stepped up their activities.
The old Home Office Inspectorate disappeared in 1971 when the new social service departments came into being and was replaced by a largely advisory Social Work Service.
The Barclay Committee (1982) argued for the reintroduction of a formal inspectorate, and the Social Work Inspectorate followed (see Chapter 11).
One of its concerns, unlike its predecessor, is the efficient and economic pursuit of their duties by local social services departments.
(For a description of the forms of inspection that currently exist see Day and Klein, 1990.)
In 1991 the Conservative government proposed to privatise one of the oldest and most respected of the inspectorates — Her Majesty's Inspectors of Schools.
Local schools were to be free to buy in the services of private organisations to inspect their standards.
Many doubted the objectivity of the results.
Capital rationing
Control of local authority borrowing began in the nineteenth century when central government was suspicious of the new local authorities and their potential to borrow money they could not  repay.
Thus the Treasury had to give permission for all borrowing undertaken by a local authority, not merely in total but for each project for which money was borrowed.
This weapon of control was elaborated and refined, especially after the Second World War, following the example of the Ministry of Education (Griffith, 1965).
Since local councils borrowed to finance virtually all their capital expenditure, permission to borrow was used by central departments to set the total capital spending limits for local authorities, determine national service priorities for capital spending, and set common design standards and cost yardsticks which ensured a tight degree of economy in capital projects.
Under the 1980 Local Government Planning and Land Act the old loan sanction procedure disappeared, and with it some of the detailed controls.
A council's total net capital expenditure for the year was controlled, not its borrowing or its project by project spending.
Money raised from selling property or land could be added.
Then that too changed.
Government policy swung in favour of selling council houses and other assets on a large scale and this gave councils potentially larger freedom to spend the receipts in any one year.
This freedom was rapidly curtailed in the 1980s and local authorities were only allowed to spend a fraction of their receipts from sales on new building in any one year.
Then in 1991 a new system of capital spending controls was introduced.
The annual capital guidelines
The public expenditure limits published after the Autumn Statement (see Chapter 4) set out target figures for local authority capital expenditure, a separate target for England, Wales and Scotland.
These are set three years ahead.
There is an annual capital guideline (ACG) for each main service for each local authority.
Part of these totals will include a figure for capital grants made by central government for a specific purpose or project.
For the most part, however, local authorities will finance their own capital spending from borrowing.
The amount they can borrow for the coming year is subject to approval by central government.
These annual ‘credit approvals’ are split between what are called basic credit approvals (BCAs), which are total figures for each service and supplementary credit approvals (SCAs) which relate to particular projects.
The final element in the total annual capital guideline is the amount the local authority is presumed to spend  financed out of the money received by past or current sales of property — receipts taken into account (RTIA).
Central government may assign a local authority a large guideline figure for capital expenditure but also assume it will finance a lot of it from sales of council houses, for example, and hence give a small credit approval.
A local council can spend more than its total guideline if it finances more from sales than the government assumes.
It can vary service spending within the total.
The ACGs for each local authority are distributed according to the measure of ‘need’ for capital spending determined by the central government.
The scale of these controls had therefore increased substantially in the late 1980s.
Controlling current spending — capping
Controlling current spending by local authorities has been central government's major headache ever since it decided in 1961 that local government expenditure was part of public expenditure and therefore should be controlled by the Treasury.
I discuss the merits of this argument at the end of this chapter.
Essentially, until the 1980s, central government had no final sanction over an individual local authority's decision to spend and therefore no way, except persuasion or financial penalties, of achieving its objective.
Central government tried both strategies after 1976, as we saw earlier.
Dissatisfied with its incapacity to make councils cut spending, the government adopted a final sanction — rate capping.
The 1984 Rates Act introduced a constitutional change of the utmost importance — the principle that central government could set a limit to the amount of taxation a local authority could levy.
By determining a local council's grant income from the centre and setting a ceiling to a local council's revenue raising, central government acquired the capacity to set a limit on any council's spending.
It did not attempt to do so for every council in the country.
It set up complex criteria.
If a council crossed an upper threshold implied by them it ran the risk of being capped.
The introduction of the poll tax or community charge was meant to replace this unpleasant practice but it failed.
Thatcher's government had to use community charge capping to limit some authorities  desire to levy a high poll tax, high; that is, relative to the government's somewhat ill-defined and obscure upper limit.
These sanctions were usually threatened against no more than twenty councils; these had to be named in Parliament and special powers taken.
Smaller authorities with budgets of less than 15 million were excluded before 1991.
Capping council tax
Under the new council tax announced in 1991 (DoE, 1991) the Conservative government proposed keeping the power to limit councils' right to cap the tax.
Indeed, in Scotland Westminster's power to cap councils had been less powerful, but that will now change.
Powers to cap in Scotland will be the same as in England under the council tax which will operate from 1993.
More from grant income
From 1976 through to the introduction of the community charge in 1990, governments had tried to curb local spending by reducing central government support.
In 1975/6 central government met 66.5 per cent of local spending in England and Wales.
By 1989/90 the Exchequer met only 43.4 per cent, with a further 4 per cent coming from a central grant that reimbursed authorities for part of the rate rebates that they gave to poor households.
The rest, 52 per cent, was income councils raised themselves from the property tax or rates .
Just over half of that, or 28.3 per cent of their total income, came from non-domestic rates, a tax on the value of shops, offices and industrial property.
Rather less, 24.2 per cent of their income, came from rates paid by ordinary householders.
The Local Government Finance Act 1988 changed that balance.
Not only did the domestic rates disappear (see below) but the non-domestic rates levied on shops, offices and industry became a national tax, determined by, and collected by, central government.
The revenue was then returned to local councils in the form of a grant.
This effectively increased the share of central grants to about three-quarters of councils' income.
The poll tax or community charge had to meet the remaining quarter.
In 1990 the unpopularity of the poll tax made even that levy politically unacceptable.
In 1992 the government made changes  that cut local taxation to about 15 per cent of revenue income.
It will be true of the council tax also.
Deciding the level of central government grant
The outcome of the public expenditure round each year produces the total amount of grant income local authorities are to receive.
This is called the total aggregate external finance (AEF).
There is a separate AEF for England, Scotland and Wales.
In 1991–2 the English total was 30,550 million, with 4,790 million for Scotland and 2,210 million for Wales.
This total ‘envelope’, as the Treasury calls it, is made up of three different kinds of grant, as follows:
1.
The largest is the revenue support grant (RSG).
This is allocated between local authorities on the basis of their population and a complex formula.
This is what central government say that councils should be spending on its services given its populations' age and social conditions.
It is called its ‘standard spending assessment’.
2.
The next largest is the payment to councils of the non-domestic rate income discussed above — the national non-domestic rate (NNDR).
This is set at a uniform tax rate throughout the country, pooled and reallocated — so much per adult, with an adjustment for poorer areas.
3.
There is a range of specific grants which meet a part of the costs of certain services that are particularly important to central government.
The largest of these is the police force.
Beyond these three basic grants are several transitional measures designed to ease the introduction of the community charge and the new council tax.
One is an area protection grant which gives extra to areas that suffered a substantial reduction in income from the business rate.
It also gives especial aid to poorer areas that lost a lot of income in the changeover.
There is, too, a grant to assist inner London boroughs taking on education powers.
There was an even more temporary grant to ease the political problems the community charge caused — the community charge reduction scheme (previously ‘transitional relief’).
The poll tax and the ‘son of poll tax’
The accountability case
A succession of measures to curb local authorities’ spending in the early 1980s had thus failed.
The government blamed this on the fact that only half the rates were paid by domestic ratepayers.
Poor households had their rates bill reduced or remitted altogether under the housing benefit scheme.
The government claimed that out of 36 million voters only 18 million actually paid rates.
Voters were agreeing to high rates bills knowing that others would pay, the argument ran.
This was largely specious.
It took the head of household — the husband, usually — to be the tax payer and assumed that wives, for example, were somehow uninterested in the tax bill or did not contribute to it.
In pointing to the large element of rates paid by local industry or commerce, the government had a stronger case.
The government concluded that if local voters were to appreciate the consequences of voting for councils that wished to spend more on local services every voter should be faced with the consequential bill — even those on low incomes.
This would make local councils properly accountable to their local electorates.
Rates unpopular
Rates were unpopular.
Although amounting to no more than 3 per cent of the average household's income, the rates bill arrived on people's door mat as a single lump sum annual charge.
Even if paid in instalments it was very visible.
It was not directly related to households' capacity to pay.
The more valuable the house, the higher the bill, but people's incomes do not necessarily match the value of their house.
Some poor people live in houses that have become valuable through changes in the local property market.
As we shall see, there may be good economic reasons to relate tax to property values, but this mismatch was perceived as unfair.
Single people living in a house on their own paid as high a rate bill as a family of four, all of whom were earning and using local services.
This, too, was a popular criticism of the rates.
It was used to argue that all members of the household should contribute to local revenue if they used local services.
In fact, there is no reason to suppose that a household with four members is more able to pay  than one with a single person, especially if three of the four are dependants.
Its income is the real issue.
The unpopularity of the rates, very evident in Scotland in the mid-1980s, led the government to adopt the poll tax or community charge.
The case for a poll tax (Foster et al .,
1980) was  advocated by the right-wing think-tank, the Adam Smith Institute, in 1985, and was then elaborated and presented as a ‘Green Paper’,Paying for Local Government (DoE, 1986).
The Local Government Finance Act was passed in 1988.
The poll tax was introduced in Scotland in 1989 and in England and Wales in 1990.
(For a sympathetic and independent account of the case for reform see King, 1990.)
Poll tax revolt
The upheaval the new system caused meant that councils had an incentive to increase the tax levy and blame the government.
The government had to give local authorities a succession of higher grants! o buy off opposition.
The task of registering every resident and tracking their movements proved intrusive and impractical.
The government ended up both being unpopular and paying more for local government.
Above all, the principle that the Duke of Westminster should pay the same tax as someone on below average earnings, despite relief for the very poor, was simply unacceptable to a wide spectrum of the electorate.
When the Conservative government came to abandon the tax after Thatcher's downfall, however, many of the Conservative Party insisted on keeping some element of the poll tax for the accountability reasons set out above.
The result was the council tax.
(For a detailed account of the period see Gibson, 1990; for a brief evaluation of the poll tax see Glennerster et al .,
1991; Smith, 1988.)
Son of poll tax
The government proposed the outlines of a new tax (DoE, 1991) to come into operation in 1993–.
It would have two elements, combining the rates and the poll tax.
Like the rates the tax would be based on the value of the property.
As with the old rating system the occupier, normally the head of household, would be liable to pay.
Unlike the old rating system there would be no attempt to value each property in the country.
Instead, properties would be placed in one of eight broad bands each relating to a  national average value.
The bottom band might include properties falling 50 per cent below the national average, the top band those more than twice the average.
The government left unresolved how properties would be valued.
There were three main contenders the rental value (what the property could be rented for), a capital value (what it could be sold for) and rebuilding costs (what it would cost to replace).
Only a minority of properties are rented and few at a market price.
Selling prices are at a market level and more readily available.
Rebuilding costs might be calculated on a rule of thumb basis but the assumptions would be relatively arbitrary.
Like the poll tax, the council tax would also take account of the number of adults in each household.
The basic tax would assume there were two or more in each household.
If there were only one, that person could claim a discount, as could poorer households.
If rebates are extensive this takes on some aspects of an income tax too.
Critics (Hills and Sutherland, 1991) claim that the administrative gains from the banding of property values will not be that great, as those near the band limits will have an incentive to appeal.
The tax will be very sensitive to the valuation principles.
Because the share of local councils' income contributed is small, small changes in spending by the council or grant by government will produce big changes in tax rates.
There will be a lot of losers in changing from the poll tax, which will make the new tax unpopular too.
The distributional effects will be very similar to a straight switch to a property tax.
The case for a property tax
The Labour Party alternative ‘fair rates’ also used a property valuation with rebates for the poor but without any element that links the number of people in the household to its tax liability regardless of income.
The case for taxing property can be made on economic and practical grounds.
Economic theory suggests that all forms of economic activity should be taxed as equivalently as possible to prevent distortions in the market.
(See Chapter 7.)
If one activity is not taxed and everything else is, resources tend to shift to that activity in excess of what would happen if people had free choice.
With the abolition of rates, ownership and use of property became the main economic activity that was not taxed, unless it was the income of  private landlords.
Taken in conjunction with the tax benefits owner occupiers receive (see Chapter 13) it can be argued that this was a major economic distortion.
Property and its owners are also relatively easy to trace and tax.
Rates had very low administration costs; hence the case for reintroducing some form of property tax.
Local income tax
The case for taxing income as a form of local revenue is simply that it is most directly related to the capacity to pay.
The Layfield Committee (1976) thought it the most feasible and equitable form of additional local revenue.
It does have serious administrative difficulties, though, unless the whole income tax system is reformed and further computerised.
At present individuals pay tax in each of their employments and their tax is deducted by their employer.
People live in households often in different places from their work.
Adding up everyone's several sources of income and grouping it into a household income, related to where people live and the local rate, is a major exercise that our present income tax system is incapable of doing.
The introduction of a local income tax therefore requires a major reform to income tax and one that points in the opposite direction to the recent individualisation of tax — with separate assessment for husbands and wives.
Some move towards a local income tax remains the policy of the Liberal Democrats and would be feasible in the long term.
The centralist and the localist cases
The centralist case
The Conservative government set out this case in 1983 (Cmnd 9008) and again in 1986 (Cmnd 9714).
Constitutionally Britain is a unitary state — not a federation like the United States or the former West Germany, where separate geographical units have reserved powers and can act independently within constitutional limits.
Local authorities are creatures of central government.
To pretend otherwise is to confuse the constitutional position.
While local participation is to be encouraged, its purpose is to give local  knowledge, not to be a rival to the authority of Westminster.
Variations between local areas' needs can be measured and compensated for in national grants.
Indeed, it can be argued that central government can draw upon and use ‘superior intelligence and knowledge’(Foster et al .,
1980).
The government (Cmnd 9008, 1983) summarised its economic case thus: ‘Ministers are accountable to Parliament for the broad conduct of the economy….
For the business and for the individual it is the total level of tax that matters most, not who is imposing it.’
In Paying for Local Government (Cmnd 9714,1986) the government said:
1.13 Because Governments are responsible for the overall management of the economy they have to be concerned with the amount of local authority expenditure, borrowing and taxation.
Local authority borrowing has implications for the Public Sector Borrowing Requirement (PSBR), the rate of monetary growth, and interest rates.
1.17 The arguments against high levels of taxation apply just as much to local taxes.
These arguments are not self-evident and it may be worth spelling them out.
The nature of the basic theoretical argument clearly differs depending on whether the economic analysis is neo-Keynesian or monetarist (Jackman, 1982).
Traditional Keynesian analysis required government to intervene in the economy to affect the total level of demand for goods and services, and to ensure that this level was high enough to be consistent with full employment and not so high that inflation was generated or a balance of payments crisis precipitated.
Aggregate demand comprised two basic elements, investment and consumption.
It was crucial for successful demand management that central government generated or contained investment to an appropriate level.
Local authority capital spending was used in this way as an economic regulator throughout the Keynesian period, 1945–76, by both Conservative and Labour governments.
For monetarists , control of capital spending was also important because it must be financed out of public borrowing, and that affects the money supply, interest rates and inflation.
However, as we have seen, central government has always had power to control capital spending and still does.
It is over current spending that the debate centres.
To neo-Keynesians it matters little what local authorities spend on revenue account.
Since local authorities have no power to finance revenue spending by borrowing but must cover their expenditure from taxes, their revenue spending — on salaries, equipment and so on— would appear to produce little effect on aggregate demand in the economy.
If they spend more and increase the local authority's contribution to demand they have to take more from local taxpayers, thus reducing their demand for goods and services.
It is this last step in the logic that caused disagreement.
Even some Keynesians argued that higher rates or local taxes could reduce the level of private savings, thus boosting demand above the expected levels.
In fact this is an empirical issue — are taxes paid out of private savings or current consumption?
If we know the extent to which changes in local spending affect savings and if government has some indication of the level of overall local spending during the coming year, it could make the appropriate adjustments to overall policy.
Moreover, the effect seems likely to be small.
Traditional monetarist theory is also dismissive of the need to control local spending.
On strict orthodoxy, control of the money supply will be enough on its own.
If this results in high interest rates, local authorities like other corporate bodies may reduce their capital spending, as the costs of borrowing rise.
That financial discipline is enough.
Monetarists have been hostile to Keynesian attempts at demand management in principle, arguing that they are inflationary.
Thus arguments for controlling local authorities' spending would appear to weigh even less powerfully within monetarist theory than in Keynesian arguments.
The real basis of the Conservative government's case then turns on the proposition that taxation is bad for the economy whoever levies it.
Thus it is clearly in the wider national interest to reduce the scale of the public sector, whoever controls it, and ‘where there is a clash between local and national mandates the national mandate must prevail’(Michael Heseltine, in Hansard, Vol. 16, No. 37).
The localist case
Those who favour local authority independence argue that: ‘National financial controls will lead to nationally run services and  that is politically dangerous’(Glennerster, Power and Travers, 1991).
The spread of political responsibility throughout the population to local councillors, school governors and so on informs more people about the nature of the financial choices that have to be made, and thus produces a more informed electorate.
This has been a traditional argument for local and participative democracy (Pateman, 1973).
The larger the scope of welfare state activities, the more force it has.
‘By providing a large number of points where decisions are taken by people of different political persuasions and different backgrounds, it acts as a counterweight to the uniformity inherent in government decisions.
It spreads political power’(Layfield Committee, 1976, p. 53, para. 14).
Individuals and families differ considerably in what kind of education they want for their children and what kind of care for their dependants.
At least the existence of a range of alternative modes of provision as between one local authority and another widens the choice available.
Local independence generates alternative and innovative models of provision.
The needs of local populations, their service objectives and the most effective ways of achieving them differ between areas.
They cannot be determined nationally; only a political and administrative system that is close to the local population, and responsive to it, can match services to this diversity of preference.
In economic theory the more nearly expenditure can be matched to individual preferences, the more efficient the outcome.
By analogy, the more nearly individual areas can match their populations' preferences for social spending to their expenditure, the more efficient will be the overall outcome — and the less ‘coerced’ local people will feel (Tiebout, 1956; Foster et al .,
1980).
This requires the capacity to make local judgements about tax levels.
Poor areas or areas with manifestly larger social problems can receive extra central help.
Those who provide and administer services must be available and open to local people's complaints and grievances.
The further away the centre of power, the more difficult it is to complain.
If local authority members are responsible for providing services but do not have to go to their own electorate to raise the money to pay for the services, they have less incentive to make effective use of these funds.
It is always possible to blame deficiencies on central government.
Proper local accountability requires a substantial source of revenue, and freedom to spend that revenue or reduce it.
This was essentially the Layfield Committee's (1976) case for a localist solution.
Layfield argued that the extent and complexity of central government's controls and the grant structures were such as to confuse those immediately involved and the public as to who was responsible for what.
The committee concluded that comprehensibility was a necessary characteristic for democratic and accountable service administration:
It is inevitable that arrangements may sometimes be complex and that there will be some aspects that require specialist knowledge.
But the main features of the system must be comprehensible to those Members of Parliament and councillors who are not specialists and to serious commentators and interested members of the public.
The requirement of accountability cannot be met unless those who are responsible to the electorate for taking decisions are capable of answering for those decisions.
(para. 11, p. 52)
Further reading
SETTING THE LIMITS LOCALLY
Approaches to local budgeting
In the light of the leverage exerted on them, how do local authorities decide what it is appropriate to spend?
Follow central guidance
One view of local budgeting is that officials are largely influenced by the advice they are given from Whitehall and that local councillors largely follow that lead, tempered only by party politics.
The public expenditure White Papers gave finance officers a broad indication of the government's medium-term intentions for local authority spending overall and for each service up to three years ahead.
What finance officers will not know until much later is how these broad intentions will work out for their own authority, given the complex and changing allocations formula in the revenue support grant.
As one officer put it in a local study (Glennerster et al .,
1983): ‘Using the public expenditure White Paper as a guide to local planning is rather like using an atlas of the world to plan a journey to Liverpool.’
Outwitting the centre
In the 1980s conflict grew in local-central politics.
‘Gentlemen's agreements’ and understandings between local officials and central government might work with Conservative councils but not with most Labour ones.
Officers, in both Conservative and Labour  areas, became more dependent on radical local politicians to determine spending strategies and whether to cut or to devise ways of outwitting central government controls.
Great ingenuity was expended in creative accounting to get round overall spending limits or capital allocations.
Capital expenditure was switched to current accounts, and parking meters and town halls leased to private companies.
These proved only temporary respites.
Overall, more diversity in local spending priorities emerged in the 1980s within the constraints central government imposed.
Told how to do it
Central government did not seek to affect merely spending priorities but also the manner in which services were provided.
This, too, was new.
The Local Government Act 1988 required local councils to put out to competitive tender the provision of a wide range of local services.
Only if the council's own refuse department, for example, won the contract would it be able to continue to collect refuse.
This process had begun under the 1980 Local Government Planning and Land Act, when councils were required to put out to tender certain housing maintenance and highways work.
Under the 1988 Act the following services must be open to competitive tender if the council wishes to permit its own service departments to participate:
1.
Refuse collection.
2.
Building cleaning.
3.
Street cleaning and other cleaning.
4.
School and other catering (such as staff canteens).
5.
Grounds maintenance.
6.
Vehicle maintenance.
The Secretary of State can add to the list.
If the local authority knows that it wishes to privatise and not use local authority employees at all, it does not have to go through the compulsory tender procedure.
In the first round of contracts in 1989, almost 75 per cent were won by in-house or direct service organisations (Painter, 1991).
A contest between competing departments
It is also possible to view the budget battle in local authorities, much like the parallel one in Whitehall, purely as an interdepartmental contest.
The main protagonists are the chief officers and chairs of the committees.
The pre-1974 local authority budget cycle was like this: each committee of a local council would discuss how much it would need to spend in the coming financial year, beginning in April.
This long list of detailed items, agreed by each spending committee, was submitted to a finance committee.
There the chairs of the various committees would haggle to bring the total additional claims down to some acceptable consequent rate increase and to decide whose budget was to be trimmed most.
The modern form of this approach has been described by Greenwood (1979).
Chief officers prepare their estimates for the coming year, setting out present spending plus price increases and what would be necessary to meet existing commitments.
Then a list of possible new schemes dear to committee members' hearts is added and a list of possible economies and cuts, 1 per cent, 5 per cent or 10 per cent in total.
The balance between additions and cuts will depend on the financial climate and the political complexion of the council.
There then follows a ‘Spanish Inquisition’ procedure at which individual cuts and new schemes are considered on a one-off basis in private by a small group of senior politicians.
The resulting bargains are then put to the policy and resources or finance committee.
It is in the course of this bartering procedure that certain simple rules of battle will emerge (see below).
The toughest chief officer, or the group with the most powerful chair, will usually win.
Incrementalism, or budgeting by habit
Another view of local budgeting is that it is dominated by habit, by small additions to or subtractions from the base budget.
Authors have identified considerable consistency in individual authorities' spending patterns over time despite the variation between authorities.
In statistical terms by far the best predictor of what an authority will spend this year is what it spent last year (Danziger, 1978).
Nor is this surprising in itself.
No council can hope to sack a large portion of its staff, who take the greater part of its  expenditure.
Many functions are mandatory.
Nevertheless, over time many authorities' spending patterns do tend to be perpetuated; the high spenders on education remain high spenders, the low spenders on services for the elderly remain laggards.
This reflects the traditions of an authority, or the lasting influence of a chief officer, but it may also reflect a natural desire by those involved to minimise the political conflicts that are generated when big changes are proposed in one department's budget compared with others.
There used to be an in-built assumption that the rate of increase in resources available to an authority would rise year by year.
Chief officers became used to submitting last year's ‘base budget’ corrected for price and salary rises plus an extra X per cent.
This may have held good in the palmy days of the 1960s for some authorities, but even then not for many (see Danziger, 1978).
Since 1976 the presumption of regular growth has been rudely shattered and has lead to the emergence of new ‘cutting strategies’(Glennerster, 1980).
Habits broken
In the short term local councils responded by making a series of adjustments, some short term, some longer term, as follows:
1.
They sold their assets — empty sites, empty schools, council houses — in the hope this would permit them to continue to build with the money.
2.
They charged for services or raised charges already in place to minimise real service cuts.
3.
They cut capital expenditure before reducing current spending on staff.
4.
They did not reappoint staff or slowed the reappointment process.
5.
They cut administrative and research staff.
6.
They cut someone else's budget — for example, grants to voluntary organisations from family service units to women's groups — before cutting their own staff.
7.
They shifted the difficult and costly cases to other departments, usually social services.
Equal pain
Unless there are good and generally agreed reasons for doing  otherwise, the rule which readily minimises conflict is simply to decrease each department's budget by the same percentage.
This effectively retains their share of the total authority budget.
Though this pattern is evident in some councils, especially in the less controversial services, it is by no means universal.
Your turn next
Some authorities have clearly operated a more variable rule.
In some years a committee chair and his or her chief officer win a particularly favourable share of the pie, perhaps because they have a popular or long-delayed major scheme to launch.
Then for the next year or two they do less well, suffering a declining budget.
There seems to be a feeling that having done well one year you should then take a back place in the queue.
Fundamental change
It is also clear that there have been long-term shifts in priorities as the cuts became permanent.
Even relatively small preferences made year by year by the same committee add up over a decade to a major strategic shift in budget priorities.
Social services departments shifted their emphasis to community care for children and the elderly as part of an attempt to economise (Kelly, 1989).
Cuts produced slower incremental growth in some parts of the budget and major shifts in others.
A simple incrementalist model simply does not fit.
The demographic needs approach
One of the accepted reasons why most participants agree to such a major shift is that the population a department services has grown particularly fast.
Education departments in the 1950s and 1960s, faced with rapidly rising school populations, were able to win the battle for funds locally just as the ministry did nationally.
In the 1980s growing numbers of very elderly people were a similar justification for social services departments to receive a higher share.
Corporate rationality
In the late 1960s and early 1970s a reform movement spread, dissatisfied with the apparent arbitrariness of traditional forms of  budget allocation.
It paralleled the growing interest in planning and public expenditure control nationally and the spread of American ideas on budget reform (Stewart, 1974; Glennerster, 1975; Hambleton, 1978).
A number of Conservative councils in the late 1960s began to introduce programme budgeting or its variants under the generic title of corporate planning , often on the recommendation of management consultants as a way of achieving greater efficiency.
A number of Labour authorities did the same, believing it could help them plan service development more effectively.
A national report (Bains Committee, 1972),The New Local Authorities: Management and Structure , recommended a revised committee and officer structure for the new local authorities that would replace the old in 1974.
Bains quoted with approval the critical comments of the management consultants, McKinsey and Co.
Inc., on one of the authorities they had studied:
in common with many other authorities [it]finds itself with an organisation and a system of making decisions that has changed little since the present structure of authorities was created out of the tangled web of local boards and functional administrations in the latter half of the nineteenth century.
The democratic forms of the Council and committees and the rigid hierarchical structure of the service have some great strengths but in many ways are not geared to the modern task of managing thousands of people and hundreds of millions of pounds of assets.
(para. 4.11)
The committee went on to recommend ‘some form of overall plan towards which the authority will work and against which it can measure its achievement’.
Instead of the brief annual bargaining over estimates, each year's budget would be the outcome of a longer-term planning process which set authority-wide priorities.
There should be fewer larger committees responsible for a whole range of related services-leisure, transport, education, housing, social services, for example.
Most important of all, a central committee, rather like the Cabinet, would be responsible for key policy and spending priorities — the policy and resources committee.
Most authorities lacked such a committee before this except in a shadow, non-statutory form within the majority party caucus.
The policy and resources committee would have subcommittees looking at finance, staffing and land, and one that would review and monitor spending programmes to see that they were achieving results economically — a performance and review  subcommittee.
The changed committee structure was paralleled by a changed management hierarchy with a new chief executive, a managing director, at its head.
In other authorities corporate management was combined with a new system of area management .
This was designed both to decentralise the delivery of services through mini-town halls, and to generate local plans which would feed into an overall local authority or corporate plan spanning a four-year period.
This was perhaps the height of the reform movement's optimism.
In a study of which authorities had developed more sophisticated budget systems and corporate organisation, Greenwood et al .
(1980b) test several interesting hypotheses.
They suggest that the environment within which local authorities have to work affects their organisational structure and budgeting procedures.
The more complex the social problems, the more elaborate the services provided —‘differentiation’.
Greater social demands for services and the interaction of these factors produce a more complex organisational response.
The greater the service complexity, the larger the authority and the tighter the limits to the budget, so the greater will be the organisational need for co-ordination and priority setting-'integration'.
Hence we would expect to see, and to some extent do see, the larger urban authorities with more social problems evolving more elaborate co-ordination and planning.
Whether these will be centralised or decentralised depends on local circumstances.
In some areas top-down systems with powerful central corporate planning groups and chief executives will not work.
Instead, authorities develop matrix forms of management — specialist study groups, collaborating on particular issues, forming and reforming.
Co-ordination takes place at all levels between departmental hierarchies.
Elsewhere, Greenwood (1979) suggests that tighter limits on spending enforced by central government encouraged more local authorities to move further away from the traditional incremental pattern of budgeting and introduce more ‘rational’ methods: strategic analyses of spending, attempts to forecast demands and changing needs, and new budget structures.
However, in the 1980s, government's repeated sudden and confused demands for economy created a great deal of uncertainty which actually led many authorities to abandon what planning systems they had created.
On the other hand, many councils saw service decentralisation, area budgeting and community councils as a move towards involving local people in the difficult decisions that cuts involved, and as a way of improving their efficiency.
Walsall, Islington and Tower Hamlets were all examples.
Nationally the Priority Estates Project pressed for devolved budgets and management boards to run council estates (Power, 1987b, 1991).
Other authorities in England, and more in Scotland, have developed different variants.
The authority is divided into smaller constituent parts with several wards grouped together.
The administration of these services is decentralised as far as possible to conform with these areas in more accessible mini-town halls.
An area committee of local councillors is responsible for overseeing these local services.
A local budget can be drawn up with a degree of devolved responsibility.
Meetings of local electors may be held to consider area priorities and identify issues of concern to that particular area.
These may be formalised in neighbourhood or community councils.
There may be local meetings to discuss services for particular groups in the community such as the elderly.
At an early stage in the council's budget process these issues and preferences are fed into the consideration of next year's spending plans.
A modern local budgeting cycle
All these experiments have left their mark, as has central government's heavy hand.
What has now emerged in most authorities is a budget cycle that includes some or all of the following features.
A central budget constraint
The Chancellor's Autumn Statement and subsequent central grant settlement sets financial parameters within which local authorities will have to work.
So, too, does some guess about where the government may set a capping limit.
The finance director gives committees advice on the authority's overall budget constraints for the next year.
However, in many authorities, especially the larger ones, the process of thinking about next year's budget has begun months before.
The corporate function
Once one budget round is over in March, the chief executive and the chief officers' group will prepare papers for the policy and resources committee identifying key issues for deeper analysis, possible priorities for the next financial year, and areas for major economies.
The finance officers will prepare an analysis of existing spending commitments and the costs of new schemes that will be complete by next year-the costs and loan repayments on the provision of a new home for old people, for example.
The finance officer will also offer advice on the revenue the authority can expect from the government and from the council tax on various assumptions.
The policy and resources committee will then set guidelines indicating clear policy priorities that should guide the preparation of the estimates, and initiate studies that will identify areas where cuts can be made, or expansion can be concentrated.
In contrast to the ‘Spanish Inquisition’ method, a prior decision on priorities and cuts will have been made before the hectic bargaining about detail begins.
Interdepartmental reviews of policy for particular groups like the elderly or the under-5s will be a continuing feature of the corporate process going to the parent committees.
Thus by the time the size of the government grant is known in late autumn, the groundwork will have been done.
A range of possible responses can be presented to members matching, some overall view of priorities.
Area reviews
Area priorities are discussed and fed into the budget review process from the area organisations, if they exist.
Departmental estimates
This more traditional process continues.
Detailed work on drafting the initial estimates for the next financial year by departments takes account of the prior guidelines and studies that have been undertaken.
They will be ready for November, before the government grant settlement arrives, and work will begin in the finance officer's department paring them down in bilateral discussions.
Chief officers and chairs will begin the process of deciding the share of the budget that is to go to education, social services and housing in the light of the strategic analysis discussed above.
The final decisions will be taken in January and February.
After this  the officers and the individual committees will be left to cut their estimates and keep within their given targets.
The policy committee resolution
This committee will have the initial task of resolving conflict between four policy streams — central government constraints, the authority's or governing party's collective goals, the demands of different geographical units and departmental interests.
The final resolution will depend on the majority party group of members and the full council.
It will inevitably be a political process but it will be a more informed political judgement, the reformers claim, than the pure bargaining process that preceded it.
In practice the procedures adopted by local authorities differ widely, and change in response to political control and financial stress.
At one extreme some authorities still follow very traditional patterns, in others a more corporate approach like that just described has been sustained.
Most are a mixture of the two.
Further reading
The sources of funds
TAXES
Taxes form the lion's share of the revenue that pays for our publicly provided welfare services.
In this chapter we begin to answer three general but basic questions.
What form do taxes take?
What economic effects  do they have?
Who bears the burden?
There is a large and technical economic literature on these issues which I can only summarise here, suggesting where interested readers can continue.
The structure of taxation
Taxes are a compulsory levy on individuals and firms made by law and levied by government.
Even with the legal penalties that exist, people go to great lengths to avoid paying taxes legally by finding loopholes in the tax laws; or they evade taxes by illegally cheating the tax authorities.
One of the basic problems for any government is that the higher the level of taxation, the greater the financial incentive to avoid or evade it.
Taxes are thus to be distinguished from voluntary contributions.
One particularly confusing term is used in the United Kingdom to describe one form of tax — the national insurance or social security contribution.
I shall discuss its historical origins in Chapter 14.
Briefly, however, the term derives from the state's gradual absorption of voluntary sickness benefit and pension schemes.
After 1948 all workers had to be members of the national scheme  and pay a fixed ‘contribution’.
The term then became a nonsense.
It bears all the characteristics of a tax and is called a social security tax in other countries.
Taxes can be levied by different levels of government — central or local, federal, state or municipality depending on a country's constitution.
Even prior to rate capping and the poll tax the United Kingdom had the most centralised revenue structure in the western world, with the exception of France and Belgium.
From 1990 it has become the most centralised system of tax collection.
Only 5 per cent of total tax revenue in the United Kingdom was raised by local authorities in the form of the community charge in 1990/1.
In France the figure for local revenue is 8 per cent, but in federal nations like Canada and Switzerland it is well over 40 per cent , in the former West Germany and the United States over 30 per cent , and in Sweden over 25 per cent .
Those countries with most fiscal decentralisation tend to expand their local service expenditures faster (Gould, 1983).
Taxes can be earmarked or general .
An earmarked tax is one that is levied to cover the costs of a particular service, and national insurance contributions and social security taxes are an example.
Since William Pitt's day, in the late eighteenth century, the British government has recognised the absurdity of keeping multiple accounts — the crown's revenue is the same whatever the source.
Economists have usually held that trying to tie a government's hands to spend in line with revenue raised for particular purposes is impossible.
Since all taxes are compulsory, earmarking is a pure fiction.
More recently, however, some American authors have argued that there is a case for separate forms of tax linked to particular purposes.
It enables voters to show some preference for different kinds of spending, for example, by campaigning to resist or increase the education or social security tax.
Earmarking, they claim, increases the amount of information and leverage voters have on tax and expenditure questions (Brennan and Buchanan, 1980).
Payment of social security contributions over a given period ‘entitles’ the payer to a benefit,(though only until the law is changed!).
Payment of other taxes is not linked to any right to benefit.
Social security contributions are paid into the National Insurance Fund from which non-means-tested benefits are paid (see Chapter 14).
All other central government revenue is paid  into the Consolidated Fund — a ‘common bucket’ from which remaining expenditure is financed.
The next most basic distinction is between direct taxes levied on households' and enterprises' incomes and indirect taxes levied on expenditure.
Direct taxes
There are various forms direct taxes can take and in theory they can be levied by either central or local government.
Poll tax
The earliest and simplest form of tax was to oblige every person to pay so much each.
The tax was used by the ancient Greeks; the levy of 1380 led to Wat Tyler's rebellion in the Middle Ages; and the tax was used by southern states in the United States to exclude black people from voting.
It was discussed by Thatcher's government (DoE, 1981) as a new source or revenue for local government, and was initially rejected.
Then, as we saw in the previous chapter, it was introduced in Scotland in 1989 and in England and Wales in 1990, but it lasted for a very short period.
Under poll tax, the poor pay a higher proportion of their income than the rich, and the share of income taken in tax falls as incomes rise, a characteristic we call ‘regressive’.
Income tax
This more modern tax, dating in Britain from the Napoleonic Wars, is now the main direct tax on households.
In 1990/1 it contributed 27 per cent of all tax receipts — not more, it is important to note.
It is levied on all those with incomes above limits which Parliament sets each year, and the amount paid varies with people's income above that level — their ‘taxable income’.
Over the long term, income tax has moved from being a tax paid only by the rich to one levied on quite poor people.
The share of a person's income paid in tax could be a flat percentage.
In practice, in this and in other countries, rich people pay higher rates of tax on their marginal earnings above a given level.
Those with lower incomes pay, or should pay, a lower share of their income in tax.
This characteristic makes income tax a ‘progressive’ tax.
In some  countries the percentage tax paid on the first slice of taxable income is quite low, say 15 per cent, and rises steadily as income rises.
In the United Kingdom most people pay a common basic rate of tax, 25 per cent in 1991/2.
Higher earners move on to a higher rate — in 1991/2, a rate of 40 per cent for that taxable income which topped 23.700.
Most people's income is taxed directly by their employers and handed on to the Inland Revenue, an arm of central government, under a system called Pay As You Earn (PAYE).
In many other countries in Europe and in states and cities of America, local income taxes are levied.
Corporation tax
This tax is the equivalent of income tax on enterprises or firms.
A firm pays tax on its profits but that part of the tax paid on distributed profits — dividends paid to shareholders — is counted towards the individual shareholders' tax bill — a ‘credit’.
Profit the company's net income-is measured as the difference between its revenue and its costs.
This sounds simple enough, but defining costs, especially those of capital equipment that wears out, is a very complicated business.
Historically governments gave firms very generous allowances and permitted them to offset the costs of new capital equipment against profits, so that in practice the total revenue from corporation tax has been relatively low as a share of all revenue.
In the 1980s the Chancellor reduced the rate of corporation tax companies paid but also reduced the allowances on new investment.
The main rate of corporation tax was reduced to 33 per cent in 1991/2, the lowest rate in Europe (Economist , 23 March 1991).
The total revenue from this tax was 10 per cent of government income in 1990/1.
Taxes on capital
So far the taxes we have discussed (except the poll tax) have been assessed on the size of an individual's or firm's income.
Another way to measure an individual's capacity to pay tax is the amount of capital assets he or she may have.
Wealth, or the ownership of capital, is far more unequally distributed than income and is more unequal in this country than in many others, though wealth data in general and international comparative data in particular are deficient (Regional Commission on the Distribution of Income and Wealth, 1979).
Hence, governments interested in reducing  these disparities have introduced various taxes on large wealth holders, directed in particular at reducing the extent to which large accumulations of wealth can be passed on to the next generation.
A tax on inherited estates began in 1894, though death duties can be traced back much further.
The modern form of death duties is the inheritance tax.
If you died with assets worth more than 140,000 in 1991/2 you paid tax at the full rate.
If you gave your money away seven years before you died you paid no tax.
There was a sliding scale in between.
Large owners of wealth with good tax advice largely avoided paying this tax.
It falls most heavily on people with very modest savings or houses who have not taken appropriate advice.
In 1990/1 this tax raised only 1,300 million, compared to the 55,000 million raised from income tax.
Stamp duty
Another central government tax raised on transfers of ownership is stamp duty.
Before 1992 it was levied on the sale of securities, other property and land and buildings.
After April 1992 duty on securities and property, other than land and buildings, was abolished.
Capital gains tax
Here a tax is imposed when individuals part with an asset and make a capital gain on it.
The gain is measured as the market price minus the price at which it was bought, indexed to take account of the general price increase in the period.
Owner occupied houses are exempt.
Once more, people can successfully avoid the tax and the revenue is comparatively small — 2,000 million in 1990/1.
Property tax
The old rates and the new council tax were, or will be, the only form of tax revenue available to local government.
The tax liability is based on the value of the property the householder is occupying.
Rates developed as a direct tax on an individual's income levied so as to take into account his or her capacity to pay.
In the days before PAYE there was no easy way of determining an individual's or family's income.
The value or size of the property a person lived in was the next best indicator.
Today the value of property is assessed by the Inland Revenue — central government civil servants — a process which (in theory) is repeated at regular intervals.
National insurance contributions
These are levied on employees, employers and the self-employed.
They are paid into a fund specially earmarked to meet the costs of the national insurance scheme — the National Insurance Fund.
We discuss this system of funding in Chapter 14.
Expenditure taxes
Some reformers (Kaldor, 1955; Meade, 1978; Pechman, 1980;Economist , 17 September 1983) have argued that instead of taxing an individual's income, it would be better to tax his or her expenditure.
It would be simple.
It would not, they argue, be such a disincentive to work as progressive income tax.
It would be less easy to avoid and it would be an incentive to save.
Other economists are less sure (Atkinson and Stiglitz, 1980, pp. 563–6).
Indirect taxes
These taxes are levied not on particular households or firms but on the goods they buy or sell.
They include the following.
Customs and Excise duties
These are some of the earliest forms of revenue.
Imports from non-EEC countries carry a tax or customs duty.
The EEC itself levies a tax on imported food which will vary according to its price.
Basically, the levy will bring the price of food up to the level set for that product by the agricultural policy of the EEC, a price the EEC will pay European farmers.
This protects the farmers and produces revenue — but the revenue goes to Brussels, not to the British government.
Customs duties also perform the function of keeping out expensive foreign-produced goods.
They are raised by a separate arm of government — Customs and Excise.
This is concerned with levying tax on certain items — many of them previously imported — such as tobacco and spirits, beer, wine and oil, including petrol.
Vehicles
Cars and lorries are taxed before they can be driven legally on the roads.
Value added tax (VAT)
This is now the major source of indirect taxation.
It is essentially a sales tax levied at a percentage of the final price of the product  (17.5 per cent from 1991), but is collected at each stage in the production process.
The shopkeeper pays tax on his or her sales of all taxable goods, minus the tax paid by those who sold him or her the goods wholesale, and so the chain goes back to the producer.
Each stage in the production process thus pays tax on the value it has added; hence the tax's name.
Charities and small firms are exempt, as are certain essential items, such as food as a product.
Total tax shares
We can see from Table 7.1 that the structure of taxation has changed substantially since 1948.
Contrary to popular belief, income tax provides only just over a quarter of all tax revenue.
That share has fallen.
It is the national insurance contributions that have become the second largest element, with 17 per cent of the total.
Tobacco has collapsed as a primary source of funds.
Local government taxes once formed 11 per cent of all tax income, a share that is down in 1990/1 to 5 per cent.
VAT, which replaced purchase tax, has become the other major revenue raiser.
In 1979, the Conservative government reduced the standard rate of income tax from 33 per cent to 30 per cent but nearly doubled the standard rate of VAT.
Then in 1991 VAT was raised again to pay for the reduction in community charge.
That rise is not shown in the table, which predates the change, but it was expected to increase VAT's share of tax revenue to 17 per cent.
What effect do taxes have?
Allocative efficiency?
For the government to raise large sums of money and redistribute them to purchase social services must have profound effects on the economy.
These matters are the subject of a large and technical literature.
The student with an interest and a good grounding in the principles of economic theory should pursue that literature beginning with a standard public finance text (Musgrave and Musgrave, 1980; Prest and Barr, 1985).
The best advanced text is   Atkinson and Stiglitz (1980).
However, the issues are of central importance and can be simplified to some extent.
Classical economists begin from a model of a free market interchange of goods and services with no monopolies or imperfections in the capital market or the labour market.
In such a free market, goods and services would be efficiently allocated.
Everyone's preferences would be reflected in their purchases of goods and their productivity in wages paid.
In economic terms, resource  allocation is optimal.
Economists can then theorise about what happens when we remove those assumptions one by one.
The introduction of governments that tax goods and incomes in various ways is of course one of the major ‘imperfections’, and economic theory is concerned to show what kinds of tax would interfere least with allocations that would arise in a free market.
One of the difficulties with classical theory is that there are so many other interacting ‘imperfections’ at work that to measure the impact of a single tax is all but impossible.
Some general principles can, however, be deduced.
Direct and indirect taxes: is it better to tax incomes or goods?
Let us first consider the impact of imposing a proportional income tax, that is, one that taxed a constant proportion of one's income however high, and raising the same revenue as a tax on one particular product, or a narrow range of products.
To take a similar proportion of everyone's income away will not affect individuals' capacities to express their preferences between goods or services though it does bias their choices between goods and leisure.
However, to raise the same revenue by concentrating all the tax on one particular product or narrow range of products would change its relative price.’
This in its turn would change people's pattern of purchases away from that which reflected their true preferences.
In theoretical terms this results in a loss of welfare for individuals.
However, this does not necessarily prove that direct taxes are more efficient in economic terms than indirect taxes, for the following three reasons:
1.
It is possible for indirect taxes to be levied at an even rate across all goods and services; a sales tax with a single rate of, say, 5 per cent, or value added tax, are examples.
If these taxes increase the price of all products in proportion to their original price, they distort market preferences relatively little.
2.
A tax on a particular product may be justified on efficiency grounds if heavy ‘external’ costs are involved in its production or use.
Tobacco or alcohol are examples.
The public is not faced with the true cost of these products because their use costs lives and uses public health resources.
Leaded petrol, too, has pollution costs.
A higher tax rate on such items can be  justified it faces consumers with the true costs, private and external, of producing and consuming the product.
A tax on — smoke or water-polluting production processes, or a higher tax on leaded petrol or a congestion tax on vehicles in city centres, or a duty on heavy lorries that badly damage road foundations, could be justified in these terms.
A pollution tax could theoretically be set at a level that would exactly match the external costs involved.
The practical difficulty lies in deciding how to value the external effects.
3.
An indirect tax could be justified in terms of pure allocative efficiency if a product were produced under conditions of severe imperfect competition — a monopoly, for example.
In the real world it is difficult to see how such a tax could be imposed or calculated, and it would make much more practical sense to tackle the offending firm under monopolies legislation.
Taxes for the future
These arguments are not mere economic theorising.
Their logic is reflected in the kinds of indirect tax that are levied.
We have seen that VAT is levied at a common standard level, with food and a few other items exempted.
That aside, VAT does fit the rules of allocative efficiency quite well.
We also tax tobacco and alcohol separately, and government has raised the possibility of extending the principle of environmental taxation even further, to face consumers with the true social costs of driving their cars into crowded city centres or polluting the atmosphere.
It is becoming clear that taxation in the 1990s could be used as a major tool to promote a more efficient allocation of resources in society, forcing consumers to take account of the long-term implications of their actions.
Taxes are not just a way of paying for welfare: they can be a way of promoting welfare too.
So far we have discussed the impact of indirect taxes on allocative efficiency.
Direct taxes can also affect the ‘efficient’ distribution of resources.
At the extreme, a 100-per-cent tax will remove all financial incentives to move to the new job in a new industry that requires a particular kind of skill.
At the other extreme, a poll tax that takes the same amount from everyone will keep the same absolute difference between the rewards in one job and the next.
As so often, we have conflict between equity or fairness and efficiency.
A poll tax takes a larger proportion of poor  people's pay, but does least ‘damage’ to the ‘efficient’allocation of labour.
Just how important efficiency considerations appear will depend on how far the reader accepts the basic theoretical framework.
However, while it is possible to discount the efficiency consequences at low rates of tax, it becomes less and less easy to do so as the rates of tax get higher.
Taxation and the supply of labour
The relevant economic argument that reaches the notice of even the ill-informed newspaper reader is the proposition that high taxation, or indeed any taxation at all, is undesirable because it limits the extent to which people work, produce and add to the ‘wealth of the nation’.
This standard economic theory refers to what is called the ‘substitution effect’.
It can be stated simply.
Individuals could spend all their time at work or play.
In practice, life is better with a mixture of work and leisure.
The worker trades (or substitutes ) one for the other until he or she is satisfied with the mix.
At this point the marginal pound he or she earns from an hour's work is just more than equal to the value of that hour in watching TV or pottering in the garden.
Wages, in a purely competitive labour market, would reflect that trade-off (or marginal rate substitution).
When an income tax is levied, it will reduce the return or rewards for labour.
At the margin, leisure will be more attractive.
The individual will work less and give more hours to leisure, but this is not what he or she originally wished to do, and his or her satisfaction or welfare is thus reduced.
This view visualises workers and potential workers weighing up the pleasure gained from an hour of gardening, balancing it against an additional hour in the office or on the production line.
The focus of this theory is upon the comparison individuals are presumed to make between the marginal value of an extra hour of work or leisure.
Clearly, then, a progressive income tax which makes individuals pay a higher marginal rate of tax as they earn more will penalise work.
This has serious implications for the whole economy.
A low-tax economy will therefore, other things being equal, be a more efficient economy.
That is the conclusion from this part of the theory.
The first standard problem is that the market is not perfectly competitive.
Workers are not able to choose to trade small  adjustments in hours worked against take-home pay.
Fixed hours and production processes, and negotiated wage rates with limited opportunity for overtime, all reduce the flexibility of the trade-off between leisure and work.
Nevertheless, some workers do clearly have some freedom, to earn bonus payments and undertake piecework, to vary effort with reward.
Moreover, the major choices that face individuals are about what kind of job to enter.
Young people may very well judge that a job in a demanding high paid position is not worth it because the financial rewards are taxed away.
Secondly, for some people work and leisure may not be clear alternatives.
Work itself may be a pleasure and the monetary reward may be of limited importance after a minimum income is gained.
Thirdly, economists often  implicitly assume that more labour supply is a good thing.
In a fully employed economy, this is reasonable.
In the recent period of excessive unemployment and weak demand for labour, the validity of this assumption is less clear.
So much, then, for the ‘substitution effect’ theory.
A second perspective emphasises the ‘income effect’.
This postulates that people have in mind a target income they would like to receive — set by the life style of their neighbours or those just above them on the social ladder.
Households will do their best, with the main earner searching for a good job, undertaking training and pursuing overtime, while the second earner goes out to bring the household income up to that socially approved target.
If a worker's earnings are taxed, his or her motivation to work longer hours, to buy the prized new car or video, is increased .
This theory counterbalances the other.
It predicts precisely the opposite human response to the substitution effect — higher taxes increase incentives to work.
To put it another way, reducing income tax will increase people's capacity to afford more leisure.
Some writers (Musgrave and Musgrave, 1980) have put the two theories together, claiming that in the low range of income workers are motivated by the second effect, but later as basic necessities have been bought, and ‘social’ necessities too, then the trade-off between leisure and work becomes dominant and the first effect predominates.
Taken to its logical conclusion, this suggests that to maximise work one would need to place high taxes on the poor and low taxes on the rich!
These issues and many more are discussed in Atkinson and Stiglitz (1980), Chapter 2, and in Atkinson (1981).
It is not enough, however, to argue that these two effects simply cancel one another out and we can therefore forget about them.
If an individual works longer hours than he or she would wish to do in the absence of taxation, that involves a loss of welfare.
Public finance economists often stop at this point, leaving the impression that all taxation does is to introduce inefficiency.
They ignore the efficiency gains that flow from providing the services which the taxation makes possible (see Chapters 2 and 3).
However, in the reverse way, social policy writers tend to ignore the efficiency consequences of taxation and concentrate on the benefits of service provision.
It is, therefore, important to know how big the effects may be.
Evidence on the effects of taxation
Evidence of the impact of taxation on incentives to work is fully reviewed by Brown (1983).
The evidence is of several kinds.
There are, for example, interviews.
Brown and Levin (1974) undertook an interview survey of workers to test their views about the impact of different levels of tax on their willingness to undertake overtime.
The results suggested no strong association.
Most workers were unclear about what their marginal tax rates were, and consequently did not have any very clearly calculated response.
Low-earning workers seemed least affected, but on higher earnings some evidence of a small disincentive was discernible.
There are also econometric studies using panel data on individuals' labour supply, wages and personal circumstances.
Houseman (1981) is perhaps the best known.
Overall, the results do suggest that high taxable rates have some impact on men's working hours and quite a lot of impact on women's.
By comparing the labour supply data of different groups facing different tax rates over time, it is possible to build statistical models that include a measure of labour supply response.
This has been done in the United States (Hall, 1973).
These also show that the measurable effects of different rates of tax were very small for most types of workers.
Some workers did, however, appear to respond as the substitution effect predicted.
Mothers, younger people, pensioners — those without primary family supporting roles — did work less when faced with higher tax rates.
Some further evidence can be gained from a series of very  interesting experiments undertaken in the United States in the 1960s and 1970s.
They were unusual for social science research: attempts at controlled experiments in selected communities of different kinds in different parts of America.
Their aim was to see what incentive effects financial aid to poor families would produce.
As a family's income rose, so the cash aid was withdrawn at different rates for different members of the sample.
There was a matching sample that received no grants.
The effect of withdrawing state income as earned income rises is precisely the same in economic terms as an ordinary tax on additional earnings.
Moreover, a cash supplement to income would also be expected to lead to a fall in work effort.
On both counts these experiments might be expected to show strong disincentive effects on work.
The first of these experiments was in New Jersey (Pechman and Timpane, 1975).
Later experiments were undertaken in Gary, Indiana (Burtless and Housman, 1978), rural areas of North Carolina and Iowa, and the western and north-western cities of Denver and Seattle (Robbins, 1982).
A summary of the results is to be found in Brown (1983).
All are subject to fierce statistical debates about the methods and whether the results can be extended to a national scale.
Different experiments also produced somewhat different results.
The earliest experiment in New Jersey suggested that the reduction in working hours produced by relatively high tax rates was small — a 0.5-per-cent reduction in hours worked by men who received a cash supplement and had it withdrawn at a 50-per-cent tax rate.
However, wives were affected.
They used their extra income gained to stay at home to look after children.
The same result showed up in rural experiments.
The largest experiments were the last, at Denver and Seattle.
They suggested that, faced with high tax rates of 50 to 80 per cent, husbands in poor families worked less — a total reduction of 5 per cent .
Wives' reductions were greater — 22 per cent— while single mothers cut their hours by 11 per cent .
How far is it reasonable to extrapolate these results to the non-poor is a highly debatable point.
In brief Overall, it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that high tax rates do reduce labour participation, certainly for poor households doing  unpleasant jobs and for women.
But the scale of these effects, especially for married men, is small.
None of these studies, however, deals with the issue raised earlier.
How far does the knowledge that the state will tax away high salaries deter people from entering high-earning and demanding jobs?
Since tax avoidance is so effective, the answer is probably not much.
However, that is not a good reason for trying to levy high tax rates that no-one can enforce.
Who pays taxes?
Like so many questions about taxation, this is deceptively simple.
If the government puts an extra tax on whisky, who pays it whisky drinkers?
If the government puts a tax on employers for every worker they employ, who pays — the employers?
A little more thought suggests that the interactions are more complex.
What if the price of whisky is already so high that no-one is prepared to buy any more if the price goes up again?
In that case, shopkeepers and manufacturers might be prepared to drop their profit margins, absorb the tax and go on selling at the same price.
In this extreme case, the tax would be paid by the producer or seller of whisky.
In the same way, if employees and unions have already squeezed as much out of the employer as they possibly can, the employer cannot pay higher labour costs without going bankrupt.
Then the effect of raising the employer's social security tax will be for the employer to pay lower wages than he or she otherwise would.
These are extreme cases, but in most situations part of the cost of taxation will be passed on or ‘shifted’ in this way.
In short, the economic incidence of taxation will not be the same as the ‘statutory’ incidence.
By ‘incidence’, economists mean where the tax burden falls — who pays.
Public finance theory sets out the possibilities more formally.
The theories show that the incidence question is complex, and that precise calculations of who pays and who benefits are very difficult to determine.
One lesson seems to be that we cannot tell anything about the consequences of taxation.
That would be too pessimistic.
It turns out that the theoretical ‘shifting’ effects are less important than they seem in theory.
(The relevant findings  and theories are accessibly discussed in Pechman and Okner, 1974; Pechman, 1985.)
Pechman's study attempts to show what difference alternative economic assumptions about the incidence of various taxes make.
It illustrates the difficulty of such studies, and also suggests some broad conclusions.
The combined effect of federal, state and local taxes in the United States in 1985 fell heavily on the poorest.
The share of income paid in taxes was more or less proportional to income for most families (about 20–5 per cent of income) and then rose for the top 10 per cent of highest income earners.
The progressivity of the tax system had been reduced between 1965 and 1985.
That pattern was not very different whatever theoretical assumptions were used.
Remarkably similar results have been obtained by studies in the United Kingdom and other countries.
Taxes do not fall more and more heavily on people the more they earn.
The outcome of the political merry-go-round that sets nominal tax rates has produced a roughly proportionate tax structure.
That finding is certainly borne out in the United Kingdom, where the shift to a less progressive tax structure has been even more evident than in the United States (Hills, 1988).
As can be seen in Figure 7.1, the combined effect of the tax and benefit changes in the period since 1978–9 have been dramatic.
The gains recorded by the top 10 per cent of households amounted to 40 a week, mostly in lower taxes, while the middle income groups were little affected and the poorer ones lost over 10 a week in benefits and higher VAT.
Findings for the United Kingdom
For many years the UK statistical service has estimated the burden of taxation and the value of benefits which households pay and receive.
It is based on a national sample of households' income and expenditure.
It does not attempt the economic sophistication of the American work we have described — there are no alternative sets of theoretical assumptions.
In most cases it assumes that the burden of tax falls where the legal form says it falls.
But intermediate taxes on production costs, like the property tax, commercial vehicle licences and employers' national insurance contributions, are assumed to be passed on in consumer prices.
They are treated like VAT.
From households' expenditure patterns it is possible to deduce how much indirect and intermediate tax is paid, and there is a straightforward entry of the direct taxes each family pays.
There are many theoretical difficulties with the whole study (see O'Higgins, 1980), notably on the allocation of benefits (Evandrou et al .,
1991).
However, given the nature of the overall bias, and the fact that the broad outline of the tax conclusions would probably not change dramatically under different assumptions, the results are worth examining (see Table 7.2).
Table 7.2 shows very clearly what a proportionately high price the poor pay for their social services through the tax system.
The reasons are clear.
The poorest fifth pay nearly a quarter of their income in indirect taxes if you include in that the assumption that employers pass on their taxes in higher prices.
This figure falls away to 12 per cent for the highest income group.
Average income tax actually paid rises from 4 per cent of the income of the poorest to only 16 per cent of the top fifth in the income range.
This is a tribute to how effectively the rich use the wide range of allowances available to them and other forms of tax avoidance.
National   insurance contributions rise to their peak with the third and fourth quintiles.
At that point there is a ceiling on contributions.
They, therefore, form a smaller share of total income for the highest income group.
The official figures now show what a family would have to pay in rates or community charge if they paid the full amount.
The housing benefit they can claim to offset that bill is added to the total income.
The overall result suggests that the total tax burden faced by the UK population ranges from about 39  per cent of income for the very poorest down to 34 per cent for the richest fifth.
If we net out rates and the rebate on rates in 1988, the poorest fifth paid about 30 per cent of their adjusted income in taxes.
The striking feature, as in the United States, is how similar is the share taken by taxes across the income range.
Taxes paid in other countries
Britons have a deep-seated belief, fostered by the popular press and some politicians, that they are more heavily taxed than anyone else in the world except perhaps the Swedes.
It is true that before 1979 the marginal rates of income tax on the very rich were high (marginal tax rates are the percentage of the last pound earned taken in tax).
At 40 per cent they are now one of the lowest in the western world (Hills, 1988).
It is true that the rate of income tax is high compared to other countries.
In the United States, for example, people began to pay tax on the first slice of their income at 14 per cent , then 16 per cent for the next band, and so on .
We begin paying income tax at 25 per cent once we move into the tax bracket.
But,on average , people in the United Kingdom do not pay more tax than the average European.
Indeed, we are now one of the least taxed nations in western Europe, though we are still more heavily taxed than the average American or Japanese.
Table 7.3 sets out the international tax league table and compares the changes since 1971.
In contrast to most countries in Europe, again, we put heavy reliance on expenditure-related taxes, like VAT, and less reliance on social security contributions paid by employers.
As we can see from Table 7.3, the share of total incomes going in tax and social security contributions increased sharply to take nearly two-thirds of all income in Denmark and Sweden.
It is perhaps not surprising that this caused a political backlash in the early 1990s.
France also saw a large increase in public spending and taxation in the nearly two decades from 1971, as did Italy from a lower base.
In contrast the United Kingdom and what was West Germany saw a small increase in the 1970s and then stabilised their share through the 1980s.
The United States under Reagan reduced its share, but only at the cost of a large budget deficit.
In conclusion
Students of social policy often concentrate their attention on social benefits and social services and forget about how they are paid for.
We have seen in this chapter how wrong that is.
There is little point in mildly pro-poor benefits if the tax burden is heavily anti-poor.
The structure of taxation matters.
During the 1980s the level of income tax for high income groups was reduced substantially.
Value added tax was increased sharply, the national insurance contribution rose.
Benefits were made less generous for some, but the major changes affected the tax structure.
The poorest groups have seen their incomes fall.
This has been done to increase the incentives the higher income groups have to work harder.
Taxes into the 1990s
If we wished to pay for welfare in a way that was less burdensome on the poor without being massively destructive to the higher  income groups what might be done?
A programme for reform might include the following:
1.
Reform local government taxation to link the local tax to capacity to pay.
In the short run this could mean a property tax with substantial rebates for poor households.
In the longer term it would mean adopting a local income tax.
2.
Levy the social security tax at the same percentage right to the top of the income range.
National insurance contributions now have a ceiling: higher earners pay no more than average earners.
3.
Make a wide band of incomes carry no income tax, and marginal rates begin at, say, 20 per cent.
That would, however, have to be accompanied by the abolition of tax relief for most present purposes, including owner occupation.
This would permit a much lower marginal rate of tax.
4.
Introduce a tax to repay the costs of higher education for those who take courses.
5.
Abolish the present inheritance tax and make recipients pay on gifts above a certain band as income.
Reforms of this kind would go further towards making the welfare system more redistributive than any likely changes in the structure of services or benefits.
Further reading
FEES AND CHARGES
Fees and charges are payments made to service providers for services rendered.
The term fee is usually used to mean a payment that covers the full cost of the service provided.
It is the market price of a professional's service — the doctor's fee, an architect's fee, school fees.
In a profit-making enterprise like a private health clinic, this will include an element of profit, a return on the capital invested.
If the organisation is a non-profit charity, like a private school, the fees will merely cover the cost of the service minus any income the school will receive from other sources.
Public sector pricing raises more complex issues but it, too, is based on the idea that the price is fixed at least to cover the marginal social cost of producing the service.
(For a general introduction to the economic theory of public sector pricing students should read Musgrave and Musgrave, 1980, Chapter 34; Judge, 1980.)
The term charge implies some rationale for fixing the levy other than pure pricing criteria.
Charges for social services cover from 5 per cent to 20 per cent of the full cost, depending on the service or part of the service (see Table 8.1).
Why?
Though some economic texts suggest that the case for charging is essentially the same as that for any price mechanism, the history of charging suggests the motivation has usually been quite different.
The history of charging
Parker, in a seminal article in the Journal of Social Policy (1976; see also Judge, 1980), summarised the reasons legislators had invoked for charging in the social services.
They were: symbolism — expressing an ideological position regardless of the economic value of the charge itself; abuse — to reduce the cost of a service to the general taxpayer by raising the revenue from users; deterrence — to reduce the cost to the taxpayer by reducing demand for a service; priorities — to concentrate available funds on priority services and charge for less urgent facilities.
Judge and Matthews (1980) examined the history of charging in the personal social services, where many activities still carry a charge, and identified an even more varied selection of motives.
It is instructive to look at some particular examples, because they show that the simple economic case for pricing turns out to be only part of the story.
To avoid stigma
In his second reading speech on the National Assistance Bill in  1947, for example, Aneurin Bevan argued that the accommodation in a local authority old person's home should be charged for in just the same way as that in a private hotel or nursing home, ‘so that any old persons who wish to go may go there in exactly the same way as many well-to-do people have been accustomed to go into residential hotels’(HC Debates, 1947, Col. 1609).
This was a clear example of the phenomenon discussed by Pinker (1971).
People in a capitalist or free market economy, he argued, tend to feel stigmatised when they receive something free.
The prevailing value system suggests that it is only if you have paid in full for what you receive that you fully deserve to have it.
Otherwise there is an element of charity and hence stigma in the exchange.
Bevan seemed to be saying just that.
Charges have also been advocated for precisely the opposite reason.
A symbolic deterrent
Mary Carpenter, in 1851, argued that charges would be necessary in her proposed reformatory schools because otherwise unscrupulous parents would ‘throw the charge of their children's bodily wants [and]those of their moral training…on the State’(Judge and Matthews, 1980).
Though reformatory schools were later transformed into approved schools and community homes, the principle of charging never seems to have been seriously questioned.
It was raised in the committee stage of the Children and Young Person's Bill of 1969 by a Conservative member who questioned whether charging should be mandatory, given the widespread variation in the levels of charging practised by different authorities.
The reply by the minister was a direct echo of Mary Carpenter: ‘The principle behind this provision in the bill is that parents should be required — if their means so permit — to pay for their child's board and lodging, so that they are in no way better off as a result of the child's being in care.’
The practical effect of the charges is, however, trivial.
Even in the nineteenth century the total revenue raised from parents in industrial schools only amounted to between 2.5 and 5 per cent of expenditure, while in the period 1948–69 the parental share of the costs of children in care amounted only to between 4 per cent and 6.5 per cent.
The most recent figure (1990) is 12 per cent.
Most parents whose children are taken into care are extremely poor, either permanently or as a result of the crisis that has led to their  being unable to look after their child.
One is driven to the conclusion that here, too, the charge has most to do with symbolism.
A real deterrent against disapproved behaviour
There is no better example of the logical and ideological confusions into which we have fallen over the charging issue than in pre-school provision.
Local social services departments (formerly local health departments) provide day nurseries for some up to the age of 5.
They provide care and not education; at least, that is the theory.
Day care is in very limited supply.
In general, only high priority cases are able to gain a place.
There also exist private day-care facilities and child minders who provide a comparable service and who are registered and inspected by social services departments.
Quite separate and distinct, so we are told by the professions concerned, are the pre-school facilities run by local education authorities-nursery classes.
These take children only from the age of 3, and are staffed not by nursery nurses but by trained teachers.
The schools are open for limited hours.
Most children attend only part-time — morning or afternoon.
Local authority nurseries charge, nursery classes do not.
Why?
Again we must delve back in history to understand how we got to this position.
Day nursery provision by local authorities was strictly limited in the 1930s and charged for, as a result of the cuts in local spending introduced as part of the National government's economy drive, but when the Second World War came and women were to be mobilised in large numbers for the war effort, the government gave local authorities a 100-per-cent grant to cover the costs of day nurseries, merely charging parents for the cost of food served to the children.
When the war ended, however, the policy changed.
Women were no longer needed in the factories, and the traditional view that a woman's place was properly in the home and that young children were best cared for by their mothers reasserted itself.
Government cut the grants to local authorities, arguing that nurseries were now required only for families in particular need (Ministry of Health Circular 221/45, 1945).
Many were closed, but local authorities began pressing government to permit them to charge and reduce the cost of providing the new nurseries that did continue.
The Labour government resisted this pressure, but the next Conservative government, in the 1952 National Health Service Act, obliged authorities to charge the  economic cost of such provision but to apply a means test.
This further reduced demand and put state nurseries on a par with private ones except in the case of poor parents.
Thus state day nurseries became confined very largely to the children of poor and needy parents, often single parents.
Free day-care provision was, and still is, seen by many as an incentive that would attract women away from their proper caring duties.
In 1989, 780,000 children under 5 were receiving day care in the United Kingdom, only 34,000 of them in state day nurseries (50,000 were in private nurseries and the remainder with playgroups and child minders).
A way of relaxing public spending limits
Pre-school education was quite different.
Legislators in the 1944 Education Act looked upon nursery education in a positive light and indeed laid a duty on local education authorities to provide enough to enable any parent who wanted it to send their child to a nursery school.
The same Act, as we shall see later, abolished fee paying in schools as being a barrier to equal educational opportunity —ergo nursery education must be free.
In fact, the resources, notably teachers, were not to be available after the war.
There was a rapid increase in the number of primary school children, with very overcrowded primary classes, and governments pushed all the available teachers and capital into primary education, limiting local authorities' right to provide nursery education even when they wished to.
It was not until the 1960s that pressure began to mount on government to lift that ban and expand pre-schooling (Blackstone, 1971).
The Plowden Committee Report (DES, 1967) contains an interesting discussion on whether there was a case for introducing charges for nursery education.
A minority report signed by several distinguished social scientists argued that there was.
The main stumbling block to expanding nursery classes as a right, which they and the majority of the committee favoured, was the limit on public spending.
By reducing the net cost to the public purse by charging on a means-tested basis, it might prove possible to persuade the Treasury to expand provision.
Without that incentive government would not implement the majority's recommendation.
Moreover, they argued, very similar provision in day nurseries already carried a charge.
Unless the state expanded its pre-school facilities, children would be catered for in the private sector,increasing class divisions.
The  majority of the committee did not accept these arguments.
Essentially they retained the belief that nursery education should be free (even if that meant there was little of it) and that to charge for nursery classes would be the thin end of the wedge, soon leading to charges for ordinary schooling.
The teachers' unions strongly supported the majority report.
Margaret Thatcher, the Secretary of State for Education in 1972, encouraged authorities to expand provision, but did not accept the suggestion of charging.
(Students may like to consider where they stand on this issue.)
Avoid cuts
In the 1980s many local authorities faced the opposite kind of dilemma.
Faced with cuts in grant from central government, they tried to preserve services by charging users.
Councils argued that rather than run down the home-help service it was better to charge those who could afford to pay and keep the total level of service.
Museum charges and higher fees for adult and further education were all defensive responses to the cuts, as well as being supported for political reasons by some councils.
Some writers feel that there is much more scope for local authorities using their wide powers to charge to enhance their revenue (Blair, 1991).
To prevent abuse or reduce demand
When the National Health Service Act of 1946 was passed it was envisaged that medical care should be freely available at the point of need.
Related activities provided under the Act by local authorities, like home helps and day nurseries, raised different issues, but all medical care, whether in hospital or general practice, dental care and opticians' services were free.
So, too, were the appliances prescribed, teeth and spectacles, or surgical appliances.
It was not long after the Health Service came into being that the economy began to go into one of its periods of crisis.
The cost of the service turned out to be much higher than had been predicted.
There was a particularly high demand for the dental and ophthalmic services which had not been included in many of the pre-war insurance schemes.
There was thus a very big backlog in demand from people who no longer faced a price barrier.
It was this aspect of the new service that critics attacked most sharply.
Popular newspapers were able to find or invent a few examples of ‘frivolous’ applications for dentures or spectacles.
The Labour government took powers to introduce charges for dentures, spectacles and appliances, but it was not until the financial crisis of 1951 that the government finally brought itself to introduce charges for these items, in the wake of the economic crisis brought about by rearmament and the Korean war.
It provoked a major split in the Cabinet and the resignation of the Minister of Health and architect of the Health Service, Bevan, as well as that of Harold Wilson.
The charges would prevent abuse: that, the Labour Prime Minister Attlee argued, was the main reason for them (HC Debates , Vol. 495, Col. 374).
We have seen, then, that the historical reasons for charging in the social services are diverse and often contradictory, but a case can still be made for charging on a priori grounds.
I shall now set out the case for and against the extended use of charging.
The case for charges
Revealing consumer preferences
The most basic case for charging is the general case for pricing in a competitive economy (Seldon, 1977).
People who wish to consume a service know what resources it uses because they are faced with a price which just covers the additional resources that are needed to provide it.
If that price is too high people will not purchase it.
The pricing system thus reveals people's preferences in a realistic way.
Faced with a zero price a consumer may opt to have the service just because it is free, while not really feeling very strongly about it one way or the other.
Bleddyn Davies (1978), in his study of school meals charging, illustrates the force of this argument.
When school meals were heavily subsidised there was little pressure to change the traditional pattern of meals, or to worry too much about quality.
When the price was raised, parents and children asked whether it was really worth it, or sandwiches would do just as well.
Many authorities had to respond by modernising their service and providing quick self-service and more popular food.
Encouraging efficiency
When a service is free it is difficult for consumers to express dissatisfaction.
If they withdraw their cash from a particular school  or college, when they are not getting what they want, the teachers will have to respond or lose their jobs.
There is a direct sanction the parent or student can bring to bear.
(I reviewed these arguments in Chapter 3.)
Instead of the public sector having the advantage of free or subsidised services, the higher the charge the nearer it will be to the private alternative.
This will put the public provider in direct and healthy competition with its private counterparts.
Social services are not different
Although some activities cannot by their very nature carry charges, there is nothing about social services that leads to such a conclusion.
Most are not pure public goods and charging for them is technically possible.
(See Chapter 2 for a discussion of public goods.)
Foster et al .
(1980) use this point to argue that there is a case for more extensive charging for local government services.
Charging brings appreciation and self-respect
It was argued by some on the Public Schools Commission (DES, 1970), for , that parents and children would appreciate the value of the education they received and not simply take it for granted if they actually had to part with some money.Faced with the full cost of schooling, parents would ensure that their children made good use of it.
The same case has been made for social work.
Free advice is largely ignored.
If you pay good money to a psychiatrist or counsellor for advice you are likely to take it seriously.
Moreover, as we saw earlier, it is possible to argue that to pay for a service produces an equal exchange relationship.
The recipient feels no obligation, or sense of charity, in a market exchange.
Pruger (1973) and Uttley (1980) argued that those who receive free services perceive themselves to be in debt in two senses:
1.
They are in a vague way in debt to society or the state.
This induces a sense of compliance.
2.
Professionals who are already in a powerful position over their  patients or clients because of their superior knowledge can also induce a feeling of deference because the client has not paid for the service.
If a free service builds up a high demand and a waiting list, that too increases a professional's power to humiliate or increase the client's dependency.
A paying consumer at least feels he or she can say, ‘I am paying for this service.
If I do not like it or you keep me waiting, I will take my custom elsewhere.’
3.
The professional may make more effort, knowing that the client is paying good money for his or her services, in a society that values things that are paid for and tends to devalue those that are not.
The poor need not suffer
Those who favour charging reject the claim that free services are the only way of ensuring that the poor benefit from them.
It is possible to adopt any of the following strategies to give the poor access:
1.
To vary the charges with the income of the recipient and, if the recipient is poor enough, to waive the charge.
2.
To enable the poor to recover the charge from an agency like the DSS.
3.
To provide everyone with a voucher that can be used instead of money to purchase a minimum amount of that particular service.
4.
To ensure through general redistributive tax and cash benefit policies that all families have sufficient resources to purchase these services if they wish.
All these arguments, it should be noted, make the case for pricing , or fees , at cost.
What they do not do is to make the case for charging token sums to a small minority of users.
Raising revenue — the pragmatists' response
Although many politicians have not been prepared to accept the thorough-going case for pricing advanced above, many have, under the practical pressure of public spending constraints, been prepared to accept charging as a supplementary way of raising revenue, or to see charges increased as the only way of preserving a service.
Public expenditure bargaining in Whitehall is conducted in terms of net spending by the departments — that is, spending after receipts from charges have been deducted.
Thus at any particular point in that debate ministers will have to weigh the merits of cutting the hospital building programme or holding down nurses' salaries against raising the prescription charge, or of reducing the number of home students against charging a higher fee to overseas students.
The DES managed to fend off pressure to increase the size of classes and other cuts in the standard of the education service by permitting the price of school meals to rise, and then by charging overseas students the full economic fee.
The DHSS and DoH defended the Health Service in the same way by being prepared to see prescription and other charges rise.
The case against charging
Social service consumers are different
The opposing view holds that social service consumers are not like consumers in a supermarket.
They are not able, or are less able, to express their preferences through a market mechanism for at least three reasons (Titmuss, 1968, Chapters 10 and 12).
Enforced consumers
Perhaps the extreme examples are the offenders who must make use of the probation officers' services.
They are scarcely free to shop around for the officer who would give them the easiest time.
Many of the social workers' functions require them to act as controlling agents, or in the interests of children against irresponsible or cruel parents, or to safeguard the community against a dangerous or disruptive mentally ill person.
The state forces children to be educated for a given period, if necessary against the parents' wishes or indifference.
The notion of giving money or quasi money to a family to spend in a way they would not otherwise choose to do is very far from the assumptions  of a free market in which people spend their own money on something they want.
Vulnerable consumers
Many recipients of the personal social services are very old, or mentally ill or handicapped, or disabled.
Moreover, these dependent people do not reach a social services department in most cases unless the family cannot care for them without help.
As a consequence, such people are weak and potentially exploitable recipients of service.
The model of equal bargaining partners scarcely holds.
Many old people are as good a set of consumers as anyone else, but the very old and frail are at risk.
Second-hand consumers
Patients are not merely vulnerable: they or their relatives are not really consumers at all.
The medical professional is in an overwhelmingly powerful position.
The doctor is essentially the ‘demander’ determining whether treatment is necessary, what kind and for how long the ‘consumer’shall receive it.
The phrase ‘under doctor's orders’ expresses a real situation that is different from a normal market.
Many services like medical care are not bought in a normal commercial transaction by a user, but are bought via an intermediary or a third party, the insurance company.
The consumer is often not even aware what the bill is, and if he or she is, merely posts it off to the company to pay.
The disciplines of a market do not apply.
None of these are an arguments against market allocation as such; they merely suggest that the market's virtues apply in a strictly limited range of circumstances.
Markets can be inefficient
While there is a good deal of intuitive sense in the observation that social workers and teachers respond to financial and other economic incentives like most workers, it is a hypothesis rather than an empirically supported contention.
We do not know that market motivation is more effective in promoting high standards of care than professional value systems, ethical standards and organisational traditions of public service, professional and peer review, inspectorates, public criticism and evaluative research.
We know  little about the way in which workers' motivations are affected by the creation of a powerful market test.
The economic literature largely ignores the fact that the public sector has devised its own alternative modes of efficiency incentive.
In many respects these are deficient and could be extended and improved, but it is misleading to suggest that no incentives to good performance exist except market forces.
There are grounds for suggesting that the market test can produce perverse incentives, as we have seen in Chapter 3.
Social services can be different
While there are close affinities between education provided in a state and a private school, much of the argument does in the end turn on the belief that there is something different in kind in the educational experience gained by a child in a local community school and one in a private school catering for a particular income group.
These views depend on political values and preferences which we are not going to explore here, but clearly if you believe that society as a whole will gain by children from all income groups being educated together, or children from a local community or religious group being educated together, you will prefer a system of finance that favours such provision.
Different financial incentives change the nature of the educational experience and are not merely alternative ways of financing the same service.
Finance and provision are seen as interdependent, not independent.
Charging need not enhance a consumer's view of a service
It can do the reverse.
In a largely market economy, individualistic values predominate.
In general we value goods with a price, and devalue the ‘free lunch’, but it is possible for some institutions and professional and personal relationships to be viewed in different terms.
As Hirsch (1977) points out, sexual relationships that are bought tend to be looked down on in our society compared with those that are freely chosen.
Social institutions of long standing sustain their own value systems.
People's attitudes to the Health Service expressed in opinion poll findings suggest it is extremely popular in comparison with the health care system of the 1930s.
The poor can suffer
The process of reducing charges for low income groups may not be effective.
Precisely because ‘paying your own way’ is seen as the socially acceptable thing to do, where some do this and others do not the non-payers distinguish themselves as undeserving or in receipt of special favours.
Even if they are not inhibited from applying for special treatment they may suffer some loss of self-respect in receiving the service free.
Evidence on this subject is extremely difficult to gather and interpret.
People do not readily admit to feeling stigmatised.
Probably the most decisive argument for the free personal social services is that most of their recipients are already so poor that charges bring little revenue.
In brief There are contested arguments for and against charging for social services, which resemble the more general argument about markets we reviewed in Chapter 3.
In practice, the origins of charging are diverse and often little more than symbolic.
They raise little revenue because so many of the recipients are poor.
Some services, however, are exceptions.
Further reading
CHARITY AND GIVING
Giving as a form of finance
Taxes are a compulsory levy to finance services.
Charges often amount to the same thing.
Fees are payments made, more or less voluntarily, depending on the circumstances, for a service you buy.
A gift or donation is, at its best, a payment made voluntarily so that a service may be given to others.
Of course, it would be naive to claim that all gifts are made with no thought of any benefit that might accrue to the individual or his or her family at some future time, or to deny that gifts are often a reflection of gratitude for past services rendered to a member of the family or the donor him or herself.
Relatives may make a gift to a local hospital that has cared for a loved one.
Parents or relatives often make donations to their old public school or college as some repayment for what it has done for them, or in the hope that it may give their child a better chance of entry!
Many donors lay down more or less stringent rules about the use of their funds and these are legally binding on the body that receives them.
They do not change as society changes and this may be an embarrassment to the organisation or trust that administers such income.
It is quite wrong to associate ‘charity’ or voluntary giving exclusively with ‘voluntary’or non-profit organisations.
As we shall see later, National Health Service hospitals obtain an important share of all monetary gifts and other voluntary help.
But while public provision does not preclude charitable giving, the existence of the profit motive in any service usually does.
It seems  improbable that donors will be motivated to give time or money to a profit-making hospital or home, on the grounds that it would be difficult to ensure that the patients or residents received the benefit, not the owner.
Forms of giving
Unpaid caring
It is possible to distinguish many different forms of giving in the field of welfare.
First, and most important in relation to the personal social services, is caring within the family — services given without financial reward to other members of the household, including children, or to relations outside the household.
A number of points can be made about this form of giving, as follows:
1.
If it were not for such giving the burden on the formal services and on tax payers would be far greater.
2.
Much of the most personal forms of care is done by women, but both men and women contribute a lot of time.
3.
Most of the burden falls very heavily on a small number of people.
4.
The motives and felt obligations that lie behind such giving are complex (Finch, 1987; Lewis and Meredith, 1988).
5.
Much of this care is not voluntary; it is enforced by lack of other services and is sometimes resented by those doing the caring.
In so far as this is the case, the result is similar to a tax on the carers concerned.
Studies in the 1980s revealed the scale of unpaid caring.
The General Household Survey's special analysis of carers in 1985 (Green, 1988) suggested that: 1.7 million adults are caring for someone living with them; 1.4 million are spending at least twenty hours per week doing so; and 3.4 million are bearing the main responsibility for the care of someone.
Overall, about one adult in seven was caring for someone who was sick, elderly or handicapped.
Although some of the early literature suggested this was a largely female responsibility, a reanalysis of the General Household Survey suggests that this is not so.
15 per cent of women are  caring for someone, but so are 12 per cent of men (Evandrou, 1990).
It is true that women live longer when more of such caring is undertaken hence there are more women carers in absolute terms — 3.5 million compared to 2.5 million men.
The type of care given is gendered to some extent; 28 per cent of women are giving personal care, as against 19 per cent of men.
Men do more physical work.
And Parker (1990) points out: ‘The costs to informal carers of caring for dependent people can include economic, physical, emotional and opportunity costs: loss and reduction of employment; reduced income; increased expenditure; restricted family and social life and physical and emotional strain': where families had a severely disabled child, mothers’ participation in the labour market was lower, they worked fewer hours and were paid less.
Fathers' employment was not as affected.
The same kinds of effect can be seen in studies of families with disabled young adults (Hirst, 1984) and a disabled spouse (Martin and White, 1988).
Putting a cash figure to the loss of employment that results from caring responsibilities is far from straightforward.
It is estimated that for women to give up work to look after disabled relatives cost earnings of 8,500 if they had no children and about 7,000 if they had.
Family income in families with dependent children is lower (Smyth and Robins, 1989).
Evandrou (1990) showed that, nationally, the equivalent income of carers (taking account of family size) was somewhat lower than for non-carers, but the real drop in income was experienced by those caring for someone in their own household.
While non-carers' individual equivalised median income was 87 in 1985, carers with a dependant in their household had a median income of only 64 a week.
This drop in income can be seen as a private contribution to the cost of care by the family itself.
The policy question is how far families should bear the burden themselves and how far the state, through social security, or otherwise, should pay for the costs of disability (see Chapter 14).
Giving human capital to voluntary organisations
Giving skills
Many voluntary organisations depend heavily on those with  technical, secretarial, accountancy, fund-raising, carpentry, building or professional skills giving their advice free of charge.
Giving time
Volunteers who give their labour free provide an important part of work done by Citizens Advice Bureaux, law centres, marriage guidance, youth work and teaching English to foreigners.
The Wolfenden Committee's (1978) survey of voluntary work in the social service field showed that 14 per cent of the national sample reported undertaking some work of that kind in a twelve-month period.
Just over two-thirds of the total, or 10 per cent, worked with some identifiable voluntary organisation.
On average these people claimed they spent about six hours a week on such work, and this was equivalent to about 400,000 full-time workers.
Later surveys of voluntary work have produced varied results (Halfpenny, 1990), but it seems that about three in ten adults undertook voluntary work on behalf of an organisation in 1990, a figure that had not changed much throughout the 1980s.
Giving in kind
Anyone who has ever participated in a voluntary organisation, youth work or parents' association will know what a central place is taken by jumble sales and selling raffle tickets (see Table 9.1).
Whether you see jumble as giving or refuse disposal, the fact is that it makes up a significant part of the income of small local organisations.
Gifts in kind on a larger scale by local shops or firms also exist on a large scale.
Unlike America, Britain has nothing equivalent to the ‘food bank’, through which gifts of food can be distributed on a community-wide basis to poor people.
The most highly organised and valuable system of giving in kind is the gift of blood.
Titmuss's famous book The Gift Relationship (1970) used the example of donating blood to raise the whole discussion about giving and social welfare on to a philosophical level.
He argued that there were some peculiar features of blood as a commodity that made the donating of blood efficient.
Since blood could be infected and since detection was both difficult and expensive, the best guarantee of purity was the screening of donors who had no monetary incentives to lie about their past medical records.
(Titmuss's work pre-dated AIDS, which reinforced his message.)
However, Titmuss's argument was deeper and more general.
Donating blood was an example of a social institution that   embodied non-selfish actions by individuals without demeaning the recipient.
It was important to provide an opportunity for that to happen in all welfare organisations, for it sustained an unselfish motivation which was in the end necessary to sustain social institutions.
Giving cash
The only form of giving that shows up in formal accounts is cash.
It comes broadly from four sources: direct giving by households and enterprises, indirect giving by tax payers, and charitable bodies' own income from property trusts or investments.
How much does the ordinary household give in cash to charity?
The Charity Household Survey, the Family Expenditure Survey and Inland Revenue figures give us some rough guide.
From July 1989 to June 1990 a national sample of households was asked to record their charitable donations of all kinds (Charity Trends, 1990 ).
In line with other previous studies the total level of cash giving revealed was very small.
Half the respondents gave 1 per month or less, and only 6 per cent gave 30 or more.
The mean or average amount was nearly 8 a month or about 0.76 per cent of  average earnings.
This means that the total household cash contributions to every form of charity, of which social services are only a small part, was not more than about 5,000 million, or one fifth of the cost of the NHS.
The level of giving has not increased in real terms at all significantly in the late 1980s despite attempts to increase its attractiveness through various tax reliefs.
Any income a charity receives is not subject to tax.
Charities are also exempt from paying various taxes such as VAT.
Taken together these are a significant help and in effect constitute an indirect government subsidy.
In so far as the levels of government expenditure are fixed by general political considerations, if one group is expressly given favourable tax treatment the value of tax revenue lost is a cost that must be financed by other tax payers.
An individual can also trigger tax help by making a covenant to a charity.
If he or she undertakes to make a part of his or her income over to a charity for four years or more, the tax the individual pays on that income is given by the tax authorities to the charity concerned.
The charity does not pay tax on its income.
Thus the price of giving is reduced for tax payers, especially higher-rate tax payers.
If I want a charity to benefit by 100 and I am paying tax at 30 per cent, I need only give up 70.
If I pay at 50 per cent, I only need give 50.
The higher the tax rate the more incentive there is to give to charity.
The lower the tax rate the more costly it is to give to charity compared to ordinary spending.
The lower marginal income tax rates of the 1980s made giving to charities relatively more expensive.
In America there are more generous tax advantages for giving to charity, since individuals and firms can offset any one-off gift against tax, whether in cash or in kind.
The inducement to give is greater, but by the same token there is a cost to the Exchequer in lost revenue.
Some early work in the United States (Feldstein, 1975; Clotfelter, 1985) has suggested that the scale of charitable donations increases faster than the reduction in tax revenue and that the level of giving increases sharply if tax reliefs are given.
Some have therefore concluded that such a tax deduction system would increase the flow of revenue to charities by more than the tax loss and hence produce an increase in social service provision.
There are, however, several assumptions in that argument.
The first is that the donations that would be made would go to  charitable social service agencies providing for the same groups as statutory agencies.
If tax-relief-induced donations did not go to pay for mainline social service functions and elected representatives still felt it necessary to continue to provide them, they would have a lower tax base on which to raise the revenue.
The second assumption is that additional tax relief will indeed increase the level of giving.
During the 1980s the Conservative government took several steps to increase tax relief on gifts with this in mind.
After 1980 it was possible for charities to reclaim tax paid on money covenanted to them for four years or more, not just at the standard rate of tax, but at the higher rate if individuals paid tax at the higher rate.
The 1986 Finance Act introduced tax relief on regular giving to charities deducted from the giver's pay packet.
In the 1983 budget, gifts to charities were exempted from capital transfer tax.
In 1990 the Gift Aid Scheme allows tax relief on single cash gifts to charities.
In short, a lot was done to increase the level of charitable donations from individuals in the 1980s.
Does it provide a new way of paying for welfare in the 1990s?
Jones and Posnett (1990) examined the relationship between the level of covenant giving and the tax price (that is, the tax relief you gain if you give through a covenant).
They were unable to find any link when other variables like prices and incomes were taken into account.
They also point out that more recent American work has cast doubt on the relationship there too.
In short, the latest evidence does not suggest that giving more tax relief will promote much more giving.
Companies are another source of cash aid.
Again, the Conservative government tried to encourage such activity by enabling them to make one-off tax deductible donations of up to 3 per cent of annual dividends.
The level of corporate support is low.
A survey in Charity Trends (1990) of the top 400 companies in the United Kingdom showed corporate support as a share of profit running at about 0.6 per cent.
This figure had not changed much on previous surveys.
Amongst those who did give, education, health and general welfare came out as top recipients, but the top 200 corporate donors altogether only gave 150 million for all purposes — a trivial sum in comparison with any social spending total: 25 billion, say, on the NHS or education (see Figure 9.1).
About 80 per cent of all giving in the United Kingdom comes from individuals, not very different from the percentage in the  
United States and Canada, but in the United States gifts amount to about 2 per cent of the GNP, in Canada 0.7 per cent and in the United Kingdom only O.55 per cent.
Individual contributions fell sharply in the recession of the early 1980s.
They were equivalent to 0.57 per cent of an individual's income in 1975 but fell to 0.35 and 0.4 per cent in the early 1980s.
By 1988 they had recovered to 0.75 per cent.
The limits of giving
We have seen that gifts of time, skills and even blood can be a significant component in the income of social service organisations, especially in the personal social service field.
Private money is less important, but still significant for some areas of voluntary non-profit social service.
Giving is also qualitatively important for the giver.
It is a means by which a person can express concern and gain satisfaction, especially if the gift takes the form of personal involvement.
Nevertheless, there are limits to the extent that charity can be an effective form of financing social welfare.
Prejudice against giving
The Victorians were much concerned with pauperisation.
They feared that well-meaning people giving out money to the poor would merely encourage the ‘non-deserving’ poor to pursue their lazy and irresponsible ways.
It was this fear, indeed, that lay behind the creation of the Charity Organisation Society, whose aim was not to prevent charity but to curb its excesses and ‘irresponsible’ hand-outs.
Though such fears may be associated, possibly wrongly, with Conservative values, a contrasting attitude is expressed by many on the left.
They do not feel that charity is an appropriate response to poverty.
The causes, they believe, are social and political and should be tackled as such.
Hand-outs to the poor will merely reduce the pressure for such change and are particularly pernicious if they are given by the rich, who are in effect purchasing their own privilege at a small price.
Both sets of attitudes reduce the motivation to give.
Reluctance to receive
To give usually brings status.
To be a recipient is normally to put oneself in a subordinate position.
It is not until that gift has been repaid and the exchange relationship put in balance again that a person will feel no sense of obligation.
The more sensitive we are to the possible stigmatising consequences of charity, the less motivation there will be for giving.
The more remote the relationship between the giver and the receiver, the less these inhibitions may be.
Perhaps that is why there is so much voluntary help given to local hospitals.
No-one supposes that because volunteers help out in the pathology laboratory, or carry tea round or give blood, the patients will feel stigmatised.
That is because giving is being undertaken within the context of a service that caters for everyone, and the gift is granted by what Titmuss (1970) called the ‘unnamed stranger’.
Nevertheless, such impersonal giving has its disadvantages.
There are, we may postulate, different kinds of giver.
Some people may be pure altruists.
They merely require the knowledge that they have given to their fellows, but most people will wish to have a closer involvement.
The more remote the giving, the less they will be motivated.
‘Free-rider’ problems
If we could be sure that everyone in the community was equally generous, it might be possible to finance social services by announcing how much it would cost to run the Health Service per head in the coming year and then leave it to individuals to post an appropriate sum to their local health authority.
We would all act on the assumption that others were acting in a similar manner.
The problem is that it would be in the self-interest of any one of us to withhold our contribution, let everyone else contribute, gain free health care and keep the cash.
We would get the ride free, as the economists put it.
(For a fuller discussion of the economic theory see Collard, 1978.)
If we know the tax inspector will force compliance if our neighbour tries to gain a free ride, we may more willingly pay our taxes.
By the same reasoning, individuals would be unlikely to donate to an activity that the state was already undertaking unless they could be sure that their gifts were not merely being used to reduce other tax payers' liability.
Arguments of this kind are very evident in discussions about how parents' associations should respond to education cuts.
If they do come in and give a computer or prevent the school library closing by providing books, may the council not simply take the opportunity to make more cuts in the hope that the parents will pay up?
The unevenness problem
If giving is specific, its spread will tend to be uneven.
If a millionaire has a mentally handicapped child, services for such children in his or her home town may be superb, regardless of how many such children there are in that town.
The problem of fluctuating incomes
Economic crisis (as we saw earlier) or simple chance factors like media coverage and fashion will affect the scale and permanence of giving for particular purposes.
Charities therefore face fluctuating incomes that make it difficult to offer consistent and continuous provision, unless they are big and have endowment or trust income to draw upon — and even then unwise investment policy or a fall in dividends or share prices may affect the level of the service offered.
These inherent limits to voluntary or charitable giving apply most directly to basic, mainline social service provision where the state accepts a clear residual responsibility.
It will provide if no-one else does.
In this situation the ‘free-rider’ problem becomes dominant.
If I wish to maximise my impact on improving human life, I can do so best by putting my effort into activities I know are unlikely to take place otherwise and into small-scale ventures where I can actually see results for my efforts.
It was for these reasons that Beveridge (1948) saw the role of voluntary activity fitting best on top of a sound comprehensive foundation of public social services.
Voluntary action could provide innovation, experiment, specialist extra help and the filling of gaps left by the state.
The economists' case for a third sector
Arguments about voluntarism and giving are apt to get confused with arguments about mixed economies of welfare and plurality of provision.
They are, in fact, quite distinct.
A non-statutory, non-profit agency may well have volunteers working for it and receive donations.
These factors will affect its organisational structure and ethos (Billis, 1989) but are not crucial to its essential characteristic — it is not a profit-making agency and it is not under direct political control.
Why should such a third sector exist?
Is it merely a remnant of the past?
Weisbrod (1986), an American economist, produced a theoretical justification.
He argued that since there was evidence of market failure (Chapter 2) and public sector failure (Chapter 3) it was logical to expect there to be room for a  third kind of organisation that served purposes which public and market institutions failed to do.
He was not able to deduce what these purposes might be, but the persistence of a third sector suggested they must exist.
Wolfenden's case
One attempt to generalise the distinct contribution of the voluntary sector was made by the Wolfenden Committee on the future of voluntary organisations (1978).
The committee argued that the two main agents for providing social care were the state, local and national, and the ‘informal’ sector, families and individuals helping one another.
It stated: ‘Although the voluntary system, as we have shown, was once the chief form of collective action outside the Poor Law, it can now best be seen in terms of the ways in which it complements, supplements, extends and influences the informal and statutory systems’(p. 26).
The voluntary non-statutory sector was able to extend provision because it could attract the services of people who would not be prepared to work for a public authority.
Not being bound by statutory rules and political control it was better able to innovate — perhaps trailblazing for local authorities to take up when the experiment was seen to work.
Voluntary bodies could provide alternatives to local council or NHS provision, thus giving clients a choice of some kind.
Some kinds of social need may not be met by the state because the groups involved are too small or too unpopular for politicians to be prepared to incur displeasure helping them alcoholics, drug addicts or battered women.
A non-statutory body with gifts from concerned members of the public can fill such gaps.
Running through much of the public debate on voluntary organisations, and not entirely absent from the Wolfenden Report, is the confusion between a non-statutory organisation that provides services and can have significant or even total support from state funds, and the notion of voluntary donations of time or money, which are not exclusively given to non-statutory bodies.
Many voluntary bodies became heavily dependent on grants from central government under the urban aid programme and the Manpower Services Commission schemes for unemployed young people in the 1980s.
There are some good arguments for tax payers' money being channelled to social service providers that are  not statutory bodies.
They may be freer to experiment or help unpopular clients, and the government can then disown them or cut off funds more readily if it is attacked.
This kind of tactical reasoning must, however, be sharply distinguished from the argument for voluntary or charitable sources of income with which we are concerned in this chapter.
By a similar slip of logic it is sometimes presumed in such discussions that voluntary bodies are the only or the main beneficiaries of voluntary help and cash aid.
But much volunteer help now flows to statutory services, like hospitals and old people's homes.
The NHS has more volunteers working for it than any other agency.
One rationale for the non-government sector is that it can more readily mobilise ‘voluntary’ help, but this is not necessarily so.
The state sector could, if it wished, make a good deal more use of voluntary help.
Some of these issues were explored in a useful international study by Kramer (1981).
He compared the role of voluntary organisations for the physically and mentally handicapped in Britain, the United States, the Netherlands and Israel.
Their scope and role were very different in many ways but, as he argues, there were more basic similarities than differences.
The unique features he identified were rather different from those identified by Wolfenden, Beveridge and other writers, such as experimentation or innovation.
These were actually relatively infrequent in the voluntary sector, which was often conservative in its approach, while the state sector could be innovative.
What the voluntary sector did, which democratic government could not do, was the following:
1.
To provide specialist care on a selective or exclusive basis — for example, for families of a particular religious denomination or area.
Governments, rightly, find it difficult to be overtly discriminatory, or to specialise in idiosyncratic ways.
Voluntary organisations attract support from such narrow groups and enthusiasts precisely because their constituency of appeal is a narrow one.
In a pluralistic society this is to be welcomed.
2.
To act as advocates or defenders of the specialist care of the group for which they are working.
‘The mission of defending and articulating the interests of undeserving populations at risk takes on more importance as the social services in the welfare state become universal’(Kramer, 1981, p. 261).
3.
To provide a vehicle for self-help or consumerism ; that is, groups of families, dependants or sufferers who seek mutual support or a means of articulating their concerns.
In practice, Kramer argues, the older traditional voluntary organisations gave little or no place to the consumer.
They were typically paternalistic.
The newer, smaller, spontaneous groups — of parents with mentally handicapped children, for example must be voluntary and self-help to retain their independence and to enable them to build the self-respect of their members.
To achieve these purposes, such organisations must be free from government interference or control.
4.
To provide main-stream services , not distinctively different in kind from those of state welfare; to supply supplementary services, complementary services or services on a cost basis to agencies of government.
Kramer points out (as I have done) that there may be the particular advantage of wider choice or plurality in these cases, but they are the advantages of a private or mixed market, not of voluntarism as such.
Kramer also adds some warnings.
If voluntary organisations expand, especially if largely in receipt of public money, they tend to take on all the disadvantages of size and age — bureaucratisation or ‘creeping formalisation’, as he calls it.
Agencies can become dependent on public finance and subservient to government or those who give the funds, such as large corporations.
In this case they are less able to perform their exclusive and critical functions 1–3.
They suffer from ‘donor dependency’.
Their very idiosyncratic and undemocratic nature, which is part of their strength, can lead to their rule by a narrow and self-selecting group.
Since they are subject to the disciplines of neither the market nor the ballot box they can become ineffectual .
We shall be returning to these arguments about the mixed market for personal social services and recent government policy in Chapter 11.
Further reading
Financing the services
PAYING FOR HEALTH SERVICES
The history of health care finance
It is impossible to understand why health care is financed the way it is in the United Kingdom without looking briefly at its historical origins.
Moreover, they illustrate many of the theoretical points that have been raised in previous chapters.
The hospitals
By the early part of the last century two kinds of hospital had emerged that set the pattern for finance and provision for the next 150 years (Abel-Smith, 1964).
The voluntary hospitals were private charities.
They ranged from ancient foundations, like St Bartholomew's and St Thomas's, to smaller local charities.
Most hospitals in the provinces relied on donations or regular subscriptions to keep going.
Such giving was not unconditional.
Sometimes the hospital was obliged to purchase goods from the traders who were subscribers, and donors also had the right to nominate people whom they wished to receive attention.
One group that was frequently excluded was the poor — those who could not be guaranteed to be able to pay their own funeral expenses.
Those with infectious diseases, too, were excluded, and children who were vulnerable to them.
The chronic sick, the elderly and others who would need long-term care were a drain on the hospitals' budgets and of little interest for teaching purposes.
So they were  increasingly excluded.
It was not only gifts of cash that kept the voluntary hospitals going, but the donation by leading doctors of their services.
What these men gained in return was the prestige and professional recognition that came from practising at one of the teaching hospitals.
Despite these developments, charitable subscriptions supplemented by local appeals could not keep pace with rising demand and increasingly expensive treatments.
One obvious way out was to charge richer patients a fee, but the hospital governors feared that this would deter charitable donations.
In smaller towns where the general practitioners ran the hospitals (often called cottage hospitals), patients were already charged.
So, reluctantly, the larger voluntary hospitals followed.
Financially squeezed by the depression of the 1880s, they began to accept paying patients.
They were treated in a quite different way and in separate wards the forerunner to the modern pay-beds.
In 1895, the Royal Free appointed an official ‘almoner’ to ensure that patients were genuinely poor and that they contributed what they could afford to their treatment.
The practice became widespread and a new profession emerged to administer the process — the precursors of modern medical social workers.
Yet payments of fees on a means-tested basis changed the nature of the voluntary sector and caused widespread resentment.
After the First World War the voluntary hospitals faced a severe and growing financial crisis.
An immediate Exchequer grant was provided to tide the hospitals over the emergency.
Moreover, people who covenanted money to the hospitals for over six years secured income tax relief on the sum (1922 Finance Act).
Thus an indirect form of Exchequer aid began.
Another new source of income was the contributory schemes, the largest being the Hospital Saving Association.
In return for paying a small weekly contribution the contributor and his dependants acquired a presumption that they would be treated free without a means test though this was never a legal right.
The association usually paid the hospital a weekly flat rate.
These schemes were very unpopular with the medical profession as they limited the number of private patients who would pay the doctors direct.
In short, voluntary hospitals that began as charities had, by the 1930s, developed an enormous variety in their forms of income.
There was also great variety in the standard of treatment they offered.
Since consultants  gave their time free they were more available in more wealthy urban areas which could support the private practices that provided their income.
By the Second World War, many of the voluntary hospitals were still in serious financial trouble, a problem the war helped solve, at least temporarily, as the government paid large sums for the treatment of war casualties (Titmuss, 1950).
Alongside the voluntary hospitals there had gradually developed a state-provided hospital sector.
Its origins lay in the Poor Law and it was never to lose that association.
The Poor Law workhouses came to accommodate growing numbers of sick, elderly and infirm paupers, and a medical officer was employed, along with nursing staff, to care for these people.
Under the Metropolitan Poor Act of 1867 and a Poor Law Amendment Act of the following year, Poor Law Guardians were able to create separate infirmaries — pauper hospitals.
They were to be equipped like any other general hospital ward.
The association with the stigma of poor relief remained, however, and to a very large extent these hospitals became the home for the long-stay patients and the elderly who were such a drain on the finances of the voluntary hospitals.
In 1929, as part of the larger reform of the Poor Law, these hospitals became the responsibility of local authorities — the county councils.
They also had control of the hospitals that had been provided under other statutes to treat the mentally ill, those with infectious diseases, tuberculosis and the mentally handicapped.
Moreover, several of the more ambitious authorities, like London and Middlesex, developed their own acute hospitals.
During the war the Coalition government produced a plan to reorganise completely the chaotic system of hospital finance and provision.
The local authorities were to be the main organisers of hospital provision, combining together in joint authorities to plan care in their areas, including the voluntary sector.
They would have no direct control over such institutions except that they could pay them for particular services.
It had some similarities to the Conservative reforms of 1990.
Such a system would not have reduced the wide disparity in standards of care or the process of means testing or the financial difficulties of the voluntary hospitals.
When the Labour government was elected in 1945, it produced more radical proposals — nationalisation of the local authority and  voluntary hospitals.
The 1946 National Health Service Act was the result (Webster, 1988).
Hospitals were to be wholly funded from taxation,provided by statutory bodies — Regional Hospital Boards — and managed by hospital management committees, with nominated members.
That change was carried into effect on I July 1948 and remains the basis for hospital finance today.
Primary care
The finance of primary care has had a very different history (Eckstein, 1964; Gilbert, 1966; Stevens, 1966; Honnigsbaum, 1979).
Medical practitioners began as individual private entrepreneurs selling their skills and medical knowledge, such as it was.
But theirs was never a free market.
The Royal College of Physicians, incorporated by Henry VIII in 1518, established a monopoly of medical practice in London by licensing registered physicians in the area.
Surgery grew as a separate profession under its own royal charter.
Both groups sold their services mainly to the rich and the upper classes,giving their service to the voluntary hospitals in the large cities.
It was the apothecaries who were the originators of what, today, we call the family doctor, or the general practitioner, and the dentist.
They were shopkeepers who sold medicines or cures and established their right to treat the sick during the plague.
They extended their functions to holding surgeries with dispensaries and to visiting the sick at home.
They became ‘the doctor’ for the working class, but they remained private entrepreneurs who had to make their living by charging for their services.
At the same time working people developed their own form of voluntary associations — the friendly societies — that enabled the better-off sections of the working class, at least, to receive cash benefits when the wage earner was ill, with the illness certified and treated by a doctor paid by the society.
By the beginning of the twentieth century they had about six million members.
Commercial insurance companies also grew and some doctors in poor areas ran their own sick clubs, to which the poor contributed on a regular basis to obtain free treatment when they were sick.
That system and the friendly societies were needed to keep doctors in business at all in the poorest areas of the industrial cities.
By the end of the nineteenth century the friendly societies were also in financial trouble.
Their members were surviving longer.
Instead of dying by the age of about 40, more were living to an age at which they could not continue to work and had to be supported.
It was a burden their funds could not bear.
Moreover, few schemes covered women or children.
This threw growing numbers on the Poor Law and added to a rising poor rate.
Lloyd George's attempt at a solution was to copy from Germany's social insurance scheme and create a British variant — National Health Insurance (Gilbert, 1966).
This provided sickness benefit and the right to free treatment and drugs for members, as well as the choice of a local doctor from those who practised in the scheme (1911 National Insurance Act).
It was essentially an extension of the friendly society schemes — the societies helped administer it — but it also covered occupational groups that had never been able to be members.
It covered all manual workers and those earning up to a given sum — 430 a year by 1942.
Each employee and his or her employer had to contribute so much per week to the scheme.
The doctor received a per capita payment for each of those registered with him or (rarely) her.
Once established there was natural pressure to extend the scheme.
Excluded groups and those just above the income limit always felt aggrieved and pressed for inclusion.
Though workers were in the scheme, it excluded children, non-working wives, the self-employed and the elderly.
This illustrates the difficulty of confining provision of a sought-after service to low-income groups (Goodin and Le Grand, 1987).
Two other features of the scheme were both bitterly resented by working people.
First, the flat-rate contributions required were the same for each person.
The incomes of similarly sized approved (friendly) societies were the same, but those which covered miners or those in more dangerous or unhealthy jobs had a high call on their benefits.
White-collar societies were thus able to be much more generous, covering members of the worker's family and dental treatment, convalescent care, ophthalmic care and more.
The resentment arose from the concentration of high-risk categories in particular occupations and the reluctance of insurance companies or societies to include them — a perfect example of cream skimming and adverse selection, discussed in Chapter 2.
Attempts to extend the scope of risk pooling by using richer schemes' surplus funds to help poor schemes failed.
(There is a  debate between historians of this period as to whether the government or the societies were to blame:(Honnigsbaum, 1983; Whiteside, 1983; Whiteside and Krafchik, 1983).
The second unpopular feature of the system arose from the different attention doctors gave to members of the state scheme compared with their private patients, often even segregated in different waiting rooms.
These perceived injustices led the trade union and labour movement to campaign vigorously for an end to the insurance system and for a single universal, Exchequer-funded scheme to cover all forms of primary care.
This solution was to be embodied in the 1946 Act.
The general practitioner, however, retained his or her claim to be ‘an independent contractor’ by receiving a sum of money from the Central Exchequer for each person who signed on to the practice.
The doctors in poorer areas, in particular, were major beneficiaries of this arrangement, which gave them a secure income for the first time.
They were private individuals or partnerships, paid by the state to provide a universal service free at the point of use.
The third leg of the 1948 tripartite structure to the NHS was the community health service administered, as it always had been, by local authorities and hence financed like any other local service partly by central government grant and partly out of local revenue — the rates.
The services included midwives, health visitors, district nurses and various clinics.
In 1974 the structure changed and they were taken from local authorities and amalgamated within the new health authorities — first area, and then later (1982) district, health authorities.
The community health services then came to be financed wholly by central government.
Expenditure on the National Health Service
From 1948, when the Health Service began, to 1990, current expenditure in real terms (excluding price increases) rose more than two and a half times.
Total spending on the NHS represented about 4 per cent of the gross domestic product in 1948, and rose to 6 per cent by 1990, stabilising in the 1980s.
Compared to most other advanced economies, that figure is low (see Table 10.1).
Public expenditure on health care is similar to the OECD average, but our overall expenditure including private is lower.
The low spending figure is, in part, a tribute to the way the NHS has been able to keep down health costs which have increased much faster in other countries, most notably those with insurance-based systems of finance (see below).
Nevertheless, strong underlying trends have been pushing up costs in the United Kingdom as they have in other countries — the increasing sophistication of medical treatment, the survival of those who would have died in an earlier decade, new and expensive drugs, the growing awareness amongst the public of potential treatments, a reluctance to merely grin and bear pain and discomfort, and above all the ageing of the population.
It is twenty-three times as expensive to provide health care for those over 85 as for people aged between 16 and 44 (see   Figure 10.1).
About half the total expenditure of the hospital and community services goes on the care of people over 65.
If we take account of the changing age structure of the population and the rising relative costs of the elderly, NHS expenditure on an age-weighted basis fell in volume terms in the 1980s.
Sixteen per cent of the budget goes on the care of the mentally ill and mentally handicapped.
None of these categories of patient so far are likely to get private insurance cover.
Nearly two-thirds of the total budget is used to pay for staff.
The largest part of that — nearly half — is on nursing staff.
Medical and dental staff take only about one-eighth of salary costs.
Drugs, dressings, X-ray and laboratory expenses take the largest share of the non-salary costs.
Hospitals take the lion's share of the NHS budget.
Family practitioner services take just over a fifth of total NHS spending.
They comprise the services of general practitioners, opticians, dentists, and the cost of drugs dispensed by chemists.
Despite the growing demographic and other pressures on the NHS, it has reduced the real costs of treating patients in the last ten years.
Taking account of the general increase in prices, the price of treating each acute in-patient fell by 12 per cent from 1978/ 9 to 1988/9 as the length of stay fell.
It fell even more for geriatric  patients — by no less than a third in the same period (Cm 1513, 1991).
The present system of finance
The National Health Service claims its funds from three sources.
General taxation provided about 77 per cent of the total in 1990–1 (Cm 1513, 1991); about 9 per cent came from a small addition to the weekly national insurance contribution; and the remaining element came from charges (6.5 per cent) and other receipts like land sales (1.7 per cent )(Cm 1513, 1991).
The National Health Service contribution is really an historic relic of the pre-1948 insurance-based system.
Beveridge thought a small part of the new scheme's income should go to the NHS as it had under the old.
Since everyone has a right to treatment whether they have been contributors or not, it is difficult to justify.
Charges to patients are made for drugs, appliances, dentistry, spectacles and, most recently, opticians' services.
Though patients were exempt from all charges under the 1946 Act, the Labour government amended that Act in 1949 to give itself the power to levy charges if it wished on prescriptions and appliances.
Prescription charges were not actually introduced until the next Conservative government in 1951.
Apart from a brief period after 1964 when prescription charges were removed, these charges have remained ever since and been increased regularly.
In 1991 the charge was 3.40 per item on a prescription.
The figure was 25p in 1979.
The scale of dental charges has risen sharply since the 1970s and now approaches the economic cost.
Those on low pay or receiving income support are exempt from all the charges.
Those excluded from paying for prescriptions are: hospital in-patients, those suffering from diseases that need continuous medication, expectant mothers and those with a baby under 12 months, children under 16 (or under 19 if they are in full-time education), men over 65 and women over 60.
Expectant mothers are exempt from dental charges, as are children at school and those on low incomes; similar exemptions apply to sight tests, glasses or contact lenses.
Young people up to 14 qualify for free treatment but not dentures.
These exclusions make the charges an  inefficient way to raise revenue.
Over three-quarters of the prescriptions are issued free to those exempt groups we have listed.
Road traffic casualties
This is a relic of the attempts to provide an income for the voluntary hospitals in the 1930's.
The Road Traffic Act of 1933 obliges motorists or their insurance company to make some contribution to the expenses of treating the victims of an accident if the driver is liable.
The sums involved are very small and do not cover anything like the cost to the NHS of car accidents.
Private pay-beds
One of the concessions Bevan made to the consultants in 1946 was that they could keep their separate private pay-beds in NHS hospitals.
Private patients can occupy separate accommodation and be treated by the specialist of their choice, in return for paying a fee.
Under the 1977 Health Service Act this is meant to be a ‘full cost’ fee which the Secretary of State fixes.
The 1978–9 Labour government tried to phase out these beds, but under the 1980 Health Service Act they were extended.
It is probably not the case that the fees are fully economic.
Many feel they do not reflect the valuable back-up services a modern hospital and trained staff provide.
Amenity beds
An ordinary NHS patient can ask to be given a greater degree of privacy in a separate room if it is not needed on medical grounds for other patients, and can pay for the privilege.
Overseas visitors
Under regulations introduced in 1982, any overseas visitor who falls sick and requires treatment other than in an accident or emergency will be charged for his or her treatment on a special scale of charges reflecting the ‘full cost’ of the care.
Various visitors are exempt: students here for more than a six-month course, EEC residents and those from countries who give UK residents free treatment (reciprocal arrangement nations).
Other income
Most of the old teaching hospitals inherited from pre-NHS days  have trust fund and endowment incomes that they were allowed to keep and administer.
These are regularly supplemented by new gifts and bequests.
Other voluntary hospitals with such funds lost them to the Exchequer, which pooled them in a central fund.
In 1974 this fund was allocated to the regional and area health authorities, and in 1982 it was once again reallocated to the new district authorities.
Many hospitals have a League of Friends that raises money on their behalf.
This is how the National Health Service's money is raised.
How is it allocated?
Allocating the money
Of the total NHS budget, as we can see from Figure 10.2, a small part — less than 3 per cent— is taken by the central department to provide central administration, supply a few specialist services and give a few specific grants.
The Department of Health, for example, manages the NHS superannuation scheme.
It meets the running costs of the Public Health Laboratory Service, which gives technical assistance, for example, to local districts facing an outbreak of an infectious disease, perhaps spread from abroad.
It meets the running costs of limb and appliance centres for the disabled.
It finances the Dental Estimates Board and the prescription pricing authorities that keep a check on dentists' and doctors' prescribing habits in order to contain costs.
The rest of the budget is allocated in two parts: that which pays for the hospital and community services — three-quarters of the total — and the remainder, which goes to the family practitioner services — the GP, the dentists, the opticians and the cost of drugs dispensed by GPs.
We look first at the way the main block of money is allocated.
Financing hospital and community services
In the early years of the Health Service the ordinary hospitals, the community health services and the teaching hospitals had been separately financed.
Variations between the hospital regions   remained wide.
The reason lay in the budgeting procedures.
Every year each region's allocation was merely rolled forward with small additions to the previous year's spending and extra to meet the current costs of new hospital premises.
The spending patterns of the 1970s still reflected the inequalities of the pre-war system.
The NHS had failed to produce ‘a uniform standard of service for all’, as Bevan put it in 1945.
Variations within regions were even greater (Buxton and Klein, 1975, 1978; Jones and Masterman, 1976; Culyer, 1976).
After the 1974 reorganisation, the new regional health authorities took over responsibility for all hospital and community health  expenditure.
The reorganisation presented an opportunity to redress some of the old inequalities.
The difficulty was partly political; the favoured regions, London notably, had powerful friends in the major teaching hospitals.
An important first step was to include these hospitals in the budgets of the regional health authorities, so that their claims had to be considered alongside everyone else's.
The next step was to devise a budget allocation procedure that reflected the health needs of different areas.
It was one thing to agree that this was desirable, another to agree a measure of need.
A working party was appointed in 1974 to produce one.
It reported in 1976 (DHSS, 1976d) giving its name to a formula that was to decide how much revenue money (that is, not capital) each region should have in England — the Resource Allocation Working Party (RAWP), Scotland and Wales (SCRAW) and Northern Ireland (PARR).
Regions were free to allocate revenue to districts as they wished.
In practice these allocations reflected the scale of existing facilities and their resident populations.
Under the 1990 reforms, districts will be financed on a pure formula basis too.
How does a formula work?
In essence each region or district gets its share of the total amount of funds available on the basis of the size of the population served, weighted to take account of the use different sections of that population can be expected to make of the service.
If a region has more old people, those people each count for more than one because they use services more frequently than average.
National data on the use of each part of the service by age and sex, married persons and unmarried persons, is used as the basis of these weightings, but they are only the first stage.
What the original working party wanted were local measures of ill health — morbidity — by age, sex and marital status.
In fact, there were no reliable district data.
Hence the study had to fall back on a proxy for measures of ill health — standardised mortality ratios (SMRs) or death rates from different diseases standardised by age.
There were many arguments about the validity of taking death rates as a proxy for ill health, but in the absence of agreement on anything better, they remain (Mays and Bevan, 1987).
There was also criticism that SMRs did not take account of the health-care costs of social deprivation.
People with poor housing conditions have to stay in hospital longer.
Old people with poor housing and with no families or supportive neighbours fill more  geriatric beds.
The official review of the RAWP formula in 1989 accepted that there should be some weighting for social deprivation (DHSS, 1989).
The Working for Patients White Paper later that year (Cm 555,1989) proposed to abandon the RAWP formula and rely instead on a ‘simpler’ weighted formula for regional allocations, moving gradually to apply a similar formula to the cash districts were allocated.
See Carr-Hill (1990).
District formulae will be fully in place by 1993–4.
Purchasers and providers
Under the changes introduced by the 1990 Health Service and Community Care Act, implemented from April 1991, the District Health Authorities have become ‘purchasing authorities’.
They use the money they have been given to buy services from hospitals or community units either in their own districts or elsewhere.
These hospitals and units may be of two kinds.
Some are managed by the districts themselves, others are self-governing trusts.
These latter are run by boards whose chair is appointed by the Secretary of State and whose members are appointed partly by the regional health authority and partly by the Secretary of State after consulting the chair.
The trusts have to finance themselves from contracts made with district health authorities, fund-holding GPs (see below) or private insurance companies.
The trusts are independent public corporations whose assets, like their buildings, are owned by and can be sold by the trust.
The Act also created a quite new form of purchaser of hospital and community services — fund-holding general practitioners (Glennerster et al .,
1992).
Under this scheme, groups of family doctors who have more than 7,000 patients can opt to become fund-holders.
In this case part of the hospital and community budget allocated to the region is transferred to the family doctor.
The amount depended initially on the number of patients referred in the previous year multiplied by the actual cost of those referrals in the hospitals concerned.
In future the plan is to move to a formula-based allocation.
These doctors then make their own contracts with whatever hospitals or other providers they wish to and pay them from their larger budget.
They continue to be funded like any other GP for their own practice work (see below).
Fund-holders' budgets enable them to purchase a range of non-emergency, mainly surgical procedures, outpatient care and laboratory tests from whichever hospital or provider they choose.
They are given a budget to spend on the drugs they prescribe for their patients.
They must keep within the budget, but if they spend less than their limit they can reallocate it to other purposes within the practice.
Financing the family practitioner services
The family practitioner services comprise not only the cost of the family doctor service — about 30 per cent of the total — but medicine prescribed by GPs,(nearly 40 per cent), pharmacists' costs (10 per cent ) and opticians' (3 per cent ).
The cost of this sector has risen faster than any other — a more than 40-per-cent increase in real terms from 1978/9 to 1987/8.
The system of paying the family doctor retained the pre-1948 idea of a payment per patient registered with that doctor.
Gradually there was added a whole range of extra payments to give doctors financial inducements to provide adequate surgery facilities and to encourage them to practise in unpopular industrial and inner-city areas, and in remote rural areas.
Thatcher's government sought to extend the financial incentives, encouraging doctors to undertake preventative health checks and reach immunisation and vaccination targets.
It also sought to tighten up what it required of doctors who received the basic NHS practice allowance for the upkeep of their premises.
If they were to be paid this sum the doctor should in return guarantee to keep the premises open at certain convenient hours.
A much fuller ‘contract’ was discussed with the profession.
No full agreement was reached and the contract was imposed on GPs in 1990.
The notion of paying GP's to provide certain specified standards of service and undertake certain preventative health measures was a step forward, in terms of both public health accountability and promoting better health .
The usefulness of certain of the activities, like visiting old people once a year or screening, was disputed by the medical profession.
The complex form of funding family doctors in 1991 is set out in Table 10.2.
These payments are found in what GPs call the ‘red    book’— a statement of fees and allowances payable to medical practitioners in England and Wales.
Essentially the Conservative government said to family doctors, ‘You want to remain private practitioners on contract with the NHS.
So in return we shall specify in more detail what we expect from you.
We expect surgeries to be open certain hours, and for you to undertake certain preventative health measures for all your patients whether they normally come to the surgery or not.
If you see and screen more than a certain target number of patients you will get paid more.’
These targets were more difficult for some doctors to meet in deprived areas or in practices where the population moved frequently.
Dentists
Most dentists are paid on a fee-for-service basis.
They claim for each piece of work done and are paid according to rates laid down by the Dental Estimates Board.
They then receive a net sum that takes account of the sums patients pay.
Dentists in health centres can be salaried.
Chemists
Chemists are paid for the costs of the drugs they dispense on an NHS doctor's prescription.
On top of that a percentage is added to cover the chemists' overheads and profit.
They are paid for remaining open after normal hours on a rota basis and sums are paid to keep chemists open in remote areas.
From this gross total is deducted the amount they collect in prescription charges.
The private sector
The private health market is largely confined to a narrow range of relatively uncomplicated surgery for those who require speedier treatment or more attractive surroundings than an NHS hospital about ‘two dozen procedures accounting for 70 per cent of expenditure’(Propper and Maynard, 1990).
About 10 per cent of the population in 1988 had some form of private health insurance cover (Propper and Maynard, 1990; Laing, 1990).
The scale of private cover has grown.
From 1971 to 1989 the number of people insured with the largest insurers, British United Provident Association (BUPA), Private Patients' Plan (PPA) and the Western  Provident Association (WPA), rose from 2.1 million to 5.2 million (Central Statistical Office, 1990).
Nearly half of these had their contributions paid in whole or part by their employers, a third having them paid in full.
In 1990 the Conservative government introduced tax relief for private health insurance for people aged 60 and over.
In the late 1980s the expansion of the sector slowed.
Costs rose and premiums were difficult to increase.
The recession made companies less keen to support their employees' premiums.
The optimistic invasion by American companies receded and even the long-established British insurers faced financial difficulty in 1992.
Many private hospitals had low occupancy rates.
Private pay-beds in UK hospitals remain and the new trust hospitals may be in a much stronger position to compete with the private sector.
Into the 1990s
The Conservatives' reforms
In the 1980s the Conservative government succeeded in checking the growth of the NHS budget.
Demographic trends required more resources if the service was merely to stand still — an increase of about 1 per cent a year in the mid-1980s.
In the period from 1960 to the mid-1970s the purchasing power available to the NHS rose by 4 per cent per annum on average.
Then it dropped to roughly 2 per cent.
But in 1983–7 the real (volume) increase in funds first fell to zero, then fell absolutely, then rose at a rate lower than 1 per cent— that is less than the increasing trend to an ageing population required to sustain standards (Kings Fund Institute, 1988; Owens and Glennerster, 1990).
The consequent growing delays and a series of scandals put such pressure on the government that the prime minister, Margaret Thatcher, took the radical way out.
She set up a fundamental review of the way the NHS was financed and organised.
This at least diverted political attention from the funding issue.
In the debate that followed, right-wing think-tanks pressed for radical changes: from introducing a requirement that people insure themselves against health bills and the state should merely help poor individuals, through tax relief to encourage private insurance, to the introduction of  competition into the health market (Letwin and Redwood, 1988; Pirie and Butler, 1988; Willetts and Goldsmith, 1988; Robinson, 1988).
More private finance?
The radicals proposed to shift the source of funding from the public to the private purse.
This option largely failed to make headway for many of the basic theoretical reasons that were outlined in Chapter 2.
At the time, in evidence to the review, Barr et al .,
(1988) argued:
private medical insurance has efficiency problems of two kinds: gaps in coverage and incentives to excessive consumption of medical care.
Gaps arise, first, because private policies generally offer incomplete (or no) coverage of chronic or pre-existing medical problems because the likelihood of treatment is too high, nor of the medical costs associated with pregnancy because this is the result of deliberate choice not a random risk.
In addition the elderly, if they can obtain insurance at all, pay very high premiums.
(These groups take perhaps two thirds of the cost of the NHS.)
In addition to such gaps, private medical insurance can also face third party payment problems, leading to exploding costs: where doctors are paid a fee for service, and treatment is paid in full by their insurance company, both doctor and patient can act as if care were free, which encourages excessive use of expensive medical resources.
The theoretical arguments receive empirical support from private systems elsewhere.
It is not sufficiently appreciated that the American private medical system is buttressed by government spending on a very substantial scale in precisely those areas where private medical insurance has gaps: Medicare (for the elderly), Medicaid (for the poor), veterans' benefits (often chronic health problems) and maternity and child welfare.
Equally predictably, given the third party payment problem, the cost of those publicly funded has come close to running out of control.
Inspection of the comparative figures is both instructive and startling.
The UK currently spends around 400 per person per year on medical care, about 360 via the NHS, the rest private.
In the USA public spending on medical benefits (ignoring tax relief) is around 470 per person per year and private spending about 640, giving a total of three times the UK figure.
Public spending in the  USA is higher than in the UK; the US spends nearly one and a half times that amount in addition on private medical benefits, yet health outcomes in the two countries are broadly comparable.
(pp. 7–9)
The fear of the cost consequences of third-party health insurance no doubt worried the Treasury most.
For whatever reason, the government chose to accept the case for retaining an Exchequer-financed service free at the point of use.
However, they also accepted the case for major change, in particular the case for an internal or quasi market within the NHS (see Chapter 3).
Some Conservative critics from the think-tanks were disappointed that consumer choice and true market solutions had not been taken further (Green, 1990).
An internal market: the case for change
In 1985 an American health economist, Alain Enthoven, had published an influential critical analysis of the NHS.
It was also publicised in The Economist (22 June, 1985; see also Enthoven, 1991).
He argued that the NHS suffered from the following:
1.
Gridlock .
‘It is more difficult to close an unwanted NHS hospital than an unneeded American military base.’
2.
Inefficiency .
There were no incentives to run a ward or service more efficiently except persuasion.
Consultants were on lifetime contracts and had no reason to change.
3.
Perverse incentives .
A consultant who treated more patients would shorten the queue and attract more patients without attracting more resources — more anxiety and no reward or means to do the job.
4.
Overcentralisation .
National pay settlements meant staff were difficult to attract in areas with high demand for labour-especially nurses in London, for example.
5.
Accountability .
No-one knew what anything cost or whether they were keeping within their budget.
6.
Free capital.
Since central government had always paid for new building, local districts and services did not have to face the cost of using buildings and capital, and hence tended to waste space and capital assets.
7.
Customers not being central.
Patients are so grateful to get treated they do not complain or get taken seriously.
None of these points was new but Enthoven's solution, drawn from recent American reforms, was — introduce competition and an internal market.
District health authorities should cease to have direct responsibility for managing the hospitals and units.
They should become purchasing bodies, buying services from whatever hospital or unit could give the best deal.
Contracts could be with a specialist unit outside the area, which would be able to keep its facility going by attracting patients needing that care and bringing with them the cash to pay for their operation.
Contracts would be made on a competitive basis with the hospital providing the ‘best buy’.
Contracts would be of three main kinds, as follows:
1.
Block contracts .
These would provide accident and emergency service for everyone at a given sum per year and meet certain quality criteria.
2.
Cost and volume .
These would undertake so many operations for half a million pounds.
If 10 per cent more were done, the payment would increase by 12 per cent; if less than the volume target were done, the payment would go down.
3.
Cost per case .
In more specialised units, each operation, episode or visit might be paid for separately.
Hospitals could lose their monopoly status: The market incentives would encourage consultants to do more, to get more resources, to offer a good service, to win the contract.
Information would have to improve and with it accountability.
Services would be charged for the value of the buildings they occupied to encourage economy.
The basic idea of a purchaser-provider split, with the district health authority as purchaser, was the crux of the Enthoven plan and became the basis of the working party's plan.
How was it to be achieved?
Hospitals might be privatised or turned into voluntary hospitals, as the Conservatives had favoured before 1946.
In the end a compromise emerged under which some — eventually most or all — hospitals and community units were to be allowed to become ‘independent trusts’ owning their own buildings and having their own governing bodies.
Those that did not survive in the market-place would close because they could not attract the revenue to survive.
The logic of the purchaser-provider split and the American model suggested that all units should be  independent.
For some this had the additional attraction that the hospital trusts could, at a future date, be simply floated off as private bodies.
An alternative model for the internal market
There was an alternative model on offer, this time advanced by an English professor of health economics-Alan Maynard of York University (Maynard, 1986).
Maynard's analysis of the NHS failings was similar to Enthoven's.
He too wanted to distinguish purchasers from providers.
The difference lay in his choice of purchaser.
The district, he argued, was too distant from the consumer.
The GP was nearer to the patient, knew more about the practical needs and family situation and was in a good position to act as the proxy but expert consumer.
If cash followed patients in ways that reflected the preferences of consumers informed by their family doctor, it would be possible to combine the virtues of consumer choice and free access to health care, and avoid the high cost of the American system of private health insurance.
This view was favoured by the new Secretary of State for Health, Kenneth Clarke, who came into office late in the discussions of the working party on the reform of the NHS.
Giving the GP power to buy hospital services for his or her patient might help redress the relative loss of status and power of GPs and primary health care in general compared to that of the hospital consultant, and be a strong corrective to some inefficient practices within hospitals.
The consultant in the old voluntary hospitals (see above) depended for his or her income on patients referred by the GP.
In the post-1948 NHS the consultant was paid a salary and could pick and choose patients from his or her waiting list.
The GP became a supplicant.
If GPs had the purchasing power they could redress the balance again.
There were, however, major problems with the idea.
Most practices were too small and had too little managerial capacity to manage a large budget.
A small budget might be swallowed up with a few very expensive cases.
Patients who cost a lot might be turned away by a GP.
The idea was, therefore, modified.
Only large practices would be allowed to opt for the scheme.
Only cheaper procedures would be included.
High-cost patients would have their higher costs met by the district — patients who cost more than 5,000 a year would have the extra met by the district  initially.
The result was the General Practice Fundholding Scheme — see Glennerster et al.
(1992) for a full history.
There were, therefore, two competing ideas for the finance of hospitals and community services — contracts set and paid for by districts and contracts set and paid for by GPs.
One was top-down funding, one bottom-up.
The government went for both at once.
The merits of districts and GPs as purchasers
The merits are as follows:
1.
More explicit accountability.
Hospitals and community units have to say exactly what they can do in a year, and districts and GPs can specify the quality criteria and kinds of service they want.
2.
Incentives for districts to rationalise their services.
Districts can buy what they want from a nearby district or a teaching hospital rather than attempt to provide everything in their own area.
3.
Districts have a clear task.
Their primary job is to measure local health needs and monitor the quality of the service.
The management of the hospital or service can be left to the unit manager or chief executive of a trust.
4.
Poorly run services face sanctions.
These units will fear they may lose their contracts and close.
This will make them perform better.
5.
GPs may be in a better position.
Fund-holding GPs in the first year were less afraid to switch contracts to better units or consultants, could make more flexible contracts, demand more attention, and use their funds to encourage consultants to come to the surgery rather than rely on patients to go to outpatients in the hospital.
They had a strong incentive to ensure hospitals made efficient use of their money on behalf of their patients (Glennerster, 1992).
Difficulties with districts and GPs as purchasers
These illustrate many of the theoretical points in Chapter 3, as follows:
1.
Costs.
Accounting information needed for contracting has been costly to obtain.
2.
Outcome measures.
Measures of quality and outcome barely exist, making it difficult to make good judgements about the ‘best buy’.
3.
Competition absent.
In many areas and for many services there are few real competitors.
The local district general hospital is the only possibility.
This leads to districts asking hospitals to do as before with the same money and little changes.
4.
Measures of need and priority.
These are poorly developed.
Some districts are relying on minimum cost rather than good value.
As a result, GPs with funds and negotiating power may get a better deal for their patients than those with no funds.
The future
The changes to the NHS outlined above were controversial.
But every health-care system is facing similar pressures and the need to improve efficiency is important, without sacrificing equity and free access, which the NHS has in larger measure than most other health care systems (Le Grand, 1989b).
The Labour Party have rejected trusts as partly privatised entities.
They have rejected an internal market as such, but they have proposed funding hospitals on the basis of the work they do — if they do more they will get more — up to a point.
Whatever government is in power in the 1990s, the purchaser–provider split is likely to remain.
A possible future is that regions will pass away and districts amalgamate to make contracts for more specialist services — tertiary care.
They could approve providers' capital plans.
Groups of GPs will negotiate and buy from the hospitals of their choice the ordinary range of services their patients need.
They may also come to contract for the community health and care services their patients need, taking over from the social services departments or competing with them.
Further reading
The financial history of voluntary and public hospitals is to be found in Abel-Smith, B. (1964),The hospitals 1800–1948 , London: Heinemann.
The best brief history of the NHS including the Conservative reforms is to be found in Klein, R. (1991).
The Politics of the National Health Service , London: Longman.
The in-depth standard history of the early years is Webster, C. (1988),The Health Services since the War , Vol. 1, London: HMSO.
For a comparative account of many of the issues discussed in this chapter see:.
For an account of the recent reforms to the finance of health care in different parts of the world see special issues of two journals that are worth a regular perusal:.