

TERRESTRIAL ENVIRONMENTS
3.1 Introduction: polar land environments
Polar communities of plants and animals testify to their own hardiness and adaptability, but also to positive advantages of polar living that ecologists from warmer climates tend to forget.
Inherent disadvantages of cold, aridity, immature soils, snow, permafrost and poor drainage must be amply compensated, for example by relative freedom from interspecific competition, parasites and predators; if there were no such compensations, polar lands would lie barren.
Seldom is polar vegetation so lush as subpolar or temperate vegetation, nor its productivity per hectare so high; arctic tundra, at first glance green and meadow-like, is often the thinnest of carpets with bare rocks and shingle showing through.
But both polar regions support vegetation and land fauna that are well adapted to their environments (Chapter 6) and varied enough to keep generations of ecologists interested in them.
The apparent simplicity of polar land ecosystems gives them a special value for modelling and quantitative studies.
Origins and history of polar biota .
Tropical and temperate environments have existed continuously on earth for hundreds of millions of years; polar conditions are relatively new.
From the end of the Permo-Carboniferous ice age 250 million years ago to about 20 million years ago, polar regions have been without permanent ice.
The species of plants and animals that inhabit them today have adapted, where adaptation was needed, only during the current ice age.
Toward the end of the Pliocene epoch 2–3 million years ago the earth's coldest environments were alpine.
These are the most likely sources of today's polar terrestrial biotas.
Only a few species inhabit both polar regions; each region has recruited almost entirely from its own hemisphere.
The environment in which polar adaptation occurred was a turbulent one, conducive to rapid evolution of a small number of hardy species.
Both    polar regions show evidence of more extensive glaciation in the recent past.
The shape, extent and histories of successive ice-sheets have been deduced from moraines, ice-scratched rocks, eskers, drumlins, altered drainage patterns and other periglacial features.
Sedimentary cores from the sea-bed, dateable by oxygen isotope measurements of their microfauna, show the spread and retreat of cold oceanic water, and hence the extent of the ice-caps (Hays et al .,
1976; Emiliani, 1978).
Pollen successions from lake-beds and cave-floor bone deposits, often dateable by radiocarbon methods mark the ebb and flow of periglacial biotas; for a review of the European flora and fauna during this period see Kurtén (1968).
The current glacial period .
The concept of four major glacial events, based on classic studies in the European Alps (Penck and Brückner, 1909) and supported by observations in Scandinavia, North America and Siberia, has in the last decade been shown to be an oversimplification.
Evidence from sea-bed sediment cores suggests that, in the 1.8 million years since the start of the Pleistocene, the temperate and polar regions have passed through a dozen or more warm-cold cycles caused primarily by changes in levels of incident radiation.
Each cycle, lasting about 100000 years, was marked by extension and build-up of ice, followed by a relatively rapid deglaciation.
For a review of these findings and the evidence for them see Imbrie and Imbrie (1979).
In the north during the most recent cycle the land ice margin retreated and advanced, for example, over the northern plains of Canada and the USA from northern Ontario and Quebec to Indiana and Ohio.
There were major advances some 60 000 and 40 000 years ago, but the greatest expanse of ice during this cycle occurred about 20 000 years ago (Goldthwait et al .,
1965), when much of the present arctic tundra and wide areas of subarctic and temperate fringe lands lay under ice (Figure 3.1).
Thus, particularly in the north, this was a period of shifting climates and habitats, in which forest, tundra and ice-sheets replaced each other repeatedly and rapidly.
The polar habitats we see today are likely to be just as transitory as those that preceded them.
3.2 Deglaciation: soil formation
3.2.1 Shedding the ice
Northern deglaciation .
In the north deglaciation has accompanied a slow, unsteady warming, in which the overall loss of ice has been punctuated by  spells of recovery.
With each warm spell tundra and forest edges have moved north, only to be forced south again during cooler spells.
Some 10 000 to 12 000 years ago the northlands were much colder than they are today, with mean temperatures 3–4°C lower.
Nine thousand years ago they were about as warm as today, though there was more ice present.
Six to seven thousand years ago a warm spell, the ‘climatic optimum’, brought southern European forests to Britain and dispersed ice from the Arctic Ocean.
Five thousand years ago, and again three thousand years ago, the chill returned, the pack ice re-formed, and the northlands were colder than they are today (Imbrie and Imbrie, 1979).
Since then they have been both warmer and colder, with oscillations of the order of 1–2°C about annual mean temperatures.
Though small on a world scale, these shifts represent milder or harsher winters, more or less precipitation, longer — or shorter-lasting snow-cover, each shift reflected in substantial ecological changes.
The circumpolar tundra and desert were reduced several times to refugia as forests expanded into them, and reconstituted into continuous zones as the forests retreated (Lindsey, 1981).
Known refugia during the last glacial maximum included central eastern Siberia, the Bering Strait area, central Alaska and Yukon, Kodiak Island, and parts of Banks, Baffin and Ellesmere Islands, west Greenland, Iceland, Svalbard and Norway (Haber, 1986).
As ice was shed from the land, sea level rose.
Relieved of its weight of ice the land too has risen, but many former coastal areas, including sites of human settlement, remain under the sea around present-day northern coasts.
Southern deglaciation .
Possibly because of its immensely larger bulk, antarctic ice has changed far less during the same period.
The ice mantle has for long overlapped the edges of the continent, unable to grow bigger without breaking off.
The current annual increment of about 2000 billion tonnes of ice, due to snowfall, is lost each year by evaporation, melting and formation of icebergs at the rim.
Climatic changes bringing more snow would result in more icebergs to maintain the balance; less snow would cause a reduction of the ice-sheet and a greater exposure of bedrock.
There is evidence at many points around the continent that more rock is exposed today than in the immediately recent past, and that there were several retreats during the present interglacial (Péwé, 1960), though not on the scale of the northern retreat.
There is evidence too that ice near the coast has in the past been thicker, for many coastal islands and mountains carry the scars of glacial movement  on their exposed surfaces.
This probably resulted from the fall in sea level during the glacial period, which would have exposed more land around the continent, allowing the mantle to spread over a wider continent, to cover what is now shallow sea-bed, and to thicken inland along the line of the present coast.
There have certainly been sea level changes since then, leaving raised beaches at many points along the exposed coasts of both continent and islands.
On these are found most of Antarctica's meagre soils plant communities and penguin colonies.
Ice has been shed also from South Georgia, Bouvetøya, Heard Island, Iles Kerguelen, Macquarie Island and other islands on the polar fringe, a process continuing into the present day on several of them, possibly all (Allison and Keage, 1986).
3.2.2 Soil-forming processes
Soils begin with the mechanical and chemical destruction of bedrock.
The simplest ahumic soils are little more than fine rock debris sorted into horizontal layers by wind, water and chemical action, and holding moisture in their interstices.
In humic or organic soils bacteria, algae and other microorganisms have colonized the debris, circulated and exchanged minerals in solution and evolved a complex organic chemistry.
This process of maturation from ahumic to organic soils takes hundreds or thousands of years; time is an important component (Ugolini, 1986).
Polar soils and their main characteristics are summarized in Table 3.1, and Figure 3.2 outlines stages in their development.
Cold and aridity .
Cold inhibits or prevents plant growth and slows down chemical processes in soils, prolonging the period of maturation.
Aridity too puts a brake on, for water is the medium for all the chemical reactions in both plants and soil, and these cannot happen in its absence.
Chronically dry soils lack organic buffers and are often strongly sodic, saline, acid or alkaline, with free soluble salts that make them unattractive for plant colonization.
Too little water brings minerals to the surface and leaves them there in an inhibiting layer; too much water may leach them away altogether, though that is seldom a problem in polar soils.
Where there is adequate water present during the spring and summer period of plant activity, soils stand a chance of attracting living matter and starting the processes that ultimately mature them.
Not surprisingly, however, a high proportion of polar soils are ahumic.
Permafrost and ground ice .
Where the ground is frozen for most of the year, soils that contain water remain solid except for a brief spell each summer, when they thaw to a depth that varies with latitude and local conditions.
The thaw does not usually exceed about 1 m on flat ground, but on south facing slopes it may penetrate to 1.5 m (Chernov, 1985).
Most soil-forming processes are restricted to this surface active layer (Figure 3.3).
Recent drilling for oil and natural gas has shown that continuous permafrost underlies much of the Arctic, reaching thicknesses of 600–1000m in the coldest regions and extending out under the sea in the Arctic basin (Figure 3.4).
It is widespread in the Antarctic, and discontinuous or patchy permafrost underlies much of the Subarctic (Washburn, 1979).
Permafrost restricts drainage; melt-water cannot sink into the ground and in summer the thin active layer soon becomes waterlogged.
The ice forms a mechanical barrier to roots, limiting the penetration of shrubs and restricting the growth, form and stability of trees.
Surface snow and vegetation help to insulate the ground in spring, restricting the depth of thawing.
Local thicknesses and effects of permafrost are discussed by Tedrow and Brown (1967) for the North American high arctic tundra, Chernov (1985) for the Siberian Arctic, and by papers in Campbell (1966) for Antarctica.
Bedrock, lithosols and regosols .
Mechanical weathering is rapid in cold desert regions.
Polar deserts are characteristically littered with rock rubble, frost-shattered from bedrock on the spot (lithosols) or redistributed, ground and compacted into pavements by glacial action, and re-exposed after the retreat of the ice sheets (regosols).
Several kinds of weathering are evident (Figure 3.5).
As in all deserts, rapid changes of surface temperature are an important disruptive force.
In McMurdo Sound, Antarctica, Tedrow and Ugolini (1966) and Tedrow (1977) estimated that shifts of 30–40°C occurred several times daily in the surface of rocks under summer sunshine, and Nichols and Ball (1964) found bare ahumic soils passing through the freeze-thaw cycle over a hundred times in the course of a summer.
Salt solutions penetrate cracks and exfoliate rocks on evaporating (Wellman and Wilson, 1965).
Wind-borne grit and ice erode antarctic basalt boulders at a rate of 1.5mm per year (Evteev, 1964), producing pavements of consolidated rock rubble with each fragment cut to a tricorn and wind-polished (Nichols, 1966).
Chemical weathering is rare in cold desert soils, though limonite, clay minerals and other typical products have been reported, and the breakdown of ferromagnesian minerals to reddish iron oxides is apparent on many rock pavement surfaces (Tedrow and Ugolini, 1966; Allen and Northover, 1967; Ugolini, 1970).
Crustose lichens .
With only limited capacity for retaining water, bedrock, regosols and lithosols are poor material for plant colonization.
Completely dry inland regions where they predominate, for example the so-called ‘oases’, support little vegetation.
Where there is a hint of moisture, rocks that have stable, non-foliating surfaces and are sheltered from wind-blast support crustose (encrusting) lichens, the characteristic vegetation of polar deserts.
These cling without roots and survive on atmospheric moisture, trickles of melt-water or trapped snow and rain.
Sometimes colourful with red or orange pigments, they occur on the dry rocky plains of northern Greenland, Alaska and Canada, on the Siberian islands, on dry rocks among the tundra where nothing else grows (Richardson and Finegan, 1977), and throughout Antarctica, including inland mountains less than 500km from the South Pole (Greene and others, 1967, Cameron et al .,
1971).
Crustose lichens are an additional weathering agent, tending to penetrate and defoliate rock surfaces (Walton, 1985).
In favourable situations they form nuclei for small communities of microflora and fauna, their debris accumulating as an organic substrate that fosters mosses and angiosperms.
3.2.3 Ahumic soils
True soils develop from these unpromising beginnings when fine materials, accumulated by water or wind, remain stable long enough to differentiate chemically into horizontal bands or horizons (Campbell and Claridge, 1987).
Cold desert soils .
In dry polar regions, where ionic mobility is low, this is a long, slow process; the cold desert or frigic soils (Campbell and Claridge, 1969) formed under these extreme conditions have been described only in Antarctica, the driest regions of the Arctic and the cold mountain deserts of Tien Shan (Tedrow and Ugolini, 1966).
Usually wind-blown, they fill pockets among coarser rubble, or on a larger scale cover many hectares of flat ground to depths of half a metre or more, firm and sometimes consolidated.
If soft enough to show footprints and vehicle tracks, they retain them for many years.
Typical cold desert soils have three layers (Figure 3.6A), of which the lowest is permanently frozen sand or gravel.
They tend to be alkaline, with free carbonate and calcium, potassium, sodium, magnesium and other ions distributed in patterns that vary with age and the amount of leaching.
In Antarctica, Campbell and Claridge (1969) distinguish three categories — ultraxerous, xerous and subxerous — respectively from the very dry  interior, the dry coasts and the damper coasts, recognizable by the amount of ionic movement that has occurred.
Salt concentrations near the surface may make them especially inhospitable to vegetation; only the soils of damper areas, in which salts are distributed evenly or concentrated at depth, are likely to support plant propagules.
However, ahumic soils are seldom completely abiotic.
Benoit and Hall (1970) and Cameron et al .
(1970), working in the Dry Valleys oasis area of McMurdo Sound (and using techniques that would later be used for detecting life on Mars), reported small populations of bacteria in samples taken even from the driest and least promising areas.
Similar microfloras have been found almost everywhere in both polar regions where ahumic soils exist.
Volcanic vent soils .
Special soil-forming conditions occur close to warm volcanic vents.
In Antarctica heat and moisture from steam and melting snow near Mount Melbourne, Mount Erebus, and on volcanic islands in the South Sandwich and South Shetland groups, cause intense chemical weathering, with the production of clay minerals, free chloride and sulphate radicals, and strongly acidic soils.
The warm, permanently damp clay provides a localized substrate where microorganisms and moss mats flourish (Broady et al .,
1987; Ugolini, 1966, 1967; Vincent, 1988).
Evaporites and saline soils .
Evaporites are ahumic soils with a high proportion of soluble crystalline minerals, formed where drainage water carrying dissolved minerals has accumulated and evaporated.
Normally associated with hot deserts, they are not uncommon in dry polar regions, surrounding saline lakes (Ugolini and Tedrow 1966).
Saline soils form near the sea when salts are blown inland from spray in summer, or in salt-laden snow lifted from sea ice in winter.
Sea spray may contain up to 25% of solid materials, organic and inorganic, and contributes significant amounts of nitrate and organic debris to coastal soils.
On Signy Island sodium ions may release potassium from soil solution, making available an important plant nutrient (Allen and Northover, 1967).
In temperate regions they support specially-adapted halophilic (salt-loving) species of plants; in polar regions they tend to be barren.
Chemical characteristics of some Signy Island soils appear in Table 3.2.
3.2.4 Organic soils
Protorankers, rankers and moss peat .
In dry polar deserts ahumic soils tend to remain ahumic indefinitely.
Only in warmer, damper regions have they a   chance to acquire the organic debris — mostly fragments of algae, fungi, lichens and mosses — that allows them to develop further into humic soils (Figure 3.6B-D).
The most advanced northern soils are arctic brown soils, which form on damp but well-drained open slopes colonized by flowering plants.
Their colour and loamy consistency indicates that organic solutions are working among the soil minerals.
Also showing a degree of maturity are ranker soils (Kubiéna, 1953; Tedrow, 1977)— coarse mats of vegetation several centimetres thick overlying and to some degree penetrating mineral soils below.
The closest polar desert approximations are protoranker soils — moist soils of very limited organic content underlying patches of moss and lichen (Figure 3.6C).
Protorankers occur widely in coastal Antarctica, wherever there is moisture enough in summer to support vegetation mats (Tedrow and   Ugolini, 1966; Ugolini, 1977; MacNamara, 1969).
They tend to be alkaline, with soluble salts at the plant-soil interface and sometimes a brown mineral horizon below.
Theoretically they mark a stage in the formation of organic soils, but as neither mosses nor lichens put down penetrating roots, and earthworms are lacking, organic material remains mostly superficial.
Organic content of the soil beneath ranges from 3.1% under lichens and 5.3% under mosses (Rudolph, 1966) to approaching 10% under lichen mats (Glasovskaya, 1958).
The vegetation cover has an insulating effect in spring, keeping the soil cool and humid and the level of permafrost high (McCraw, 1960).
In maritime Antarctica some Signy Island soils underlying moss peats (Allen and Northover, 1967; Holdgate et al .,
1967), and at least two of eight soil groups identified by Everett (1969) from Trinity Peninsula, seem likely to be protorankers.
Where moisture is limited and productivity low the moss covering remains thin.
Where productivity is higher the carpet thickens and becomes peaty; Allen and Heal (1970) reported moss peat up to 2 m thick, overlying rather than mixing with the mineral soil beneath.
Brown soils .
True organic soils require the presence of vascular plants with penetrating roots, and a lively population of soil flora and fauna, preferably including earthworms.
On the arctic tundra Tedrow (1977) distinguishes arctic brown soils on well-drained sites, and tundra soils on wetter areas, the latter grading into waterlogged bog soils.
These are poorly developed brown soils, low in organic content though overlain by mats of plant material, a strongly mineralized subsurface layer and a permafrost base.
They often carry an active microbiota of bacteria, algae, nematodes and other creatures that mediate slow decomposition and the incorporation of organic materials into the soil (Figure 3.6D).
Brown soils of this level of maturity are found as far north as Devon Island (75°30'N) in the Canadian Arctic, forming mosaics with polar desert soils (Walker and Peters, 1977).
In Siberia they are more widespread and varied than in North America, where glaciation was heavier and longer-lasting.
Simple brown soils occur in the maritime Antarctic, on damp north-facing slopes in association with Antarctica's two species of flowering plants (Allen and Heal, 1970).
Richer, more mature brown soils occur in polar fringe regions of both hemispheres, usually underlying grass and herb meadows.
Though the soil may be frozen for part of the year, root growth is vigorous, earthworms may be active, there is plenty of organic debris to be rotted down, and the decomposing agents are more abundant than in the dry deserts.
Ornithogenic soils .
Soils saturated by concentrated bird droppings occur throughout the world; those of seabirds in dry areas are of particular economic interest as origins of phosphate deposits (Hutchinson, 1950).
They are found at both ends of the world (Syroechkovskiy, 1959), being especially prominent at penguin breeding colonies in coastal Antarctica.
Colony sites include massive quantities of highly phosphatic and nitrogenous guano, and are scattered also with feathers, food, egg membranes and the carcasses of unsuccessful chicks (Figure 3.7).
On continental Antarctic coasts these deposits weather slowly (Campbell and Claridge, 1966; Orchard and Corderoy, 1983; Ugolini, 1972), with little modification of underlying mineral soils.
At old abandoned sites friable, loamy subsoil of silt and clay develops, and at long-abandoned sites most soluble salts gradually disappear.
Some have enhanced populations of bacteria (Boyd and Boyd, 1963; Vincent, 1988).
Though these might seem ideal sites for vegetation, they are not especially attractive to algae, lichens and mosses.
In the warmer, damper conditions of maritime Antarctica, colony sites examined by Myrcha et al .
(1985) showed more active leaching and mineralization, notably phosphatization, of the underlying soil, with rapid run-off of soluble nutrients to the sea.
Nunataks and cliffs with small local populations of gulls, petrels and skuas gather deposits which seem more encouraging to plant growth (Siple, 1938; Lovenskiold, 1960; Rudolph, 1966), perhaps because concentrations of guano are less overwhelming.
3.2.5 Patterned ground
Bare or thinly-covered polar soils often show characteristic hillocks, or patterns of circles, rectangles, polygons and stripes; these may be marked out in shallow furrows and ridges, or by lines of stones, on scales of 1 m to 30 m or more (Tedrow, 1977).
The patterns are common to both hemispheres and appear only on open ground, not under permanent ice (except for some ‘fossil’ patterns representing an earlier interglacial), or under longstanding snow drifts or thick vegetation.
Depending on the presence of soil moisture, they are absent from very dry ground and vary in structure according to wetness.
On moderately dry ground, for example along the coast of Antarctica, unsorted polygons are convex shapes in the ground up to a few metres across, ringed by a network of furrows that mark the positions of persistent cracks (Figure 3.8).
As temperatures fall with the approach of winter, the soil freezes and contracts, forming the cracks which open to admit snow and surface rubble.
When the soil expands again in spring the contents    of the cracks are compressed into wedges.
The cracks recur each year in the same places, the wedges thicken annually, and the ground between buckles into irregular domes, ridges, or pancakes with raised edges.
Parallel cracks form where the soil is patchy or irregular, or the ground sloping; on flat ground lesser cracks appear at angles to the main system, forming irregular polygons.
The tops of the wedges are often covered with gravel and may be awash during the spring thaw.
Sorted polygons occur on wetter ground; they are common for example on bare ground in maritime Antarctica and widespread on the arctic tundra (Figure 3.9).
The simplest are fine earth spots, which stand out like molehills on a lawn and are often defined by rings of large pebbles or stones, which they appear to have shouldered aside.
During freezing in wet soil, water is drawn into horizons which solidify in parallel layers, forcing soil and stones upward.
On thawing in spring the fine soil collapses and falls past the stones, which thus become isolated at the surface and encircle the actively freezing and thawing material.
On hillsides, stone   stripes form in much the same way across the slope (Chambers, 1966a, b, 1967; Holdgate et al .
1967).
On a larger scale, in very wet ground, lenses of ice several metres thick may accumulate over a number of years, causing hummocky ground; on thawing they create pits from which originate many tundra ponds.
Very large lenses up to 50 m thick form extensions of the permafrost, giving rise to steep-sided hills called pingos which in many tundra regions provide the highest relief Pingos may be many centuries old and covered with permanent vegetation.
Though summer moisture and warmth encourage vegetation, soil mobility discourages it, and the most active spots in patterned ground remain uncolonized (Figure 3.9).
Stable furrows, ridges and hillocks provide a range of environmental conditions which plants select according to their needs.
Patterned ground is thus reflected in a patterned carpet of mosses and flowering plants.
Patterning is widespread and often spectacular in the Arctic.
Though widely reported from Antarctica, it is seldom so striking in the drier southern soils.
3.3 Land plant communities
Northern and southern polar plant communities have few species in common, but fall readily into similar biogeographical categories according to cold and aridity.
Several workers have devised systems of classifying either habitat or vegetation for one or both regions.
For the north see for example Polunin (1951), Young (1971) and Bliss (1981); Bliss (1981–9) provides a table of comparison between eight published biogeographical systems.
For the south see Bliss (1979), Greene (1964), Holdgate (1977), Stonehouse (1972, 1982), Pickard and Seppelt (1984) and Smith (1984).
Among the few who have tried to compare the two regions, French and Smith (1985) are concerned particularly with subpolar tundra, and Aleksandrova (1980) prescribes a simple geobotanical regional zoning that covers both polar and subpolar zones at both ends of the world.
Here I use Aleksandrova's system for the north, and a compatible though slightly different system (Stonehouse, 1982) for the south.
These are summarized in Tables 3.3 and 3.4.
3.3.1 Northern plant communities
Polar desert and tundra .
Tundra is a Lappish word, probably derived from the Finnish ‘tunturi’, and meaning ‘treeless heights’.
It was originally   applied to the open plains of northern Kola Peninsula (Kol'skiy Poluostrov).
Now it is used widely in a geographical sense for all the plains, vegetated but treeless, that lie north of the boreal forest in Europe, Siberia, North America and Greenland, up to the boundary of the polar desert.
Polar desert is the area of bare rocks and soils beyond the tundra, where only a thin, patchy covering of plant life is found.
Confusingly, the same terms are used also for the plant communities of these regions.
In its botanical sense tundra is a working abbreviation for arctic tundra vegetation, the tough, low-lying vegetation that typifies the arctic treeless area.
There is also mountain tundra, a similar kind of vegetation growing on high mountain slopes in lower latitudes.
Similarly the term polar desert covers both the area and the vegetation characteristic of it.
Arctic desert vegetation .
The northern polar desert has few macroscopic plants or none; where present the vegetation forms a single thin layer, with cryptogams (algae, lichens, mosses and hepatics) dominant.
Mosses and lichens provide much of the patchy ground cover, forming mats rather than carpets with bare ground between.
Angiosperms (flowering plants) are present but insignificant.
Lichens, particularly encrusting forms, are the most prominent plants, dominant in many communities and providing the highest biomass.
Neuropogon sulphureus (= Usnea sulphurea ), a bipolar species, is typical, growing in colourful patches among species of the genera Collema ,Ochrolechia ,Pertusaria ,Toninia and others.
Algae, especially blue-green forms, occur among the lichens.
Mosses are represented mainly by small clusters including species of Bryum ,Pohlia and Myurella ;Rhacomitrium lanuginosum and Andreaea spp. are common on poor soils and Onchophorus wahlenbergii grows in wetter areas; some larger tundra mosses are present but comparatively rare.
Liverworts grow chiefly in association with mosses, sometimes forming black incrustations.
Angiosperms are usually tiny, growing in isolated clusters and nowhere forming the bulk of the cover.
Only about 60 species thrive in the low summer temperatures.
Their most characteristic form is compact cushions (for example poppies Papaver , moss-campions Draba and saxifrages Saxifraga ), or small tufts (grasses Phippsia algidae and Poa abbreviata ).
In their horizontal distribution plants often follow soil patterning (p. 77), mosses, lichens and angiosperms aligning themselves along the cracks between polygons, with crustose lichens occupying the centres.
Notably absent from this zone are the sedges Carex stans , and the angiosperm families Polypodiaceae, Liliaceae, Betulaceae, Empetraceae and Vacciniacae, all well represented further south.
Sphagnum bogs and peat mires are missing; occasionally the ground is wet enough to support moss mires, involving ahumic soils and an overgrowth of mosses Orthothecium chryseum , or Campylium and Bryum spp. forming protoranker mats on top.
Among lichens the genus Cladonia is very rare, except for C .
pyxidata and other cup-like forms.
Within the arctic desert region Aleksandrova distinguishes northern and southern subzones.
The northern belt includes Zemlya Frantsa-Iosepha, the northernmost islands of Severnaya Zemlya, the De Long Islands, the northernmost group of Novosibirskiye Ostrova, and the coldest, driest, most completely icebound islands of the Canadian arctic archipelago (Borden, northern Prince Patrick, Lougheed, Ellef Ringness, Amund Ringness and Meighen Islands).
The southern belt includes the northern tip of Novaya Zemlya, the bulk of Severnaya Zemlya, Cape Chelyuskin, several of the less extreme Canadian arctic islands, the northern coasts of Devon, Axel Heiberg and Ellesmere Islands, northern Greenland, and Nordaustlandet and Kong Karls Land in Svalbard.
While the northern belt has an almost exclusively polar desert flora, the southern belt has climatically-favoured areas where tundra species occur patchily, and forms a transition zone between high arctic and tundra.
Its flora includes a few vascular cryptogams (ferns).
The boundary between the edge of the southern zone and the tundra is the 2°C July isotherm.
Longitudinally the whole desert region is divided into Barents, Siberian and Canadian provinces, with similar but distinctive plant assemblies.
Arctic tundra vegetation .
Arctic tundra vegetation is a mosaic of plant communities, usually compact, wind-sculptured, and less than 1 m high.
Lichens and mosses are often prominent, but tundra communities also include shrubs, sedges, grasses and forbs (flowering herbs other than grasses).
Composition of the communities varies according to soil, aspect in relation to sun, drainage, length of snow-cover and other variables.
At its richest, on good soils in warm, sheltered spots, tundra can form lush meadows, thickets of tussock grasses and low shrubs.
At its poorest, on rocky soils in harsh, unsheltered environments, it is a thin layer of vegetation, including flowering plants, that seems to survive only with difficulty.
Tundra vegetation forms a semi-continuous zone all the way round the Arctic basin, wherever there is land far enough north to support it.
In northern Scandinavia there is only a narrow band a few kilometres wide along the northeastern coast of Kola Peninsula.
In central Siberia, Alaska and Canada tundra forms a belt several hundred kilometres wide on the mainland and extends far out onto the islands beyond the continental coasts.
Two subzones are usually distinguished.
The southernmost subzone is one of transition from forest to typical tundra.
Where the treeline is sharply defined it may hardly exist at all; more often it is a narrow band of forest-tundra, in which stands of trees alternate with dense shrubby tundra.
The northern zone is one of progressive impoverishment, where tundra vegetation thins rapidly in height, density and number of species.
Ground with less than about 50% cover is called fellfield; below about 20% fellfield becomes polar desert.
Typical tundra forms a thin, semi-complete vegetation covering in which grasses or low shrubs up to about 50 cm tall are dominant; spaces within it are caused by bare rock outcrops, and characteristic patches of mobile soil which all plants find difficulty in colonizing.
Many tundra species occur in  polar desert and forest as well, but only in tundra do they dominate their communities.
Tundra vegetation includes a greater variety and profusion of algae, lichens, liverworts and mosses than polar deserts, but a more striking and diagnostic difference is the variety and form of angiosperms, notably low shrubs, herbs and grasses.
Aleksandrova rather confusingly calls the northern and southern belts arctic tundra and subarctic tundra, separating them by the 6°C July isotherm.
In the narrower northern subregion the richest plant assemblies are dominated by dwarf shrubs, for example polar willows Salix polaris , the avens Dryas octopetala ,D .
punctata and D .
integrifolia and the heather Cassiope tetragona ; these grow at most only a few centimetres high, forming thin stands that barely cover the ground.
This region has the longer history of continuous occupation by tundra, for at no time during the post-glacial period was it invaded by forest.
In the southern zone, where the growing season is longer, thickets of larger, denser shrubs become possible.
Characteristic plants include birches Betula nana ,B .
exilis and B .
glandulosa , bilberries Vaccinium uliginosum and crowberries Empetrum hermaphroditum , which grow recumbent or semi-prostrate, in some patches forming a complete ground cover.
Along its southern edge stands of low trees intermix with the shrubs, in places grading insensibly into forest.
These communities dominated by dwarf and recumbent shrubs represent the best conditions of soil, warmth and moisture in their respective subregions.
Other communities, less diagnostic but equally representing the tundra, occur in less optimal conditions.
Aleksandrova divides each tundra subregion latitudinally into northern and southern zones, providing four belts of progressive floristic enrichment and diversity within the tundra biome.
The northernmost zone has the least continuous plant cover, the most patterned ground exposed, and the narrowest range of communities.
The southernmost has the densest vegetation, the most complete cover, and the widest variety of both angiosperms and plant communities.
Tundra ecologists stress the mosaic characteristic of this vegetation; many different kinds of tundra communities are reviewed in individual articles in Bliss et al .
(1981), which cover the whole arctic area.
For detailed surveys of lowland tundra on Devon Island, northern Canada, see Bliss (1977); for a wide-ranging though equally detailed account of Soviet tundra see Chernov (1985), and for a most readable though more general survey of tundra vegetation see Sage (1986).
A simple approach to the diversity of tundra communities is to classify them as dry, moist or wet, according to dampness underfoot.
Dry :fellfields and barren grounds .
Widespread in the north, and restricted to dry uplands in the south, are expanses of rough, open terrain with virtually ahumic soils.
For much of the year they appear barren; with summer moisture the dried-out cushions and patches of vegetation burst into life, yielding arctic poppies, avens, moss campions, saxifrages — flowers familiar from the arctic desert, here abundant enough to provide a scattering of colourful, threadbare mats.
Adding to the textures are chickweeds Stellaria , wintergreen Pyrola grandiflora , willow-herb Epilobium latifolium , mountain vetch Astragalus alpinus , dwarf willows, heathers, Labrador tea Ledum decumbens and other small woody shrubs, alternating with thin grasses, mosses and lichens.
Moist :shrub and heath lands .
The central tundra belts are steppe-like plains where low shrubs, sedges and grasses form a semi-continuous cover of vegetation up to 1 m high.
In moist lowlands a dense ground cover of short grasses, mosses, lichens and occasional ferns (Woodsia spp.) grows from peaty, sometimes waterlogged soils.
Dwarf willows, birches and alders (Alnus ) form the emergent vegetation.
Better-drained uplands have thinner soils and a ground cover of grey-green lichens, notably Cladonia spp., the so-called reindeer mosses.
The tundra is widely grazed by mammals, especially voles and lemmings that burrow in the undergrowth.
Small shrubs — cranberries Vaccinium vitis-idaea , bilberries, bearberries Arctostaphylos spp., crowberries, Labrador tea, and arctic heather — grow in patches; lupins Lupinus arcticus , buttercups Ranunculus lapponicus , windflowers Anemone parviflora and louseworts Pedicularis spp. produce colourful flowers in summer, and several of the shrubs produce bright red leaves and berries in autumn.
Where snow persists late in summer and the growing season is short, meadows of short grasses and herbs appear among the shrubs.
Wet :mires ,marshes and ponds .
Undulating coastal plains and other ungraded lowlands, underlain by permafrost, in summer form some of the tundra's wettest areas.
Ponds, marshes and mires fill the hollows, alternating with higher ground which emerges first from under the snow and dries out in the course of summer.
From wet, acid, peaty soils with partly decomposed debris emerge tussock grasses, rich swards of pendent grass Arctophila fulva and tundra grass Dupontia fischeri , sedges Eriophorum and Carex , rushes Juncus spp., cotton grasses Eriphorium angustifolium and dark green, hummock-forming mosses.
Shrubby alders and willows, buttercups Ranunculus pallasii and marsh marigolds Caltha natans line the  pond edges, with grass swards that become favoured grazing grounds for aquatic birds.
Ponds of the southern and central tundra warm quickly once their ice has melted, and build up a moderately rich flora and fauna.
The tundra-forest boundary .
The treeline defining the southern tundra edge is often fringed by a forest-tundra zone, narrow in North America but broadening in Eurasia to a band up to 300km wide.
Chernov (1985) describes a transition zone of multi-layered vegetation, rich in species, patchy because of local variations in drainage and microclimate.
On dry ground thickets of willow, birch and alder alternate and mingle with moss and grass meadows; in the hollows are moss mires of Sphagnum and Hypnum spp., yielding to sedges, cotton grass, pendent grass and mare's tails Hippuris vulgaris spp. in the wetlands.
South-facing slopes where snow lies late support meadows of grass and herbs; drier ridges carry a dense growth of dwarf shrubs.
Shrubs that grow knee-high further north reach waist-height and above at the forest edge.
Isolated stands of small, wind-stunted trees are characteristic, in North America usually white or black spruce Picea glauca ,P .
mariana , in Eurasia Scots or stone pine Pinus sylvestris ,P .
pumila .
Forming islands in the tundra, their height is determined by winter snow depth; deep snow protects the body of the tree, but exposed tips of leaders and lateral branches are nipped by winter winds.
Seeds are set in good seasons, but few are viable, germination is low, and seedlings are vulnerable to predation.
Poor regeneration from seed is an important factor that inhibits the spread of forest into the tundra (Tikhomirov, 1961).
3.3.2 Southern plant communities
Southern biomes .
In Stonehouse's (1972, 1982) classification of southern biomes (Table 3.3) the antarctic region includes the whole of Antarctica north to the Antarctic Convergence.
Within it lie circumpolar continental, maritime and periantarctic zones, the first bounded by the 0°C summer isotherm, the second by the northern limit of pack ice.
Aleksandrova's (1980) bipolar classification is primarily geobotanical, though it recognizes similar boundaries and differs mainly in nomenclature.
Her ‘antarctic polar deserts’ region covers the continent, peninsula and islands up to the northern limit of pack ice, and is divided into southern and northern subregions separated by the 0°C summer isotherm, which approximates to the isoline of zero radiation balance.
Aleksandrova's system thus includes Stonehouse's two southern zones in  one region, her two subregions corresponding almost exactly to his continental and maritime zones.
This classification emphasizes a legitimate interest of a bipolar geobotanist — the existence of a southern polar desert directly comparable to the better-known northern one.
Stonehouse is concerned more to emphasize environmental and ecological differences between the continental and maritime regions, supporting Holdgate's (1964) original concept of a maritime antarctic province, and in accord with other biologists (e.g. Smith, 1984) whose main interests are antarctic.
Continental plant communities .
First impressions in the field suggest that large areas of ice-free Antarctica are sterile.
However, many of the seemingly-barren rocks carry a sparse flora of algae or lichens, and few damp crevices or patches of soil are without at least a microflora of algae, bacteria or fungi.
Cameron (1972) cultured green or blue-green algae from some of the driest and least-promising looking areas of the McMurdo Dry Valleys oasis.
At 3600 m on Mount Erebus, Ross Island, where no surface vegetation was apparent, Janetschek (1963) recorded bacteria, blue-green algae and microfungi a few centimetres down in the volcanically-warmed soil.
From dry stone pavements in the Vestfold Hills oasis Broady (1986) reported green and blue-green algae, zoned in slightly damp subsurface soil under and around translucent stones, in areas apparently devoid of vegetation.
Vincent (1988) reviews these communities thoroughly.
Algal, lichen and moss communities grow wherever there is a hint of moisture, in a variety of habitats all over the continent.
On mountain flanks within 5° of the South Pole they cover less than 1% of the ground; on damper coastal flats and uplands they may spread to 15% cover or even more.
Very few species are involved; just how few are present is hard to tell because collections are patchy and taxonomy confusing.
Floral compositions of some representative antarctic plant localities appear in Table 3.5, where they are compared with a single northern high tundra community.
Smith (1984) credits continental Antarctica with 15 taxa (provisionally species) of mosses, 100 of lichens, one hepatic, with no ferns, pteridophytes or angiosperms.
Following intensive studies of sites in Victoria Land, East Antarctica, Janetschek (1967) gave a provisional list of at least 150 species of algae, over 32 species of lichens and 8–10 species of mosses — a representative selection from a high-latitude desert area.
A comparable dry desert area of the arctic might yield a similar selection of cryptogams, but there would probably be up to a dozen species of flowering plants scattered among them.
In comparable latitudes of the   arctic the flora is much richer (Table 3.4).
On 43 km 2 of Truelove Lowland, Devon Island (75 °N), there are more species of lichens, liverworts, mosses and ferns, and some 90 species of angiosperms (Bliss 1977).
The environments are similar; without doubt the single most important difference is the greater opportunity for recruitment from adjoining forest, steppe and alpine regions in the north.
Cold desert flora .
On the driest uplands of Antarctica and in oases, encrusting grey and orange lichens Buellia frigida ,Alectoria miniuscula ,Biatorella antarctica ,Umbilicaria decussata and species of Caloplaca ,Xanthoria ,Usnea and Candelaria may be the only visible signs of life.
In damper areas Nostoc commune , a prominent blue-green alga, occurs widespread in plaques associated with bacteria, green algae, fungi and mosses; in early spring their black, dried-out patches show where summer moisture will gather.
Two macrolichen species are shown in Figure 3.10.
Where a slight flow of water is guaranteed for a few days, for example in crevices and gullies that conduct snow-melt trickles, mosses gather among the lichens.
Where water accumulates, mosses become dominant; the wettest patches have mats, even hummocks, of Bryum ,Grimmia ,Ceratodon and other species, growing from a substrate of dead but barely decomposed organic material and often partly overgrown with lichens.
Prasiola crispa and other green algae are widespread at the coast, forming mats where seabird droppings add nutrients to melt-water; again lichens and mosses may grow in association.
Colonization and succession of plants are reviewed in Smith (1984).
Both are slow processes; the establishment of a typical antarctic plant community involving only a few species may take centuries or even millennia (Lamb, 1970).
In some situations the first colonizers are algae, often nitrogen-fixing   cyanobacteria or blue-green algae (Nostoc ,Oscillatoria ), followed by lichens and mosses which draw nourishment from the algal detritus (Llano, 1965).
In others lichens colonize and replace each other(Lindsay, 1978), in a process taking 200 years or considerably longer.
Oases .
Shumskiy (1957) defines antarctic oases as substantial ice-free areas separated from an ice-sheet by an ablation zone, and kept free from snow by ablation due to low albedo and radiation.
The most likely cause is a local   reduction in precipitation.
Details of seven antarctic oasis areas of size range 8–1000 km 2 appear in Table 3.6.
This list is minimal, for many more ice-free areas around the continent would qualify for inclusion at the lower end of the size range.
Oases are misleadingly named; they are simply polar desert areas, notable for their absence of ice but not for floristic abundance.
Similar ice-free areas in the arctic go unremarked.
Botanically, oases contain only the alga-lichen-moss communities that would be expected in continental habitats relatively recently freed from ice (i.e. during the last few thousand years), where water is scarce and winds are strong.
In the Vestfold Hills oasis on the Ingrid Christensen Coast, East Antarctica, Broady (1986) recorded over 80 species of terrestrial algae, and Seppelt(1986a,1986b) found 22 species of lichens and four mosses; a further three species of moss and a hepatic were recorded nearby.
Botanically this oasis is now one of the most completely studied areas of continental Antarctica (Pickard, 1986b, 1986c).
Maritime Antarctic communities .
By Smith's (1984) reckoning (see Table 3.5) Antarctic Peninsula alone has 20% fewer taxa of lichens than continental Antarctica, but 50% more taxa of mosses.
The maritime antarctic as a whole has 20% more lichens than the continent and 150% more mosses; in addition it has 25 taxa of hepatics to the continent's one, and two species of angiosperms that have not yet been found on the  continent.
Thus the maritime zone is richer both in species and in variety of plant communities than the continent, though still poor in comparison with an arctic biome much closer to the pole.
Smith (1984) presents a generalized classification of antarctic vegetation based mainly on maritime communities; a more detailed account of a similar classification appears in Gimingham and Smith (1970).
There are two major divisions, a widespread non-vascular cryptogam formation and a herb formation.
The former lists seven or eight subformations made up of algae, lichens and mosses in varying combinations; the latter includes only one subformation, involving the two antarctic flowering plants, the grass Deschampsia antarctica and the pink or pearlwort Colobanthus quitensis .
Almost all the maritime alga-lichen-moss communities are richer in species and more luxuriant in growth than their continental counterparts, more so on the outlying island groups than on Antarctic Peninsula, and more on the northern than on the southern peninsula.
Two subformations are particularly prominent.
In the Usnea-Andreaea association of lichens and mosses the two named genera are usually represented, together with other species of lichens and algae.
This is a versatile and widespread subformation common on all kinds of surfaces, in which crustose and foliose lichens combine with moss cushions to form mats (in the most    favourable conditions, carpets) several centimetres deep.
The Tortula-Grimmia association of mosses occurs on wet alkaline substrates (for example marble outcrops); species of the named genera form deep carpets in which other mosses, lichens and hepatics settle, forming some of Antarctica's most complex stands of vegetation (Gimingham and Smith, 1970).
A moss peat bank is shown in Figure 3.11, and a section through a moss cushion in Figure 3.12.
The herb subformation involves one or both species of flowering plants, usually in combination with mosses.
It occurs mostly on sheltered, well-watered cliff faces and damp coastal flats where there is local protection from wind and spray.
In specially favoured areas the grass is extensive enough to form patches of turf; the pinks are usually rarer and more dispersed.
Despite intensive searches neither has been found on Bouvetøya and only the grass is known from the South Sandwich Islands.
Elsewhere they are usually found together; the southernmost record is from Barn Island (62°41'S), Terra Firma Islands, Marguerite Bay (Smith and Poncet, 1985).
The periantarctic zone .
Antarctic islands that lie north of the northern limit of pack ice have markedly longer summers and milder winters than those that are invested by pack ice.
At sea level and on their lower slopes, they have correspondingly richer vegetation with more species (Table 3.4), more complete ground cover, and especially more flowering plants.
Warmth, moisture and deep-rooted plants ensures the presence of mature soils on all these island; coastal regions of the three largest are notably green, with rich stands of tussock grasses, shrubs and fellfields.
The presence of soils in turn ensures the presence of breeding petrels that burrow in soils, or require the dense vegetation for nesting, and of a few species of birds (and indeed of introduced mammals) that live entirely on the resources of the land.
South Georgia and Heard Island, lying well south of the Antarctic Convergence, are both heavily glaciated.
South Georgia, with a wide range of terrestrial habitats below its permanent glaciers, has recruited a flora of considerable variety, mostly downwind from South America.
Heard Island, comparatively tiny, has little open ground and a smaller range of habitats; comparative remoteness has presumably given it fewer opportunities to acquire a flora.
Iles Kerguelen and Macquarie Island, lying on the Antarctic Convergence, have correspondingly richer floras close to sea level, including several species of ferns and flowering plants.
3.4 Land animal communities
3.4.1 Land invertebrates
Arctic land invertebrates .
Damp polar desert soils and vegetation mats contain a small but active microfauna of consumers that feed on bacteria, algae, fungal hyphae and plant debris.
Soils of Devon Island, for example, yield protozoa, rotifers, tardigrades, turbellarians, nematodes, enchytraeid worms, copepods, ostracods, cladocerans, mites, spiders and insects (Ryan, 1977).In wetter areas platyhelminths, collembolae and larvae of chironomids and other flying insects become dominant.
On the warmer tundra beetles, moths, butterflies, ichneumon flies, bumblebees, craneflies, blowflies and other diptera become prominent in summer, with larvae that live in fresh water, moist soil, vegetation, or in the living or dead bodies of other animals.
Spiders and mites are widespread; biting simuliid flies and mosquitos plague man and other warm-blooded animals, and warble flies become the special bane of reindeer and caribou.
These small invertebrates form a community of a kind that is familiar in soils and low-standing vegetation of temperate regions at either end of the world.
The herbivores are mainly microfeeders, consuming bacteria, algae, fungi and detritus.
Conspicuous by their absence are larger invertebrate herbivores, for example browsing and grazing insects, that often become dominant on temperate grasslands.
The carnivores are small and relatively  insignificant.
All are strongly seasonal, with activity limited to a few days or weeks in summer.
Polar adaptations of a few species, so far as they are recognized, are discussed in Chapter 6.
Antarctic land invertebrates .
The southern assemblies of terrestrial invertebrates that compare most directly with those of the arctic tundra are found, not on continental Antarctica, but on uplands of the larger periantarctic and subantarctic islands.
These are the environments that, in terms at least of summer climates, most closely match milder parts of the northern tundra.
However, it is not surprising that the southern islands, relatively tiny and lacking contiguity with major landmasses, are comparatively poor in phyla, families, genera and species.
Maritime and continental Antarctica, recently planed by glaciation and with even fewer opportunities for recruitment, are poorer still.
Insects, mainly collembola, and arachnids, mainly mites, are the dominant forms (Block, 1984).
Maritime Antarctica has in addition one species of soil copepod, two of chironomid midges (Figure 3.13), and a very limited   fauna of introduced species, local to scientific stations and transient.
Notable absentees are earthworms and enchytraeids, terrestrial molluscs, amphipods and isopods, hemiptera, lepidoptera, pseudoscorpions, spiders and myriapods (Block 1984).
Many of the vertebrates at either end of the world carry resident populations of feather lice, mites and other ecto-parasites that breed on the body; nestbreeding fleas and ticks are understandably less prominent in high latitudes, where nest material is minimal.
3.4.2 Land vertebrates
Arctic land vertebrates .
Amphibia and viviparous reptiles (for example vipers Vipera berus ) reach the northern edge of the forest but rarely cross the treeline.
Birds are prominent on the tundra, especially in summer when migrant waders and waterfowl pour in from the south; only a few species are year-round residents.
Mammals are plentiful though less prominent.
Voles, mice and lemmings are active under the snow in winter, hunted by predatory weasels, stoats, foxes and wolves.
Larger browsers and grazers include hares, rabbits, musk oxen, and reindeer and caribou.
Polar adaptations of some of these species are discussed in Chapter 6.
Resident land birds .
Arctic land birds breed almost entirely between mid-May and July, when days are long, the weather is propitious, the ground is unfrozen and relatively clear of snow, and food is most easily hunted.
Outside the months of breeding all but a few species disappear to wintering grounds well south of the Arctic Circle; thus the arctic has over 150 species of breeding land birds, but only eight of them reside on the tundra all the year round.
The resident species include stocks that breed far to the north in summer, and in autumn move south to the warmer tundra, or from tundra to warmer coastlands, to avoid the harshest winter conditions.
Three pairs of closely related species — the buntings, redpolls and ptarmigan — each with a northern and southern representative, illustrate graded levels of arctic penetration.
Sparrow-sized buntings and redpolls, weighing 30–35 g, are the smallest and perhaps the hardiest of polar birds.
Too small to be able to carry massive winter insulation, they nevertheless survive; it is remarkable to see such tiny objects maintaining normal avian body temperatures (39–40°C) in ambient temperatures some 60–70°C lower, seeking shelter under eaves and in or under snow, and maintaining their high metabolic rate by constant foraging.
Lapland buntings Calcarius lapponicus winter in  temperate and subpolar latitudes and breed on the southern tundra in summer (Tryon and MacLean, 1980).
Closely-related snow buntings Plectrophenax nivalis winter in small flocks where the snow is thinnest on the southern tundra, and fly northward to breed on the high arctic tundra in summer, when snow still plentiful on the ground (Pattie, 1972, 1977).
They maintain themselves throughout the year on a diet of seeds and insects.
Common redpolls Carduelis (= Acanthis )flammea and arctic redpolls C .
hornemanni make up a similar pair, the former more southerly in distribution but overlapping in parts of their range.
Both species feed mainly on birch seed in winter, finding it respectively on snow-free areas of the tundra and in the sub-boreal forests.
Breeding also on the antarctic fringe (see below), common redpolls have the widest latitudinal breeding range of any passerine.
Of the third pair, rock ptarmigan Lagopus mutus and willow ptarmigan L .
lagopus , the former breed and winter farther north.
Both shift annually from relatively thin brown or speckled summer plumage to much denser white winter plumage (West, 1972).
They feed on insects, seed and shoots, digging in the snow with well-feathered feet and burrowing for food and shelter.
Ravens Corvus corax and snowy owls Nyctea scandiaca (Watson, 1957) are among the hardiest residents; snowy owls have been reported as far north as 82N on Ellesmere Island in winter (Gessaman, 1978).
Both are large enough to carry dense plumage and subcutaneous fat; both are hunters of other birds and small mammals, and ravens also scavenge on the leavings of other species, including man.
Snowy owls, northern counterparts of the cosmopolitan eagle owls (Bubo sp.) are usually sedentary, wintering on or close to their breeding areas.
However, high populations and food shortages, occurring every four or five years (see below), drive them far south into and beyond the boreal forest (Fogden, 1973).
They breed from mid-May onward, hatching eight or more young in good years but only one, two or none when food is scarce.
Migrant land birds .
Every spring the Arctic's tiny resident populations are swamped by a huge influx of migrant birds, which fly from the tropics and temperate zones to feed and breed on the tundra.
Over 120 species are involved, most prominent among them waders (shorebirds), waterfowl including divers (loons), geese, swans and ducks, and birds of prey.
Many migrate almost entirely overland, along ‘flyways’ or traditional routes featuring coastlines, rivers and mountain chains.
Their flights may take a few hours or many days.
Some species have long passages over the sea, for example the ducks, geese, waders and passerines that cross from northwestern Europe to Greenland.
Lesser  goldern plovers Pluvialis dominica make long trans-oceanic flights; Alaskan breeding stocks cross 4000 km of the Pacific from wintering in Hawaii, while Asian stocks make even longer journeys from New Zealand and Oceania to breed in Siberia.
For a review of migration see Evans (1985); for reviews of breeding patterns and adaptations among arctic migrants see Perrins and Birkhead (1983) and Sage (1986).
Migration is usually initiated as a physiological response to increasing day length.
The birds fatten beforehand for their long flight, and unless delayed seriously by bad weather they arrive on the breeding grounds with fat in reserve.
This helps to protect them from starvation during the first week or two, when conditions may still be hard.
In species such as swans and geese, which lay large clutches of eggs soon after arrival, the reserve on landing may indeed determine breeding success for the year.
The migrants waste no time in starting to breed.
Large species with long incubation and growth periods, for example swans and geese, are particularly pressed for time.
Many are already paired from previous matings; all are usually nesting, courting, mating and laying within a few days of arrival.
Unseasonable bad weather may mean a late start to breeding and the loss of an entire season's young; in particularly bad seasons large numbers of birds may fail even to start, and miss a breeding season altogether.
After incubation and the exertions of tending their young, adults require the rest of the summer to regain condition and undergo at least a partial moult, then to fatten again for their journey back to the wintering grounds.
In some species the post-nuptial moult occurs in areas separate from the breeding grounds, requiring a midsummer migration.
A tundra bird community .
The summer nesting population of Truelove Lowland, on Devon Island, is a typical high tundra assembly; for details of breeding and feeding, including special studies of the snow buntings, see Pattie (1977).
Three species of arctic residents, Lapland longspurs, snow buntings and rock ptarmigan, are joined annually by a dozen species of long-distance migrants — red-throated divers (loons)Gavia stellata , arctic terns Sterna paradisaea , oldsquaw Clangula hyemalis , common and king eider Somateria mollissima and S .
spectabilis , glaucous gulls Larus hyperboreus , snow geese Chen caerulescens , parasitic and long-tailed jaegers Stercorarius parasiticus and S .
longicaudus , white-rumped and Baird's sandpipers Erolius fusicollis and E .
bairdii , and black-bellied plovers Squatarola squatarola .
The total bird population of the lowland includes  occasional-breeding snowy owls Nyctea scandiaca and peregrine falcons Falco peregrinus .
In general terms, the snow geese and ptarmigan feed mainly on vegetation.
Snowy owls and falcons, which nest only occasionally on Truelove Lowland, are the top predators, feeding mainly on small mammals and birds.
Between these extremes jaegers, terns, loons, plovers, buntings, longspurs, sandpipers and ducks occupy secondary and tertiary feeding levels, foraging for aquatic invertebrates, insects and seeds.
Gulls and jaegers especially are opportunists, feeding on insects, fish, small mammals and whatever else is plentiful.
As in lower latitudes, clutch size and nesting success among arctic land birds depend on the amount of food available each season, and this varies considerably from area to area and season to season.
In areas where conditions are favourable, in seasons of good weather, productivity of vegetation and insects may locally be very high.
While numbers of residents available for breeding each year depends on local productivity in previous seasons, numbers of migrant birds are determined partly by circumstances and events on their wintering grounds, where food may be scarce and predation high; the birds are also considerably at risk during their long flights.
Thus arctic breeding grounds often appear underpopulated in relation to their carrying capacity, and there is plentiful food for all that manage to get there safely.
This is what makes the migrants' long journey to the Arctic worth while.
In some passerine species it even justifies slightly larger clutches than are found in the same or closely related species of lower latitudes (Ricklefs, 1980).
However, food species are few, food webs are simple, and there are few alternatives if one or two sources of food disappear temporarily.
Buffers and balances that in temperate latitudes keep populations steady have less application in polar regions, and swings between success and failure, between underpopulation and overcrowding, tend to be violent.
Thus in years when lemmings and other small rodents are plentiful (see below), owls, skuas, jaegers and other aerial predators fare well and raise many offspring.
Foxes, weasels and other ground predators also flourish on the rodents, reducing their take of eggs and fledglings, and more of the young birds survive to breed in future years.
After two or more good seasons in succession, predatory birds become markedly more plentiful.
They nest at higher densities and leave no room for non-breeding birds, which are displaced and forced to ‘irrupt’ to unfamiliar ground.
So snowy owls may appear in southern Canada, Britain and southern Europe (see above), while their populations remaining at home suffer poor breeding seasons due to overcrowding.
The subsequent collapse of the rodent population due to competition and over-predation leads in turn to the collapse of aerial predator populations, temporarily restoring an unstable balance.
For more general  accounts of Arctic land birds see Stonehouse (1971) and Sage (1986).
Arctic land mammals .
Of some 4000 species of mammals in the world as a whole, only about 50 species have penetrated the Arctic (Sage, 1985 and Table 3.7).
This list includes eight marginal species — mountain and forest mammals that occur only on the arctic fringe — and over a dozen others that seldom penetrate far and are never found in the northern zones.
Just over a dozen species, marked with as asterisk in Table 3.7, are widespread on the tundra throughout the year.
These are mostly species of wide arctic distribution, morphologically distinct from their nearest kin outside the Arctic, suggesting a long-term   commitment to polar life.
All are lowland species whose ancestors probably inhabited lowland forests and steppe; curiously absent from the polar tundra are montane mammals of the subpolar fringe, for example Dall (Figure 3.14) and snow sheep, marmots, pikas, and upland (Siberian and red-backed) voles, which might have been expected to take readily to life on the low tundra (Chernov, 1985).
Largest among the tundra herbivores are musk oxen and caribou.
Too big to seek shelter within the snow, they are equipped with unusually dense fur and live in groups which offer protection equally from cold and predation.
Musk oxen were formerly widespread across the low tundra, but hunting by man has now restricted them mainly to north Greenland and the Canadian far north.
They feed voraciously in summer and store energy as subdermal fat.
In winter they keep to high, snow-free ground where continued grazing is possible, losing weight until the new flush of growth in spring.
Caribou and reindeer, respectively new-world and old-world representatives of a single species, form large migratory herds which winter on southern tundra or within the forest, and move north across the tundra in summer.
Almost all reindeer are now domesticated.
Generally smaller and more manageable than caribou, they are widespread in managed herds  in southern Greenland and across northern Eurasia.
Small herds introduced into northern Canada and Alaska during the twentieth century are now flourishing and helping local economies.
Caribou herds, formerly subject to severe hunting, continue to wander across the North American tundra subject to much lighter hunting pressures and non-intrusive human management.
Among large predatory mammals, polar bears are mainly maritime, spending much of their time along the coast or on sea ice where they hunt for fish and seals.
Grizzly and Kodiak bears (brown bears) are land-based and mainly herbivorous, feeding on roots, shoots, berries, wild honey and occasionally taking fish, small mammals and birds, and offal.
Grey or timber wolves are major predators of small mammals and birds, and also of caribou, reindeer and other deer (for example moose) that emerge onto the tundra in summer.
Small mammals avoid the harshest winter conditions by living within or under the snow.
Insectivorous shrews are confined mainly to the forest-tundra and tundra edge; only the arctic shrew and masked shrew, both holarctic species, are widespread on the southern tundra, and none penetrates far to the north (Bee and Hall, 1956).
Voles and lemmings, which are mainly herbivorous, range widely across the central and southern tundra, but only three species — arctic, Hudson Bay and brown lemmings — are plentiful on the northern tundra.
Of the lagomorphs, snowshoe hares are animals of forest and forest-tundra; Alaskan, varying and arctic hares are widely-ranging tundra species (some taxonomists say merely races of a single species).
Some southern populations winter in the forest; northern populations winter in the snow but are often found further north than any other mammals (Anderson and Lent, 1977).
Predatory on the smaller species are wolverine, arctic foxes, otters, mink, weasels and short-tailed weasels (ermine), which take small mammals, birds, eggs and carrion.
Wintering within the snow's protection (see summary in Sage, 1986b), feeding on last year's vegetation at the snow-ground interface, lemmings and other small herbivores with high capacity for reproduction are sometimes able to produce four or five litters per year, each of five or six offspring.
After two or three such years their numbers build up spectacularly within favoured areas.
Though owls, skuas and other predators move in and often enjoy successful breeding at their expense, the proliferating herbivores continue to outnumber them and to outpace the relatively low productivity of their food supply.
When they have eaten much of the available food, the huge population  collapses; though some individuals emigrate, most die of stress, diseases and starvation.
Because they are likely to have damaged storage organs and growing points as well, the capacity of the plants to recover is slowed.
Thus population numbers of small herbivores, in circumstances of limited food production, cycle over periods of three to four years.
Those of some larger mammals, for example hares and lynx, fluctuate in longer cycles of 10–13 years.
This phenomenon, characteristic of arctic populations but not confined to them, is discussed by Batzli et al .
(1981) and Crawley (1983).
Antarctic land birds .
There are no resident land birds in maritime or continental Antarctica.
Vagrant birds of South American origin are reported from time to time on the South Orkney and South Shetland Islands; their presence indicates repeated possibilities for colonization, but they invariably disappear quickly.
Islands within the northern limit of pack ice support only two species on land — sheathbills Chionis alba and C .
minor .
Though land-based and pigeon-like in appearance, sheathbills have maritime attributes of dense plumage, including thick grey underdown, and a store of subdermal fat.
They stay close to the sea, scavenging on penguin, cormorant and seal colonies, along tide lines, and in rock pools (Jones, 1963; Stonehouse, 1985).
In the periantarctic zone some individual C .
alba are year-round residents on South Georgia; others migrate, presumably to the South American mainland.
The small population of C .
minor on Heard Island is entirely resident, not surprisingly so in view of the distance over water to more agreeable wintering grounds.
South Georgia supports also resident pipits Anthus antarctica and pintails Anas georgica (Weller, 1975), both derived from similar South American stocks.
These feed on insects, shore-line and tide-pool fauna and soft vegetation in South Georgia's deep sheltered fjords.
Breeding speckled teal A .
flavirostris , also of South American origin, were first recorded on South Georgia in 1971 (Weller and Howard, 1972).
Macquarie Island, close to the Antarctic Convergence, has a resident population of common redpolls Acanthis flammea , a species which spread south to subantarctic islands after its nineteenth-century introduction into New Zealand from Europe.
Macquarie Island has also resident grey duck Anas superciliosa , mallard A .
platyrhynchos and weka Gallirallus australis , the latter a flightless rail introduced from New Zealand in the late nineteenth century.
Iles Kerguelen, also close to the Convergence, support an endemic pintail A .
eatoni , closely akin to the northern pintail A .
acuta (Watson et al .,
1975).
Antarctic land mammals .
Though Antarctica must once have been the  home of marsupials and possibly of placental mammals, it is currently the only world continent without a land mammal population.
None of the peripheral islands has naturally-occurring land mammals, but many have acquired rats and mice accidentally and browsing and grazing mammals by design; Leader-Williams (1985) lists 15 species introduced to the islands.
Rodents came ashore mostly from sealing and whaling ships; they survive well, mainly close to sea level, on all the main island groups north of the northern limit of pack ice.
On South Georgia reindeer, introduced from Scandinavia by whalers early in the twentieth century, flourish and appear to be spreading; horses and sheep introduced to the same island did not survive.
Farming and stock-raising were attempted on Auckland and Campbell Islands (Fraser, 1986) and Iles Kerguelen (Lesel and Derenne, 1975), but were never successful for long.
3.5 Summary and conclusions
Cold polar land environments are relatively new; though cold mountain environments may have existed throughout the earth's history, until the current glacial period polar regions have been temperate at sea level.
Climatic fluctuations have ensured that most polar soils are recently formed; because of ice-induced turbidity and slowness of soil-forming processes in cold conditions, the soils remain mostly immature, and unpromising media for the growth of vegetation.
Arctic soils show the wider spectrum of maturity; even in the most favoured conditions, few antarctic soils have passed beyond the ahumic stage.
Arctic terrestrial vegetation, drawn widely from the north temperate region, varies widely in quality, density and productivity from south to north.
Antarctic vegetation is comparatively meagre, including for example only two species of vascular plants.
Similarly, comparisons between northern and southern populations of land animals reflect the many more opportunities for polar recruitment, and the wide range of available niches, to be found in the Arctic.
FRESHWATER ENVIRONMENTS
4.1 Fresh water in polar regions
The chronic aridity of both polar heartlands has already been noted.
Though the antarctic ice-cap is estimated to contain 90% of the world's water, only a tiny fraction of it becomes available each year for living material.
Similarly the arctic desert, with or without ice sheets, has very little water available during the short summers, and none in winters.
On the polar fringes warmer air brings in moisture and deposits it as hoar-frost, snow or rain.
Though water is solid for much of the year, the annual thaw in spring and summer provides a wide range of aquatic habitats that support biological activity, and may even allow high productivity for a few weeks each year.
Wet soil is essentially a freshwater habitat, dealt with in Chapter 3 above.
Melting snow and ice surfaces provide transient substrates which bacteria and algae colonize, forming patches of pale green, red or yellow several hectares in extent.
Snow-melt and rain gather in runnels, streams and even small rivers, that flow for a few hours, days or weeks in summer but are stilled by freezing for the rest of the year.
Ponds and lakes form in poorly-drained rolling country, accumulating debris and nutrients, freezing partially or completely in winter but providing a limited habitat for plants and animals in summer.
4.2 Polar freshwater habitats
4.2.1 Snow and ice habitats
Freshly-fallen snow surfaces are virtually sterile, though bacteria are present in detectable quantities even on the southern polar ice-cap (Meyer-Rochow, 1979).
Older snow surfaces become adulterated; damp snow attracts wind-blown particles electrostatically (Benninghoff and Benninghoff, 1985), acquiring films of rock dust, bacteria, spores and plant propagules.
These accumulate as the snow melts under spring sunshine, and  the resulting discoloration hastens the melting.
Fragments of moss and algae that land on snow surfaces survive well in the moist environment, and may settle through the remaining snow to colonize the ground beneath.
Ionization and other atmospheric processes add nitrates and ammonium compounds to the snow in nutritionally significant quantities (Parker et al .,
1978).
Snow close to the coast is often additionally contaminated by mineral salts and organic material from the sea.
In summer these are carried inland in sea spray; in winter impregnated snow from the sea ice deposits them on coastal rocks and snowdrifts.
In late spring, snow surfaces within a few hundred metres of the coast often show a flush of colour, usually pink, green or brownish-yellow, caused by patches of unicellular or colonial algae.
On the South Orkney Islands Chlamydomonas ,Raphidonema and possibly Ochromonas are implicated (Fogg, 1967), similar accumulations of algae in a wide range of species have been seen at many other points around the coast (Akiyama, 1979; Kol and Flint, 1968; for a recent review see Vincent, 1988).
Their productivity is low, fixed carbon being of the order of 10 mg m -2 of snow per day; colour differences are due to different stages in development of the cells, and their sudden, often dramatic appearance during warm spells is more probably due to progressive loss of covering snow than to rapid proliferation (Fogg, 1967).
Snow algae are widespread in alpine and polar regions, but require persistent banks of melting snow to form spectacular coloured patches; they are rarely seen, for example, on the colder coasts or interior ice-cap of Antarctica.
Their ecology has been reviewed by Hoham (1975, 1980).
On the lower reaches of glaciers and on ice shelves close to the sea, where ablation exceeds snowfall in summer, wind-blown dust and rock fragments encourage local melting.
The resulting shallow pits and pools, often extending over many hectares, accumulate salts and nutrients from year to year.
Many are rich enough to support a distinctive cryoconite flora of algae and cyanobacteria, which survive winters encapsulated in the ice (Wharton et al .
1981; Vincent, 1988) and flourish briefly during the summer thaw.
4.2.2 Still-water habitats
Over much of the Arctic, surface drainage is poor; permafrost seals the subsoil, and snow-melt provides a flush of water in late spring.
In the northern desert there is rarely enough snow for melt-water to accumulate, and ponds are rare.
Where winter snow is plentiful, ponds and shallow lakes occupy large areas; over much of the tundra they form networks of static waterways that make walking difficult after the thaw.
On ice-scoured  uplands and coastal flats there may be more ponds and lakes than dry land.
Coastal plains often feature long, shallow lakes, separated and aligned by raised beaches and occupying up to 90% of the terrain.
Antarctica has relatively little standing water.
Large lakes, many of them strongly saline, are reported from several of the oasis areas; freshwater lakes are also present even in high latitudes, and temporary lakes form in summer alongside many glaciers.
Small coastal summer ponds are rare on the mainland but plentiful in the maritime and peripheral Antarctic regions.
Lakes form also on poorly-drained ice, alongside glaciers and ice-caps, on snow-covered ice-sheets, and between ice-sheets and ice-filled moraines.
Some are long-lived, fed by annual influxes of melt-water.
Others are temporary, flooding during the summer melt and liable to sudden drainage through rifts in the ice and other causes (Hambrey, 1984).
Polar lakes and ponds are partly or completely frozen and snow-covered for much of the year.
Large ponds and lakes, especially those in high latitudes, stay frozen all the year round, accumulating snow-melt water from rocks nearby and part-thawing only in exceptional seasons.
Large lakes thaw round the edges but tend to retain a core of ice in summer; in consequence their waters never warm far above freezing point.
Small lakes and ponds thaw completely.
Lakes that owe their volume to a balance between inflowing and outflowing water may change radically between seasons, almost draining in winter when the inflow slows down, and overflowing when summer melt brings in water that cannot escape through still-frozen outlets.
Lakes that are ice-free in summer begin cooling at their surface late in the season.
The cooled waters sink and circulate until the water mass reaches the critical temperature of 3.98°C, at which fresh water is densest.
Thereafter cooler waters overlie warmer, and the surface freezes while bottom waters are still relatively warm.
Shallow ponds freeze to the bottom in winter; deeper ones may remain unfrozen at depth, providing a still, protected habitat for overwintering fish, larvae, eggs and spores.
Conversely, spring warming begins immediately under the ice as soon as sunlight penetrates, usually, in early summer after the surface snow (which is relatively opaque to solar radiation) has ablated or melted.
Water that is warmed a degree or two above freezing point sinks into the colder water below, and is replaced; the resulting density currents stir the lake into turbulence and spread warmth, a process that is enhanced by wind-stirring as the ice disperses.
Thus the water quickly becomes isothermal, at temperatures close to those of the air or ground surface nearby.
Some stratified hypersaline lakes are permanently warmer in their lower layers  than at their surface, sometimes because of volcanic heating, more often due to solar warming through the ice and upper layers of water.
Most polar lakes are highly oligotrophic, with clear waters and a very limited range of species inhabiting them.
Notable exceptions are arctic oxbow and other remnant lakes formed on river plains, which may be muddy and well endowed with minerals.
Ponds range from oligotrophic to highly eutrophic, according to their situation and history.
The poorest are the clear waters of ice-scoured uplands, where there is little soil or vegetation.
Those on low-lying land invested by tundra vegetation are usually richer, with a seasonal turnover of minerals and slightly higher productivity.
However, such important nutrients as nitrates and phosphates are generally scarce, because rates of bacteria decomposition in the soils of the catchment areas are low, and very little leaches out into the water.
Ponds and lakes that are frequented by birds often have an enhanced productivity, based on nutrients from the birds droppings and decaying feathers.
Even the richest polar ponds and lakes have fewer species and lower productivity than most ponds of similar size and shape in temperate latitudes.
A few polar lakes are saline, their salts originating either from sea water and spray or from rock weathering in their own catchment areas.
Sea water on chilling precipitates salts sequentially, first calcium carbonate, then sodium sulphate at -8.2°C, sodium chloride at -22.9°C, and magnesium and potassium chlorides at -36°C, leaving a residual solution rich in calcium chloride (Nelson and Thompson, 1954; Thompson and Nelson, 1956).
Deposits of many of these minerals, notably halites (hydrated sodium chloride) and mirabilite (hydrated sodium sulphate) occur in the sediments and surrounds of many existing lakes, and in dried-out lake deposits.
Saline water reaches its maximum density at temperatures below 3.98°C; at 27 ppt and above the maximum is reached at freezing point, which is also determined by salinity.
4.2.3 Running-water habitats
Few rivers start in polar regions, though some very large ones flow across arctic and subarctic lands to discharge into the Arctic Ocean.
The great northward-flowing rivers of Siberia and the lesser ones of North America (Figure 4.1) bring year-round flows of water and warmth from the south.
They bear thick ice in winter and their flow is strongly seasonal (Table 4.1), especially so in those that rise or have much of their catchment area in tundra or boreal forest.
Over 35% of the annual flow of the Lena, in   Siberia, is delivered during the peak month of June, less than 1% in each of the three months of February, March and April.
More characteristic of the regions are small graded rivers and streams fed by springs and surface runoff, and seasonal, short-lived torrents that flow from glaciers.
In these up to half the annual output may occur in the three or four weeks of springtime thaw.
Like the larger rivers they are erosive, undercutting and destroying their banks to form wide, braided channels.
They carry heavy loads of sediment, abandoning it along their course and in extensive deltas; the finer deposits are often colonized by vegetation, providing some of the richest and most productive communities in the tundra mosaics.
More characteristic still are the thousands of tiny meltwater streams that trickle from ice-sheets and snow-banks for a few days or  weeks each summer, often following the same channels year after year, and sometimes building up mats of vegetation along their course.
The Arctic is well endowed with running-water habitats.
Continental and maritime Antarctica have no large year-round rivers, and only a very few smaller ones, mostly glacier-fed torrents, to match the smaller tundra rivers of the north.
The periantarctic islands have many permanent or seasonal streams, spring-fed and carrying run-off from the peaty vegetation throughout the year.
4.3 Aquatic ecology: food webs and productivity
4.3.1 Arctic aquatic communities
Still-water communities .
Arctic ponds and lakes freeze to depths of 1–2.5 m from September onward, and accumulate a layer of compacted snow on top of the ice during winter.
Thawing occurs slowly in May and June; generally the larger the water body, the longer it takes to thaw out in spring, and the cooler it remains through summer.
In a study of lakes and ponds on Truelove Lowland, Devon Island (75°30'N), Minns (1977) found the smallest lake (16ha) free of ice by 17 July, while a larger one of 95 ha retained ice until early August.
Temperatures at the lake-beds in about 6 m depths were higher than at the surface when ice was present, rising from 1°C in mid-May to about 3°C in late July.
When most of the ice had gone, wind stirred the waters; by late summer temperatures became a uniform 4–5°C at all depths.
Temperatures of nearby ponds rose higher, to 8°C.
Char Lake (74°42'N), the subject of long-term studies on Cornwallis Island, with an area of 52.6 ha, was typically ice-free from early August to mid-September.
The waters were layered from October to May while ice  was present, with temperatures close to freezing point near the surface but at 1–1.25°C near the bottom in 26 m.
From June onward warming through the ice set up circulation currents which gradually raised temperatures to a uniform 4°C throughout the water column (Rigler, 1974).
Biological activity starts long before the ice has melted.
In Truelove Lowland lakes aquatic algae and bacteria begin photosynthesis as early as February, when snow still mantles the ice and less than 1% of available light penetrates (Hobbie, 1962,1964; Holmgren, 1968).
Often the algae accumulate in a thin layer on the underside of the ice sheet, dispersing when the ice melts.
Measuring chlorophyll a in water samples as an index of phytoplankton abundance, Minns (1977) found it already plentiful under the ice by mid-May and reaching peak values in late May and June; Kalff et al .
(1972), working on Char Lake and a neighbouring lake in the Canadian Arctic, recorded active production from February onward.
Algae that are capable of photosynthesis at very low levels of light intensity proliferate early in the season, to be replaced by a succession of other species as light intensity increases (Kalff, 1970).
Primary productivity is generally low, averaging 10–50mg C m -2 daily in May and June and rising to 70–80 mg C m -2 daily during the summer peak of production; on average only 6–12g C m -2 fixed throughout the year (Kalff, 1970; Minns, 1977).
Lack of nutrients, rather than low temperature or incident radiation, is the single most important factor restricting primary production.
Production is often highest in early summer when nutrient levels are maximal, though the water is still close to freezing point.
By the time the water warms, all available nutrients have been absorbed and productivity falls.
Only a few lakes show a second, late-season peak of production.
Shallow lakes sometimes have a bottom layer of aquatic mosses, which by photosynthesis add oxygen to the water close by.
Deeper lakes are likely to have the bottom sediment-covered, and the lower water layers may remain unstirred and stagnant.
The fauna of these lakes is usually restricted to rotifers, tardigrades and other small detritus-feeding invertebrates, a few species of copepods and other crustaceans, enchytraeid worms and the larvae of chironomid flies.
The planktonic copepods Limnocalanus macrurus produce eggs from September to November; the nauplii which hatch after about one month mature in the following June (Roff, 1972, 1973; Roff and Carter, 1972).
Mysids Mysis relicta by contrast have a two-yearly cycle; females require the same amount of energy for breeding as individuals of the same species in warmer climates, but take a year longer to accumulate it (Lasenby and    Langford, 1972, 1973).
Chironomids, including several species which bite man and other warm-blooded animals, are plentiful in the lake, forming the main food of arctic char, the single species of fish.
Faunal relationships in Char Lake are reviewed by Rigler (1974): studies of individual species or groups include those of Morgan and Kalff (1972) on bacteria, Nurminen (1973) on oligochaetes, Welch (1973) on chironomid larvae and Holeton (1973) on arctic char.
Hypersaline lakes are fairly common in coastal areas of the Arctic which have until recently been ice covered, and since liberation have risen isostatically from below sea level (Figure 4.2); see Hattersley-Smith and others (1970).
On Garrow Lake, a hypersaline lake of 418 ha on Little Cornwallis Island, northern Canada (75°N), Dickman and Ouelett (1987) found an ice cover up to 2.4 m thick lasting almost 11 months of the year.
With a maximum depth of 50 m and little opportunity for wind-stirring, the lake waters are strongly layered.
A brackish upper layer of about 10 m is underlain by about the same depth of more saline water; beneath from about 20 m lies a permanently stagnant bottom layer of ancient sea water — a memento of the island's emergence from the sea some 3000 years ago (Figure 4.3).
During the brief period of open water in summer temperatures rise 2–3°C in the upper 10 m layer.
The unstirred brackish water beneath is permanently warmer, temperatures rising to 9.1 °C at 20 m, the junction with the deepest layer.
From this level downward the temperature falls to 6.5° 7° at the bottom.
The anomalous heat is thought to be due to solar energy, which penetrates the surface ice in spring and warms the depths.
Phytoplankton and zooplankton occur mainly in the upper 10 m.
Diatoms, notably Cyclotella spp., predominate in summer, and microflagellates Rhodomonas and Cryptomonas spp. for the rest of the year.
A layer of photosynthetic bacteria lives permanently on the boundary between brackish and highly saline water.
Some 51 taxa of algae have been recorded from Garrow Lake, but only one crustacean species Limnocalanus macrura , and a single fish species, the four-horned sculpin Hyoxocephalus quadricornis .
Running-water communities .
Craig and McCart (1975) divide northern Alaskan streams and small rivers into three categories; mountain streams, spring streams and tundra streams.
Mountain streams are usually the longest, originating from springs on high ground and picking up ground water and tributaries as they descend.
Most flow for four or five months of the year from May to October; some flow throughout the year.
Their upper waters remain cool, seldom above 4–5°C in summer; lower reaches may    be warmer in summer after crossing the plains, achieving 10–15°C.
Spring streams are generally shorter, typically forming the tributaries of mountain streams.
Arising from perennial springs, they are usually small, well established and stable, with high mineral content; many flow year round.
The spring water temperatures remain low and fairly constant throughout the year, seldom falling to freezing point in winter or rising above 8–11° in summer.
Tundra streams flow in meandering channels through tundra vegetation, draining the peaty soils, picking up humic acids and acquiring a low pH as they go.
Frozen solid in winter, they warm quickly in spring sunshine and may reach temperatures of 15–16°C by high summer, but are the first to slow down and freeze in autumn.
Of the three kinds, mountain streams are least productive, with the smallest standing crop of invertebrates and least variety of species.
Tundra streams are richer in invertebrates by a factor of 10, spring streams richer still by a factor of 100.
Mountain and spring streams support populations of arctic char Salvelinus alpinus ; tundra streams support grayling Thymallus arcticus , which spawn in their sluggish waters.
4.3.2 Antarctic aquatic communities
Still-water communities .
Antarctic freshwater ecosystems include permanently frozen lakes high among the inland mountains, seasonal inland or near-coastal lakes of the ice-free areas, some of which are highly saline, and fresh or partly-saline coastal lakes and ponds (Heywood, 1977, 1984).
Priddle and Heywood (1980) regard antarctic lakes as forming an evolutionary series which has developed over the period of about 20 000 years since the ice-sheet was maximal; this is in any case a convenient way of describing them.
Proglacial lakes .
The simplest lakes lie on or in front of ice-sheets, formed by seasonal melting that may be enhanced by the presence of scree or windblown dust.
In Antarctica many such lakes occur inland, some on shelf ice close to sea level, others high among mountains or nunataks.
Of hundreds recorded from the air, only a very few have been visited even briefly by sledging parties, and little is known of their biology.
They accumulate from annual melt-water off the mountains and ice-sheets; their temperatures remain close to freezing point during a superficial summer thaw, though some of the deeper ones may have a permanently unfrozen core.
Nutrients are extremely limited, and the lakes support only thin populations of algae and bacteria.
Lakes formed in rock basins by retreating ice-sheets pass through several evolutionary phases.
As a moraine-dammed valley is exposed, water flowing in seasonal torrents accumulates on the valley floor, forming a lake that lengthens and broadens as the ice face retreats.
The presence of a lake slows the inflow of water, causing rock debris and finely-ground rock flour from the base of the melting ice-sheet to be deposited as sediment on the lake-bed.
The surrounding catchment area at first contributes little but clear run-off, and the lake water remains oligotrophic for a long period.
However, as vegetation and mineralized soils develop in the catchment, minerals, organic nutrients and soil microorganisms begin to enter the lake from this source.
Lakes close to the sea acquire minerals faster than those inland, from wind-blown spray and from seals, penguins, gulls and skuas, which like to wash in fresh water.
Adamson and Pickard (1986) describe several kinds of freshwater lakes in the Vestfold Hills oasis area.
Pelite and Chelnock lakes, respectively supraglacial and proglacial, are fed by melting ice cliffs; Crooked Lake is an open-valley lake fed by a through-flowing river, and there are many closed valley lakes reflecting the water balance prevailing over previous centuries; one, Thalatine Lake, has over 40 minor beach terraces reflecting some 1300 years of evaporation.
Others, for example Watts Lake, began as marine inlets but were isolated by isostatic uplift and washed free of salt water by melting land ice; there are also saline lakes of similar origin (see below).
Many other antarctic lakes are known at these early stages of development.
Few on mainland Antarctica gain substantial nutrients from the soils of their catchment, except around the coast where birds and seals become important agents of eutrophication (Goldman, 1970).
More advanced lakes are found in the maritime Antarctic.
Long-term studies of 17 lakes on Signy Island (Heywood et al .,
1980; see also Hawes, 1985) provide the most thorough coverage of a wide variety of lake types.
Heywood (1984) summarizes the ecology of three lakes of varying nutrient content, occupying valleys of a coastal lowland.
These typify many other lakes of similar size and aspect throughout the maritime Antarctic (Heywood, 1987).
For studies of similar lakes on the South Shetland Islands see Paggi (1987) and Kieffer and Copes (1987).
Formed in ice-cut cirques or shallow, steep-sided valleys, the Signy Island lakes are moraine-dammed and often rimmed by a rubble-covered shelf about 1 m below the surface; the shelves are swept clear of sediment by wind-induced turbulence, and fall away to a narrow, sediment-filled trough.
There is no emergent vegetation.
In an environment of heavy snowfall, where mean monthly temperatures are above freezing point in summer but   down to -15°C in winter, the lakes are frozen over with 1–2 m of snow covered ice for 8–11 months each year.
Temperatures at the bottom, down to 15 m in the deepest, fall to about 1°C in winter.
In summer when melting is well advanced, persistent winds stir the waters and the lakes become isothermal, with temperatures up to 6°C.
During this period they receive varying quantities of nutrients and bacteria (Ellis-Evans and Wynne-Williams, 1985) and yeasts (Ellis Evans, 1985a and b), washed in from their catchments (Table 4.2).
Oligotrophic lakes .
Moss Lake is typical of oligotrophic, high-level lakes, recently formed and remote from the sea.
In a glacial cirque basin 48 m above sea level and 800 m from the shore, it has a surface area of 15 000 m 2 and a mean depth of 3.4 m.
Most water and ions enter the lake directly from precipitation or snow-melt.
There is little leaching from the catchment area, which is small and covered with perennial ice, bare rock or scree, with hardly any mineral soil or vegetation.
The waters are clear, and salinity and nutrient levels are very low (Table 4.2).
Phytoplankton of diatoms and other green algae is poorly developed; chlorophyll a values of up to 8.0 µg 1 -1 were recorded, and annual   production was estimated at 12.6 g C m -2 in a year (Ellis-Evans, 198 la).
In compensation, these clear lakes often have a rich benthic flora of perennial mosses (Calliergon, Drepanocladus spp.) and algae (for example Tolypothrix ,Plectonema and Phormidium ), both liberally covered with epiphytic blue-green and green algae.
Growing slowly to form dense mats, some with strands several m long, these fix up to 6g C m -2 annually.
The calanoid copepod Pseudoboekella poppei is a planktonic browser, fed on in all stages of its development by the larger copepod Parabroteas sarsi .
On the lake-bed cladocerans Macrothrix hirsuticorna ,Aloma rectangula and Ilyocryptus brevidentatus and two ostracods Notiocypridopsis frigogena and Eucypris fontana browse or scavenge on the benthic mats, which contain a microfauna of protozoa, turbellaria, rotifers, tardigrades, nematodes, gastrotrichs and enchytraeid annelids (Heywood and others 1979, Heywood, 1984).
Mesotrophic lakes .
Heywood Lake typifies older, more mature lakes closer to the sea.
It lies in two adjoining basins 4 m above sea level and 200 m from the shore, with a surface area of 45 000 m 2 and a mean depth of 2.0 m.
An extensive catchment area with mineral soils, frozen in winter but waterlogged in summer, supports swards of moss and lichens which contribute minerals to the water (Table 4.2); the lake is also visited by seals in summer.
Waters are clear under the ice in winter but turbid from organic and mineral particles when the ice has melted.
Salinity and nutrient values are very much higher than those of Moss Lake, and the waters are markedly more productive.
Chlorophyll a values up to 170 mg m -2 were recorded in spring and up to 40 mg m -2 in summer.
Over 3 g C m -2 were fixed daily during the summer peak, and the annual rate of production was estimated at 173.0g C m -2 (Light et al .,
1981) or 139–270g C m 2 (Priddle et al .
1986).
Lakes that are rich in phytoplankton  and other suspended matter tend to have correspondingly less benthic vegetation, presumably because of light limitation in summer.
Bacteria were plentiful in the water column of Heywood Lake; Hawes (1985) provides evidence that they enhance algal photosynthesis in lakes where nutrients are low, by speeding the recycling of carbon, nitrogen and phosphates.
Planktonic crustaceans include Pseudoboeckella poppei ,Parabroteas sarsi and immature stages of the fairy-shrimp Branchinecta gaini ; mature stages tend to browse deeper on the benthos.
There are fewer invertebrate species in the benthic algal mats, which are less developed than in Moss Lake.
Eutrophic lakes .
Amos Lake lies 10 m above sea level, adjacent to the shore on the windward side of the island; like many others in this situation, it is vastly enriched by marine influences.
A small lake of surface area 6000 m and mean depth 1.7 m, it has a relatively small surrounding catchment basin, but the area is a popular summer resort for seals and nesting giant petrels Macronectes giganteus .
There is little vegetation, but excreta and moulted hair contribute organic material to the soils, and the waters of Amos Lake are saline, turbid and nutrient-rich (Table 4.2).
Well stirred by seals, Amos Lake was too murky for direct productivity comparisons with the other lakes.
Productivity was concentrated close to the surface; chlorophyll a values were high in summer and a daily peak production of over 300 mg C m 2 was recorded, decreasing rapidly below 1 m (Heywood, 1984).
Pseudoboekella poppei ,Parabroteas sarsi and Branchinecta gaini were present in the water column, but there was little or no benthic vegetation or associated microfauna.
Bacterial counts were generally high.
Both aerobic and anaerobic bacterial decomposition contributed to nutrient recycling in lakes at all nutrient levels (Ellis-Evans, 1982; Hawes, 1985); the role of anaerobic bacteria is enhanced in winter when the water is static under its ice cover.
Where nutrients are plentiful, productivity is high, production far outstrips decomposition, and organic sediments accumulate on the lake beds.
Saline lakes .
Lakes with densely saline waters are found in several of Antarctica's oasis areas.
Their origins and histories are varied, but all occupy ground that was previously glaciated and many are ancient.
Among the largest and most fully-studied lake systems, Lake Bonney in the Dry Valleys of South Victoria Land has probably existed for over 100 000 years (Hendy et al .,
1977), and a sediment core 2.8 m long from neighbouring Lake Fryxell is estimated from C-14 dating to represent over 50 000 years'  deposition (Parker and Simmons, 1985).
Similar lakes are known also in smaller coastal oases at Bunger Hills, Vestfold Hills, Schirmacher, Soya and Thala Hills.
The ecology of saline lakes has been reviewed by Heywood (1984) and Vincent (1988).
Saline lakes of the Vestfold Hills oasis (Figure 4.5) string out along a valley, formerly a marine inlet, which rose and was cut off from the sea 5000–8000 years ago when the local land ice melted (Kerry et al .,
1977).
Their salinities vary according to how long ago their waters were left to evaporate, and the amount of fresh water entering them annually; of the four main lakes, Deep Lake, the deepest (34 m) and most salty, has a mean salinity of approximately 280ppt, roughly eight times that of sea water and similar in density to Dead Sea water.
Deep Lake, and the slightly less salty Club Lake, seldom freeze over, though their surface temperatures drop almost to -20°C in winter.
Wind-stirred in all but the deepest layers throughout winter, in summer they become thermally stratified, with surface temperatures over 10°C.
Algae and bacteria are present in all the lakes at all depths; productivity is very low, and few herbivores or scavengers have been recorded.
Metazoans are virtually absent except in some of the lakes where fresh water seeps in at the edges.
In higher latitudes, the saline lakes and ponds of South Victoria Land present a wide spectrum.
Many are well above sea level and appear to owe their high salinity entirely to long-term accumulation and evaporation (for a discussion of this point see Heywood, 1984).
Don Juan Pond, 122 m above sea level in Wright Valley and now only a few centimetres deep, is assumed to be the remnant of a much larger freshwater lake of at least 10 m depth.
Currently fed by a saline stream and limited snow-melt, its salinity, dominated by calcium chloride, is about 13 times that of sea water, and high enough to ensure that it seldom if ever freezes.
The pond is virtually sterile except for algal mats which grow only at points about its edges where fresh water is available (Harris et al .,
1979; Wright and Burton, 1981).
Lake Vanda, also in Wright Valley, is a highly-stratified lake some 5 km 2 in area and up to 70 m deep.
The remnant of a larger lake that once filled the surrounding valley, it has a superficial layer of fresh or slightly saline water down to 50 m deep, replenished seasonally by glacial streams, notably Onyx River, and stirred by their turbulence.
Beneath lies a core of ancient salty water with a concentration of 140 ppt and a temperature of 25°C; the origin of this warmth is uncertain, but more likely to be solar than geothermal.
The lake surface is permanently frozen to a depth of 2–4 m, with ice that thaws only around the edges in summer.
Several other lakes in the area share some or all of these characteristics.
The ice cover inhibits wind-induced turbulence, minimizes penetration of sunlight and keeps the temperature of the surface waters almost constant.
Algae are present in the upper layers; productivity is low even in summer, and probably restricted to a shallow near-surface layer beneath the ice.
Oxygen produced by photosynthesis accumulates in surface waters, but the saline substratum is anoxic; nitrifying bacteria accumulate at the boundary between, forming a substrate where algae and heterotrophic bacteria also congregate, and photosynthesis is maximal.
Sulphur bacteria may be present below the anoxic zone, reducing sulphate ions and liberating hydrogen sulphide.
Benthos around the lake edge includes mats of blue-green algae and moss, often with a microfauna of rotifers, tardigrades and other scavengers.
In the productivity of Lake Vanda phosphorus is a limiting element (Vincent and Vincent, 1982), because of gravitational losses into the sediment and lack of turbulence to return it to general circulation.
Phosphorus that diffuses upward from the bottom is absorbed by the accumulated bacteria and algal cells at the top of the anoxic layer; very little penetrates to the less saline layers above, which are thus limited to the very small amounts brought in by Onyx River.
For a full discussion of nutrient cycling in this remarkable lake see Vincent (1988).
Running-water communities .
Antarctica has many small seasonal streams, and a few large enough to be called rivers.
Nearly all are coastal; those of the continent are fed mainly from melting glaciers, those of the maritime region mainly from melting snow.
Usually dry throughout winter, they start with the onset of spring thaw.
Unbuffered by variations in gradient, their flows often fluctuate widely from afternoon maxima to early morning minima.
Their waters seldom have opportunities to spread and be warmed; temperatures are usually less than 5°C.
Continental streams run for one to three months annually, those of the maritime Antarctic for four to six months or more.
Many carry finely-divided glacial sediment.
Plankton in Antarctic streams is usually low, restricted to algae or other organisms washed from lakes or ponds along the route.
Stream beds are sometimes more productive, those with clear water supporting films or mats of cyanobacteria (Phormidium ,Nostoc ,Oscillatoria ) and epilithic algae (Binuclearia ,Prasiola ).
Beds of continental streams dry out quickly after the brief summer flow; any ice present ablates, and the desiccated mat is subject to intense winter cold.
Those of the maritime region remain moist for a longer season, and usually remain protected by ice or snow, if not by water, throughout winter.
In consequence they support richer algal mats, often  with well-developed filamentous species (for example Klebsormidium ,Mougeotia ) which are active for much of the year (Vincent, 1988).
Though they appear green and contain abundant chlorophyll, productivity of these mats is generally low: much of their material is moribund, and persists only because of an absence of decomposers.
Though the periantarctic islands are well endowed with ponds, lakes and streams, comparatively little is known of their biology.
4.4 Summary and conclusions
Though water is a solid for much of the polar year, and generally poor in minerals even when in liquid form, both snow and aquatic polar habitats support life.
Melting coastal snow supports an ephemeral algal flora that stains it red or green.
Polar ponds and lakes are limited in their energy uptake by snow-covered ice, which also inhibits wind-stirring for much of the year.
Permanently frozen catchment areas limit the amount of minerals available, though there is usually a small intake from soils during the summer thaw.
Because food chains are simple, minerals absorbed into primary production settle in sediments where, in the absence of decomposers and detritus feeders, they may be lost to circulation.
Some polar lakes, especially deep ones close to the coast and those in snow-free areas, may be saline with strongly-developed layering.
Productivity is generally low in both still- and running-water habitats, limited mainly by lack of nutrients.
MARINE ENVIRONMENTS
5.1 Introduction: polar seas
As mariners have long been aware, a voyage from tropical to cold oceans is a passage from dearth to plenty.
Tropical oceanic waters, generally poor in nutrients and productivity, support only a fraction of the biomass found in the cold northern and southern oceans.
Except inshore, and in areas of upwelling where local productivity is high, tropical seas have relatively few fish, seabirds, porpoises and whales.
There are no congregations of tropical seabirds to match the huge concentrations in high latitudes; nineteenth- and early twentieth-century whaling and sealing were predominantly polar and subpolar activities, pursued despite the hazards of cold, stormy environments, and commercial deep-sea fisheries still thrive on the polar fringes.
That polar seas are richer than polar lands is immediately apparent at either end of the world.
The arctic tundra supports both birds and mammals, at densities that are low in summer and even lower in winter; by far the densest concentrations of both are of marine species that live and breed ashore but feed entirely at sea.
High arctic human populations are based on land, but usually live close to the sea and draw much of their sustenance from it.
The antarctic continent has no indigenous land birds or mammals, and man cannot live off the land there; however, many millions of marine birds and mammals feed at sea and come ashore or onto the sea ice to breed.
Subpolar seas of both hemispheres are richer than polar seas, with a longer but less intense season of high productivity.
From the concentrations of birds and mammals in high latitudes has grown the myth that all polar seas are immensely productive.
On the whole they are not, but the seasonal productivity of a few areas is very high, and subpolar seas include some of the richest patches of ocean known anywhere in the world.
The pack ice and fast ice that spread over polar seas form vast sheets many hundreds of square kilometres in area.
They form a barrier that isolates the sea surface from the atmosphere and reflects away solar radiation, but they are also important biological habitats, supporting a   distinctive microbiota, providing shelter for planktonic animals, and forming a floating platform on which birds settle and seals breed.
The Arctic and Southern oceans differ in many respects; some key similarities and differences are summarized in Table 5.1.
5.2 Polar marine habitats
5.2.1 Sea ice formation
Sea ice starts to form when surface waters are at freezing point and turbulence is low.
Ice crystallizes out and accumulates in a surface layer which thickens and consolidates; on calm nights with air temperatures well below freezing point a layer 20 cm deep may form overnight and be firm enough to take the weight of a man by morning.
This amorphous frazil ice is easily broken by swell into small floes that rub against each other and continue to grow, developing characteristic upturned edges of pancake ice in a matrix of loose crystals (Eicken et al .
1988).
In continuing calm and cold conditions the pancakes fuse together and the ice sheet thickens further, by growth of amorphous crystals and accretion of ice platelets — flat crystals — from below (Figure 5.1).
Once established, the pancakes and solid sheet ice are subject to lifting by swell, which may be generated many miles away in open water, and to lateral pressures from winds; sections split into floes which raft over   each other, or form pressure ridges along their edges.
Rime and snow collect on the upper surface, depressing the floes and allowing the sea to flood over, freeze, and strengthen the ice further.
During the growth period planktonic bacteria, diatoms and even minute animals are built into the ice, forming communities which develop and stain the floes, especially the undersurfaces, green or brown.
The ice crystals are pure water, and the concentrated brine that remains after their formation gathers in pockets and channels between the crystals, ultimately to drain back into the sea and sink away from the ice-sheet.
On melting in spring the ice provides a thin layer of low salinity at the surface, and often an already-flourishing community of algae, which waves and wind-stirring soon disperse.
5.2.2 Arctic seas
The Arctic Ocean, including the Barents, Kara, Laptev, East Siberian, Chukchi and Beaufort seas, covers about 14 million km 2 , almost two-thirds  of the Arctic region as a whole (CIA, 1978).
The deepest area is a central depression some 2500km long and 1500km wide, surrounding the North Pole and oriented at a right angle to Greenland (Figure 5.2).
This is crossed by a submerged mountain range, the Lomonosov Ridge, which runs between northern Greenland and the New Siberia Islands (Ostrova Novosibirskiye), flanked by a lesser ridge on either side.
The Lomonosov Ridge rises from a sea-bed some 4000 m deep to within about 1000 m of the surface, splitting the depression into Eurasian and Amerasian basins; the   Eurasian basin is the deeper, showing soundings of 4500 m between northern Greenland and the Pole.
A single deep channel links the Eurasian basin with the submarine Greenland Basin east of Greenland; a shallower channel links it with the Baffin Basin west of Greenland.
The continental shelf surrounding the depression is less than 200 km wide off Greenland and North America but 500–1000 m wide off Eurasia; altogether it totals about half the area of the ocean.
North of Greenland and central Canada the shelf is down to 450 m deep.
Under the Barents Sea between Scandinavia, Svalbard, Severnaya Zemlya and Novaya Zemlya it is 200–350 m deep, and off most of Siberia, extending eastward to Alaska, it forms a broad submarine plain only 60–100 m deep.
Arctic Ocean waters are continuous with the Pacific Ocean via the 80-km wide Bering Strait, and with the north Atlantic Ocean on either side of Greenland, via the 1400-km wide Norwegian Sea in the east and the much narrower channels of the Canadian archipelago in the west.
A net inflow of about 8000 km 3 of warm salt water enters the basin annually through the Bering Strait.
A very much larger flow, possibly 400 000km 3 , enters annually from the Norwegian Sea (Kort, quoted in Zenkevitch, 1963).
Compared with these flows, inputs of fresh water from the rivers of North America and Asia are negligible, though their local effects are marked especially in summer (Chapter 4).
Balancing outflows of about 430 000 km 3 of water and 6000km 3 of ice pass southward, mostly along the eastern flank of Greenland but also through the Canadian islands.
Arctic sea ice .
Winter sea ice covers some 12–13 x 10 6 km 2 of the Arctic basin, extending over most of the ocean surface; the amount of sea ice varies from season to season, but usually only the southwestern Barents Sea north to Murmansk remains open to shipping.
Sea ice also covers Baffin Bay.
Hudson Bay, much of the Labrador Sea and the St Lawrence estuary, invests the coasts of Labrador, Greenland, Svalbard, western Alaska and eastern Siberia, closing the northern Bering Sea and filling the Sea of Okhotsk as far south as the Kuril Islands and northern Japan.
Summer cover in the Arctic basin is reduced to a central asymmetrical core of 5–8 million km 2 , about half the winter area (Figure 5.3).
The summer ice presses against Greenland and the eastern North American coast, which are thus effectively closed to shipping all the year round.
From about June onward there are navigable waterways through the Barents, Kara and Bering seas and along much of the Siberian coast (the ‘northeast passage’), though heavy pack ice usually persists between the mainland and Severnaya Zemlya and off Wrangel Island.
There are also wide coastal  lanes along the northern shore of central and western North America.
Outside the basin only northeast Greenland and the channels of the Canadian archipelago remain heavily invested in ice, though a ‘northwest passage’ is usually navigable between the mainland and Banks and Victoria islands.
Even in the depths of winter the sea ice is never a complete cover.
Slow clockwise circulation of the ice mass in the Arctic basin, coupled with local winds and both horizontal and vertical (upwelling) currents, cause the formation of wide cracks and polynyas (anomalous patches of open water).
These openings, some of which occur in the same place year after year, are often of great biological importance, allowing light to penetrate, phytoplankton to bloom, and whales, seals and seabirds to survive when the rest of the sea remains covered.
During summer loose pack ice from the Arctic Ocean streams southward through the Greenland Sea and down the east Greenland coast; lesser streams pass from the Barents Sea to the Norwegian Sea and from Baffin Bay down the Labrador coast, ultimately to melt in the warmer waters of the north Atlantic Ocean.
Icebergs and ice islands .
Interspersed with ice floes are larger masses of ice that have broken from glaciers and ice shelves on land; icebergs are the fragmented products of glaciers, ice islands the larger masses, up to 60 m thick and 30 — 40km long, broken from ice shelves.
Both are produced from the ice sheets of Ellesmere, Devon and Baffin Islands and Greenland (Jeffries, 1987).
Some circulate in the Arctic Ocean, others stream down the east Greenland or Labrador coasts and disperse widely in the north Atlantic Ocean, becoming a hazard to shipping.
A few reach 40°N before melting away; a very few are large enough to continue southward, occasionally as far as New York and Bermuda.
Like ice floes, small bergs and ice islands form roosts for seals and seabirds, and often carry an interesting microbial flora and fauna.
5.2.3 Antarctic seas
The Southern Ocean is a broad, deep ring of water, contiguous with the southern Atlantic, Indian and Pacific oceans but bounded by the Antarctic Convergence (p. 11).
Its total area of about 28 million km 2 (roughly twice that of continental Antarctica) includes many small marginal seas and two much larger ones, the Weddell and Ross Seas, occupying shallow bights on either side of the continent.
The continental shelf lies unusually deep because of the vast burden of ice on the land, mostly between 400 and 800 m below sea level.
Except in the Ross and Weddell bights and along the coast of West Antarctica the shelf is generally narrow, rarely more than 100 km wide.
From the shelf edge the continental slope descends steeply to an abyssal plain, partitioned into deep Atlantic, Indian and Pacific ocean basins by submarine ridges and platforms (Figure 5.4).
Mostly between 3000 and 5000 m deep, the sea-bed falls to over 8000 m in an abyssal trench east of the South Sandwich Islands.
A submarine mountain arc links South Georgia, the South Sandwich, South Orkney and South Shetland Islands and Antarctic Peninsula.
Iles Crozet and the Prince Edward Islands share a submarine platform, and a much shallower platform links Iles Kerguelen and Heard Island.
Antarctic sea ice and icebergs .
A major feature of the ocean is the ring of shifting pack ice that occupies the southern half, permanently surrounding Antarctica and increasing four-to fivefold from summer to winter.
In autumn fast ice grows out from the land to meet new ice that forms at sea; from a March minimum of 3–5 million km 2 the pack ice spreads to 17–20 million km 2 by September (Foster, 1984), an annual variation far greater than that of the Arctic Ocean (Figure 5.5).
Despite its persistence, much of the pack at any time is less than one year old, averaging 1–2 m thick.
Only in corners where fast ice fails to break out each summer, or where pack   accumulates and circulates in local gyres, do the floes last several years, and thicken both by pressure-rafting and by accretion.
The western Weddell Sea, the eastern Ross Sea and much of the Pacific coast of West Antarctica are notorious for their heavy, multi-year pack ice.
The September-October northern limit of pack ice varies considerably from year to year.
Though often hazy and irregular due to wind scattering, the edge is visible from satellites and can be monitored month by month (Foster, 1984).
In some winters it extends as far north as the limit of cold Antarctic surface waters, i.e. to the Antarctic Convergence, particularly in the Pacific and Atlantic sectors of the ocean.
Mean monthly positions of the    ice edge are now well established for all sectors of the Southern Ocean (Bakayev and others, 1966).
Within the pack ice polynyas and leads form and re-form constantly (Eicken et al .,
1988), creating openings that are biologically no less important than those of the Arctic (Figures 5.6, 5.7).
The presence of coastal polynyas in high latitudes in early spring, for example, allows seals and seabirds to start breeding before the main ice-sheet has dispersed; indeed the presence of a breeding colony on the Antarctic coast is a sure indicator of the presence of open water in early spring, before the main ice-sheet has dispersed (Stonehouse, 1967).
Polynyas are important also in giving man access to high latitudes (Figure 5.8).
Flotillas of tabular icebergs and ice islands sail among the pack ice.
Generated from the antarctic ice-sheet, they are far more numerous and often much larger than their arctic counterparts, the largest exceeding 200 km long when newly formed.
Three ice islands recently broken out from the Ronne-Filchner ice shelf, in the southeast corner of the Weddell Sea, in area totalled 11.5 thousand km 2 and in thickness some 500 m (Ferrigno    and Gould, 1987); a single one almost 160km long with an area of over 6200km 2 , released from the Ross Ice Shelf in 1987, was estimated to contain enough water to last the State of California over 600 years (Polar Record , 1988).
Movements of large tabular bergs have been monitored from satellite photographs (Swithinbank and others, 1977) or by signals from radio transmitters tracked via satellites (Tchernia and Jeannin, 1984).
They tend to follow recognized paths westward through the zone of easterly winds immediately surrounding the continent, then eastward and north through the westerlies.
The largest pass beyond the pack ice limit and out of the Southern Ocean altogether, melting, fragmenting, and disappearing in the warm subantarctic waters beyond.
5.2.4 Food webs
Food webs are basically similar in northern and southern polar seas (Figure 5.9).
Primary producers, as in all other oceans, are the phytoplankton — single-called plants of surface waters.
Almost moribund in winter, the cells proliferate from early spring onward, starting even before the dispersal of the sea ice and continuing through late spring and summer for as long as supplies of nutrients last.
Diatoms of diameter greater than   35 um are a prominent component of phytoplankton at either end of the earth, and until recently were thought to provide most of the primary production.
There is now increasing evidence that smaller cells of diameter 2–20 um have been seriously underestimated in energy budgets; they may be responsible for half the total primary production in southern waters and no less in the north.
Zooplankton includes herbivores that browse exclusively on phytoplankton, carnivores that feed on neighbours, and omnivores that take impartially plant, animal or detrital material.
Crustaceans, notably copepods, form the bulk of the browsers: euphausiids (including ‘krill’) are especially prominent in antarctic waters, where they form the main food of many birds and mammals.
Larvae of fish and bottom-living invertebrates, which are often prominent in zooplankton of temperate seas, are notably absent from polar surface waters.
Bacteria, protozoa and other micro-scavengers are likely to play important but as yet uninvestigated roles in the zooplankton.
A few species of pelagic fish feed on zooplankton, but the major predators in surface waters of either polar region are sea birds, mysticete whales and  pelagic seals.
Other species of fish, whales and seals feed in mid-water or on the sea-bed, where their prey are mostly fish and squid.
Both polar regions have patchy and rather limited stocks of benthic animals; of the two, the Antarctic is far richer in both variety of species and numbers of individuals.
5.3 Arctic Ocean ecology
5.3.1 Northern water masses
Coachman and Aagaard (1974) distinguish four major arctic water masses.
The top 50–100 m of ocean forms the polar mixed layer, a layer diluted by fresh water (mostly from rivers; see below) to salinity of about 32 parts per thousand (ppt).
In constant contact with ice, its temperature remains close to freezing point.
Beneath lies a mass of slightly warmer, more saline water some 600 m deep.
This is Atlantic water, which originates in the north Atlantic Ocean at a temperature of 2°C and salinity of 35 ppt, and cools almost to 0°C as it circulates slowly about the ocean basin; its salinity remains high at 34.9ppt.
Between these two lies a pycnocline layer, 100–150 m thick, of intermediate temperature, salinity and density, spreading from the continental shelf where it is formed during the freezing of surface ice.
Filling the central depression is a layer of arctic deep water of temperature -0.9° to -0.5°C and salinity 34.94°C; it is slightly warmer in the European basin than in the Canadian, and probably of Atlantic origin.
The water masses are illustrated in Figure 5.10.
The surface polar mixed layer circulates clockwise, driven by anticyclonic winds.
Ice floes circulate with it across the Pole from eastern Siberia toward Ellesmere Island, Greenland, and out into the north Atlantic Ocean, mostly along the east Greenland coast.
Deeper water layers circulate counterclockwise, driven by the constant inflow from the Norwegian Sea along the Siberian shelf.
Near Bering Strait the small inflow of Pacific water circulates locally in the pycnocline layer.
Precipitation over the ocean is low, in volume probably exceeded five or six times by the fresh water that pours in from the rivers (Rudels, 1987), locally diluting the surface layer.
Evaporation is low, but much fresh water is exported annually as ice floes 2 — 3 m thick.
5.3.2 The plankton
Phytoplankton .
Because of its inaccessibility, the marine ecology of the Arctic basin is poorly known; most studies have been made from isolated  shore stations off Alaska, Canada or Greenland (see for example Alexander, 1974; Bursa, 1961; Cairns, 1967, Clasby et al .,
1976; Grainger, 1979), or from temporary drifting stations on ice floes manned by Canadian, U.S. or Soviet biologists (Brodsky and Pavshtiks, 1976; Dunbar and Harding, 1968, Zenkevitch, 1963).
Primary production is based mainly on diatoms, living in the ice and in open water.
The season of production lasts probably less than two months in the Arctic basin, and up to four months in the peripheral region (read Bursa, 1961).
Published estimates of primary production are generally very low; values of annual production of carbon per square metre, tabled by Grainger (1979), range from less than 1 g in the Arctic Ocean to 10–100g off West Greenland and in channels and fjords among the Canadian islands.
Zooplankton .
Because of the steady flow of Atlantic Ocean surface waters into the Arctic basin, most zooplankton species found there are of Atlantic origin.
For example, of the 60 or more species of copepods found in arctic plankton, some 50 are of Atlantic origin; only a very few species penetrate  from the Pacific, though some of those have been reported close to the Pole (Brodsky, 1956).
Surface waters in contact with melting ice tend to be very thinly populated with zooplankton.
There are consequently very few pelagic fish or diving birds to be seen, and the zone of permanent pack ice gives an impression of lifelessness.
However, zooplankton is sparsely distributed at all levels.
From 30 m to 50 m down, the small copepod Oithona similis becomes plentiful; below this Oithonia and another small species,Microcalanus pygmaeus , are joined by the larger calanoid copepods Calanus finmarchicus ,C .
hyperboreus and Metridia longa .
Other forms reported include rhizopod and radiolarian protozoans, hydromedusae, ctenophores, ostracods, amphipods, pteropods, chaetognaths and appendicularians (Brodsky and Pavshtiks, 1976).
The richest and most varied zooplankton occurs below about 800 m in warmer Atlantic water.
Peripheral waters among the seasonal pack ice are richer in both species and individuals; the Barents Sea (Norderhaug et al .,
1977) and polynya areas among the channels of the Canadian Arctic archipelago (Stirling and Cleator, 1981) have specially  favourable conditions of mixing and upwelling that promote relatively high productivity in summer.
Arctic char Salvelinus alpinus , which spawn in rivers and fatten in the sea during their fourth and fifth years, capelin Mallotus villosus , which winter in deep water but rise to form huge surface shoals in summer, and arctic cod Boreogadus saida are among the few pelagic, plankton-feeding fish in both polar and subpolar waters.
In deeper waters are sculpins (Family Cottidae), eel-pouts (Zoarcidae), polar cod Arctogadus glacialus , polar halibut Reinhardtius hippoglossoides ; further south these give way to the more familiar cold water species — northern cod, haddock, coalfish, skate, halibut, herrings, etc., that are hunted commercially for European and North American markets.
5.3.3 Mid-water, sea-bed and shore
Mid-water regions of oceans are always the hardest to explore and model; very little is known of this region of arctic waters.
Practically all arctic and subarctic shores are ice-bound from late autumn onward.
Once air temperatures have fallen well below freezing point, frozen spray accumulates along the shore.
When the sea freezes, a series of working tide-cracks form at the junction of land ice and sea ice, renewed twice daily during each tide cycle.
The shore remains frozen until the summer thaw; during summer the beaches and rocky shores alike are scoured by floating  ice; in consequence few plants or animals inhabit the intertidal or upper littoral zones.
The sublittoral is similarly scoured by shifting ice, but mats of short-stemmed brown and red algae flourish from about 2 m downward, below the level of ice floe movement.
These grow actively from spring onward despite the persistent sea ice above; though little light penetrates the snow covered ice, lack of wind-induced turbulence keeps the water clear.
Close inshore the sublittoral flora and fauna is often disrupted by the formation of anchor ice, which grows on the sea-bed as heat is withdrawn from the land during the coldest months.
Anchor ice accumulations, being less dense than sea water, break away from time to time and rise to the surface, carrying with them entrapped and frozen plants and animals, which gather in layers under the inshore floes.
The continental shelf has a covering of fine muds, derived mainly from the great continental rivers, and siliceous diatom shells from the plankton.
Seaweeds grow to depths of about 100 m; below that level plants are rare, but the sea-bed is thinly carpeted with animals that live in or on the mud and feed on the rain of debris from above.
Some feed by direct ingestion, for example nemertine worms, crabs, shrimps, starfish and brittlestars; others are filter-feeders that spread nets or pump water to filter minute particles of food, for example sponges, polychaete worms, euphausiid shrimps and clams.
Demersal fish browse this carpet; the sea-bed in high latitudes supports many more species of fish than surface waters.
5.3.4 Birds and mammals
Seabirds .
About 50 species of seabirds feed in arctic and subarctic waters some in enormous flocks.
Many, for example the auks and petrels, feed at sea all the year round, often at great distances from land; these are the most numerous, breeding in cliff colonies that include thousands of nesting pairs.
Others, for example the cormorants, gulls and terns, are more coast-bound, feeding offshore in winter but mainly in shallow coastal waters in summer; they breed in smaller colonies, usually of a few dozen pairs close to good feeding grounds.
Skuas and jaegers — predatory gull-like birds — winter at sea but feed almost entirely ashore on insects and small mammals during the breeding season; phalaropes, divers and several species of ducks similarly switch from marine foraging in winter to feeding and breeding on the tundra wetlands in summer.
For notes on the size, distribution and feeding of arctic seabird communities see Croxall et al .,
(1984) and Croxall  (1987); for reviews of their general biology see Stonehouse (1971) and Sage (1986).
Auks, guillemots and razorbills of the family Alcidae are the characteristic seabirds of the Arctic.
Narrow-winged, small and compact, they fly powerfully with rapid wing-beats, sometimes planing over the water like hydrofoils; in hunting they dive and use their wings for propulsion under water, feeding mostly on plankton and small fish (Nettleship and Birkhead, 1985).
Some 14 species breed in northern waters; those that range farthest north include Brunnich's guillemot Uria lomvia , smaller black and pigeon guillemots Cepphus grylle , which occur in the polar basin, and C. columba , common guillemots U. aalge , razorbills Alcatorda and puffins Fratercula arctica , which are cliff-breeders, breed on many ice-bound islands.
The garefowl or great auk, largest of the family and a non-flyer, bred in southern Labrador, Greenland, Iceland and north Britain.
Constant harassment and predation on their breeding grounds by fishermen reduced their stocks during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries; the last individuals were killed by man in 1844.
Only one species of petrel, the northern fulmar Fulmarus glacialis , breeds throughout the Arctic, on cliffs in Iceland, Svalbard, Greenland, the Canadian archipelago and Siberian high arctic islands.
Gull-like in appearance, with gliding and soaring flight, they feed by settling on the water and bobbing for plankton at the surface.
Atlantic storm petrels Hydrobates pelagicus and Leach's storm petrel Oceanodroma leucorhoa are temperate species that breed within the arctic fringe only in Iceland and Labrador.
They nest mainly on rocky islets and feed by hovering and dancing over the water.
Shearwaters visit subarctic feeding grounds in summer, Manx shearwaters Puffinus puffinus from nesting in Europe, sooty and slender-billed shearwaters P .
griseus and P .
tenuirostris from islands in the southern oceans.
These dive and swim underwater for planktonic food, the partly-folded wings acting as hydroplanes that help the shearwaters to hunt below the level of superficial feeders.
Seals and whales .
Of the world's 32 living species of seals, ten occur in or close to arctic waters (Stonehouse, 1985a; see data in Table 5.2.)
Seals are aquatic mammals that feed at sea and emerge from it to rest, give birth and tend their pups.
For these purposes sea ice is a useful extension of land.
Several species live where sea ice is present; a few live almost entirely among pack or fast ice.
Life cycles and general biology of arctic stocks are summarized in King (1983).
Of the three families of the order Pinnipedia, walruses and true or   phocid seals are best represented in cold waters.
Geographically separate stocks of some species are recognized, for example in walruses there is an Atlantic stock spread between Hudson Bay and the Barents Sea, and a Pacific stock found in the Bering, Chukchi, East Siberian and Laptev seas.
Of the phocids, ringed, bearded, harp and hooded seals have the northernmost distributions, while ribbon and grey seals penetrate the arctic fringe, respectively in the Pacific and Atlantic oceans.
Fur seals and sea lions are restricted to the Bering Strait area and seldom enter icy waters.
Seals take much of their food close to the surface, plankton and pelagic fish forming their main prey.
Walruses and bearded seals, the two largest species, feed mainly on the sea bed, diving in shallow waters to depths of a few hundred metres, using their vibrissae to hunt in the mud for molluscs and crustaceans.
Killer whales Orcinus orca are the main predators of most species.
Polar bears hunt several species, notably ringed seals, on the sea-ice breeding grounds, and man is a major predator of harp and hooded seals, valuing especially the pelts of pups and immature animals for commercial sales.
Northern fur seals have for centuries been exploited commercially on the Pribilov and other islands in the Bering Sea; since 1911 stocks have been managed and  exploitation limited under international agreement, providing a rare example of successful management of an international resource (Young, 1981; Gulland, 1974).
Arctic fringe seas are well stocked with whales and dolphins — both toothed whales feeding on fish and squid, and baleen whales feeding mainly on small fish and krill.
In far northern waters narwhal Monodon monoceros , beluga Delphinapterus leucas and Greenland right (bowhead) whale Balaena mysticetus have a circumpolar distribution along the ice edge and in loose pack.
Krill-feeding right whales were heavily hunted by British, Dutch and other commercial whalers for baleen and oil during the nineteenth century (Brownell et al., 1986); like narwhals and belugas, their stocks are now protected, and only limited non-commercial hunting by northern natives is allowed.
Predatory killer whales and several other species of dolphins, northern beaked whales Berardius bairdii and northern bottlenose whales Hyperoodon ampullatus hunt in cold waters to the ice edge and beyond; summer visitors to the Arctic include grey whales Eschrichtius gibbosus and northern stocks of humpback whales Megaptera novaeangliae , male sperm whales Physeter catodon , blue whales Balaenoptera musculus , fin whales Balaenoptera physalus , sei whales Balaenoptera borealis and minke whales Balaenoptera acutorostrata .
5.4 Southern Ocean ecology
5.4.1 Southern Ocean water masses
Three main water masses can be distinguished within the Antarctic Convergence (Knox, 1970).
Antarctic surface water forms a layer 70–200 m thick, ranging in temperature from freezing point (-1° C; to -1.8° C) to 3–4°C and in salinity from almost fresh to 34.5ppt, or slightly higher over the continental shelf.
This water originates at the Antarctic Divergence, a    narrow zone close to the continent where diverging westerly and easterly winds pull subsurface waters upward and spread them across the ocean surface.
The water masses are illustrated in Figure 5.11.
The subsequent history of the upwelled water determines its main characteristics.
That which spreads northward is warmed in summer to a maximum of about 4°C at the Convergence, where it sinks below still warmer subantarctic surface water; beyond the boundary it continues to spread north as the subsurface Antarctic Intermediate Current.
The southern component spreads over the continental shelf.
In winter this water is chilled and frozen; ice formation releases cold brine which sinks and mixes with underlying water to form a distinctive water mass of high density and high salinity, called antarctic bottom water.
This creeps across the shelf and down the continental slope, spreading along the sea-bed; much of it is formed over the shelves of the Weddell and Ross bights, and from there it spreads far northward into the northern hemisphere.
Between bottom and surface waters, forming the main mass of ocean, is a layer of warm deep water.
Over 2000 m thick, warm deep water originates as surface waters of the temperate and tropical oceans, and flows southward beneath the subantarctic surface water.
Emerging at the Antarctic Divergence, it replaces the water lost to the two northward flowing currents.
Characterized by temperatures of 1–3°C and salinities around 34.5–34.7 ppt, it provides a constantly-replaced, nutrient-rich environment for the plankton of surface waters.
Strong but shallow currents within the Antarctic Divergence carry ice and surface waters westward about the continent.
Westerly-flowing currents entering the Weddell Sea cause the development of a strong gyre, which carries a stream of cold, ice-filled surface water clockwise and releases it northward past the tip of Antarctic Peninsula and the South Orkney Islands.
This circulating cold water accounts for the anomalously low mean temperatures of eastern Antarctic Peninsula.
In the Ross Sea similar forces develop a counter-clockwise circulation, causing the piling-up of pack ice off the northeastern corner of the bight and along the West Antarctica coast.
The strong eastward currents generated by prevailing westerlies are most marked at the surface, but penetrate to impart an easterly flow to the full depth of the water column.
5.4.2 Antarctic plankton
Phytoplankton .
In winter when the sun is low or absent, primary production at the ocean surface is minimal.
Surface waters retain few algae from  the summer crop; there is little light, and the amount present is insufficient to stimulate the cells to division.
Waters that are ice-covered remain unstirred by wind, and all particles including algae tend to sink and not be replaced.
The world's clearest sea water has been recorded in the Weddell Sea in early spring, clear enough for a Secchi disc to be seen at a depth of 79 m (Gieskes et al .,
1987;Polar Record , 1987).
This far surpasses an earlier record of 53 m in the Mediterranean, and is close to the transparency of distilled water.
As the sun climbs higher in early spring, warmth and light return.
More light is refracted below the surface, and algae, especially diatoms. rapidly become plentiful.
Many of these first algae of the season are released from ice floes; as the pack ice melts, initially at its northern edge and later across its whole width, diatoms and other algal cells that have been trapped in its interstices are liberated into the sea and soon begin to divide rapidly.
The surface waters, now well-stirred by wind, are high in nutrients, and primary productivity starts to rise.
To the ice algae are now added open-water species, all proliferating; from September to January the amount of chlorophyll a present in surface waters climbs rapidly, keeping pace with incoming solar radiation (El-Sayed, 1971, 1985).
Over 100 species of diatoms are involved in this massive spring bloom, including both pennate (flag-shaped) and discoid forms, e.g. Nitzschia ,Thalassiosira ,Thalassiothrix ,Corethron ,Odontella and Chaetoceros spp.
Present in lesser numbers are species of dinoflagellates, notably Protoperidinium and Dinophysis , and other algae including the silicoflagellate Dictyocha speculum and gelatinous Phaeocystis poucheti .
In spring local accumulations of diatoms stain ice floes and the water immediately beneath them green or brown; quite commonly in summer the algae form dense soup-like concentrations extending over huge areas; El-Sayed (1971) reported a yellow bloom of Thalassiosira tumida covering 15 500 km 2 in the southwestern Weddell Sea.
Many of the diatom species and even more of the dinoflagellates are endemic to antarctic waters.
Stocks and rates of production vary from one area of the Southern Ocean to another.
Both tend to be high at the northern edge of the pack ice, over continental and island shelves where turbulence brings fresh resources to the surface, and at boundaries between water masses.
Both stocks and production rates rise to a peak in December toward the Antarctic Convergence, and in February or March in higher latitudes, for reasons that are far from clear.
Sunlight is still plentiful, the waters continue to be well-mixed by turbulence, and nitrates and phosphates (which often limit aquatic production) remain abundant except in very local areas  (Hardy and Gunther, 1936; Balech and others, 1968).
Fogg (1977) and others have suggested that other key elements or nutrients may be used up, but none has yet been identified as limiting.
The grazing of increased stocks of zooplankton will by this time no doubt be making significant inroads (see below).
In lower latitudes there is often a further slight rise in standing crop and productivity in autumn, followed by a rapid decline to midwinter.
Phytoplankton studies have generally involved nets with meshes greater than 35 um, which are fine enough to catch the algae that predominate in most crops.
For quantitative sampling, nets are often paired (Fig. 5.12) and fitted with meters that measure the flow of water through them.
In high concentrations of algae the meshes become clogged, and their filtering efficiency is reduced; however, it is not usually difficult to estimate numbers of cells per cubic metre of sea water.
Alternatively the standing crop present in a given mass of water (i.e. biomass per unit area or volume) can be estimated from the amount of chlorophyll (specifically, chlorophyll a) present (p. 112).
To assume that all the chlorophyll is contained in diatoms and other algal cells of similar size may, however, be misleading.
Recent studies using much fine filters, of mesh size 10–20 um, indicate that a wide range of very small organisms, collectively called nanoplankton, are also present in surface waters.
These are as yet little-known but clearly very important in the economy of the plankton.
They may contribute as much as 70% of biomass and productivity locally (El-Sayed and Taguchi, 1981; Yamaguchi and Shibata 1982).
Even smaller particles of less than 2 um, called picoplankton, may also play an important role in productivity of polar waters, and indeed throughout the world's oceans.
For Antarctic waters El-Sayed and Weber (1986) reported that up to 70% of chlorophyll a in the water column was contained in particles smaller than l um.
In the view of El-Sayed (1987), one of Antarctica's leading marine biologists, ‘the picoplankton are a very important but highly variable component of the Antarctic marine ecosystem’.
Zooplankton and pelagic fish .
These are present in Antarctic surface and near-surface waters throughout the year, concentrating dramatically in the top 200 m in summer.
Antarctic zooplankton is characterized by an almost complete absence of larvae of benthic animals, and surface layers are rich in individuals but poor in species; numbers of species tend to increase with depth (Knox, 1970).
That the characteristic communities are widespread both latitudinally and longitudinally is not surprising.
Mackintosh (1960) draws attention to an important aspect of the annual vertical migration that many species follow; dispersing northward at the surface in summer, their descent to 400–600 m in winter ensures that they return south in the southward-flowing waters at those depths.
There is also a constant westward drift in surface waters immediately surrounding the continent, and an eastward drift under the influence of westerly winds beyond the Antarctic Divergence, that spread species longitudinally and ensure circumpolar distributions.
The single most prominent invertebrate species is the shrimp-like crustacean Euphausia superba .
Its popular name ‘krill’ originated with Norwegian whalers.
Prevalence of krill in summer surface waters has given rise to a misconception that krill and other euphausiids constantly dominate the zooplankton.
In fact copepods, notably Calanoides acutus ,Calanus propinquus and Rhincalanus gigas , form the bulk of the zooplankton for much of the time (Voronina, 1966, 1968; Hopkins, 1971).
The different life-stages of these species become prominent at different times of the year and at different depths; many species have marked diurnal (vertical) and annual (horizontal) migrations (Hardy and Gunther, 1936; Dinofrio, 1987).
Euphausia superba is shown in Figure 5.12.
Medusae, ctenophores, chaetognaths (Eukronia ,Sagitta ,Euchaeta and other species), salps, pteropods and larval fish also are generally present, often locally in swarm concentrations.
Euphausiids, of which the largest are over 5 cm long, may form dense shoals several hectares in extent.
Krill E .
superba and closely-similar E .
frigida are species prevalent across the central and northern zones of the Southern Ocean; smaller E .
crystallorophias is most common in colder waters among the pack ice and immediately surrounding the Antarctic continent (Marr, 1962).
Throughout summer in the richest areas of the Southern Ocean, notable north and east of Antarctic Peninsula, huge swarms averaging 40–60 m across are often seen.
Though individually translucent and almost invisible, euphausiids have enough pigment and are present in sufficiently density to tint the water red or orange.
Such swarms are fed on by mysticete (whalebone or baleen) whales, and experienced whale hunters sought the swarms of krill in the expectation that whales would be seeking them too.
Like the smaller copepods, euphausiids are mainly herbivorous, combing algal cells from the water and gathering them in a basket-like arrangement of bristles on their many-jointed forelimbs.
They feed suspended in mid-water, but are versatile enough to browse also under the ice and on the seabed.
Krill take algae in a wide range of sizes, probably from 2 um to 60 um or  more, varying their diet by combing up small copepods as well(McClatchie and Boyd, 1983; Boyd et al .,
1984).
The life cycle of krill is adventurous, though incompletely known despite decades of intensive study; for summaries see Everson (1977); Miller and Hampton (1988).
Breeding areas include the Bellingshausen Sea, Scotia Sea, and rich, disturbed waters around the island of the Scotia Arc.
Krill eggs, 5–6 mm in diameter, are laid near the surface and sink to depths of over 1500 m; the first few larval stages (nauplii and metanauplii) develop at even greater depths before the young krill rise to feed close to the surface.
Such important parameters as age at maturation and longevity are unknown, though it seems likely that krill breed two or three times in a lifespan of three to five years.
Where they spend winter has hitherto been uncertain; there is now strong evidence that most of the stock moves south in autumn and winter immediately under pack ice (Marschall 1988), where they browse on algae.
Other prominent omnivores and carnivores in the zooplankton include the larger copepods, chaetognaths, salps and larval fish.
Less prominent, but quite possibly no less significant in energy pathways, are masses of heterotrophic choanoflagellates, bacteria and other small-to-microbial organisms, the presence of which, like that of the very small autotrophs, has only recently been perceived (El-Sayed, 1987).
Among surface of predators are the pelagic shoaling fish Pleurogramma antarcticum (Figure 5.13), which forms an important link between the plankton and the higher vertebrates.
5.4.4 Mid-water, sea-bed and shore
Mid-waters of the Southern Ocean are little explored; for long considered empty, they are now known to be the haunt, possibly the refuge, of several species of fish and squid which feed either near the surface or at the bottom.
Many are fast-moving and able to avoid trawl nets, but less adept at avoiding penguins and seals; most of the smaller species are better known from the stomach contents of predators than as independent catches.
Shores of the Antarctic continent and the maritime region, like those of the Arctic, are subject to ice scouring, which neither plants nor sessile animals are able to survive.
Where islands beyond the northern limit of pack ice (for example South Georgia) have a rich intertidal flora and fauna, and are ringed by beds of giant kelp Macrocystis gigantea with strands 20–30 m long, those within the pack ice zone have a relatively bare shoreline and restricted sublittoral flora.
Anchor ice (see above) grows freely from the sea-bed in high latitudes.
Studying the littoral zone near Palmer Station, on the South Shetland Islands, Hedgpeth (1971) noted considerable seasonal variation.
Granite rocks that were almost bare in early spring had by late summer acquired a thin growth of brown diatoms (Navicula ,Fragilaria ,Achnanthes ,Licmophora ) and filamentous green algae (Ulothrix ,Enteromorpha ,Cladophora ,Monostroma ), growing upward in a narrow band upward from mean low tide level.
Below them, and clearly marking the low-tide level, extended a perennial covering of pink crustose algae (Lithothamnion ,Lithophyllum ).
Among the green algae were small crustaceans and worms, and in a narrow zone above were small specimens of red algae (Curdiea ,Iridae ,Leptosomia ), growing in crevices during the summer only.
A single browser, the limpet Patinigera polaris , lived mainly below low-tide mark but emerged to scour the whole zone; those close to sea level were predated by dominican gulls Larus dominicanus .
From the sublittoral zone downward the sea-bed is covered by fine debris.
The continental shelf and deeper sea-bed beyond, to a distance of 300–600km from the shore, have a covering of fine grey glacial mud, forming a layer that varies in thickness from a few metres over active areas of sea-floor spreading to 200km or more in older, more stable regions.
Within the mud is a scattering of angular boulders — rock fragments that have been carried from the land by icebergs and dropped as the bergs  weather and melt.
Further north the mud is siliceous, enriched by a constant rain of diatom casings from the phytoplankton.
In waters north of the Antarctic Convergence the bottom mud becomes calcareous, due to the rain of foraminiferan casings from the surface.
Cores drilled from these muds provide an excellent long-term record of changes in the distribution and species composition of algae and foraminifera, from which changes in surface water temperatures may be deduced.
These thick accumulations of mud provide substrate for a rich sea-bed fauna, predominantly of water-filterers (sponges, molluscs, salps) and scavengers (worms, arthropods, pycnogonids, fish).
5.4.5 Birds and mammals
The Southern Ocean is the feeding ground of many thousands of seabirds, seals and whales, some present only in summer, others throughout the year.
Seabirds .
Of 38 species of birds that breed south of the Antarctic Convergence, seven are penguins, four albatrosses, 20 smaller petrels, and seven others include gulls, skuas, terns and cormorants.
Of these, 10 species breed on the Antarctic continent and a further five on Antarctic Peninsula; the rest breed on the islands and archipelagos both north and south of the limit of pack ice.
Within the Convergence only five species of birds feed on land or in fresh water, all on islands close to the Convergence; they include two species of pintail ducks, two of sheathbills and a single species of pipit (Stonehouse, 1972).
Details of breeding, feeding ranges and other data on all antarctic and subantarctic species are summarized in Watson (1975); see also Stonehouse (1985b), Siegfried (1985) and Croxall (1984).
On continental Antarctica two species of penguins, emperors Aptenodytes forsteri and Adelies Pygoscelis adeliae , are the most prominent breeding birds; both breed colonially in groups that may number tens or hundreds of thousands.
Emperors are winter breeders, gathering on inshore sea ice to lay their single eggs in May and June, incubating and brooding chicks on their feet through the coldest months in temperatures that may drop below -50°C.
Adelies breed ashore, mostly on raised beaches close to sea level from November onward; they lay two eggs in pebble nests in October and November, rearing their chick through summer.
McCormick's skuas Catharacta maccormicki , brown predatory gulls (Figure 5.14), breed among the Adélies in summer, feeding partly at sea but also scavenging on the penguin colonies for abandoned eggs and chicks.
Several species of petrels including all-white snow petrels Pagadroma nivea , mottled pintado petrels Daption capensis and tiny Wilson's storm petrels Oceanites oceanica breed in cavities on scree slopes and under rocks.
Many breed on coastal cliffs, but small colonies are reported on isolated nunataks tens or even hundreds of kilometres from the sea.
The maritime antarctic region has Adélie and closely-related gentoo and chinstrap penguins P .
papua and P .
antarctica , a second species of skuas C .
lonnbergii , dominican gulls Larus dominicanus , blue-eyed cormorants Phalacrocorax atriceps , and a wider selection of petrels that breed both at the surface and in cavities among scree.
Periantarctic islands lying north of the pack ice zone have the broadest range of breeding seabirds, including king penguins A .
patagonica , crested penguins Eudyptes chrysolophus and E .
crestatus , wandering albatrosses Diomedea exulans , two or three species of mollymauks (smaller albatrosses), and several species of burrowing petrels (for example prions Pachyptila sp., grey petrels Adamastor cinereus and white-chinned petrels Procellaria aequinoctalis ) that nest deep in the peaty soils.
Most of these seabirds appear on land only during spring and summer, breeding when surface waters are richest in plankton; for the rest of the year  they disperse widely.
Adélie penguins winter in the pack ice; most others fly to open water north of the ice, where they circle the west wind belt.
Brown and McCormick's skuas and Wilson's petrels fly as far as temperate latitudes of the northern hemisphere.
During the summer breeding gulls, skuas, terns and cormorants feed close to land; the rest range widely over the ocean, browsing at or close to the surface in single-species or mixed flocks.
Though all are feeding from the same source, and to some degree feed on whatever is most plentiful, competition is minimized by selective feeding; Croxall and Lishman (1987) and Prince and Morgan (1987) summarize methods of feeding respectively among penguins and petrels in southern waters.
Antarctic seals and whales .
The six species of antarctic seals are summarized in Table 5.2; for surveys of their ecology see King (1983), Laws (1984) and Bonner (1985).
There are no southern walruses.
The largest antarctic seals are southern elephant seals, which breed on cool temperate and antarctic fringe islands; immature animals appear on antarctic mainland coasts in summer.
These are probably the deepest divers, feeding mainly on fish and squid.
Intensively hunted during the nineteenth century, they have more recently been managed and subject to controlled hunting on South Georgia (Laws, 1960).
Ross and crabeater seals live solitary or in widely-dispersed communities on the pack ice, usually toward the outer edge, feeding largely on krill.
With a total population estimated at 15–30 million, crabeaters are almost certainly the world's most numerous seals (Laws, 1984); their wide dispersal on pack ice protects them from human depredations.
Leopard seals, which feed on krill, fish, squid, young seals of other species (notably crabeaters), and penguins and other birds, also occupy the outer edge of the pack ice, but range widely from the cool temperate islands to Antarctica.
Weddell seals, which feed mainly on fish and squid, breed mainly on fast ice close to the shore of Antarctica and fringe islands, and spread to the pack ice in late summer.
Breeding groups of over 2000 have recently been found among the shelf ice of the Weddell Sea (Hempel and Stonehouse, 1987); a small breeding population occurs on South Georgia.
Southern species of fur seals are island breeders (Figure 5.15).
Formerly plentiful on antarctic fringe and peripheral southern islands, they were hunted almost to extinction by commercial sealers during the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
Stocks have recently recovered; populations are expanding on South Georgia and many of the Scotia Arc islands (Bonner, 1985) and a newly-established breeding colony has   recently been reported on Iles Kerguelen (Jouventin and Stonehouse, 1985).
Several species of dolphins and small whales, including killer whales, Commerson's dolphins Cephalorhynchus commersonii , dusky dolphins Lagenorhynchus obscurus , hourglass dolphins Lagenorhynchus cruciger , and southern beaked whales Berardius arnuxii have been recorded in the Southern Ocean, mainly in ice-free waters.
Among the larger whales, southern stocks of sperm whales (males only), humpbacks and four species of rorquals — blue, fin, sei and minke whales — are regular summer visitors to the rich waters north of the receding pack ice (Gambell, 1985).
They penetrate south to varying degrees, blue and minke whales often appearing well south of the pack ice edge.
Minkes, together with southern bottlenose whales Hyperoodan planifrons (Figure 5.16) and killer whales have been reported making use of late winter polynyas several hundred kilometres within the pack ice edge (Hempel and Stonehouse, 1987).
Humpbacks, sperms and rorquals formed the basis of an extensive antarctic whaling industry, which began in 1904 at a single whaling station on South Georgia and expanded enormously over the next three decades, making use of both shore stations and pelagic fleets.
Though controlled in part by international agreement, the industry overfished its stocks and declined during the 1950s and 1960s.
For a brief history see Gambell (1985); for fuller coverage see Tønnessen and Johnsen (1982).
The removal of many thousands of large whales, especially the krill-feeding rorquals, from the Southern Ocean within a few decades is thought by some ecologists to have favoured the many other species, including fish, birds and seals, that feed on krill.
5.5 Summary and conclusions
Polar seas, dominated by seasonal sea ice, are ecologically poor in winter and very much richer in summer, especially around their fringes and where disturbance or upwelling enhance nutrient supplies.
The structure, water masses and sea ice cover of Arctic and Southern Oceans are compared; the central Arctic Ocean, permanently ice-covered, has no direct equivalent in the south, except in the much smaller gyres of the Weddell and Ross Seas where pack ice circulates.
Despite their differences, the two oceans support basically similar food webs, with high seasonal productivity from small overwintering standing crops.
The possible significance of marine microflora, hitherto neglected, is discussed.
Deep-water and mid-water communities are surveyed briefly, including the little-known but important cephalopods.
Prominent at both ends of the earth are large stocks of fish, seabirds, seals and whales, which maintain indigenous human communities and attract commercial enterprise.
ACCLIMATION, ADAPTATION AND SURVIVAL
6.1 Organisms and polar environments
Though the earth has always had poles of rotation, the polar environment has not always been cold (Chapter 1).
High latitudes were temperate until cooling began in the mid-to-late Pliocene; overall cooling from then to the present has been punctuated by spells of warming.
As isotherms swung north and south during repeated cycles of warming and cooling, the temperate biota bordering the cold regions migrated latitudinally with them.
Intensification of cold allowed the arctic flora and fauna to spread southward; amelioration encouraged repossession of the borderlands by temperate species.
Natural selection for polar flora and fauna has never, therefore, been simply the selection of cold-hardy species for increasingly cold environments.
Many other factors not directly related to cold have been involved.
The wobbling but persistent angle between earth's axis and ecliptic (Figure 1.2) has ensured that, though not always icy, polar regions have always been strongly seasonal.
Adaptation to thrive in seasonal environments, in which day-length, temperatures, water and food availability and other important factors fluctuate widely throughout an annual cycle, may be at least as critical as adaptation to cold, and more difficult for species to adjust to by natural selection.
The ability to fit life-cycles into seasons, to flourish in times of plenty and survive in times of dearth, is clearly critical for polar species; so also are such qualities as adaptability to change, avoidance of specialization, and deftness in colonizing new habitats.
6.1.1 Acclimation and adaptation
These two important adjustive processes occur simultaneously but within different time-scales.
Acclimation is the non-heritable modification of characters caused by exposure of organisms to environmental changes.
It may occur several times within an organism's lifetime, sometimes within a span of hours or even minutes.
Individuals acclimatize to cold, for example, by adjusting physically, physiologically or psychologically following cold exposure.
Such changes are ephemeral, readily reversible and not known to effect the genome.
Adaptation has two linked meanings, both implying longer-term hereditary changes.
An adaptation is a modification of the genome resulting in structures, functions or behaviour patterns that increase the probability of an organism surviving and reproducing in a particular environment.
Thus, all warm-blooded animals are insulated, but the special insulation of polar birds and mammals, additional to that of their temperate or tropical counterparts, is an example of adaptation in this sense.
The time-scale involved is seldom measurable, but spans many generations.
Adaptation in the second sense is the accumulation, in a species, of enough of these changes to promote viability within the specified environment.
Polar plants and animals are judged to have acquired adaptation — to have adapted — when they are demonstrably successful within their environment.
Though individual acclimations are not inheritable, ability to acclimatize may well be inherited.
Plants and animals that were incapable of acclimatizing to cold would not have survived in the cooling environment of the early Pleistocene.
Those that were able to acclimatize might have survived long enough for hereditary processes to be invoked and adaptation to occur.
Their facility in acclimatizing may still be called into frequent use during the lifetime of individuals, for example in the annual frost-hardening of herbaceous plants.
6.1.2 Polar adaptation
Many species that thrive in polar habitats are found also in subpolar and temperate habitats.
When polar stocks of such cosmopolitan species are recognized as differing in form or physiology from temperate stocks, they are often assigned to separate subspecies or races.
Polar stocks are generally assumed to have accumulated, and still be accumulating, adaptations that equip them for the polar environment; endemic polar species, that are found only in polar regions, are assumed to be derived from temperate or subpolar stocks, via intermediate stages that no longer exist.
Many polar species have clearly originated in this way by adaptations of metabolism, form and lifestyle.
Their penalty for doing so is frequent failure, for polar habitats are harsh and highly variable, unbuffered and unpredictable.
The rewards for the enterprising are abundant, though seasonal, energy for the asking, in relative freedom from competition.
Polar adaptations are usually developments or extensions of adaptations that organisms have acquired elsewhere to meet other challenges; only   secondarily and relatively recently have they acquired polar relevance.
Lichens that survive cold and desiccation on mountain tops in temperate regions may find tundra winters only marginally more difficult, and tundra summers an unaccustomed blessing; the adaptations they already possess for harsh temperate environments become pre-adaptations for polar living.
Aquatic birds that spend much of their time in water, well insulated by fat and waterproof plumage (Figure 6.1), are pre-adapted for life in cold lands; the insulation of marine mammals in temperate seas pre-adapts them for polar seas.
It is not surprising to find lichens, penguins, seals and whales well represented in polar regions, and varying only slightly, if at all, from non-polar congeners.
The adaptations of form, physiology and behaviour of polar species, whether acquired early or late in their evolution, are combined in solving the problems presented by the polar environment.
Strategies for survival adopted by some particular groups of organisms are summarized below.
6.2 Survival in plants
6.2.1 Resistance to freezing
Conditions of temperature and light in polar regions differ in amount but not in kind from those of temperate regions.
Polar plants must be capable of being frozen for several months each year, and to undergo repeated freeze-thaw cycles throughout the growing season, even at the height of summer.
They must be able to cope with aridity, high daily and seasonal temperature ranges, seasonal swings in photoperiod from long days to long nights, and a growing season ranging in length from three to four months on the polar fringes to a few days or even hours in higher latitudes.
These problems, and some of the strategies adopted by plants, for dealing with them, are discussed fully by Larsen (1964), Bliss (1971), Savile (1972), Courtin and Mayo (1975) and Heide (1984).
Frost-hardening — the process that enables plants to withstand freezing conditions without damage — is a property of cells that develops seasonally in response to climatic factors.
Its mechanisms have been studied most fully in vascular plants of commercial importance, for example cereals, green vegetables and shelter-belt trees, in temperate boreal regions that are subject to hard winter frosts (Kaurin et al .,
1985).
Similar mechanisms are likely to be involved in all other multicellular plants in which hardening occurs.
Most tropical plants have no resistance to freezing and are killed by even slight frost.
Cell sap normally starts to freeze at about -3°C, and ice forming within the cells causes fatal damage to plant tissues.
Most temperate species tolerate subzero temperatures to one degree or another, initially by avoiding tissue freezing but also by being able to tolerate and contain ice in their tissues.
Avoidance involves allowing cell sap to concentrate, so reducing its freezing point; in this way frost-hardened plants may remain ice-free and physiologically active for many days at temperatures well below 0°C.
Frost-hardening may affect some tissues but not others; it is not unusual for well-established tissues to be hardened but for buds and growing shoots to be nipped by frost.
Frost-hardening is an acclimation process invoked by environmental stimuli.
The stimuli vary with species but include cooling and decreasing  daylength: wavelength and intensity of light are also implicated (Kaurin, 1984).
Tronsmo and Kaurin (1985), present a simplified model of the process.
Cells that have a genetic capacity for hardening are stimulated by the environment to produce isoenzymes — alternatives to those normally in production — that change the phospholipid and sterol content of the cell membranes.
The isoenzymes, which may be derived from alternative gene sets provided by polyploidy, in effect increase membrane permeability and allow water to pass out of the cells, concentrating cell solutions and lowering their freezing points.
Simultaneous changes in the cell walls, hormonally induced, produce negative pressure potentials during extra-cellular freezing, which control the dehydration.
Several other factors affecting protein bonding within the plasma membranes may be involved (Levitt, 1962; Siminovitch, 1969).
By concentration of cell contents and supercooling, frost-hardened plant tissues readily survive temperatures down to -10°C.
Freezing is further inhibited when the cell sap is divided into several vacuoles rather than a single large one.
Ice begins to form due to the presence of bacteria or other nucleators in the cell sap.
When freezing occurs, over 60% of the freezable water becomes frozen at -4°C, practically all of it at -15°C.
By further concentration, and by various methods of isolating the cooled, concentrated cell sap from contact with nucleators, some plants can withstand supercooling in at least some of their tissues to temperatures as low as -55°C.
Many hardy herbaceous and woody plants tolerate ice in their tissues, but are killed by build-up of ice due to increasing cold or length of frost.
Gusta (1985) has reviewed the sequence of events.
When a plant starts to freeze, ice accumulates first in interstitial water, leaf veins and other extra-cellular spaces.
The presence of ice withdraws water in vapour form from distal cells, concentrating their solutions and building up the extra-cellular crystals.
The dehydrated plasma membranes adhere to the cell walls, causing them to collapse; growing ice crystals rupture the cell walls and membranes and destroy cytoplasmic integrity.
On thawing, live cells rehydrate and return to their original shape; damaged ones fail to recover and die.
Physiological and biochemical aspects of the process are reviewed in more detail by Kacperska (1984).
The converse process of de-hardening, induced by exposure to warmth, is less clearly understood, but is probably not a simple reversal of hardening.
Temperate species are slow to accept it; those that de-hardened and resumed growth at the first sign of spring warming would suffer severe damage in subsequent frosts.
Temperate species of vascular plants that invade the low Arctic are often damaged or killed by frosts in summer; those native to the high Arctic withstand repeated severe summer frosts without damage.
From the Canadian Arctic Porsild (1951) records catkins forming on Salix richardsonii , one of the dwarf willows, during an unseasonable warm spell in April; the catkins were frozen solid during a subsequent three-week spell of intense cold, but resumed flowering immediately afterwards and set seed in June.
Savile (1972) comments that arctic plants may be brittle with frost, sheathed in ice or buried in snow during the summer period of most rapid growth, and yet able to resume growth immediately and without injury as soon as warm weather returns.
Though obviously similar, summer hardiness appears to be a more rapid and flexible process than the hardening and de-hardening of autumn and spring; it is an adaptation that every species of the high polar region is likely to need.
6.2.2 Non-vascular plants
Algae, mosses, liverworts and lichens have many preadaptations but few special adaptations for polar life.
In the Arctic, few northern polar taxa are sufficiently differentiated to be called endemic species.
For example, of 134 species of mosses identified in Peary Land, north Greenland, Holmen (1960) categorized only one,Ortothecium acuminatum , as endemic to the area, and only 24 (18%) as having a mainly arctic distribution; the remaining species are widely distributed in the north temperate zone.
Southern hemisphere cryptogams are relatively poorly collected, with confused phytogeographic relationships (Smith, 1984; Longton, 1985).
Among 105 species of maritime and continental antarctic mosses (Smith 1984) only a few are currently regarded as endemic, and the number declines as ‘antarctic’ species are discovered in South America and elsewhere.
Most of those collected on the continent are well represented in temperate southern latitudes; some are cosmopolitan, and a few ecologically prominent species are bipolar (Longton 1985).
Similar relationships are found among polar lichens and algae, suggesting that temperate latitudes provide a reservoir of pre-adapted non-vascular plants, from which polar regions are constantly colonized and recolonized.
The single most important pre-adaptation common to these forms is their ability to cope with drought by partial dehydration, and to resume active metabolism quickly on rehydration.
This is a useful quality in any dry climate, warm or cold.
By conferring additional resistance to cellular frost damage, it is especially useful in alpine, steppe and boreal  forest regions, and no less so for polar conditions.
The non-vascular cryptogams have wide climatic tolerance, and spread readily by wind-distributed spores or vegetative propagules.
Most plant bodies are small and compact, allowing full advantage of warmth at the boundary layer between rock and atmosphere, and protection against wind erosion under a thin snow-covering.
Adaptation in bryophytes has been summarized by Savile (1972).
Many species are genetically variable and thus readily adaptable; many are monoecious and self-fertile, and able to penetrate new areas without completely sacrificing genetic recombination.
Though not aggressive colonists, they reproduce freely by vegetative growth and thrive in a range of conditions that other plants find intolerable.
Antarctic mosses have survived three years in darkness at -15°C (conditions that might occur under long-lasting snow-drifts) and grow readily in the miniature greenhouses that form under thin snow or translucent ice.
In moss turf (Polytrichum alpestre ) and moss carpet (Drepanocladus uncinatus ) communities on Signy Island, South Orkney, Collins (1977) found growth starting before snow-melt, though most  occurred during the four snow-free months between November and March.
Polar plants grown experimentally in temperate regimes thrive better and produce more per unit area, performing best in temperatures 5–20°C higher than at home.
Mosses growing on Signy Island in summer at temperatures between -5°C and + 5°C have an optimal net photosynthetic rate at 10–15°C; the rate is depressed at temperatures above 15°C, which may be experienced across midday in high summer.
Net annual production of 400–99gm -2 dry weight is reported from Signy Island, values comparable with those recorded in both temperate and Arctic tundra communities.
Similarly, in the subarctic moss Dicranum elongatum Heino and Karunen (1985) found a temperature optimum for photosynthesis of about 10°C, though there was little variation within the range 5–15°C.
This species photosynthesized actively throughout the year on a mountain slope in Finnish Lapland (69° 45'N).
Production was highest in August, decreasing in late autumn to low winter and spring levels; rates were quoted as ‘quite high’ even in temperatures close to freezing point.
Lichens, generally prevalent where soils are poor or absent, grow in conditions of aridity, exposure, and abrasion by wind-blown sand and snow that no other plants tolerate (Lamb, 1970; Dodge, 1973).
Some 60 out of 90 antarctic genera are crustose, producing a flat thallus closely appressed to the substrate; only 17 genera are foliose (i.e. with a divided, leaf-like thallus), and only 15 genera, occupying the least exposed positions, are fructicose — short, cylindrical, erect or recumbent, and attached only at the base (Dodge, 1973).
Growth, standing crop and metabolic rates of lichens are difficult to measure, but these unusually tough plants seem particularly well preadapted to polar conditions.
They respire at lower levels of light, temperature and tissue moisture than bryophytes or vascular plants, and are protected by dehydration against exhaustion of carbohydrate reserves (Smith, 1984).
Photosynthesis occurs at temperatures as low as -10°C and very low ambient light levels (Gannutz, 1969, 1970).
Extreme cold is no additional burden; lichens have survived after experimental plunging into liquid nitrogen at -196°C (Kappen and Lange, 1972).
Optimal temperatures for photosynthesis measured in polar species are generally lower than those quoted for mosses and closer to ambient temperatures (Lange and Kappen, 1972; Kappen et al .,
1981; Kappen and Friedmann, 1983).
Smith (1984) tabulates productivities in fructicose lichens of up to 1130 gm -2 dry weight in South Georgia, and up to 250gm -2 on Signy Island.
6.2.3 Vascular plants
The arctic vascular flora includes some 1899 species and subspecies, representing 404 genera and 106 families (Löve and Löve, 1975).
Non-flowering plants include 61 taxa (species and subspecies) of pteridophytes and 10 of gymnosperms; flowering plants include 511 taxa of monocotyledons and 1317 of dicotyledons.
Those of the low Arctic (within a boundary similar to that of Aleksandrova, discussed on p. 85) appear mainly to be boreal alpine species that have spread northward.
Some spread after the last glaciations, others have been there longer after surviving the glacial periods in ice-free refugia (Lindsey, 1981).
Vascular plants of the high Arctic seem by contrast to be remnants of the Tertiary flora that have survived in refugia  throughout all the glaciations and recently dispersed southward, though seldom beyond the low Arctic zone.
Some 24% of them are true endemics; 18 species of flowering plants in this category are restricted entirely to the high Arctic.
For a discussion of vascular plant distributions within the Arctic see Haber (1986).
Many arctic vascular plants are polyploid; multiple chromosomes appear in almost 60% of low arctic species and 70% of high arctic species (up to 80% of high arctic endemics).
Polyploidy may enhance adaptability, and is regarded as useful preadaptation for stressful environments (Löve and Löve, 1974).
Plant form .
Though widely distributed across the Arctic, and included among the northernmost of all vegetation, vascular plants are readily susceptible to damage by wind and frost.
Savile (1972) draws attention to the role of strong winds and abrasion in determining their distribution and habits.
Like mosses and lichens, the vascular plants adopt low profiles, colonizing sheltered sites away from prevailing winds, where they are protected by snow in winter.
Herbaceous forms grow as tightly-packed mats (Saxifraga ,Stellaria ), rosettes (Draba ,Potentilla ) or cushions (Silene ), habits that keep them under the snow in winter and close to the warm soil surface in summer.
Winter buds, containing the vulnerable growing points, are seldom covered by protective bud scales, which might impede early spring growth.
More often they rely on whorls of old leaves, tightly-packed neighbouring shoots, and above all snow-cover, to protect them from wind abrasion.
Monocotyledons, including grasses and sedges, form tussocks of hard, often silicious leaves that protect the growing points within.
Woody shrubs too depend on winter snow for protection against extreme cold and wind abrasion, which shape them by killing exposed growing points.
While much of Siberia, Alaska and the western Canadian Arctic have well-developed shrub tundra, strong winds and low snowfall keep much of the central and eastern Canadian tundra almost free of emergent shrubs (Savile, 1968).
At Chesterfield Inlet, northern Canada, in these conditions, Savile and Calder (1952) found willow shrubs (Salix spp.) and dwarf birch Betula glandulosa growing only 15 cm high on open ground; in the shelter of boulders the willows grew to 1 m or more, but in exposed areas they became completely prostrate, with  horizontal laterals close to the ground.
They thus became barely distinguishable from the genetically prostrate species of willow, for example S .
arctica , which grows to the extreme northern limit of land (Savile, 1972).
Rosettes, mats, cushions and tussocks create internal microenvironments that are more favourable to growth than the world outside; temperatures and humidities measured among growing shoots in spring are usually higher than ambient, though soil and root temperatures may remain lower.
Dark pigments in leaves and flowers contribute to warming; their sparing use in spring leaves suggests that green pigments alone are sufficient to bring the leaves to optimum temperatures.
Mountain sorrel Oxyria digyna and tufted saxifrage Saxifraga caespitosa typify highly variable species; the colder and more exposed the site, the darker, more heavily pigmented are the stems and leaves (Savile, 1972).
The pigmented, parabolic flowers of arctic poppies Papaver spp., buttercups Ranunculus spp. and several other genera follow  the sun, focusing its rays at their centre; this provides a warm spot attractive to pollinating insects, and raises the temperature of maturing anthers and ovaries.
Pubescence (hairiness) characterizes many alpine species (Hedberg, 1964); stem and leaf hairs reduce air circulation and water loss, protect leaves from over-bright sunlight and trap outgoing heat.
Only a few arctic species (perhaps of recent alpine derivation; Savile 1972) are densely hairy, but many use hairs strategically to good advantage.
The almost transparent hairs on catkins of S. arctica and other willows, for example, coupled with dark pigmentation, provide greenhouse conditions that help to warm the underlying tissues and enhance seed production (Krog, 1955).
Growth .
Growth is generally slow; seasonal growth in widely-distributed species is faster where the climate is warmer.
Salix arctica , for example, grows three times faster in East Greenland than at Resolute, Cornwallis Island, and barely survives at Isachson, Ellef Ringnes Island; July mean temperatures are respectively about 8°C, 4°C and 2°C (Warren Wilson, 1964).
Arctic stocks of Oxyria digyna (Mooney and Billings, 1961) and meadow rue Thalictrum alpinum (Mooney and Johnson, 1965) have lower optimal photosynthetic temperatures than alpine stocks of the same species.
Some arctic species appear to be markedly temperature-sensitive in rate of growth, others less so, though low temperatures generally reduce the total biomass attained by cold-tolerant species in a single season (Savile, 1972).
Limits may be set also by deficiencies of nitrogen and other key minerals in the soils.
For methods of measuring photosynthesis, gas exchange, growth and production in high arctic vascular plant communities see Mayo et al .,
(1977), Addison (1977) and Whitfield and Goodwin (1977).
Dwarfism, both genetic and phenotypic, is marked among high-latitude flowering plants.
Where the growing season in short, a successful  stratagem of many plants is to remain small, grow short flowering stems, and invest their small savings of energy in a few well-endowed seeds.
The short season available for growth restricts annuals and biennials mainly to the arctic fringe; one notable exception,Koenigia islandica , produces tiny plants 4–5 cm high in especially favoured areas as far north as Devon Island and northern Greenland, where they set seed annually.
Perennials succeed by responding early to spring.
Few are fully evergreen; rather more keep a small proportion of semi-evergreen leaves (usually the last to be produced in summer; Savile, 1972) that allow them to start photosynthesis as soon as the sun returns.
Many store food overwinter in fleshy stems, roots and leaf  bases; deep storage roots are restricted to dry areas of the subarctic, where the spring thaw comes early.
Most perennials grow periodically, stopping before the end of the growing season when they have reached a particular stage, for example the production of winter buds.
A minority, including many grasses, grow aperiodically, continuing until stopped only by bad weather in autumn and resuming in spring.
Periodic growth ensures that plants reach safe overwintering stages, and do not risk the loss of tender new tissues to frost.
Aperiodic growth takes full advantage of long seasons, but risks the loss of unseasonable shoots or flowers.
The distinction is blurred by species that grow periodically in hard conditions and aperiodically where they are protected.
The crucifer Braya humilis was originally described as aperiodic in northeast Greenland (Sørensen, 1941), where flowers produced in late autumn were retained frozen but viable in snow until the following spring; the same species was found to be periodic, with a late summer growth check, in the harsher snow-free conditions of Hazen, north Ellesmere Island (Savile, 1972).
Growth and maturation of vascular plants are often controlled by light, usually in conjunction with temperature.
Dormancy is a response to short day-length and low temperatures; growth begins as days lengthen and temperatures increase.
Spring bud-break, flowering, the formation of next year's buds, germination, stem growth, and the development and movements of leaves all depend on spectral quality or quantity of ambient light.
Polar plants appear to have adapted positively to the long days, long nights, low light intensities and other special conditions (Chapter 2) of their environment.
Experiments show that many tolerate a wide range of light conditions, but a few high polar species perform best in long day regimes, or refuse to flower in anything less than a 22–24-hour day.
We do not know how many species of temperate latitudes have been unable to adjust, and so disqualified themselves as polar colonists, or to what extent existing polar plants are restricted in their distribution by light.
For a review of plant adaptations to light environments see Salisbury (1985).
Reproduction .
Arctic flowering plants are mostly capable of cross-fertilization, and make use of both wind and insects in pollination.
Many are also self-fertile, or form seed by agamospermy, in which diploid embryos appear in seeds without benefit of cross-fertilization.
In one or other of these ways, seeds are usually produced abundantly in normal seasons.
Most seeds are spread by wind; a few rely on birds or mammals for dispersion.
Rhizomes, runners and bulbils are alternative forms of vegetative  reproduction common in grasses and sedges, and known also in many dicotyledons.
These methods allow plants to spread in marginal regions where seeding is uncertain.
Like agamospermy, they yield offspring that are genetically identical with the parents.
Inbreeding appears to outweigh crossbreeding in many stocks of arctic plants, a condition that may be adaptive in a harsh environment where interspecific competition is insignificant.
For discussion of the genetic implications of this interesting possibility see Savile (1960, 1972) and Mosquin (1966).
The two species of antarctic vascular plants, antarctic hair grass Deschampsia antarctica (Figure 6.2) and antarctic pink Colobanthus quitensis , occur patchily on Antarctic Peninsula south to the Terra Firma Islands, and on the South Orkney and South Shetland Islands.
Only D .
antarctica has so far been found on the South Sandwich Islands (Smith, 1984; Smith and Poncet, 1985), but both occur on South Georgia.
In the maritime Antarctic they form short mats or cushions up to 25 cm across and 5–1Ocm deep, typically on warm north — or west-facing slopes close to sea level, in association with each other and with mosses; they are usually underlain with brown soils to which they have contributed roots and other organic material (Longton, 1985).
On South Georgia the hair grass forms extensive meadows, the pink grows in fellfields associated with   shrubs, grasses and mosses (Bonner, 1985).
For studies of the distribution and physiology of these species at various localities throughout their range see Edwards (1972, 1973, 1974, 1975); for a study of experiments in introducing other vascular plants from South Georgia to the maritime Antarctic see Edwards (1980).
6.3 Survival in invertebrates
The microfaunae of polar soils and freshwater environments include representatives of many invertebrate phyla.
Soil fauna studies in groups other than mites and insects have generally been restricted to systematic collection, identification, taxonomy, basic ecology, and estimations of biomass and energy flow (Ryan, 1977; Block, 1977; Procter, 1977).
Though many polar invertebrate species appear to be endemic, very little is known of their biology: the liveliest, most prominent and most numerous elements are the arthropods, and these have provided most of what is known on adaptations and ways of life in terrestrial and freshwater environments.
6.3.1 Insects
Many non-polar insects that live in northern continental areas are subject to extremes of cold in winter and heat in summer; alpine insects may meet similar conditions every day.
In some species there is evidence of supercooling, i.e. failure of the body fluids to freeze at temperatures appropriate to their osmolarity.
In others, dehydration and the accumulation of glycerol or other antifreeze agents in the body fluids appear to be implicated in lowering the freezing point (Danks, 1978, 1981).
Species vary in their ability to tolerate freezing.
Some die at the first hint of frost; others, for example the damp-living larvae of chironomid midges, can be subjected repeatedly to temperatures of -20°C and below, with up to 90% of their body water frozen, and recover completely on thawing (Scholander et al , 1953).
Adaptations of arctic insects are summarized by Kevan and Danks (1986a and b) and Chernov (1975, 1978, 1985).
Overall these species are darker, smaller and hairier than temperate counterparts.
Darkness and hairiness, especially noticeable in butterflies of the genera Boloria and Colias , are taken to be adaptations for absorbing and retaining heat during basking.
Smallness facilitates rapid warming to working temperatures, though it may also be a symptom of food sparsity; compactness, including relative shortness of limbs and wings, helps to conserve heat and moisture.
Wings are short or absent in several arctic species of stone flies, crane flies, midges and moths; females are especially likely to have reduced wings and  to avoid flying.
Eyes and antennae are relatively small in some species, suggesting that sensory inputs are limited.
All insects are most active in summer; though seldom apparent on cold, sunless days, those of the high tundra must be able to hunt, feed, evade predators and reproduce at temperatures which would immobilize species from lower latitudes.
Only bumblebees in flight are known to maintain higher-than-ambient body temperatures; heat is generated by the flight muscles and kept from escaping by the furry surface of thorax and abdomen.
Basking is highly characteristic of arctic insects.
Many diptera bask in sunlight inside flowers, warming themselves and at the same time facilitating pollination; hordes settle on conspicuous dark or bright surfaces when air temperatures are low, and beetles collect on sunny patches of ground that are sheltered from wind, indicating a constant need for warming.
Flying insects keep close to the ground and out of the wind, haunting sheltered valleys and lees of hills, seeking direct sunlight as much as possible.
Swarms and mating flights seldom rise more than two or three metres off the ground; aerial mating may be replaced by mating on surface vegetation.
Life cycles .
Life cycles are adapted to low temperatures.
Where similar temperate species take a year or less to complete their life cycles, polar species may take several years.
Individuals feed and grow slowly, spending longer at each growth stage and ultimately producing fewer eggs.
All stages from eggs to adults must be capable of withstanding low environmental temperatures; eggs especially have to be cold-resistant throughout the winter.
Overwintering strategies of many species are unknown.
Of those that are known, aquatic insects that winter as immature stages in large ponds probably have the warmest environments.
Eggs, larvae and pupae remain unfrozen under the ice at temperatures between 0° and 4°C.
Those in smaller ponds must experience much lower temperatures when the water about them freezes.
Many aquatic flying insects stage mass emergences in early spring, suggesting that winter dormancy is a necessary part of their cycle.
Sex is often unnecessary; a high proportion of polar insects including caddis flies, stone flies, midges, simuliid black-flies and plant bugs are parthenogenetic.
A few are polyploid (cf. plants, above).
Insects that winter on land, under snow, among rocks and vegetation or in soil are similarly exposed to extreme cold.
Blowflies, psillid bugs and bumblebees are among the few that winter as adults, seeking sheltered corners under rocks and vegetation, close to the soil and under an  insulating layer of snow.
Blowflies winter also as maggots or pupae in carcasses; butterflies and moths probably winter only as larvae or pupae.
Dehydration and the accumulation of glycerol in tissues facilitate freeze resistance at all stages of life cycles from eggs to imagos (Danks, 1978,1981).
Antarctic insects and mites have been widely collected from stations that include some of the world's southernmost outcrops.
Collembola live among mosses, lichens and turf, feeding on fungal hyphae, dead plant material, live algal cells and microorganisms.
A few are present on almost all vegetation, wherever it is found.
High densities of up to 100 000 m -2 have been recorded on moss turf in the South Orkneys, and on warm summer days ponds in South Georgia are occasionally covered with a grey film of collembola, apparently newly emerged from the soil.
Of 47 species that occur in the Antarctic region, Wallwork (1973) considers about 70% endemic; 17 species occur in continental and maritime Antarctica.
Rapoport (1971) characterizes antarctic species as heavily pigmented; otherwise they appear unremarkable, with few special adaptations for polar life.
Their basic ecology, whether studied on the continent (Prior, 1962; Wise and Shoup, 1967; Janetschek, 1970) or on the maritime and periantarctic islands (Strong, 1967; Etchegary and others, 1977; Tilbrook, 1970, 1977; Block, 1982) is similar throughout their range, indicating that collembola, like lichens, are well adapted for harsh environments but not especially equipped for polar life.
The upper lethal temperature for one species,Gomphiocephalus hodgsoni , was as high as 29.5° in moist conditions; the lower lethal temperature ranged between -11°C and -23°C, unaffected by acclimation.
In Cryptopygus antarcticus , the subject of intensive studies by Tilbrook (1977) and Block (1982), specimens from South Georgia were on average smaller and lighter in weight, and matured at smaller size, than those from Signy Island, but respiration-weight and metabolism-temperature curves of the two stocks were similar.
Cold-adapted collembola may metabolize slightly faster than temperate species; in laboratory stocks of C .
antarcticus moulting occurs down to lower temperatures than in temperate stocks (Burn, 1981).
Very little is known of the ecology or adaptations of periantarctic beetles, grass aphids or thrips.
Two species of diptera, both chironomids, occur in the maritime Antarctic.
Belgica antarctica (Figure 3.12), a wingless midge, is confined to the shoreline of northwestern Antarctic Peninsula and the South Shetland Islands, where its larvae feed in moist soil and tide pools.
Adults are not frost-tolerant; only eggs (and possibly larvae) survive the winter.
Parochlus steinenii , a winged midge, occurs sparsely about the South Shetland Islands and more commonly on South Georgia.
6.3.2 Freshwater and marine invertebrates
Heywood (1984) typifies the fauna of antarctic lakes and ponds as non-specific opportunists, feeding on epiphytes, detritus and bacteria, that encyst or produce resting eggs when conditions become severe.
Rotifers have for long been know to survive repeated freeze-thaw cycles.
Among antarctic crustaceans the anostracan Branchinecta gaini overwinters as eggs, which hatch in spring, possibly in response to osmotic changes.
Those encased in ice hatch with the thaw; those already in water hatch as the medium surrounding them is diluted by melt-water.
Adults grow to varying sizes, depending on food available, and lay eggs in late summer.
The adult population dies when an ice cover forms and oxygen levels within the water fall, after a lifespan of about three months in ponds and up to six months in lakes.
Copepods Parabroteas sarsi and Pseudoboeckella poppei overwinter only as eggs in water bodies that freeze completely or become anoxic; in large lakes they are active year-round, breeding in late winter to produce nauplii that feed on the early plankton bloom.
Resting (i.e. overwintering) eggs appear from midsummer onward.
Marine invertebrates live in more stable environments than those of land or fresh water and generally face less extreme conditions; they are unlikely, for example, to dry out, freeze, or suffer wide changes of temperature or salinity.
Their body fluids are isotonic with sea water, and they have no special problems of freezing comparable with those of fish (see below).
Adaptations of intertidal animals in cold climates have been studied by Kanwisher (1959).
Generally rare in polar regions, where sea ice inhibits their settlement, they are often plentiful on subpolar shores where they may be exposed twice daily to six-hourly spells of near-freezing sea temperatures, alternating with similar spells of very much lower air temperatures.
Those examined by Kanwisher simply froze when exposed to extremely cold air.
At -30°C up to 90% of their body water became ice, which formed mainly in intercellular spaces, resulting in high but apparently non-lethal concentrations of solutes within the cells.
6.4 Survival in fish, birds and mammals
6.4.1 Fish
Of the 20 000 or so living species of fish, only about 120 are found south of the Antarctic Convergence, and most of those are endemic (Everson, 1984).
The Arctic too has a small though less exclusive fish fauna, but there are no known bipolar species.
Most polar fish live in waters at temperature that  are very stable and close to 0°C.
Low temperatures place them at no obvious disadvantage — they have evolved physiological systems that allow them to move just as fast as temperate or tropical fish, and they are no easier to catch.
Possibly resulting from low-temperature adaptations, they tend to grow seasonally and overall more slowly, take longer to mature, and produce fewer, larger eggs (Everson, 1987).
They are mostly stenothermic, i.e. unable to survive temperature ranges of more than a few degrees, or even to acclimatize effectively.
The antarctic shallow-water marine fish Rigophila dearborni , accustomed to living at -1.5°C, dies quickly at temperatures only 0.5°C lower or 4–5°C higher (DeVries, 1978).
The body fluids of marine fish are generally more dilute than those of sea water, and would be expected to freeze at temperatures of -0.6° to -0.8°C (Schmidt-Nielsen, 1975), a degree or more higher than the freezing point of polar sea water.
Body fluids of some polar fish are slightly more concentrated than those of temperate species, but ionic differences in osmolarity are minute and have little effect on freezing point.
Non-pelagic species, which do not normally come into direct contact with ice, appear to avoid freezing simply by supercooling; their fluids remain ice-free even 1–2°C below freezing point.
If touched by ice experimentally their gills and other vulnerable tissues freeze, and they die immediately (Scholander et al .,
1957).
Pelagic species that live among ice contain antifreeze agents, often unusually high concentrations of plasma proteins (Hargens, 1972).
One agent occurring in the antarctic species Trematomus borchgrevinki (Figure 6.3) has been identified as a glycoprotein of molecular weight up to 21 500, which appears to bind itself to ice crystals and inhibit their  growth (Lin et al .,
1972).
Weight for weight it is far more effective than salts in depressing freezing point, and physiologically far less intrusive on cellular activities.
Presence of these substances in the blood presumably replaces any need for supercooling, and allows pelagic fish to hunt in the highly productive region immediately under the ice floes.
Channichthyid fish of antarctic waters, for example the icefish Champsocephalus aceratus , are unusual in possessing only a few erythrocytes (red blood corpuscles) as larvae and none as adults; related species have much reduced erythrocyte counts throughout life.
Their oxygen requirements are normal and blood systems are similar to those of other fish, except that the heart is larger and gill blood vessels are comparatively wide, allowing a faster circulation of blood.
These fish appear to rely on a rapid circulation of plasma to meet their oxygen needs; what advantage (if any) this  stratagem confers is not clear, but it is one that would not be feasible in warmer oceans where the oxygen content of the water is lower.
6.4.2 Homeotherms
Warm-blooded animals the world over maintain a high and constant core temperature.
Their main source of heat is their own metabolic activities, and nearly all maintain core temperatures of 38.5°C (most mammals) to 41°C (most birds).
Assuming a mean temperature of 14°C for the earth and lower atmosphere as a whole, all but a very few homeotherms in tropical regions lose heat constantly to the environment.
Losses are reduced by insulation and behaviour, but must ultimately be made up from metabolic energy sources, mostly by cellular oxidation of fuels derived from food.
The benefits of homeothermy are apparent from the wide variety of form and lifestyles adopted by birds and mammals, but the costs are high.
A mammal or bird of given weight in a temperate climate requires between three and seven times as much food to keep going as a reptile of similar weight.
Both the environmental temperatures and the body activities that provide the main source of internal heating fluctuate from minute to minute, yet the point of balance represented by core temperature remains remarkably constant.
Very precise feedback control mechanisms ensure that, though skin temperatures may vary considerably, core temperatures remain steady within 1°C or less; for useful discussions of how this is achieved, even in polar environments, see Kleiber (1961) and Schmidt-Nielsen (1975, 1976).
In pioneering studies of Alaskan birds and mammals from a wide range of environments, Irving and Krog (1954) concluded that polar homeotherms maintain core temperature similar to those of their temperate and tropical  counterparts.
Though many more polar homeotherms have been examined since then, evidence to the contrary has been slight.
Except in rare cases of torpor or hibernation (neither is generally used in polar environments), homeotherms in cold climates show no special adaptations involving temperature control.
In fact polar homeotherms, whether northern or southern, show very few recognizable adaptations for polar living.
Many appear to be recent colonists from temperate regions, representing species that have extended their breeding ranges northward or southward in post-glacial times.
Carrying their own temperature environment within them, their adaptations, such as they are, relate mainly to seasonal cycles of food.
Most avoid extremes of polar cold and dearth of food by wintering elsewhere, and using the polar environment only during its most tolerable phase.
Species that overwinter make use of their avian or mammalian pre-adaptations, rather than special modifications, for polar life.
The few year-round species of high-arctic birds and mammals make good use of feathers, fur and subcutaneous insulation.
Small mammal species (voles, lemmings) dig or burrow in snow, isolating themselves from environmental extremes and keeping in touch with food at the ground-snow interface.
Larger grazing species (caribou, musk oxen) are especially well furred.
Taking as a practical measure of insulation the ‘clo’ unit (equivalent to normal clothing worn by a human at rest in an ambient temperature of 20°C), wolves and polar bears carry insulation of 6 7 clo, and arctic foxes in winter carry 8 clo, rather more than is deemed efficient for human polar clothing.
Large mammals also select their environments carefully, and bunch together to reduce surface heat losses.
The whiteness of polar bears and arctic foxes provides camouflage, and may also allow solar radiation to penetrate and heat the skin surface directly.
Aquatic birds and mammals, equipped with subcutaneous blubber, may also have a covering of fur or feathers.
The waterproof feathers of many marine birds, underlain by a dense blanket formed from the aftershafts of individual feathers, enhance insulation and serve also to keep out wind and snow.
Polar penguins are slightly better insulated against their extreme environmental temperatures than are species of temperate seas (Stonehouse, 1967); temperate species need good insulation, and that of polar species need be only slightly better to be effective in lower temperatures.
Emperor penguins (Figure 6.4), breeding furthest south and across midwinter, not surprisingly possess the best insulation of all.
Whales and seals, the largest polar aquatic mammals, rely almost entirely on blubber for insulation.
Whales that migrate annually to polar seas enter   the cold regions in early spring with very thin blubber, and fatten markedly during the polar summer.
Fur, which relies on trapped air for insulating efficiency, cannot be effective in animals that spend all their lives in water, and rapidly loses effectiveness by compression in those that dive deep.
The thin pelts of hair (phocid) seals and denser pelts of fur seals probably afford better protection against wind-chill than against the cold of the sea (Figure 6.5).
Special adaptation is required in a few species to fit breeding cycles into the polar year.
Most polar birds breed seasonally, mating in early spring and timing their laying and incubation so that chicks are fed and released   during the summer flush of food.
Among the larger ones, Adélie penguins Pygoscelis adeliae , living close to Antarctica at the southern edge of their range, start to breed in October or November (early spring).
By doing so they just manage to have their chicks ready for sea by late February, and complete their post-nuptial moult before the March freeze-up.
Still-larger emperor penguins Aptenodytes forsteri , with longer incubation and chick-rearing periods, set back their courtship and laying to June (mid-winter), incubate through the coldest months of July and August, and rear their chicks through early spring.
The chicks are released precociously at only  about half adult weight, giving the adults time to complete their own moult and be ready for breeding the following season (Stonehouse, 1985).
For seasonal breeding and feeding in other southern birds see Siegfried (1985); for accounts of northern birds and mammals see Sage (1986).
6.5 Summary and conclusions
Polar species are recruited from neighbouring regions; the wider variety living on land within the northern polar boundary reflects wider subpolar and temperate recruiting grounds in the north than in the south.
Relatively few species using polar regions are endemic.
Several categories of plants and animals are preadapted by life in temperate region for an easy transition to polar regions; they need to change little once they are established, so speciation pressures are light.
Polar cold may be less  constricting than other factors, for example aridity or intense seasonality, that characterize polar regions.
On land lichen, mosses, many flowering plants, mites, insects and other invertebrates, and many species of birds and mammals, come into this category.
Aquatic mammals and birds also are pre-adapted by life in cold temperate waters, and seem well able to cope with the marginally colder conditions in polar seas.
Acclimation and adaptations for polar living are discussed, and the life-cycles and physiological traits of some polar organisms are examined.
MAN AND THE POLAR REGIONS
7.1 Introduction
Evolved in the tropics, most naked of all the apes, man is physiologically among the least likely of all warm-blooded creatures to flourish in polar regions.
Yet from the tropics he spread in stages northward and south into cooler regions, reaching the Arctic — a milder Arctic than the present one — about 30000 years ago.
Later generations spread south as far as the tip of South America; later still they reached similar latitudes in southern New Zealand.
Vagrants from these populations may have explored the Southern Ocean and landed on some of the cool temperate islands, but there is no convincing evidence for their reaching Antarctica.
Man unclothed would not have survived long in the far north or south.
Only by wearing the furs of other animals, by use of fire and by liberal application of his wits, has northern man has survived as an indigenous polar and subpolar animal for more than 20000 years.
Human problems in extreme cold are both physiological and environmental.
Polar folk, like other homeotherms, show little evidence of special physiological adaptations for life in cold climates, and the meagre environmental resources have kept their populations small, widely dispersed and nomadic.
In recent years new problems have arisen from the mixing of indigenous polar cultures with those from outside, introducing new ecological demands and imposing new stresses on people and environments ill-equipped to cope with them.
7.2 Man and cold
7.2.1 Homeothermy
Like other homeotherms, man maintains a high and constant body temperature against the environmental gradient.
He does so by metabolizing fuels in muscular and other body cells.
At rest in a mild environment his  basal or standard metabolic rate is about 2 000kcal or 8 400kJ per 24 h, equivalent in work units to just less than 100W, the output of a reading-lamp bulb.
Unclothed and at rest, cold-adapted humans can maintain a core temperature (i.e. central body temperature, measured by mouth or rectum) of 37°C in still air down to 27–29°C, or in water down to 35°C; in either case the skin and extremities are likely to be several degrees cooler (Edholm, 1978).
As core temperature starts to fall, self-regulating mechanisms start to restore equilibrium.
Shivering, a form of involuntary muscular action, raises the metabolic rate and elevates body temperature; in extreme cases it can quickly raise metabolic rate by a factor of four to five.
To provide this energy, stores of blood sugar and fats are metabolized.
Metabolic rate rises with all other forms of activity, by factors of two or three in walking and up to eight or ten in more strenuous exercise (Durnin and Passmore, 1967).
Fuel consumption rises proportionately and excess heat is likely to be generated.
For body temperature to remain stable, the excess heat must be shed in exhalation and by radiation, conduction, evaporation and convection from the body surface.
Not surprisingly, food requirements increase substantially with activity.
Infants enhance heat production by metabolizing brown fat, a form of storage tissue, mostly subcutaneous, rich in mitochondria and biologically active.
Though used by the young of many homeotherms, this method of warming is not open to adults, even those of populations subject to extreme cold, for the brown fat disappears before adolescence.
Other forms of ‘non-shivering thermogenesis’ may be used by human populations that encounter cold.
Alacalufe Indians of Tierra del Fuego, for example, maintain a slightly enhanced metabolic rate without shivering while sleeping in cold, damp conditions.
After days in searing heat, Australian aboriginals withstand cold nights in the desert without shivering; possible mechanisms are enhanced metabolism, a lower threshold for the start of shivering, and a slight overnight fall in core temperature.
7.2.2 Man in polar environments
No special adaptations for dealing with cold, beyond the level of acclimation, have been found in indigenous Arctic folk.
The squat, short-limbed build once characteristic of the Eskimo (now generally called Inuit) is rapidly disappearing in modern generations (Godin and Shephard, 1973); it was probably as much a product of malnutrition as of genetic endowment.
This build would ensure the smallest possible surface area  through which to lose heat, though the effect in well-insulated subjects can only have been trivial.
Inuit may have slightly higher than average basal metabolic rates (though this too is doubtful;ibid .)
and lower threshold for onset of shivering.
Those who pursue the traditional hunting way of life tend to be lean and fit (Shephard and Rode, 1973).
Like fishermen and others who work in cold conditions, they develop tolerance to cold in hands and faces, possibly a function of enhanced blood circulation in exposed areas of the body.
However, the success of the Inuit is based far more on dressing, housing and feeding themselves as well as possible, and avoiding risks that would expose them unduly to cold.
Similar strategies are adopted by the non-indigenous people who leave temperate environments to live temporarily in polar regions; they make small physiological adjustments, but rely for safety on good clothing, housing and food, and constant alertness to risk.
Metabolic activity arising from muscular exercise, coupled with insulation in the form of layered windproof clothing, is generally enough to maintain human body temperature against polar extremes.
Insulation up to 3 clo units (p. 177) is effective for active people, and up to 4 units for sedentary work (Brotherhood, 1973); additional thickness of clothing tends to be cumbersome and counterproductive, requiring more energy to carry it about.
Heat is readily generated by activity; even increased muscular tone generates enough to restore comfort in chilled but well-insulated subjects.
Running, climbing and other strenuous action soon produce a need to shed heat, indicated by raised skin temperature and the onset of sweating.
This can often be balanced by temporary exposure of skin, e.g. lowering an anorak hood or removing one or both gloves.
To avoid condensation and accumulation of sweat, with consequent risk of chilling and internal frosting, polar clothing must be well enough ventilated to allow vapour to escape during activity.
Inuit skin clothing is loose-fitting with built-in ventilation; for modern polar wear, much thought has gone into the design of garments that are lightweight, comfortable, windproof, and efficient, whatever the wearer is doing.
Wind is notorious in making cold seem colder, chiefly in its effects on exposed skin.
‘Wind-chill factors’, calculated originally in experiments involving heat losses from dry uninsulated surfaces (Siple and Passel, 1945), are often represented either as reduced temperatures or as additional heat lost per unit of time.
Both indices can be misleading when applied to real situations involving man or other homeotherms.
Well-insulated subjects in windproofs (similarly, birds or mammals with wind-resistant plumage or  pelage) may be virtually unaffected even by very strong winds.
By contrast, poorly-insulated subjects, especially if wet, have their rate of cooling dramatically increased by even light winds that are strong enough to disturb the boundary layer around them.
Thus an inadequately-clothed walker or climber may be at risk if exposed to winds to 2–3 m per second, and only marginally more at risk in winds three or four times as strong.
In either case safety lies in finding either a windproof covering or a sheltered corner as soon as possible.
The surface of a warm, damp body takes up the wet-bulb temperature of the air around it.
Wind may secure this equilibrium faster, but no wind, however strong, can reduce the temperature of a body below its own wet-bulb temperature.
In traditional skin clothing or modern padded polar suits, man can work outside without difficulty at environmental temperatures down to -40°C, and with extra precautions (face masks, electrically-warmed suits) at temperatures considerably lower.
On the Antarctic polar plateau in high summer at -36°, Dalrymple (1966) reported low wind speeds, little cloud and strong sunlight, combining to create ‘a rather pleasant environment’.
While Siple (1959) and his colleagues (including a dog) strolled comfortably about the South Pole in calm weather with temperatures of -70°C, prolonged work outside became difficult, even dangerous, below -55°C.
More extreme cold is tiresome as well as dangerous.
Ignatov (1965) reported that in winter at Vostok, almost 3500 m above sea level on the high Antarctic plateau, kerosene (paraffin) becomes a jelly at -60°C and solidifies at -85°C.
At -75°C diesel fuel has to be chopped with a hatchet.
About -80°C, antifreeze turns to pink ice and gasoline (petrol) fails to vaporize or ignite.
Scientists who have worked on the high plateau forgivably take a cavalier view of coastal and maritime Antarctica, writing it off as ‘that banana belt up north’.
Inhaling very cold air may cause local freezing in air passages and lungs, or spasms similar to asthma that make breathing difficult.
At all subzero temperatures there is a some danger of frostbite (local freezing of tissues in the face or extremities).
This may lead to blistering, and, if untreated, to necrosis and gangrene.
However, life in polar regions is generally healthy, strenuous and safe.
Paradoxically, danger and discomfort are often severest at temperatures close to freezing point, when outer clothing, wetted by rain or melting snow, loses some of its insulating properties.
Deaths due to exposure are more likely during winter in temperate mountains and uplands than on properly-managed polar expeditions.
Those who live in cold climates require high-calorie diets, but only if they are living actively in the open air; sedentary indoor workers need no more  than their counterparts in temperate latitudes.
Activities associated with exploration — sledging, ski-marching, hunting, tending dog teams, even walking on snow and carrying heavy clothing — all involve hard work, for which two to three times the normal caloric intake is required.
The additional calories are spent on muscular activity, and the heat generated is more than enough to maintain the subject's temperature against the steep environmental gradient.
7.3 Arctic man
People first reached Siberian Arctic coastlands from central Asia, successive waves moving northward to populate what may then have been a relatively mild maritime area.
Man was among the last of a wide range of Eurasian mammals to trek overland through the forests and tundra of Beringia, now the Bering Strait region, during the late Pliocene and Pleistocene.
Some 10 000 years ago, detachments began to move eastward from Asia to North America.
From there, man spread eastward and south, ultimately to occupy the whole of the new continent to the southern tip of South America (Hopkins, 1967).
As the last (Wisconsin) ice sheets advanced in the north, human populations shifted southward before them.
As the ice retreated the northlands again became tenable, and some 6000 years ago coastal populations from northeastern Siberia spearheaded new waves of immigration eastward.
The first American polar folk were well clothed in sewn animal skins and equipped for maritime life with kayaks (skin boats), fish-hooks, harpoons of bone and ivory, bows and arrows.
A shamanist philosophy helped to even the odds against them, and they spread through the Aleutian Islands and along the Arctic coast of North America (Figure 7.1), forming the distinctive northern folk formerly known as Eskimo, now called Inuit in recognition of their pan-Arctic racial identity.
Successive waves spread through the Canadian archipelago to northwest Greenland, moved down the Mackenzie River, and crossed eastward to Labrador and southern Greenland.
7.3.1 Inuit, Saami and others
Until very recently the Inuit, the true Arctic folk, lived as their ancestors had lived during those early days of coastal occupation, in small, nomadic groups with rich culture but few material possessions (Birket-Smith, 1959; Herbert, 1976).
Physically small, compact people (but see above), they kept separate from their nearest neighbours, the North American forest Indians, maintaining a common northern culture varied by local customs and practices.
Their way of life involved annual circuits from one seasonal hunting ground to another, using the few materials available to them — stone, clay, bone, skins, sinews, and a little driftwood timber — with dog sledges for transport.
Traditionally in summer they were based ashore, living in skin tents and sod huts, hunting and fishing from skin canoes (kayaks and family-sized umiaks) among the ice floes, trapping fish at weirs and stone barriers in the  rivers, and searching the tundra for caribou, musk oxen, smaller game, birds, eggs and berries.
In winter some continued ashore, reinforcing their tents and huts for extra warmth, while others moved out on to the inshore sea ice, living in snow houses and feeding mostly on fish and seals.
Arctic folk of Europe and Asia — the Saami (formerly called Lapps) of Scandinavia and the northwestern USSR, and the Nenet, Yakut and Chukchi of Siberia — share common ancestry with the Inuit and are physically similar, but have developed more land-based ways of life.
Only those in the far east, bordering the Pacific Ocean, were truly maritime; the rest centred their economies on river fishing, hunting, trapping and reindeer herding.
These patterns of life were still widespread at the start of the 20th century; a few pursue it today, but under the influences of civilization, most have settled and traded at least part of their culture for southern ways.
7.3.2 Exploitation
Protected by their icy environment, northern folk were for long virtually isolated from southern influences.
The skills and cultures they developed sustained them in a harsh living, and gave them a lasting, non-destructive role in Arctic ecology.
Their small nomadic populations, growing and subdividing during the good years, were periodically culled by cold and starvation.
Indigenous human populations only marginally affected the huge northern stocks of whales, fur seals, seals, walruses and fish.
With little access to trade outlets, early Inuit had neither the power nor the will to over-exploit or destroy their few resources.
Mediaeval explorers from the south made little impact on their society, but incursions of southern whalers, sealers, missionaries, fur traders and administrators on an unprecedented scale during the 18th and 19th centuries exposed them more fully to southern civilization, often with devastating results (Hall, 1987).
Hunters from the south who took thousands of whales and seals did not generally compete with the indigenous folk or reduce the food available to them.
Their most damaging impacts were the introduction of diseases and alcohol addiction, which incapacitated and occasionally destroyed whole communities (ibid .).
Fur trading had a more insidious ecological impact, for what the indigenous people had taken on a small scale for subsistence was now demanded on a large scale for sale in the south.
The acquisition of steel knives, guns and patent traps made hunting and everyday life easier for the Inuit, but the price paid in furs for these trade goods represented over-exploitation of a meagre community resource.
From intensive trading arose changes in the life style, values and population structure of local communities, massive over-use of resources, and the need for new economic inputs  to maintain northern communities at even a minimal standard of living.
By the late 19th century many northern populations were decimated; the survivors lived half-starved in squalor and disease, unable to continue their traditional lifestyles but without viable alternatives.
Their plight was gradually recognized during the early 20th century; from the mid-century onward it has been the role of administrators, teachers, health workers, economists and lawyers to unravel some of their problems and provide alternative means of living.
Many of those responsible saw their task as one of assimilation — to bring northern folk into southern-based cultures and modern ways.
More recently, northern folk have seized a greater share in responsibility for their own affairs; they seek to take advantage of southern benefits, while at the same time maintaining their northern identity.
The most humane and ecologically sound management policies, made possible by constant inputs of money from the south, combine elements of Inuit culture with the elements of southern life that are most useful to them.
Thus a modern Inuit village family may live in a small settlement of insulated timber housing, spend part of their time working for wages in government or private company employ, hunt caribou or seals for meat, and tend traplines for extra money to buy consumer goods from the store or mail-order catalogue.
They are today more likely to wear store clothing than skins, and to travel by skidoo (motor sledge) than dog team.
Village schooling and primary health care will be available locally, with more advanced education and medical services in the main centres.
The basic ecological problem of limited resources remains.
The biological resources that just supported small nomadic populations at a neolithic level of culture cannot be expected to support larger populations at southern standards of living.
Agricultural development is restricted to the subpolar fringe and generally unpromising.
Though crops can be raised for local consumption in favoured areas of Alaska and Siberia, efficient horticulture is possible only under glass and with considerable inputs of energy; it is generally cheaper and more reliable to bring in produce by road or air from the south.
Only a few marine biological resources are capable of massive exploitation, but these generally require more capital to develop than can be generated locally.
The fisheries developed off Greenland and Iceland, started by colonial investment and now protected from foreign exploitation, are helping to raise standards of living ashore.
Non-biological sources of income, including revenues from defence installations, scientific surveys and mineral exploitation, are also helping to keep northern communities viable.
However, the high costs of bringing building materials, fuels and plant to the Arctic, and the difficulties and  expense of exporting ores and other minerals to where they can be used, discourage development of all but the most urgently needed mineral resources; at present oil is the major export from Arctic North America.
Tourism is a slowly-growing source of revenue, helped by the development of air transport networks and the dedication of parks and wilderness areas.
Thus northern communities that live above subsistence level generally have to be subsidized, and can expect to survive only while subsidies last; their continuance depends on political decisions, which vary from one part of the north to another (Armstrong and others, 1978).
Under Soviet rule, Asian indigenous communities have largely been assimilated into southern ways.
In North America and Europe, divided politically under United States, Canadian and Greenlandic rule, the Inuit are both reaping the benefits and suffering the inconveniences of a rapid culture-shift from traditional to modern ways.
They retain a common language and are developing a political awareness that may ultimately unite them into a distinct western Arctic nation.
7.4 Man in the Antarctic
Antarctica has no indigenous population.
The Southern Ocean was virtually unknown to man before the 16th century, apart from possible visits to the ice edge by wandering Polynesian mariners.
The southern islands became known mostly during the 17th to 19th centuries; Antarctica itself remained unvisited until the late 18th century, and unrecognized as a continent before the start of the 20th century.
Biology played an important role in southern exploration, for many of the early explorers were sealers and whalers.
The current population is mostly made up of scientists and support staff working on contract for one or two years.
Though several nations claim parts of Antarctica, virtually no-one regards the continent as home.
7.4.1 Discovery and exploitation
Though geographers of classical times had predicted the existence of a southern polar continent, exploratory voyages of the 16th and 17th centuries ventured no further than the temperate zone of the southern hemisphere (Mill, 1905).
The ice-covered ocean surrounding Antarctica was first penetrated by Captain James Cook, RN, in his exploratory voyages of 1773 and 1774 (Cook, 1961).
Of more immediate significance to contemporaries were his observations of fur seals on southern islands, especially South Georgia.
From the late 18th century onward these brought sealers from  North America and Europe into the Southern Ocean; during the subsequent decades of competitive exploitation it was sealers who discovered most of the cold temperate islands, the ice-covered islands within the pack ice belt, the tip of Antarctic Peninsula, and the great ice-filled bight of the Weddell Sea.
Major Russian, French, British and US expeditions of the 1840s made further discoveries in the far south, effectively defining the shores of the predicted continent almost to their present positions (Reader's Digest , 1985).
Reports of an abundance of whales in the Southern Ocean brought European whalers south during the late 19th century, when scientific exploration of the continent also began (Hayes, 1932).
Geological exploration both coastal and inland yielded reports of coal measures and mineral ores, though in small amounts and generally difficult of access.
Unsuccessful at first, southern whaling began to flourish from the first decade of the 20th century, based initially at shore stations on South Georgia, later on pelagic fleets of factory ships and catchers.
These pursued the large whales, mostly rorquals and sperm whales, penetrating southward into the pack ice and almost to the shores of the continent.
In a strongly competitive industry, high levels of skill and technology brought success for over half a century.
The industry continued on a large but declining scale until the 1960s, by which time most of the big rorquals had been hunted beyond economic levels.
Today there is very little hunting in Antarctic waters, and stocks of the larger whales remain sadly depleted.
From the 1920s onward, efforts were made to rationalize and control southern whaling, notably through the International Whaling Commission; protective measures included prohibitions on the killing of the most heavily depleted species, protecting immature whales and females with calves, and the introduction of seasonal quotas.
These measures were more for the maintenance of the industry than to save whales.
However, not enough was known of the biology of stocks to make control measures credible or effective, and whalers in international competition for declining stocks had no alternative but to press for the largest allowable quota, and hunt at maximum efficiency to attain the largest share.
For a review of the decline of southern whaling, see Bonner (1980).
More recently, pelagic fleets of several nations have fished the Southern Ocean effectively for pelagic and demersal fish, squid and krill; for overviews of their catches and potential see Grantham (1977), Eddie (1977), Everson (1977) and Knox (1983).
Agriculture in the south has been restricted to stock-raising, mostly for the local consumption of whaling communities, on some of the peripheral  and cool temperate islands.
On both South Georgia and Iles Kerguelen, free-ranging reindeer have proved especially successful.
Populations of smaller mammals, including rabbits and rodents, have also been established in these latitudes, generally to the detriment of the habitat (Bonner, 1984); none has yet survived on mainland Antarctica or on islands within the pack ice belt.
Mineral and other non-biological resources are present but have not so far been exploited; for surveys of mineral potentials, see Holdgate and Tinker (1979) and Gjelsvik (1983).
7.5 Polar conservation
Taking ‘conservation’ to mean the wise use of resources, this section explores current strategies for the conservation of polar resources at either end of the world.
Though barely habitable by man, the polar regions have for generations yielded goods that are valued by man.
The Arctic's small indigenous populations live at subsistence level, or are subsidized, like its non-indigenes, toward higher standards of living; Antarctica has no indigenous humans, only floating populations kept there at considerable cost for scientific or political ends.
Except for marine products, the few goods that polar regions yield are seldom valued highly enough to offset the high costs and risks of exploiting them.
Much of the northern produce has come from the subpolar maritime fringe, notably whalebone and whale oil from the open sea, seal oil, hides and furs from islands and sea ice, fish, and, most recently, shrimps from the continental shelf and slopes.
Boreal subpolar forests have yielded furs, and northern lands and continental shelves are currently being explored or exploited for minerals, including coal, metallic ores, oil and gas.
Products and yields vary according to fashion and demand; whaling, sealing, fur trading and mineral ore exploitation have declined in recent years, but commercial fishing and fossil fuel exploitation are well established and likely to continue.
Southern polar products are entirely maritime; the Southern Ocean, especially on its subpolar fringe, has yielded whale and seal products, and is currently being exploited for fish, squid and krill.
No minerals have yet been exploited in Antarctica or the subantarctic islands, though coal and metallic ores are known to exist in exploitable amounts, and there are strong expectations — as yet no more — that oil and gas may occur in exploitable deposits offshore.
The term ‘resource’ covers all assets available to man, and some further resources of polar regions are coming to be valued increasingly in a crowded world.
Both regions include splendid scenery and wildlife, for which a possible wise use is well-managed tourism.
Both include wilderness, an altogether more delicate asset that is to some degree marred by almost any human incursion.
There is no wise use for wilderness, except to preserve it by excluding man altogether.
A working compromise is to allow strictly regulated rights of passage, that permit monitoring but exclude all possibility of exploitation in any other way.
7.5.1 Overexploitation
From the 16th to the 19th century, in some places even into the present century, exploitation of polar resources has been largely unmanaged, and limited only by market satiation.
Whaling on the high seas, like right of passage, was traditionally free for all; so were commercial sealing and fishing.
As new lands were discovered, rights to exploit inshore fish, seals and other assets were sometimes claimed along with the territory, but neither policing nor management were usually practicable.
Uncontrolled competition, hungry markets and high profits during the 18th and 19th centuries virtually destroyed northern polar and subpolar stocks of whales, fur seals, elephant seals, sea lions and sea cows.
During the 19th century Southern Ocean stocks of fur seals and elephant seals were similarly reduced almost to extinction.
Simultaneously many southern islands were devastated by the introduction of pigs, goats, sheep, cattle, rats, mice, cats and other alien species, to the lasting detriment of their vegetation and bird stocks.
During the 20th century, stocks of southern whales, especially humpback whales and the larger rorquals, were hunted excessively despite the attentions of the well-founded International Whaling Commission.
During the same period stocks of commercial fish in the subpolar north Atlantic and Pacific oceans were exploited far beyond levels of sustained yield.
By contrast, for over 60 years the International Fur Seal Commission provided exemplary management for exploited Pribilov Islands fur seals.
For 20 years a small oil industry based on South Georgia elephant seals, which ended when commercial whaling from the island ceased in 1963, was also well managed on sound biological principles.
There is now widespread interest in protecting remnant stocks of polar and subpolar animals, in allowing at least some of the devastated islands to recover, and in preserving what remains of wilderness areas at either end of the world.
7.5.2 Arctic ownership and management
The rights of owner-nations to manage and exploit resources on land and in nearshore waters are clearly defined.
Where ownership is agreed, responsibility for resource management can be supported by law, and management is generally possible.
Where ownership cannot be established, there is neither responsibility nor law; resource management is likely to fail until some equally sound basis for law can be established.
Ownership of arctic lands is nowhere in dispute; every hectare of mainland or island north of 60°N is allocated to one of six nations — Canada, the USA, the USSR, Finland, Denmark, Iceland or Norway.
Where doubt over sovereignty has previously been raised, border commissions have secured agreement; even the once-vexed question of Spitsbergen yielded in 1924 to an international treaty that interested parties accepted in preference to continuing dispute.
Each sovereign state has enacted legislation establishing national parks, scientific or scenic reserves and wilderness areas.
Usually this has required little more than the extension of existing legislation to cover the special case of Arctic reserves.
Wardens are few, but so are visitors to many of the remoter areas.
Rules of procedure have been established for minerals exploration, mining and the processing and transport of minerals, and other conservation measures that to one degree or another rationalize exploitation and protect the environment from unnecessary damage.
International legislation covers trans-frontier movements of reindeer, caribou and other migratory species.
Where conflicts of interest arise (should minerals exploration be permitted in a caribou reserve? see Sheldon, 1988) there are precedents and procedures for resolving them.
Rights to exploit northern marine resources are only slightly less clear.
Under the 1982 Convention on the Law of the Sea, 12-mile territorial limits and up-to-200-mile Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZs) have replaced three-mile limits throughout the world, and are as valid in the far north as elsewhere.
Subarctic fishing grounds that were once free for all are now controlled by the country in whose EEZ they lie.
The ‘cod wars’ that embroiled Iceland and the UK in the 1970s have been settled by generally accepted legislation.
Though areas of uncertainty and dispute remain, for example in the Barents Sea, settlement is expected within the terms of the 1982 Convention, or at least within the spirit of international cooperation that underlies it (Theutenberg 1984).
The Convention, which is specifically concerned with resource management, endorses scientific research, and encourages international cooperation of the kind that, during the 1970s and early 1980s, investigated the  circumpolar status and welfare of polar bears.
It covers fisheries, marine mammals and other resources within EEZs, providing for stocks that are shared by neighbouring states.
It provides also for management of resources outside the EEZs, both high-seas fish stocks and the resources of the sea bed; the latter it declares to be ‘the common heritage of mankind’ and places it under the control of an International Sea-bed Authority.
7.5.3 Management in Antarctica
Rights over resources in the far south are less clear.
Where ownership is undisputed, for example on many of the Southern Ocean islands, rights are clearly assignable and internationally accepted.
The French control Iles Kerguelen, Crozet, Amsterdam and St Paul, and lease specified fishing rights to Soviet and other fishermen in circumscribed zones surrounding them.
Similarly South Africa controls the Prince Edward Islands, Australia controls Heard and Macquarie islands, New Zealand controls Campbell Island and the Auckland, Bounties, Antipodes and Snares groups.
The UK, despite opposition from Argentina, is in de facto control of the Falkland Islands, South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, and has established an effective fisheries management programme for Falkland Islands waters.
Each controlling nation enacts conservation legislation for its islands, proscribing hunting, settlement, burning, introduction of alien species and other forms of  despoliation .
Many islands have the status of reserves, with flora, fauna and other natural amenities rigorously protected, at least on paper, through laws enacted by the owning countries.
Sovereignty over continental Antarctica is less clear because ownership is in question.
Seven nations (Australia, France, New Zealand, Norway, the UK, Argentina, Chile) claim sectors of the continent; the claims of the last three overlap substantially, and only the first five recognize each others' claims reciprocally.
The USA and USSR deny existing sovereignty claims, make no claims of their own, but reserve the right to make claims in the future.
Several other nations (Brazil, China, Federal German Republic, German Democratic Republic, India, Japan, Poland and South Africa) have declared interests in Antarctica and established scientific stations there, but lay no claims to territory themselves, and avoid adopting positions on the claims of others.
Laws enacted by claimant nations within the territories claimed, including those concerned with conservation and resource management, could not be regarded as binding by other nations that for any reason rejected the claims.
This mattered little while Antarctica remained virtually   empty, as it did up to the end of World War II, but became important in post-war years when scientists and technicians of many nations began to work there.
Possible difficulties and conflicts were avoided by the creation, initially under US initiative, of the Antarctic Treaty of 1961, which avoided questions of ownership and provided an alternative basis for conservation legislation.
The Treaty arose from international cooperation during the International Geophysical Year (IGY).
The twelve nations most concerned in Antarctic research during the IGY (1957–58) negotiated the original treaty, ratified in 1961, which was and still is open to all nations to join.
Since 1961 twenty other nations have signed the Treaty, of which six have been   acquired the special consultative status accorded to nations that are active in research.
Under Article IV, signatories agree that for the duration of the Treaty (initially 30 years) sovereignty claims will not be pursued or strengthened, i.e. are effectively shelved.
New legislation covering the area is agreed among and ratified by the Treaty powers.
The Treaty was not specifically concerned with conservation, but from recommendations discussed at its biannual Consultative Meetings have arisen three conventions that implement conservation, the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Flora and Fauna, the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals, and the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources.
The first two relate to the Treaty area, circumscribed by 60S; the third applies within the much wider ambit of the Antarctic Convergence.
By defining sites of special scientific (mostly ecological and geological) interest, and setting upper limits to catches of seals, fish and krill, between them these measures ensure that the Antarctic area will not be despoiled casually, and that its biological resources will not again be exploited without some reference to their capacity for sustained  yield.
For ecological, legal and political issues arising from the Treaty see Orrego Vicuna (1983), Triggs (1987) and Parsons (1987).
7.6 Summary
Man is a primarily a tropical animal, only recently arrived in polar regions.
Aspects of human homeothermy are discussed; for their survival, human populations clearly depend more on skills of dressing, housing and hunting than on physiological adaptation.
The ecology of indigenous northern human populations (Inuit, Saami) is outlined.
Arctic biological resources have been sufficient to support small, scattered, nomadic populations which lived mainly along the coast or rivers.
Southern influences from the 17th century onward, including those of fur traders, whalers, sealers and commercial fisheries, have tended generally to over-exploit natural resources and place indigenous populations at risk.
Similarly, stocks of seals and whales in high southern latitudes suffered over-exploitation during the 19th and 20th centuries.
Resource management and conservation strategies are currently being attempted for both polar regions.
Those for the north, and for many southern cold temperate islands, are based on national legislation drawn up by owning countries.
Those for Antarctica are based on the international Antarctic Treaty, which seeks generally-acceptable legislation to cover present and future conservation for the Antarctic area.