

Chapter Nineteen
Floy and Fenella and Snodgrass had passed an almost totally sleepless night.
Floy had spent several hours in deep discussion with Snodgrass and, between them, they had made an attempt to sketch out the layout of Tara, so that they could see if there were any weak areas they might make use of.
‘But I think it is a pointless exercise,’ said Floy, somewhere towards morning, a thin, cold light filtering in through the windows to where he sat at a great desk, his black hair tumbled, hollows in his cheeks, his face white with fatigue.
‘For one thing we've hardly seen Tara and, for another, we don't know what kind of spells and enchantments they might have strewn about.’
Snodgrass, who had studied more sketches and impressions of the lost castles and palaces of Earth than he could remember, said he thought that nothing like Tara had ever existed anywhere in any world.
‘Didn't someone in the Wolfwood say it was partly raised by sorcerers?’ he said.
‘That'll be it, mark my words.
You're almost sure to be right about the spells and enchantments.
Difficult.
It'll be the kind of place you might walk out of as brisk and easy as a knife cutting butter, or you might very well wander about for days, well, weeks even, without finding a proper door.
It's always the same with enchanted castles,’ said Snodgrass, as if , thought Fenella, only vaguely listening, enchantments were the sort of thing you met up with every day.
Fenella had not heard all of the discussion.
She had curled up in the deep old window seat, the velvet coverlet from the bed wrapped about her for warmth, and had drifted in and out of an uneasy sleep.
Of course they would escape and of course they would outwit the Gruagach, thought Fenella, her mind tumbling with images, fighting to stay awake in case she could help Floy and Snodgrass.
Of course they would escape and they would rescue Nuadu.
It was important not to remember how Nuadu had looked in those last moments, defiant and unafraid, his head thrown back as the Robemaker had dragged him forward by the vicious crimson rope-lights.
I won't remember it, thought Fenella, leaning her flushed cheek against the cold window.
I'll remember how he looked at me just before the Robemaker took him and how he called me ‘Lady’.
And I'll remember, as well, those strange fragments of memory I had when we arrived, because they certainly weren't anything from my memory.
But it was probably better not to think about Nuadu at all.
Fenella pulled the velvet folds of the cover about her and tried to sleep and not to think about what would happen and whether they would be let  out of these rooms and what stories she might have to tell the Gruagach about Star People and the Fire Court and the other fictional places they were supposed to have travelled to.
Her mind swam in and out of sleep and the fire burned lower.
And then, quite suddenly, it was full morning and the sun was slanting across the floor of the rooms.
Floy was sleeping where he sat, his head resting on his folded arms, a look of such exhaustion on his face, that Fenella almost wished to be back on Renascia fighting Quilp and the Council and trying to plan to outwit the Dark Lodestar.
But it is morning, thought Fenella, washing her hands and face in the water from the brass ewers, liking the thick, fluffy towels left for them.
It is morning and it is sunny and there is a world to be explored.
And surely, oh surely, we shall be able to go after Nuadu, and surely the giants are friendly and last night was only a bad dream.
And, said Fenella, very firmly indeed, I will not believe that any of us are in danger.
They were taken to breakfast by Caspar, who unlocked the doors, and regarded them rather shamefacedly.
‘Good morning,’ said Floy, as if nothing had happened and Caspar, who looked uneasily over his shoulder, then said, in an urgent whisper, ‘I didn't like locking you in, you know, but I didn't have any choice.’
‘I don't think we expected anything else,’ said Floy, with complete courtesy and Caspar hunched his shoulders crossly and said, ‘There might be a plan.
Could you be ready and keep your wits about you, do you think?’
‘Of course.’
Floy did not say: even though we do not really trust you, but Fenella and Snodgrass both felt him think it.
Fenella thought that it was a pity that Caspar was so scared of the giants, because he knew so much about Tara that he might have been of considerable help.
He certainly knew the whereabouts of the Robemaker's workshops.
But he had locked them in last night and he had done so on orders from the Gruagach so they did not dare rely on him.
They would do much better to rely just on their three selves.
‘I'm quite hungry for some breakfast,’ said Snodgrass, as they followed Caspar along the galleries and down the staircases and through huge, high-ceilinged chambers.
‘It's always very plentiful,’ said Caspar seriously.
‘And His Majesty has particularly requested your presence.’
‘How very good of him,’ said Floy, blandly.
Caspar shot him a suspicious look.
‘I suppose you don't trust me after I locked you in,’ he said.
‘Quite right.
We don't.’
‘I suppose I can't blame you,’ said Caspar, morosely.
‘I wouldn't trust me, either.
But you'll see.
I shall come up with something.
I'm supposed to be guarding you, but I shan't.
Only we'll have to make it look as if I am.
In here.
If you could try to look as if you're being guarded, it would go a long way.
But don't worry too much about it, because they won't notice very much.
They're not morning people, the Gruagach.’
Breakfast was served in a long, low-ceilinged room, with a deep  fireplace, on which were roasting several animals which Snodgrass said, in an awed whisper to Fenella, were oxen.
There were barrelsful of butter and platters of fruit and great sides of bacon and ham and sizzling sausages.
The giants washed their breakfasts down with immense tankards of mead and ale and grunted and were inclined to be morose, which seemed to bear out Caspar's remarks about them not being morning people.
The Gnomes of Gallan sat together at the far end of the table.
They were presented to Floy and Fenella and Snodgrass by Caspar and they had all swept bows (Bith's hat had fallen off) and been charmed to meet travellers like this.
But then, wasn't Tara the place for travellers, they said.
Hadn't it always been known as the centre of the Western World?
They were rather pleased with themselves for saying this, because it was something the Gruagach would find quite flattering and, also, it had not referred to the Wolfkings, which would have been extremely discourteous, not to say disastrous.
They sat together, in the small-sized chairs brought up by Balor, and ate their breakfasts and told one another wasn't this the finest meal ever and would they all look at the roasting oxen, because it was a long time, well it was years, really, since any of them had seen such a sight.
Bith took off his hat, which was a polite thing to be doing, and Culdub Oakapple tucked his yellow neckerchief into his collar by way of table napkin.
Fenella, who rather liked the look of the Gnomes, thought they were a bit like careful children, diligently remembering their manners, sprinkling their conversation with ‘please’ and ‘thank you’, and with things like, ‘I'll trouble you for the jam pot, your honour’, or ‘after you with the tomato chutney, your worship’.
They polished off most of the sausages, which they seemed greatly to enjoy, and Bith of the Bog-Hat and Flaherty shared a firkin of the giants' ale, which Balor had brought up from the cellars.
But after they had finished eating (which seemed to the travellers to take for ever), Goibniu sent the other giants out of the room, because he had important business to discuss.
‘You'll be told in good time,’ he said and would not listen when Goll the Gorm said, crossly, as they trooped out, that it was always the same; they were not told what was going on and it was a disgrace and a scandal and there'd be a revolution at Tara before much longer, if there wouldn't be an outright war.
‘Now,’ said Goibniu, resting his elbows on the table rather vulgarly and eyeing Fenella greedily, ‘now, my guests, we have a little proposition to put to you.’
Floy, who had been cutting himself a slice of ham, looked up, because there was a lick of anticipatory pleasure in Goibniu's tone.
He exchanged a look with Fenella and saw that she was watching Goibniu quite politely, but that there was a wariness in her eyes.
But Goibniu was smooth and courteous; he was very nearly urbane.
He paid a brief homage to the Gnomes, who had journeyed all the way from the Gallan Mountains to bring their ideas for the new Queen's Crown Jewels and did not refer to the fact that they were four days late on account of getting lost on the way.
He said they would all be wanting  to study the designs the minute Balor had cleared away breakfast and Bith at once reached for the knapsacks, and said he hoped Flaherty had not spilled jam on the drawing of the four-pronged diadem and Flaherty, injured, said indeed he had not and it the best damson jam he had ever tasted.
‘And if there's a bite more, I won't refuse, your prominence.’
Goibniu remembered that Gnomes were reportedly extremely greedy, but said they would take a look at the designs now, if the Gnomes were quite ready, thus galvanising the Gnomes into anxious industry, resulting in much unpacking of knapsacks and unrolling of parchments and remarks such as, ‘Who's got the plan of the turquoise bracelet?’ and ‘Why did we bring along four sketches for the everyday silver tiara?’and ‘Flaherty's sitting on the Coronation sceptre!’
But, at length, the drawings and sketches were laid out and the plans for Flaherty's new steam-powered melting pot which had unaccountably been packed by mistake put away again.
Weights were placed at all the corners of the sketches to stop them springing back into tight rolls.
‘And there it is, your throneships,’ said Bith, beaming, because when all was said and done, hadn't they produced the finest old sketches ever heard of and wasn't there good reason for them to feel proud?
Goibniu was pleased with the designs.
The Gnomes had gone to considerable trouble; Culdub and Bith had sat up long hours and consulted books and chronicles and there had been much burning of late candles and worried scurryings to and fro between the Gnomes' houses in the little mountain village.
Flaherty and MacKnobb had produced thin gold and silver and emerald paint with which they had coloured the fine charcoal designs and the end result was really rather good.
The Gnomes sat together at the end of the breakfast table and waited anxiously for the verdict.
They thought that Goibniu was looking happy (although it was always difficult to tell with giants) and thought, wasn't it a fine old thing to see how well the designs were being received and wasn't it great, altogether, to see how well received the Oakapple's sketches were, because hadn't he been the guiding light behind most of the work?
Goibniu studied the parchments for some time, seeing that there was an elaborate circlet of gold for Flame if she became Inchbad's Queen, studded with firestones which would be mined from Fael-Inis's Fire Mountains.
There was a corresponding Crown for Inchbad, of course, and the Gnomes had cleverly managed to make these subtly similar.
There were ornate neck circles with chippings of moonstones and slender, silver anklets engraved with the tree symbols of fertility and great chunks of raw gold somehow veined with amber which would be used as Coronation accessories.
And there were silver amulets studded with turquoise, bearing the insignia of the Gruagach and also the insignia of Flame's ancestry.
This had been quite difficult and the Gnomes had scratched their heads a good deal, because, although people did not openly refer to it, everyone knew that Flame's father was Fael-Inis and it had meant a lot of worrisome discussions as to whether this fact ought to be openly acknowledged, or whether it might be discourteous to draw attention to it.
Goibniu thought it all looked very nice.
He did not refer to anything so vulgar as payment, of course, because the Gnomes would not expect it.
But he said they would present the designs to Reflection, these very sketches, and there would be a great deal of acclaim given to the Gnomes as a result.
Culdub Oakapple opened his mouth to say that acclaim was all very well in its way, but they had been hoping for something a bit more financial than that, but the two Gnomes on each side of him trod on his foot to stop him, because you could not always trust the Oakapple to be tactful.
They could not be offending the Gruagach, and they especially could not be offending Goibniu the Greediguzzler.
Bith remembered a nearly forgotten, seldom-told belief that, although Gnome was an acquired taste amongst giants, they would occasionally serve it at very special occasions.
If Inchbad married Flame, it would be a very special occasion indeed; it might be just the occasion when they would want a dish or two of roast Gnome and, more to the point, it would get the Gruagach out of paying for the new Crown Jewels.
Fenella and Floy and Snodgrass had sat quietly at the other side of the table, not eating very much, listening carefully to everything that was said.
Floy had been interested in the Gnomes' sketches; like Fenella, he found the Gnomes rather attractive, friendly people and he thought their designs were clever and subtle and beautifully drawn.
Snodgrass embarked on a story about a very famous jewel called the Koh-i-noor, which he thought had once adorned a great King's State Crown and explained how it had been so rare and so heavy that it had had to be kept locked away behind bars and guards, so that nobody could steal it.
The Gnomes were very interested in this; as Flaherty said, you could not know too much about these things, although it was a pig's pity that such a jewel couldn't be worn by the King of the day when he went about his reigning, because wasn't that the purpose of crowns and jewels anyway?
‘But,’ said Flaherty, ‘it's all for your exaltednesses to say.’
‘We thought,’ put in Bith, who was feeling a bit bolder now that Goibniu had approved their ideas, ‘we thought that the lady — that is Reflection's daughter — might like to see the designs before we put them to the forge, your honour.’
He looked wise and solemn when he said this, because he knew that ladies — even sorceress's daughters — had their own ideas about what they ought to wear and it was not to be supposed that Flame would be any different.
‘Colours,’ said Bith rather vaguely.
‘It'd be nice for her to be given the chance to make a suggestion or two.’
Flaherty asked who was to take the sketches to the Fire Court and the Gnomes at once looked alarmed, because hadn't they already travelled all the way from Gallan and it a terrible long journey, never mind getting lost twice, as well as the Robemaker's Workshops and the Cruachan Cavern being on the route.
‘But of course,’ said Bith firmly, ‘if your honourships were wanting it, then we'd go and be pleased to.’
And the Gnomes looked at Goibniu worriedly and waited.
Goibniu was still studying the drawings and thinking that Reflection, greedy creature, would surely not be able to resist them and that it mightn't be a bad idea to revive the ancient traditional dish of roast Gnome for the wedding feast, which would save them having to pay the Gnomes anything.
But he smiled rather overpoweringly at the Gnomes, and said that: no, they would not dream of asking them to make such a journey, so hard on the heels of their march in from Gallan.
‘We are hoping that our two new friends will assist us by acting as emissaries to the Court,’ said Goibniu and, turning his head, smiled at Floy.
‘It wasn't,’ said Floy, in the privacy of their bed-chamber, ‘a request.’
‘An order,’ said Fenella, nodding.
‘Carry out this task, while we keep your lady hostage,’ said Snodgrass.
‘They've locked us in again, you know.’
‘I do know,’ said Floy, his eyes glinting angrily.
‘It was politely done —’
‘That one they call Goll the Gorm,’ nodded Snodgrass.
‘I don't call him polite; in a pig's ear I don't.’
He frowned and said, ‘You know, dear boy, I think we may have to do what they want.’
‘Go to this place — what do they call it? the Fire Court — and take the proposals for the marriage of Inchbad,’ said Floy.
‘Yes.
But that,’ said Snodgrass, worried, ‘would mean leaving Fenella here.’
‘We can't do that,’ said Floy, staring at his sister.
She was listening intently and her eyes were thoughtful, as if she might be toying with some idea of her own.
It was unthinkable that they should leave Fenella here at the mercy of the giants.
‘We'll have to find a way of taking Fenella with us,’ he said.
Fenella, leaning forward eagerly, said, ‘But listen, the journey to the Fire Court takes you past the Robemaker's Workshops.
We heard them all say so.
It's the very thing we've been waiting to hear.’
‘Yes,’ said Floy.
‘But it's too high a price.’
‘It sounds rather fearsome,’ said Fenella, slowly, ‘to be left here with the giants.
But I truly think we can't miss the chance of getting there.’
‘Not if it means us going off without you,’ said Snodgrass.
‘We can't possibly do that.’
‘I don't think we're going to be given any choice in the matter,’ said Floy, rather grimly.
‘Goibniu said they'd send the gatekeeper — what's his name?
Balor — along with us.’
He looked at them.
‘That wasn't simply to show us the way,’ he said.
‘They could give us maps and we could find the way perfectly easily.
It was to make sure we didn't run away.
Balor's coming as a guard.’
‘To bring us back,’ nodded Snodgrass.
‘But of course we d come back for Fenella,’ said Floy.
‘Don't they think we would?’
‘They can't know.
It's this question of different beliefs and different loyalties,’ said Snodgrass.
‘If it wasn't all so dangerous, I'd almost be finding it interesting, you know.’
‘Goibniu suggested that I could mark the evenings by telling them tales of our travels,’ Fenella said, remembering.
‘One tale each night.
I don't know how long I can keep that up,’ said Fenella.
‘But I think I could keep it going for quite a while.
I could tell them about Renascia to begin with.’
She glanced at the other two.
‘Doesn't it seem an awfully long way away, now?’
‘Worlds and aeons,’ said Floy, softly.
‘Shall we miss it when we have time?’ said Fenella, a bit wistfully.
‘I do think I'd like to miss it.
It seems so — so callous not to be thinking about it and wondering what happened to it.’
‘We'll mourn for it when we have time,’ said Floy, touching her hand, and Fenella looked at him gratefully, because that was exactly what she had been feeling.
Of course they would mourn for Renascia and remember all of the good things about it, only just now they had other things to concentrate on.
‘I'll spin the Gruagach some tales,’ she said now, frowning.
‘Renascia and as much as I can remember of Earth legends and perhaps something about the Dark Lodestar as well.’
‘Scheherezade,’ nodded Snodgrass.
‘The lady — well, she wasn't a lady at all, really, but she saved her life by telling exotic tales to her captors.
She spun it out for years.’
‘There you are, then,’ said Fenella.
‘It's been done before and it can be done again.’
‘But look here,’ said Floy, ‘you won't have to do it, because we'll find a way of taking you with us.’
‘as if we'd leave you here on your own,’ said Snodgrass, clicking his tongue at the very idea.
‘I think you'll have to,’ said Fenella, who found the idea completely appalling, but who was trying to be practical and sensible and make it sound safe for them to go so that they could get Nuadu.
‘Also —’ She stopped and looked up, and Snodgrass said, ‘Someone's coming.’
‘The Gruagach?’
‘I don't think so.’
It was not the Gruagach, but Caspar, who had come quietly along to their rooms when the giants were taking their midday snooze.
‘They always do,’ he explained, unlocking the door and coming in cautiously.
‘It's the one time when Tara becomes almost quiet.
Could I sit down?
I've thought of a plan.’
The three travellers looked at one another and then Floy said, ‘Sit down.’
‘It isn't brilliant,’ said Caspar, ‘I'd have to say it isn't brilliant or clever or even very subtle.
But it might work.’
He looked at them, his head on one side, and Floy said, ‘Do go on.’
Caspar said impatiently, ‘Oh, for goodness ’ sake, Floy!
Do I look like the sort of person who consorts with giants!’
He leaned forward.
‘I don't know where you're from,’ he said, ‘and I don't want to know.
I've got enough to worry about without wondering if you're from the Ancient Past or the Distant Future, or somewhere quite different altogether.
It's your business,’ said Caspar firmly.
‘But I do know that the Gruagach have only one use for Humans and if you stay here long  enough you'll find out what that is.
Into the dungeons and then onto the Fidchell board,’ said Caspar, tucking his chins into his neck and looking solemn.
‘And it's a nasty end, that one.’
‘Quite,’ said Floy.
‘Well, I've had enough of it,’ said Caspar, looking plumply mutinous.
‘I've had enough of hunting down Humans for them to play their grisly games with!
It's — it's little short of traitorous,’ he said.
‘And I'm not going to do it any more.
I'm going to do what you said; walk out of tara and hide.’
‘Well?’ said Floy, sending a warning glance to the other two.
‘You'll have to go to the Fire Court with Balor,’ said Caspar, earnestly.
‘You do know that, don't you?
If you don't they'll certainly have you all for supper.’
‘What about Fenella?’
‘Fenella can follow you in a day's time.’
‘How?’
‘I'll bring her,’ said Caspar, and sat back and regarded them with the plump pleasure of a person who has reached a final decision.
It took longer than he had expected to persuade Floy to agree.
Floy was suspicious and Caspar did not really blame him for that.
‘I don't blame you one little bit,’ he said, earnestly trying to win them over.
‘But you can't stay here, that's for sure.’
Floy said, slowly, ‘If Snodgrass and I were to agree to it —’ He stopped and Caspar said, ‘Yes?’
‘How long would the journey take?
And what sort of things might we have to encounter on the road?’
As to that, Caspar had no definite information.
He thought it would certainly be a couple of days' journey to the Fire Court — the giants would be sure to know, he said, because they had already sent emissaries with the marriage proposal.
But he thought it could not be more than a couple of days.
‘Fenella and I would set out a day later,’ he said, looking at Fenella and thinking that she was rather a nice sort of companion to be having on a journey.
Probably she would have a good few stories to tell about the world they had come from.
Caspar would quite enjoy hearing about that.
Floy said, very carefully, ‘Could you show us the route?’ and Fenella looked up, as if , thought Caspar, she had heard something in Floy's voice that the rest of them had not heard.
But he thought it a reasonable request to ask for a route and he took himself away to Tara's great map room to procure maps for them.
He did this quite openly, because if anybody asked where he was going, he would say he was finding out the route to the Fire Court for Floy and Snodgrass's journey.
It was nice to be able to tell the complete truth for once.
But the only person he met was Balor, on his daily forage to the wine store during the Gruagach's afternoon snooze, to replenish his secret stock of ale and mead, which had been sadly depleted with all these unexpected visitors to Tara.
Balor did not grudge offering guests a mite of good wine, because it was only polite, but there was no denying it  made inroads on your hoard.
And if he had to set out on this nonsensical journey to the Fire Court with the Humans, it would be as well to just stock up a bit for his return.
They spread the maps on the floor of the larger of the two bed-chambers and Caspar pointed with a podgy finger to the Fire Country where Reflection had set up her Court.
‘It's on the edges of Fael-Inis's country,’ he said, ‘and we all know why.’
‘Why?’
‘Because,’ said Caspar patiently, but wondering where these three had come from, for goodness' sake, ‘because Reflection once had a bit of a — well, more than a bit really…
And they do say that Flame is very like him.’
He eyed the three travellers a bit hesitantly.
Floy said, ‘Do you mean that Reflection and Fael-Inis were once lovers?’ and Caspar, hugely relieved, said, ‘Well, so they say .’
He glanced over his shoulder and Snodgrass, who loved gossip, glanced over his as well, because you never knew who might be listening in an enchanted castle.
‘They do say,’ said Caspar thrillingly, ‘that she pursued him for positively centuries , until he gave in, purely to get her out of his way.
He's elusive, you see,’ explained Caspar earnestly.
‘You never know quite when you've got him.
Well, that's always supposing you can get him in the first place, because the number of people who have actually seen him, you can count on one hand.’
He paused for breath and regarded them expectantly.
But Floy said, in an expressionless tone, ‘Do go on,’ and Caspar looked at Floy doubtfully, because he was not altogether sure of Floy yet and he had the feeling that Floy might very well be thinking and assessing and generally not revealing all his feelings.
And so Caspar, who though the could be as reserved as the next man, merely said, ‘Oh, he's a strange one, Fael-Inis.
A bit of a fly-by-night.’
And returned to charting the journey to the Fire Court.
Fenella, who had never seen a map quite like this one, had curled up on the floor to listen.
The road to the Fire Court looked quite straightforward really; it seemed as if you had to go past a large lake and on down a narrow, windy mountain road with houses dotted on each side.
Floy had asked about dangers and what they might expect to encounter, but Fenella did not think it looked especially dangerous.
‘Well, it isn't dangerous precisely,’ said Caspar.
He hesitated and tapped the map with his finger.
‘Or, at least it isn't so long as we avoid that bit of road.’
‘Why?’
‘Well, they do say,’ said Caspar, and stopped and looked at them again.
‘They do say that it's there that thy Robemaker has his Workshops.
‘And the Robemaker's Workshops,’ said Caspar, shuddering, ‘are the worst place in the world.’
Chapter Twenty
The Purple Hour was descending as the Robemaker thrust Nuadu Airgetlam before him down the final stretch of road that led to the grisly Workshops.
Nuadu, aching in every bone, the lower part of his face constrained within the harsh red mask fashioned from the Robemaker's ropes of light, had not made a sound.
He thought that the Robemaker was waiting for him to do so; perhaps somehow to indicate that he would ask for mercy, but he had done nothing.
He could not speak and he would not make any gesture that would show weakness.
He would, somehow, behave as the true Wolfprinces would have behaved in such a situation.
He would behave as his mother's people would have behaved.
And so he walked quite calmly and very nearly leisuredly before his captor.
And although the Robemaker lashed out at him from time to time with the thin, cruel rope-lights, he managed not to flinch.
He had some idea of what was ahead of him, for he knew the terrible tales about the Robemaker's Workshops.
He knew it was unlikely that he would ever see the true Ireland again because he was being taken to the place that many people believed to be one of the Gateways to the Dark Ireland.
Certainly, now, he would never see inside Tara.
He could think, with a brief twist of the old cynicism, that he had never seen inside Tara anyway and that he could not miss what he had never had.
But he did miss it; he thought he had been born homesick; he certainly thought he had spent most of his life waiting and longing and aching for the Bright Palace where his mother's people had quarrelled and laughed and made love and war, and where the charming ruthless Wolfkings had woven Ireland's history.
But he had never seen Tara; he had been abandoned at birth, he had been flung out by the King, who would have none of his Queen's bastard wolfson at his Court.
Finally, Nuadu had found his way to the strange twilight community of the Wolfwood; the place that gave shelter to the half-breeds: the bastard sons of Royal Houses, the creatures who were not possessed of sufficient Beastblood to be acknowledged at Tara, but yet were not entirely Human.
Creatures welcome in neither world, he had thought, bitterly.
We were all of us outcasts; we were all of us flung out by the Lords of Tara, who were jealous of their lineage and protective of their inheritance.
These half-breed mongrel creatures had acknowledged Nuadu as an aristocrat; a bastard but still a Wolfprince, royal through his mother's noble blood.
They had made him their leader and Nuadu, cynical and bitter against his own kind, had thought that for all he was a base-born  prince, still he had a Court of a kind and subjects of a sort.
When the Gruagach had come storming down from the Northern Wastes and attacked Tara and stolen away the Wolfking's son, Tara's heir, the people of the half-world of the forest had vanished, afraid and timid.
They had wanted no part of the terror and the bloodshed, and they had hidden in the mountains and the caves and the remote Northern Isles.
Perhaps, when the battles were over and Ireland was whole once more, they would return, but perhaps they would simply remain in the hill-farms and the distant mountains, forging their own cultures, making their own legends, weaving their strange secret stories into the fabric of Ireland's history.
But Nuadu had ridden out for the king and for the captured half-brother he had never known.
He had ridden out for his mother's people as well, and finally, he had joined with the people of the Court, ‘For’ l he had thought, ‘it is my people, my half-brother the Gruagach seek to drive out.’
He had thought he had not cared what became of him in the battle and he had thought that, when it was over, he would return to the Wolfwood and that the creatures amongst whom he had lived would return, also.
But the Wolfking had been killed and the prince imprisoned inside the Dark Realm.
The giants had taken Tara for their own and when Tealtaoich and the others had fled to the Forest Court, Nuadu had gone with them, neither quite one of them nor quite not one of them, but feeling a cautious kinship with them and discovering, with cynical amusement, that they were looking to him to lead them back.
‘After all,’ Tealtaoich had said silkily, ‘you may be a bastard, my friend, but you are a High Queen's bastard and you were sired by a Wolf.
You have the blood of the Wolves of Tara and there is no question but that it makes you a Wolfprince.’
The green eyes had been steady.
‘You have a claim on Tara,’ said Tealtaoich.
‘You are the heir presumptive.’
‘If we are honest, you have far more right to Tara than any of us,’ put in Oisin.
‘Even though we shall not necessarily admit it,’ said Feradach and Nuadu had seen that they would serve even a bastard scion of the Wolfline before any other creature.
And for all that, I have fallen into the hands of the Robemaker, he thought angrily.
I am as much a captive as my half-brother.
Nuadu knew that the Robemaker would put him to the treadmills; that he would be forced to work at powering the Silver Looms to weave the Robemaker's enchantments.
He would have said that he was as courageous as most, but he knew that no one ever escaped from the workshops.
People lived and died there; they did not grow old there, because no one could live for very long in the Robemaker's hands.
And once their physical usefulness was at an end, the Robemaker tore out the souls of his slaves and carried them to the Soul Eaters in the Cruachan Cavern, which some believed were the Gates of Hell.
Well, at least, he thought, with a glimmer of the old wry humour, at least I shall witness things the legitimate Wolfprinces did not.
They were nearing the workshops now and Nuadu could see, in a  saucer-shaped dip, the dull red glow rising into the night sky.
‘The furnaces,’ said the Robemaker, in his dreadful, diseased voice.
‘My creatures stoke them and work the treadmills, and so the Silver Looms are never allowed to still.’
‘My creatures…’
And now I am one of them, Nuadu thought.
The crimson rope-lights still held him, so that he was forced to go on down the slope until they stood before the terrible dwelling place of the necromancer.
Nuadu stopped and the Robemaker stopped with him, as if he might be saying: well, Wolfprince?
Savour this last moment out in the world.
Look your fill on my domain for, once inside, you will never come out.
‘Not until you are useless and flayed and bent,’ said the Robemaker softly and Nuadu knew that his thoughts had been heard with ease.
‘Not until the skin is hanging from your back and your thighs in strips and your flesh is withered from the heat and your sight is dimmed from the dry fire of the furnaces.’
The Workshops were a huddle of black, rather low structures; made of some kind of harsh, dark stone.
Here and there were archways in the stone and through the archways, low doors.
The windows were narrow and mean-looking, but from each one glowed the dull red fire from the terrible furnaces.
And everywhere, at every corner, within every stone and door and roof was the immense, thrumming power of the Silver Looms.
It poured out into the still night and Nuadu shivered, because he knew it for the evil magic of the Dark Ireland; the ancient, malevolent enchantment of the necromancers.
Within the Wolfwood he had known and experienced the strong pure magic of his people; the music of the sidh and, later, the beautiful wild bewitchment of the stirring Tree Spirits.
He had inherited, as well, a thin vein of sorcery of his own; a little from his mother, but a great deal from his father the wolf.
He would have said that he had as reasonable an acquaintance with sorcery as anyone in Ireland.
But now, here, in the hands of the most purely evil being ever known to Leland, on the very threshold of the Dark Realm of the Necromancers, Nuadu felt, as if it was a solid wall, the evil strength and the merciless dark magic emanating from the Workshops.
Behind the Workshops was flat, barren wasteland, with stunted trees, and twisted roots.
Nuadu glanced at this and saw that there might once have been verdant greenery, perhaps even a small forest.
But the heat and the darkness and the twisted magic had long since drained the heart from the land; the dark sorcery had sucked out the goodness and turned it into a stunted, abandoned place.
Black Wry rose in him against this creature, this monstrous being who was turning Ireland into black barrenness; above the mask his eyes glinted and he wanted to spring on the Robemaker and tear his throat from his body.
But he could not move and, even if he had been able to, he knew that the Robemaker could fell him in a breath-space by sorcery.
As they moved nearer, Nuadu felt the heat belch out.
The dull red glow was all about them now and the baleful light fell across the  Robemaker's cloaked figure so that, although his face remained hidden, Nuadu caught the glitter of his eyes, red and inverted and, despite the belching heat, he felt ice close about his heart.
I shall never escape from this place.
I shall die here and then this creature will tear out my soul and carry it to the Court of the Soul Eaters.
And then I shall be flung for ever into the River of the Dead…
And then they were inside, and the doors had closed to.
The sound of the door to the Robemaker's Workshops closing, was one of the worst sounds Nuadu had ever heard.
For a moment, he did not move and, at his side, the Robemaker waited, the slanting eyes watching from deep within the hood.
And then, ‘Well, Wolfprince?’ he said in his hissing, bubbling whisper, making Nuadu think of lipless jaws and clotting wounds.
He wondered what hideous deformity might lie beneath the silken cloak and the deep dark hood.
‘Well, Wolfprince?’ said the Robemaker.
‘Where are your supporters now?
Where are the creatures who swore to you their allegiance if you would regain the Bright Palace for them?’
He leaned nearer and Nuadu stood his ground.
‘They are cowering in the Wolfwood, Nuadu Airgetlam.
They are trembling and hiding,’ he said, the slimy lick of pleasure overlaying his voice.
‘They are protecting their miserable skins while Ireland falls further into my grasp.’
He paused and then said, in a soft, menacing tone, ‘And Tara, Nuadu of the Silver Arm?
What of tara?
Who now walks its silver halls and dwells in its marble galleries?’
One hand was flung outwards in a clutching gesture.
In the hands of my creatures, Wolfprince, just as you, now, are in my hands.’
He indicated the seething red-lit Workshops.
‘Here is the True Ireland,’ said the Robemaker.
‘Here is my Ireland, Wolfprince.
Here is the powerhouse of necromancy.’
And stood back and folded his arms as Nuadu looked about him.
The Workshops of the Looms were far larger than he had expected.
They seemed to stretch back for a very long way and Nuadu, narrowing his eyes, trying to find his bearings, thought that they must go back and back into the hillside behind the road and deep within the earth.
The ceiling was low and there was a thick, suffocating feel to the air and a stale, old stench.
Despite the heat, Nuadu felt again the chill about his heart.
On each side of the room where they stood were massive iron furnaces; great, glowing stoves that belched out waves of heat so that the air was heavy and fetid.
Huge pipes of what looked like iron protruded from the furnaces and ran along the sides of the workshops, disappearing into the ceiling in places and, in other places, into the walls.
Steam rose here and there, not in puffy, damp, friendly clouds as if a kettle was boiling, but in hissing, angry spurts, as if some unseen being was venting its spleen.
Before the furnaces were some of the Robemaker's captured slaves; Humans, once-strong sons of Ireland's farmers and woodcutters and blacksmiths and builders and woolmen.
The ordinary, honest, good-humoured people who had lived under the protection of the Wolfkings  and rendered them allegiance.
Will it never cease, thought Nuadu, this endless hungry taking of our people by the Black Ireland?
He stood very still, staring about him, his eyes adjusting to the glowing heat.
He thought that here and there in the slaves he could detect traces of an old lineage.
There was the dark-eyed, slant-featured look of the ancient lost Royal Houses of Ireland in several of them, the glossy hair that might easily have been fur in others.
But he knew it to be a frequently found trait, for most of the Noble Lords of Tara had long since dispersed and the enchanted Beastblood, once guarded so jealously, had nearly died out.
if these young men possessed traces of the Beastblood, it was from so far back that it could not be measured, and it was so slight that it could no longer hold the power to call upon the beasts for aid.
Black fury rose in him against the evil creature who was leeching Ireland of her youth, but Nuadu quenched it, lest the Robemaker turn it to his use.
As his eyes adjusted to the scorching dry heat, he saw that the slaves were all lightly clad; in the main, they wore ragged breeches, with the upper halves of their bodies and their feet bare.
The exposed skin was flushed and glowing; here and there it resembled tanned leather and, in some cases, it looked as if it had split and healed, and split again.
The slaves' hands were blistered and flayed and oozing, covered with angry weals that were burns from direct contact with the white heat of the furnace doors.
They moved slowly, shamblingly, and there was a terrible hopelessness about them.
Several of the furnace doors were open, and threw out merciless, scorching fire.
The creatures who were working had shovel-shaped implements with which to throw in an endless supply of wood and Nuadu, scarcely able to believe this, thought: but they are felling the Trees!
They are murdering the Trees!
And blinked and looked again, for the felling of living Trees, the cutting and slicing and mutilating of Trees which had not died and dried and seasoned naturally, was one of the oldest and most strictly forbidden practices in Ireland.
As he stood there, a massive double door at the far end was kicked open and several more of the Robemaker's creatures came shuffling in, dragging a wheeled cart, with a newly cut-down beech Tree lying on it.
The Robemaker liked a hand in their direction and the creatures at the cart took up massive double-edged axes and began to hack the Tree into small sections.
As the first axe cut into the Tree, a great wailing cry of agony rent the thick stifling heat of the workshop and Nuadu knew at once that the Tree had been taken down while it lived and while the naiad still dwelled within it.
From where he stood, Nuadu saw the slender, copper-haired Beech Naiad emerge from the murdered tree, her arms chopped to ribbons, her body maimed in a dozen places, the red-gold blood of the beech spurting from her.
She hovered for a brief time over the trunk of the tree, tears streaming from her eyes, shuddering as the axes continued to cut into the wood, shaking her head from side to side.
Nuadu could see that her fingers were gone now, and that she was trying to pull herself back into the heartwood, which would have been her dwelling  and the place from which she drew sustenance and vitality, but the Robemaker made another of his sudden curt gestures and the slaves fell to their work again, sweat streaming from their half-clad bodies and Nuadu saw the heartwood splinter and fall apart.
The Beech Naiad let out a last cry of desolation, and fell to the floor.
There was the sudden achingly sweet scent of burning logs on an autumn night and then the drift of thick, crisp, beech leaves in the depths of a forest and the Beech Naiad seemed to melt and shiver and dissolve into nothing.
The furnaces were blazing up more strongly now, and the slaves began flinging the freshly chopped beech-wood into the molten depths.
There was the cold ring of iron, as they levered the great doors shut and the rhythmic clanking of machinery as the steam from the furnaces was forced along the great pipes.
Through the doors at the far end, Nuadu caught the whirring sound of the Looms.
The slaves continued their stoking, shuffling to and from the cart, heaving the beech logs into the next furnace.
The Robemaker moved forward, prodding Nuadu onwards and, as they moved down the centre of the Workshop, the blazing furnaces roaring on each side of them, Nuadu felt his skin already shrivelling from the heat.
How must it be to work here day after day, month after month, knowing there was no end to it?
He glanced at the working slaves, and saw that their skin ran with fluid from fresh blisters and their eyes were bloodshot, the eyebrows and lashes singed to nothing; many of them walked awkwardly, as if they had become deformed.
The Robemaker said, emotionlessly, ‘The soles of their feet are skinless from the heat of the floors.
There are trays of salt for them to walk across when that happens, so that the raw flesh can be hardened.’
From within the deep dark hood, Nuadu caught the sudden glint of white bone and heard the guttural laugh.
‘And, of course, I hear your thoughts, Wolfprince,’ said the Robemaker.
‘You have surely not forgotten the ancient necromantic art of the Stroicim Inchinn ?’
Nuadu did not move, but the icy fear closed about him again.
The Stroicim Inchinn , the ancient forbidden art, sorcery of the strongest and most dangerous kind: the power of one mind over another.
It was an enchantment expressly forbidden by the Ancient Academy of Sorcerers, and Nuadu had thought that even the Lords of the Dark Ireland hesitated over it.
In the realms where it was studied, it was recognised as the ability to tear and claw into the mind of another.
It was the terrible and forbidden dark side of the pure and honourable Sanhailt and, although Nuadu had heard of it, he had thought it extinct.
The Robemaker was watching the slaves.
‘It would not be practical for their feet to be ruined,’ he said.
‘And if they flinch at the sight of the salt, there are persuasions I can use.’
The crimson rope-light snaked out and Nuadu saw the nearest slaves cower and put up their hands to shield their faces.
One, who did not appear to be as badly scorched as the others, stood his ground, and eyed the Robemaker rather challengingly.
Nuadu wanted to cry out to him not to be so defiant, for the Robemaker could certainly not by vanquished in such a way.
‘Dear me, a reckless one,’ said the Robemaker, sounding amused.
‘A small lesson for you, Human slave.
And the Wolfprince shall see it.’
The crimson rope-lights whipped forward effortlessly and the boy who had glared angrily at the Robemaker was forced back against the nearest furnace.
Nuadu could see that his eyes were distended with fright now, but he stared back at his captor, unflinchingly.
‘You,’ said the Robemaker, gesturing impatiently to the nearest slaves.
‘Take up the axes.
Do it !’
He folded his arms and power streamed from his eyes, so that the two slaves were caught in the white glare.
Slowly, blindly, they raised the axes to shoulder height.
Nuadu knew the young man was already lost.
The Robemaker had only to exert his will; he had already clawed his way into the minds of the two slaves with the axes; it would be nothing to him now to whip their minds to his will.
And his will was that the slave, the young man who was scarcely more than a boy, should somehow die for his brief moment of rebellion.
The two slaves moved jerkily, as if they were at the ends of strings.
Puppets, thought Nuadu, unable to look away.
He is using them like puppets.
The boy was backed against the wall between two furnaces, and Nuadu saw his face twist with pain.
He guessed that the wall would be excruciatingly hot and that the boy's skin would be blistering and shrivelling.
The Robemaker said softly, ‘Slice by slice — and slowly ,’ and the slaves moved mechanically forward.
Slice by slice…
The slaves swung the axes low, with one accord, and the boy's feet were cut from his legs, so that he fell suddenly on to bleeding stumps of leg.
The colour drained from his face and he would certainly have fallen, had not two crimson rope-lights shot out and pinioned his arms to the wall, so that he was forced to stand, vertically, half hanging by his hands, half supported by his mutilated legs.
Blood and splinters of bone spattered the floor, and Nuadu saw that the thin rivulet of blood nearest to the furnace actually bubbled from the heat of the floor.
And when the soles of their feet are skinless, there are trays of salt for them to walk across to harden the skin…
Again!’ said the Robemaker, his voice liquid and clotted now, and the two slaves swung again, a little higher this time, so that the hard, straight shin bones were sliced across, and the boy's legs were shortened a little more.
‘Fuel for the furnaces,’ said the Robemaker.
‘You!
Into the fire with the dead meat!’
And at once, two more leapt forward and scooped up the bleeding lumps of flesh and bone and flung them into the open furnaces.
There was a roar of heat and, briefly and nauseatingly, the sudden sharp scent of cooking.
Nuadu felt his stomach twist and clenched his teeth against it.
The boy was screaming and begging for mercy now, his lips bitten through.
‘Again!’ cried the Robemaker and now his voice had ridden to a high excited whine and Nuadu, glancing covertly at him, saw that he was roused to a devilish excitement.
The boy was barely conscious now; his face was the colour of tallow  candles and his body sagged, held only in position by the crimson lights.
The two slaves were hacking at his thighs now, and two more came forward, moving jerkily, so that Nuadu knew that the Robemaker was using the Stroicim Inchinn on them also.
‘The thighs!’ cried the Robemaker, ‘the thighs and the hips!
Take them before I hurl you, also, into the furnaces!’
He stood for a moment, a towering dark figure and watched as the blood — sluggish now — seeped from the boy's mangled body.
‘Human weakling!’ said the Robemaker, contemptuously.
And then, in a different, gloating voice, ‘But his soul I shall take.’
He moved and the slaves cowered back, as if , thought Nuadu, they had witnessed the next part before and feared it even more than the mutilating of the boy.
The two who had used the double-sided axes seemed to become more aware and Nuadu thought that the Robemaker had probably withdrawn the piercing spikes and the pinchers of the Stroicim Inchinn from their minds.
They looked about them a bit hazily and then at the bleeding half-thing that had been the young boy and scuttled into a corner.
The Robemaker stood over the remains of the boy and lifted his arms wide, so that the cloak fluttered and his arms resembled great black wings.
He pronounced a string of words in an unfamiliar tongue and, as he did so, the light changed abruptly and became dark and malevolent, tinged with purple.
Black-edged shadows fell across the glowing floor.
There was a beating of wings overhead and a leathery, rustling sound and the slaves cringed and covered their faces.
Nuadu stood his ground, his eyes raking the shadows.
For I believe I am about to witness a thing few people see and live to tell of , he thought.
Into the magenta light of the spell-ridden Workshop there appeared a monstrous creature, composed of great leathery wings and claw feet and a hideous, horny head, with great dark, gaping eye sockets and a bony, sloping jaw.
The face of the creature was pointed, animal-like, goat-like, and there were cruel curving talons protruding from its front paws and curling toes with gristly joints and sharp nails at the back.
There was a dry, rustling sound, as if old dry bones were being rubbed together and the sound of fleshless lips chuckling.
Nuadu stayed where he was, but his mind was tumbling with horror and revulsion.
There was a dreadful, fetid stench on the air and the creature swooped across the workshops, the wingspan of its great jagged wings immense.
Nuadu knew that the Robemaker must have summoned one of the creatures from the Cruachan Cavern to take his victim's soul and, as he watched, the winged creature fell on the remains of the young boy, and settled on his chest, nibbling and clawing its way into his face.
Sickness rose in Nuadu, but he fought it and forced himself to watch.
The boy's eyes had been drawn out by the Soul Eater and it gave a dry, evil chuckle of triumph.
Its talons whipped out and embedded themselves into the boy's skull, using the emptied eye sockets as a means of entry and Nuadu, narrowing his eyes against the dimness, saw that the talons were in fact hollow tubes, thin transparent bones.
The Soul Eater crouched for a few moments and Nuadu saw that a thin silvery fluid was beginning to course along its hollow talons.
It gave a low moan and Nuadu felt the nausea lift his stomach again, because there had been a very nearly sexual quality in the sound.
The Robemaker was standing very still, his hooded face turned in the direction of the Soul Eater and its victim.
The slaves were huddled together in a corner, their faces turned away, as if afraid that the Soul Eater's attention might suddenly turn to one of them.
For from the power of a Soul Eater from the Cruachan Cavern, there is no escape, ever…
The winged creature had finished with the boy now and Nuadu thought it had taken its fill of the strange silvery liquid.
But it remained still for a moment and there was the shimmer of silver about the boy's head.
For the soul does not easily yield to those who will steal it for the purposes of evil…
And then the Soul Eater spread its wings again, and the pointed skull-like head turned to the Robemaker.
‘Another soul against your debt, Robemaker ,’ said the creature in a dry, whispery voice.
‘The scales will have tipped a little farther over.
But we ask far more of you before your bondage is at an end.
Mere must be more souls for us, Robemaker .’
‘There will be more, Master,’ said the Robemaker.
‘You know the pronouncement ,’ said the creature.
‘You must live with your curse until we have eaten our fill .’
And then, turning its head to look round the workshops, it said, ‘We do not ask of you that you give us your slaves, Robemaker, for it is vital that the Looms are kept weaving.
It is vital that you continue to suck from Ireland her head and her being and her puny strengths .’
‘I continue to do so, Master,’ said the Robemaker and, although there was not the smallest trace of subservience in his voice, Nuadu, listening intently, received the impression that the Robemaker was choosing his words with care, as if he was in some and of thrall to this being.
The Soul Eater said, ‘We shall meet again, Robemaker.
In the Cavern of Cruachan, at the Court of my people .’
It spread its wings again, and the heavy dark beating of them filled the air.
‘Mere are many centuries before the debt is paid and the curse we placed on you lifted.
Mere are many more nights when you will attend the Court of the Soul Eaters and render us homage .’
There was a deepening of the shadows and a swirling of something heavy and turgid and foul, and then the creature was gone and the Workshops were once again lit to crimson and the slaves turned back to their tasks.
Chapter Twenty-one
Snizort thought he was getting on rather well.
He had spent most of the day talking to the people of the exiled Court and had made copious notes.
He had rather enjoyed it and it had helped him to keep his mind off what might be happening to Snodgrass and to Floy and Fenella.
He had asked a great many questions of the exiled Court and he hoped, he said earnestly to Oisin, that they would not think him inquisitive.
It was only that none of this was quite what he had been used to.
Oisin said, very courteously, ‘Since our own Chroniclers and our Poets and Story Tellers were unable to follow us into exile, it is we who should be grateful to you for creating an account of what is happening.’
This was extremely polite of Oisin and Snizort had been heartened.
He would make a very careful and very thorough account of it all, he said.
He had already made some notes about the battle, and about the Gruagach besieging Tara —;
‘On the orders of the Robemaker and CuRoi,’ said Eogan sharply.
‘Yes, the Gruagach would never have done such a thing if it hadn't been suggested to them,’ put in Feradach.
‘Or even if they hadn't been well paid,’ added Tealtaoich.
‘I hear that Goibniu, the Gruagach High Chancellor, is quite the most venal giant you could ever meet.’
‘Giants are all venal,’ said Feradach.
They were seated round the long oak table, with the remains of supper still spread out.
Behind them, the Wolfwood was shrouded in the blue and violet shadows of the Purple Hour and Snizort could hear the night rustlings and scurryings and patterings of tiny woodland creatures.
But within the clearing it was warm and safe-feeling; Clumhach had lit their usual fire, which was burning up brightly, and somebody had placed a cauldron of spiced wine to simmer over it.
Snizort thought that this was probably the time of day that the Beastline enjoyed best; supping at the long oak table, making plans to regain Tara, drinking spiced wine or mead.
At his side, Oisin said gently, ‘It is how we lived at Tara.’
‘Yes?’ said Snizort, who had forgotten this business of having your thoughts overheard.
‘The days were spent in — oh, many things,’ said Oisin, his dark, velvety eyes far away.
‘Hunting, perhaps, or travelling.
Chasing the white stag through the forests — never catching it, of course, for it is a — a creature of legend, the white stag.’
‘Yes.
Do go on,’ said Snizort, reaching for a newly sharpened charcoal stick.
‘Perhaps there would be guests to be welcomed — travellers, or merchants from the East who would display their wares of silk or gold or ivory,’ said Oisin.
‘Perhaps there would be studying for some of us, discourse with the druids or the sorcerers.
For those who held Office under the King-that is, Chancellorships or Council positions — there might be meetings in the Star of the Poets.’
He looked at Snizort to make sure that Snizort understood and Snizort at once said, ‘Yes, we had our own governing people in Renascia.
A Council of Nine we called it.’
‘Nine is interesting,’ said Oisin, thoughtfully.
‘It is a very mystical and very powerful number, although twelve is more frequently found.
Although there are only six of us here now, once there were Twelve Royal Houses.’
He indicated the twelve carved thrones at the edges of the clearing, set into the immense Trees.
‘I do not know when those were carved,’ he said.
‘Our legends say that it was at the same time as the great Ebony Throne of Ireland.’
‘That is inside Tara?’
‘No.
No, the Ebony Throne is lost to us, as so much else is lost to us,’ said Oisin.
‘I understand,’ said Snizort, who had lived in a world where entire civilisations had been lost and who had spent his life searching for fragments of them.
‘It happened not all at once, you understand,’ said Oisin.
‘Not as it happened to your people, in one immense disaster.
It happened naturally, over many years, and always sadly.
Our people were killed in battles such as the great CuChulainn of the Chariot Horses at the Battle against the Erl-King in the High King Cormac's time.
Sometimes they embarked on quests and did not return.
Sometimes they were taken by the Dark Lords and imprisoned for ever in the Black Ireland.
There were many causes and many reasons and nothing lasts for ever.
And so now there are only six Royal Houses.’
‘That is very sad,’ said Snizort.
‘But twelve has always been a number of great meaning to us,’ said Oisin.
‘You will find it repeatedly.
We have the Twelve Sacred Couches of Conchobar in the Hall of Light within Tara.
And there were the twelve evil Lords who served the necromancer Medoc.
And twelve stone idols surrounding the ancient monster-god, Crom Croich.’
Snizort, on his own account, offered the Twelve Knights who had sat at a round table so that no one of them should be at its head and no one at its foot.
‘That's something I've never come across,’ said Oisin, his expression absorbed and interested.
‘And there were the Twelve Companions of Odysseus and the Twelve faithful Apostles,’ said Snizort.
‘And we know that our ancestors kept twelve days of revelry for some feast or other.
We tried to keep those as well, in memory of them, although we did not know which part of the year they had their twelve days.’
‘Perhaps,’ said Oisin, ‘our worlds are not so very far apart.’
‘Go on about Tara,’ said Snizort.
‘Oh, Tara,’ said Oisin and the sudden, slightly mischievous grin  liked his face.
‘It was said to be the most brilliant Court in the western world.
And although the days would be taken up with working and hunting and discussions, every evening we would gather in the Sun Chamber and every evening there would be a banquet of some kind.
We would eat and drink and there would be entertainments and music and dancing and stories.
Travellers and pilgrims and men of unknown cultures and religions would be there, for no one was ever turned away, and every creature was welcomed and given food and shelter and his story listened to.
You and your friends would have been accorded places of honour,’ said Oisin, ‘for certainly you have one of the strangest stories ever told.’
Oisin had managed to bring a number of books and chronicles out of Tara and Snizort had studied these during the afternoons.
Eogan had told Snizort about the ritual mating between Humans and beasts, which could only be done under the strict control of the Court Sorcerers and the Panel of Judges, and Snizort had been entranced.
‘It's fascinating,’ he said, scribbling away busily.
‘Now, have I got it quite right?
I don't want to make any mistakes.
Every fourth or possibly fifth generation, the youngest son or daughter of each house has to appear before the Panel of Judges —’
‘Sometimes it's longer than four or five generations,’ said Feradach.
‘It depends on the strength of the blood, of course,’ said Dian Cecht.
‘My family could go for seven generations,’ said Clumhach.
‘In fact, I once had a third cousin — or was it a great-aunt…?’
‘If the Bloodline is judged to have weakened, then the Ritual is ordered,’ said Eogan.
‘The — dear me — the actual mating with a fox or a —’
‘Yes,’ said Oisin, and smiled.
‘Contrary to what you would think, it is rather a solemn occasion.’
‘I think it's unnatural,’ said Miach, rather defiantly, from the other end of the table and Dian Cecht shuddered.
‘So unpleasant,’ she murmured.
‘And to one who has been delicately reared —’
‘Of course,’ said Feradach loudly, ‘you do get the occasional bastard outside the Enchantment.
They're frequently mutants, because of the mating being done without the protection of the Enchantment.
But sometimes it works.’
‘Like Nuadu,’ said Dian Cecht urbanely.
‘Well yes.’
Oisin had drawn breath to respond to this, when Eogan, who had been looking towards the forest, suddenly said, ‘What's that?’
‘What?’
‘There's something moving in the Forest!’
‘I expect it's the sidh , isn't it?’
‘The sidh are out there,’ said Feradach, looking searchingly into the trees.
‘But Eogan's right.
There's something else out there as well.
Something that isn't the sidh .
Can't you hear it?’
‘Yes,’ said Oisin, after a moment.
‘There's something moving in the shadows.
Something huge…’
They were all scanning the forest's depths now and Snizort saw that  a sudden stillness and an intense wariness had stolen over them, as if whatever was moving out there in the Forest was strange and alien and menacing.
Feradach and Eogan had both been right.
Deep within the shadows of the Wolfwood, there were unmistakable movements; not ordinary movements as if somebody was walking quite normally and openly through the Trees, or even furtive movements as if somebody was creeping along, dodging between the trees, hoping not to be seen.
It might have been very nearly normal if the movements had been like that.
Snizort thought you might very nearly expect creatures, beings, anything at all, to steal through a darkling forest and lie watching the strange group of people eating supper and drinking wine in the glow from the fire.
The movements were fumbling and searching and somehow groping.
It was as if there was something out there — or perhaps several somethings — struggling to break free of a force that had held them for a very long time.
Things that had been yoked, harnessed, held down and held back by a power that was dissolving.
Things that had for centuries slept without stirring, but that were now stirring and waking and might, at any moment, come prowling through the forest…
Here and there they could see long, reaching arms, struggling dark shapes, the occasional ripple of something that was touched with silver by the moonlight, but that might be green-tinted and golden by day…
It was the most remarkable thing any of them had ever witnessed.
It was strong and deeply magical and filled with power and enchantment and with the twilit scents and the dusk-laden sounds that were part of the ancient Wolfwood.
From somewhere quite close by they could all hear the faint, unearthly singing of the sidh and Snizort caught glimpses of blue-green iridescence and of shimmering wings beating on the air.
‘Yes, the sidh are close to us,’ said Tealtaoich softly, when Snizort touched his arm and nodded towards the sounds.
‘They are singing the Tree Spirits back into the world.’
‘Is that something they always do?’
‘Oh yes,’ said Tealtaoich, his eyes on the shadowy forest and the struggling Tree Spirits.
‘Oh yes, they would pour out their music for something so magical as this.’
The Tree Spirits were discernible now; it was as if they had broken through a thick veil, through a smothering black curtain, and they were recognisable as distinct forms, moving slowly in and out of the forest.
The Purple Hour had come and gone and it was full night now, so that moonlight lay across the forest, gleaming coldly, silvering the outlines of the Trees and the silhouettes of the awakening naiads and dryads.
There were more of them now.
Oisin, who knew a little of the theory of sorcery —‘Although I have never aspired to its practice,’ he would have said modestly — knew that with the emerging of the first, the others would have gained strength and confidence.
He knew, as well, that Tree Spirits cling tenaciously to their homes until those homes become untenable because of the Tree dying and drying and he  thought that Miach's spell must have been stronger than any of them had thought for it to draw the Spirits so filly and so firmly into the open.
The Tree Naiads and Dryads were a curious blending of flesh and skin and muscle and bark and tree and leaf.
You could not be quite sure where the Tree part ended and the Human part began, although nobody was sure if Tree Spirits possessed any Human blood.
Most people thought they did not.
In the main, the Spirits were Oaks; solid, not young forms, with rather benevolent and scholarly expressions.
Their arms were half arms and half branches and their faces were part of the trunk part of the Tree.
They did not have hair, but trailing fronds of leaves and bracken.
The Elms, who seemed to stand next in line, were plain and sturdy, with pale-ish bark for skin and a good deal of greenery.
They stayed close to the Oaks, as if they considered it their duty, and they looked as if they might find life a serious business.
In between the Oaks and the Elms darted the Silver Birches, slender and frivolous-looking, with wild, shining white hair that streamed out behind them and mischievous features and trailing garments that might have been some kind of cloth, but might as easily have been simply their pale leaves.
The watchers thought that the Silver Birches would certainly be a bit wild and probably without any moral sense at all and Clumhach thought he must remember to tell everyone about his great uncle who had succumbed to a Silver Birch one scandalous afternoon.
It would not do to forget something so interesting.
The Copper Beech Naiads were the most beautiful creatures any of them had ever seen.
They were exquisite, rather fearless-looking creatures with manes of flowing red gold hair and skin the colour of an autumn sunset, long narrow eyes and slender, graceful arms and feet.
As Snizort and the Court sat, barely moving, the Trees seemed to become aware of the watchers and, one by one, ceased to move and turned to regard them.
A great hush fell over the entire Wolfwood, as if , thought Snizort, every living creature knew or heard or sensed what had happened and was waiting to see what the Trees would do.
And I believe the Trees are judging us, thought Snizort.
They've broken free and they're turning to see what kind of creatures called them out of their enchanted sleep.
They're inspecting us and they're considering what we are and whether we're all right.
Tealtaoich said, very softly, ‘You know, one of us must approach them.’
‘Yes,’ said several voices, rather doubtfully.
‘Had it better be me?’
‘Well, you're next after Nuadu,’ said Feradach.
‘Yes, but he didn't actually say —’
‘He wouldn't,’ said Eogan, his eyes still on the Trees.
‘He never accepted the leadership of us all, not officially.
He wouldn't appoint anyone to lead in his absence.’
‘Because he didn't care?’ asked Clumhach anxiously.
‘No.
Because he cared too much.
And Tealtaoich is nearer to the Wolfkings than any of us.
He's the King's cousin.’
‘I should not dream of putting myself forward in any way at all,’ said Dian Cecht.
‘But I do think that someone of authority should go into the forest and approach the Tree Spirits.’
‘All right,’ said Tealtaoich, suddenly.
‘I'll do it.’
He stood up and moved stealthily and warily forward and Snizort saw, for the first time, the sleek, feline grace.
Tealtaoich was not exactly padding into the forest and he was not precisely slinking into it either.
But the impression of dark, catlike prowling was there; the image of fur-covered paws and of sheathed claws and lashing tail.
Snizort glanced at the others and saw in each of them, now, faintly but definitely the unmistakable traces of their lineage.
as if something within them had sharpened to awareness, or perhaps as if the darkling forest had wakened their strange ancestry and quenched the Human side of them.
I suppose it is all right, he thought.
I suppose we are right to throw in our lot with them.
But there was no time to give this disturbing idea attention; Tealtaoich was nearly at the Trees and the Trees were grouped together watching him and waiting for him in complete silence and it was important not to miss a single instant of any of it.
Tealtaoich had moved with a soft, measured tread towards the flowing, twining shapes, not once hesitating.
‘And,’ said Oisin softly, ‘it's actually quite brave of him.
We none of us know if the Trees are safe or not.’
‘Tealtaoich is far braver than he'd like you to think,’ said Feradach.
Tealtaoich had passed through the twisting shadows and was standing facing the Trees now, a slender, solitary figure, silhouetted darkly against the massive solidity of the Oaks and the flowing silver-tipped hair of the Birches and the cascading russet leaf-hair of the Copper Beeches.
The Tree Spirits were a great deal taller than Tealtaoich and, from out of the blending, shifting, gold and green and russet, their eyes were ancient and wise and beautiful.
‘And watchful,’ thought Snizort.
‘Bless my soul, they are certainly not to be lightly regarded, these creatures.’
Behind the Spirits they could see the shapes of the Trees themselves, stark and empty-looking, rather dark and brooding, like abandoned houses whose windows stare blindly and blankly.
The Oak Naiads were at the centre of the group, with the Elms in attendance.
They're Elders, thought Snizort.
The Oaks are the Elders of the Forest and the others are aware of it.
They'll all have opinions and ideas and suggestions, but it'll be the Oaks who decide and the rest will bow to their decision.
The Silver Birches looked rather fun.
They seemed to giggle and shrug and eye Tealtaoich mischievously and be unable to decide where they would like to sit.
They darted about on the front of the group, their silver-leaf hair rustling like raw silk.
On the edges of the Trees, the Copper Beech Naiads had simply sunk to the ground, their hair falling about their bodies in rich cascades of colour, making pools of glowing russet and brown all about them.
They fixed their huge unreadable golden eyes on Tealtaoich.
The Trees seemed to be waiting for Tealtaoich to make the first  move and the largest of the Oaks had inclined their heads quite courteously.
‘But,’ said Clumhach in one of his huge whispers, ‘you get the feeling that you could easily be made to feel a fool by them, don't you?’
‘Speak for yourself,’ said Oisin, to whom this remark happened to have been directed.
‘Those Silver Birches don't look very reliable.
Still, I'd rather have them with us than against us,’ added Feradach.
Tealtaoich stood quite still, regarding the waiting Trees and seeing that they were listening and apparently politely prepared to hear anything he had to say.
‘You are well come,’ he said at last, and the Trees inclined their heads again.
‘They'll like that,’ murmured Oisin to Snizort.
‘It's the ancient welcoming Ritual and, in all of the stories, the Tree Spirits set very great store by rituals.
And they'll like the fact that it's a Prince of Ireland who has been sent to talk to them.’
Tealtaoich, facing the Tree Spirits, was remembering this as well.
Then, hoping he could remember enough of the ancient language of chivalry and selecting his words with extreme care, he said, ‘Good Trees, we ask your assistance,’ and saw the Elms nod to one another meaningfully, as if they had been expecting all along to be asked to do something for the Humans.
‘Tara is in the hands of the Dark Powers,’ said Tealtaoich, hoping that this was the correct thing to say, because nobody had seemed quite sure which side the Trees would be on.
‘It is in thrall to a Necromancer of the highest order and the Wolfking is dead.’
There was a rustle of emotion at this.
The Beeches drooped their beautiful heads and their copper leaf-hair rippled across the forest floor.
The Elms looked at them rather disapprovingly and then turned back to Tealtaoich.
Tealtaoich said, ‘You have always been on the side of justice, Trees; come with us and fight with us and for us, as you have done in the past.’
He lifted his voice slightly.
‘Come with us and help us to beat back the Dark Ireland once again.’
A pause.
‘Once before,’ said Tealtaoich, reaching into his memory, ‘once before, you answered the Wolfkings’cry for help.
It is a part of our history, that, and a part which we revere greatly.
Once before, you rose up from the great forests of Ireland and came to the aid of our greatest King of all, Cormac of the Wolves.
You turned the tide of a battle then, centuries ago.
‘We have kept that memory with us ever since and we have always believed that the Trees would ever be on the side of the Wolfkings and the Beastline and the One True Ireland.’
He paused for breath.
‘Will you fight with us and for us again?’ said Tealtaoich.
‘Will you come with us to Tara and help us sweep to victory?
Will you fight for the descendants of the great Cormac and his daughter Dierdriu and the descendants of Grainne the Gentle and of Erin and of Niall of the Nine Hostages?
And of all the Wolfkings and Queens who have made Ireland great?’
Tealtaoich paused again and stood waiting and a murmur of  approval went through the others.
Feradach whispered to Oisin that you had to give credit where it was due; Tealtaoich really did this sort of thing extremely well.
‘Yes, but I don't know if he's reaching them,’ said Oisin, his eyes on Tealtaoich's slight form.
‘They're rather overpowering, aren't they?’
The Trees seemed to be thinking Tealtaoich's words over and Tealtaoich, still standing before them, received the impression that they might be somehow conferring with one another in some silent fashion of their own.
The Oaks bent their branchy heads closer and the Silver Birches rippled and chattered.
And then the largest of the Oaks moved forward and Tealtaoich saw that he had the high, domed forehead of a scholar and a thinker and that his ancient eyes held wisdom and knowledge.
‘Son of the Wild Panthers,’ said the Oak, in a warm, woodsy sort of voice, ‘son of one of Ireland's most ancient Bloodlines, is it solely to ask our help that you have woken us?’
Tealtaoich thought, rather grimly, that this was a nasty one.
They had woken the Trees only so that they could ask for their help, of course.
As he hesitated, searching for the proper words, the Oak spoke again.
‘We have slept the enchanted slumber, the Draoicht Suan , for many centuries,’ it said.
‘You will know of our history and you will know that we were sent into that slumber many hundreds of years ago, by the Dark Lords who held sway in the reign of the High King Cormac.’
‘I do know,’ said Tealtaoich, and thought there was a note of reproof in the Oak's tone, as if the Tree Spirits were angry at being summoned like this.
They are not going to help us, he thought, and knew a rush of complete despair.
The Oak said, ‘But we have lent our aid to the Royal Houses of the Beastline in times of extreme danger and we have also fought to regain Tara for the rightful heir.’
The rightful heir…
Taken and imprisoned and held fast in the black depths of the Dark Ireland.
I wonder if they know about that, thought Tealtaoich.
But he only said, ‘Will you join with us?’ and looked at the Oak very straightly.
There was a pause, and the Oak seemed to study him afresh with solemn, scholarly eyes.
‘Ireland is threatened by a terrible force,’ it said, and the listening Court held their breath.
‘It is menaced by the evil CuRoi and by the Robemaker.’
At the mention of the Robemaker, a shiver went through the Trees.
‘We know it and we feel it,’ said the Oak.
‘We do not promise to help you, Son of the Panthers.
But we will attend a Council of War and hear your plans.
If we believe that Ireland can be purged of the Dark Lords and the Wolfline reinstated, then we will join with you.’
The Oak regarded Tealtaoich severely.
‘For,’ it said, ‘unless the Wolfline is reinstated, Ireland is surely doomed for generations to come.’
Chapter Twenty-two
Floy and Snodgrass, with Balor accompanying them, set out from Tara at noon the next day.
‘Carrying,’ said Goibniu, ‘the new marriage proposal, and the designs for Flame's jewels.’
The new proposals contained a revised list of the territories the Gruagach were prepared to cede to Reflection in exchange for her daughter but Caspar, who had managed to get a look at these, had told Floy that the Gruagach were only ceding some barren bits of wasteland surrounding the Robemaker's workshops, the Lake of Dhairbhreach — which nobody in their right minds would want — and a mountain or two.
‘It looks quite good on paper,’ he said.
‘In fact, it looks very generous.
But it's nothing more than a double-cross, really.
Goibniu will never give away anything that is worth a button.’
The Gnomes had rolled the designs for the new Crown Jewels into cylinders and packed them carefully into long, hollow tubes, which they had brought with them for the purpose.
‘Best copper on gold,’ said Bith of the Bog-Hat.
‘Engraved with tongues of flame,’ said Flaherty, who had thought up this himself and did not want it overlooked.
‘I did the engraving,’ said Culdub Oakapple.
‘What you do is, you heat up an iron spike —’
‘Don't let Floy forget the chart of colours.’
‘— until it's so hot it's white —’
‘And there's the pearl diadem we made, just as a bit of a gift —’
— I blistered my thumbs on it —’
Floy said, ‘I shall not forget anything and I feel sure that Reflection and Flame will be greatly impressed by your sketches.’
The Gnomes broke into wide grins at this and said wasn't impressing the thing and Floy in the right of it, and impress was what they'd set out to do and hadn't Floy the way with words?
‘And if,’ said Bith of the Bog-Hat, ‘your impress-ship should ever be wanting an armlet or two, or maybe a plain everyday crown circlet, we'd be happy to oblige.’
The Gnomes chimed in, saying to be sure they would, obliging was what they were, and it the best thing of all to be, leave aside impressing, which was just as important.
‘And so,’ said Floy, looking at Fenella, wondering how all this might have been received on Renascia, ‘and so, we will set off.’
Fenella looked at Floy and remembered about the Robemaker and the way he had captured Nuadu and rendered them all helpless, and  about the exiled Court and the sidh and the Tree Spirits that Miach had almost awoken, and which might turn out not to be friends, but enemies.
And thought: and Floy is going off into the midst of all these and it is perfectly possible that I shall never see him again.
But it would not do to show any emotion before the giants, who had all gathered to see Floy and Snodgrass off, or before Balor, who was waiting in high good humour at the unexpected excitement of a journey to the Fire Court.
And so Fenella said, ‘I wish you a safe journey,’ and was pleased that her voice came out firm and perfectly calm, as if she was quite accustomed to seeing her brother off on a journey to the Court of a Sorceress, which would take him past all manner of weird and darkly enchanted places.
‘And a speedy return,’ said Caspar, winking plumply on the side that the giants could not see.
‘That's important.
A speedy return.’
They were to depart from the Western Gate.
‘Which,’ said Caspar, ‘is where all important journeys start from.’
‘It will be our first real sight of Ireland,’ said Floy to Caspar, as if there was nothing more on his mind other than surveying the land they were about to travel through.
He stood for a moment, framed in the great gateway, and Fenella saw how the early morning light touched his dark hair and brought out red glints in it and saw, as well, that his eyes were shining, as if he was already looking ahead to the dangers and the adventures.
Yes, perhaps it will be all right.
Of course it will be all right.
Snodgrass was discussing with the Gnomes the best route to take and Caspar was making sure that they had packed the maps and Inchbad and Goll the Gorm and Arca Dubh were nodding and smiling and, of course, there was nothing sinister in their smiles — and there was certainly nothing in the least sinister in the way that Goibniu was looking at Fenella, thumbs hooked in his belt, his wide greedy mouth curving into a satisfied grin…
Balor was going to let down the drawbridge so that they could ride across it.
‘Seeing that it's a special occasion,’ he said, and Goibniu had procured two horses for Floy and Snodgrass to ride.
Balor would walk, because giants did not ride.
‘There aren't horses that would carry them,’ muttered Caspar.
‘And on horseback you'll get a better chance of losing him.’
The provision of horses was unexpected, but curiously cheering, because it seemed to show that the giants were sending Floy and Snodgrass off in reasonable style, as if they expected them to return.
‘Of course you will return,’ said Goibniu.
‘The lady will be here, waiting for you.’
There was another of the smiling glances at Fenella.
‘She will entertain us every evening after supper,’ said Goibniu and Floy nearly abandoned the entire thing there and then, because there had been something so meaningful in the way that Goibniu had said entertain that he wondered how they could ever have considered leaving her here alone.
‘I suppose,’ said Floy, thoughtfully, fixing Caspar with an equally meaningful stare, ‘that we can trust you, can we?’and Caspar said, ‘Oh, for the — Floy, I've been trying to get away from these creatures ever  since they took Tara!
We'll meet you on the road leading to Lake Dhairbhreach as we arranged.’
‘Yes,’ said Floy.
‘All right.’
Neither Floy nor Snodgrass had ever actually seen a horse, let alone ridden one.
‘But it is not really so very difficult,’ said Snodgrass, after he was hoisted into the saddle and discovered how to take up the reins.
Floy stood where he was for a moment, looking up at the great, shining edifice that was Tara, Ireland's Bright Palace, the great legendary Citadel of Light, the home of the Wolfkings…
Shall I ever see this again ?
And then, with a pang of real anguish:shall I ever see Fenella again ? he thought.
But there was nothing to be done; Goibniu had made it a request that Floy and Snodgrass travel to the Fire Court leaving Fenella alone.
It had been courteously framed, but Goibniu had arranged for Balor to go with them and Floy had known — and everyone had known — that it had not really been a request but a command.
There was a quick, rather fierce embrace.
‘Go safely, Floy,’ whispered Fenella, who thought it safer not to say more, and then one of the stable hands brought the second horse forward and Floy found, as Snodgrass had, that it was actually quite easy to spring into the saddle and it was rather a safe feeling to be seated astride a horse like this.
And then the drawbridge was falling, with a clanking and a whirring of machinery and the light was pouring into the courtyard and the Gnomes were cheering and the giants were nodding to one another, and there was nothing for it but to ride away with Snodgrass, with Balor loping along at their side, with Fenella behind in the hands of the Gruagach.
It was a rather dreadful feeling to know you were alone inside a castle of giants.
Fenella, tidying her hair for supper, thought she had never felt quite so alone in her life.
Probably everything would be all right and probably there was nothing to be afraid of.
Probably Inchbad and the others would be extremely friendly and entirely courteous.
Also, the Gnomes would still be there.
Fenella, who had almost forgotten about this, was cheered, because it was impossible to be afraid (well, almost impossible) with Bith and Culdub and Flaherty and the rest of them.
Caspar came to collect her before supper.
‘In case you miss your way,’ he said, but Fenella had heard the key turn in the lock earlier and knew she was still being treated as a prisoner.
Supper was rather an odd meal.
Fenella was seated next to Inchbad, who patted her hand and said she was a pretty little thing, but seemed preoccupied.
Goll the Gorm sat on her left and devoted all his attention to the food and Goibniu was two seats down.
The Gnomes sat at the far table, eating and drinking happily, whiling away an amiable half hour by telling anyone who would listen the entire history of the Crown Jewels and the history of the Gallan forges.
Flaherty took a drop more of the giants' mulled wine than was good for him and very nearly disgraced his fellows by reciting an extremely improper poem, describing the exploits of a fair maiden who had fallen foul of a wicked and lustfully intentioned knight, but who had then escaped by invoking  a demon who withered the knight's passion.
The Gnomes thought this very funny and Caspar laughed loudly but Inchbad and the giants missed the point.
‘Stupid,’ mouthed Caspar at Fenella, under cover of the serving of half a dozen roast boars.
‘I told you.
We ought to be able to creep out easily when they're all asleep,’ he added and Fenella frowned at him, because they could not risk the giants guessing what they intended to do.
They were three quarters of the way through the meal when Caspar, who did not miss anything any of the giants said and who had, in fact, long since perfected the art of listening to three different conversations at once, suddenly went rather white and made frantic gestures to Fenella.
‘What's the matter?’ said Fenella as Caspar trotted round to her chair, under cover of bringing round a Human-sized bowl of fruit.
‘And do, for heavens’ sake, be watchful or they'll suspect us of collusion.’
‘What's that?’ said Caspar.
And then, ‘No, don't tell me, we haven't got time.’
He took a deep breath and glanced round at the giants.
‘They're going to celebrate the Fidchell again,’ he said.
‘Yes?’
‘Yes.
With you and the gnomes.
They're not overly partial to gnomes, but they think it's too good an opportunity to miss.’
‘But they were going to wait for Floy to get back!
I was going to tell them about Renascia and the Angry Sun and —’ Fenella trailed into silence, staring at Caspar.
‘They aren't going to wait for Floy to come back,’ said Caspar.
‘In fact, from what Goibniu said, I rather think they don't expect him to get back at all.’
‘Oh,’ said Fenella, suddenly feeling rather sick.
‘But that means —’ And stopped.
‘It means,’ said Caspar, ‘that you and the Gnomes are going to be impaled on spikes and partly roasted on the Fidchell board.
And then you'll be finished off in the sculleries.
‘And then they'll eat you,’ said Caspar, and Fenella stared at him in horror.
It was difficult to make the Gnomes understand.
Caspar and Fenella had to explain it four times, and a fifth for Flaherty, who was still recovering from his overindulgence in the matter of the mulled wine.
To begin with, the Gnomes thought it a fine idea to be part of the traditional Fidchell and Bith of the Bog-Hat told how the Wolfkings had played it during the Winter Solstice with solid gold figures studded with ivory and pearl, which the Gnomes always had the supplying of.
Flaherty said to be sure this was true, although he misremembered the last time they'd been called on to supply them, it being all of two years since the Wolfkings had been driven out by the Gruagach.
It was all very difficult.
‘And dangerous,’ said Caspar, with a backwards glance to where Goibniu was standing before the fire in thy characteristic pose, thumbs in belt, surrounded by half a dozen or so of the others.
He got down to  the serious matter of explaining to the gnomes that the intricate, almost scholarly,Fidchell that the Wolfkings had enjoyed, bore no resemblance to the horrid gruesome version that the Gruagach played.
Fenella was watching the giants, feeling cold inside at the way in which they all kept glancing slyly in her direction.
There had to be something they could do.
‘Couldn't the gnomes do something?’ she said.
‘Bith, Culdub, can't you think of something we can do?
You know more about this kind of thing than I do.
What do people do when they're threatened by giants?’
‘If we don't do something extremely soon,’ said Caspar, who was watching the giants furtively, ‘they'll be heating up the squares any minute.’
One of the older Gnomes, who had a face like a wrinkled nutcracker and bright twinkly eyes, asked would a bit of magic be of any use anywhere, because wasn't magic a powerful thing when you had a difficulty, and the other Gnomes said to be sure it was.
Caspar said crossly, ‘Well,of course it would be of use, only we haven't got any.’
The Gnome, whose name was Pumlumon said, ‘But of course we have,’ and the Gnomes all shook their heads sadly, and did not know what things were coming to when Humans did not remember about Gnomes having any magic.
Fenella, trying to keep her voice low, so that Goibniu and the others would not hear it, said, ‘But what sort of magic, Pumlumon?’ and Pumlumon beamed and said weren't there all kinds.
‘But if it's the giants you're wanting to fool, then it'd be the grand old Draoicht Suan ,’ said Pumlumon, and the Gnomes nodded sagely and said that would be it, the Draoicht Suan it would be, the spell that had kept the Trees fast asleep for so many years now, and wasn't it a powerful strong spell and Pumlumon the fellow to be spinning it for them all?
‘Well, what does it do?’ asked Fenella, who was by no means sure about trusting an enchantment and who did not like the way Goibniu and Fiachra Broadcrown were flipping coins and chuckling sinisterly over the results.
Pumlumon said in a voice of utmost astonishment, ‘But has your honour never heard of the Draoicht Suan ?’ and was instantly hushed by Bith of the Bog-Hat, who had by now sensed that something was wrong, being a gnome of more percipience than his fellows and who liked, no more than Fenella, the manner in which Goibniu was eyeing them all.
He told the others they must not forget about roast Gnome being a traditional dish for the Gruagach's grander festivals.
Such as a wedding feast, said Bith severely.
‘It's the Enchantment of Slumber,’ said Pumlumon.
‘It sends your enemies into the deepest of sleeps.
My word, I'm surprised that your worshipfulness has never come across it.
At one time, you couldn't travel more than a half day across Ireland without coming across the Draoicht Suan in one form or another.
Well, that's what keeps the Trees from waking,’ said Pumlumon, looking solemn.
‘And if we're to outwit these giants, there's nothing for it but for me to call up the  Draoicht Suan .
We'll send the giants into the enchanted slumber and be off back to Gallan in the whisk of a glowworm's tail.’
He beamed at them again and Caspar was beginning to relax, because it seemed as if they might escape after all and Fenella was remembering about magic being very nearly everyday here, when Pumlumon said, ‘Of course, that's so long as I can remember the words.’
He thought he probably would.
He said there was not much of it to remember, really.
Wasn't it one of the simplest magics there was and his grandfather, to say nothing of his great-grandfather (who had lived long and fared well) passing it down to him.
Why, said Pumlumon, hadn't there been a time, not so very long ago either, when he could rattle off the words that set the Draoicht Suan working with no more ado than you might make in the squashing of a flea, always supposing you wanted to do something so pointless, which Pumlumon himself never had.
‘But you can remember it all?’ said Fenella, anxiously, and Pumlumon pushed his hat well back and scratched his head and said once he got it going, it would follow as the night the day, or maybe it was the other way round.
‘The thing is getting it going,’ he said.
‘If I could have a few minutes — let's say half an hour — to think it over and make some notes, I daresay we'll be as right as a snail's whisker.’
‘But we haven't got half an hour,’ said Fenella.
‘They'll be bringing up the squares at any minute.
You'll have to pronounce it at once.’
‘Yes, but we want to get it the right way about,’ said Pumlumon.
‘It won't do to be saying it backwards, or inside out, or to be missing a bit out that's important, or adding a piece from another enchantment.
Bless my best boots, that would never do at all.
I'll just recite it through quietly to be sure I can remember it first, shall I?’
‘We'll have to distract the giants, then,’ said Fenella practically.
‘Supposing I offer to tell them about the Feargach Grian ?’
The Gnomes thought this a fine old idea.
In fact, Flaherty thought it was a better idea than invoking the Draoicht Suan until it was explained to him that unless Pumlumon did invoke it, they would all of them be roasting on spits in the Gruagach's sculleries before the night was out, to which he said that giants had always been partial to roast Gnome and he had always thought it was a mistake to come to Tara in the first place.
‘Give me a few moments,’ said Pumlumon, setting his features in a frown of concentration and Fenella looked at Caspar with a have-we-any-choice expression and then, taking a deep breath, walked across to the group of giants by the fire.
Inchbad was pleased to see Fenella, pretty little thing, approach them.
Of course, it was probably quite an ordeal for Humans to sup with giants, although Inchbad was pleased to think that they had all treated Fenella and the other two with courtesy.
The Gruagach were strong on courtesy; Inchbad had always been very firm about this, even to the extent of feeding prisoners before the Fidchell which Goibniu had always said was a waste of good food and wine.
But it paid off in the end; here was the pretty little Girl-Human walking over to talk to them, smiling up at them — Inchbad always noticed the fair, smooth skins of humans, whereas giantesses were apt to be a bit coarse and occasionally had incipient beards.
You could not really beat a Human's skin.
Inchbad found himself thinking he would rather like to stroke Fenella.
Perhaps they should reserve tonight's Fidchell solely for the Gnomes.
Nobody wanted to stroke a Gnome, except perhaps another Gnome, He thought he might just have a word with Caspar to see if Fenella could be brought along to his, Inchbad's, bed that very night.
Goibniu would have had his eye on her, but that was just too bad.
Goibniu would have to wait his turn.
There was really no reason why the Girl-Human could not be brought to all their bed-chambers, one after the other, before she was used in the Fidchell .
This was an eminently reasonable arrangement and nobody could possibly object.
The Girl-Human had seated herself before the fire; Inchbad could see how the firelight fell across her face and brought out red lights in her hair.
He bent to hear what she was saying, because she had a rather soft voice.
Soothing you might call it.
The sort of voice you could just nod off to.
Yes, he would very much like to stroke her.
Face, neck, breasts…
Giantesses tended to have loose thick-grained breasts.
Inchbad was rather partial to a soft, tender Human breast.
He shifted in his seat a bit.
Yes, certainly Caspar would be told to make ready the royal bed-chamber tonight.
The Girl was explaining how she thought perhaps she ought to make some kind of thanks to them for their hospitality.
(Goibniu and Fiachra Broadcrown sniggered at this, but nobody took any notice.)
The Girl said that they had been so kind and welcoming; food all served to them and very good, too, and such comfortable bed-chambers for their use.
And they had expressed such interest in the Feargach Grian she was saying; as people of culture and learning, naturally they would be interested in it, she quite understood this.
This was appealing to everyone's better instincts and most of the giants looked alert and nodded at one another, because, of course , the Gruagach were known the length and breadth of Ireland for their culture and learning.
It had been really quite sharp of the pretty little Human to see that.
Perhaps a tale or two from other lands? the Girl was saying, smiling up at them.
In her own country, there had been a saying: ‘Singing for your Supper’.
She could not sing, she said, not really, but she could tell some stories for her supper.
Would that do?
And she smiled so nicely at Inchbad and Goibniu that everyone smiled back and thought it would be really very interesting to hear about some of the strange lands and the faraway worlds the Humans had visited from the great Feargach Grian , and also that it was always a shame to eat Humans when they were pretty and young and friendly.
And while nobody wanted precisely to abandon the Fidchell which everybody enjoyed so much, there was really no reason why they could not play it with the Gnomes tonight and save Fenella for tomorrow, or even the day after.
And so Inchbad sat down and beamed at Fenella and said they  would be interested to hear her stories and, at the same time, nodded to the waiting Fiachra Broadcrown to get the Fidchell squares ready for the Gnomes.
Fenella took a deep breath and, leaning forward, clasped her hands about her knees.
It was warm over here by the fire and there was an unpleasant stench of stale giant and the surreptitious breaking of wind from Goll the Gorm who had eaten too much onion broth again, but these things would have to be overlooked.
From the comer of her eye, she could see Pumlumon frowning and tapping his forehead for inspiration and the others standing in a worried circle about him.
Fenella began to speak at exactly the same moment that Pumlumon began to intone the Draoicht Suan .
To begin with, it did not seem as if anything was going to happen.
Caspar, who distrusted most magic on principle, thought that probably nothing would happen at all and the evening would end as so many evenings were ending lately; with the heating of the squares and the terrible screaming of the victims.
But Fenella seemed to have caught the Gruagach's interest fairly and squarely; Caspar, only partly listening, heard her telling them about another life, another world, where people had fled in panic from the Feargach Grian many centuries earlier and how the Feargach Grian had, on that occasion, appeared in one of its truly terrible aspects.
‘The Angry Sun in truth,’ said Fenella, her expression absorbed, her eyes fixed on Goibniu and the others.
Caspar saw Inchbad nodding and Goll the Gorm was utterly rapt.
Pumlumon seemed to have got himself quite well into the enchantment now; he was looking much less worried than he had looked ten minutes earlier.
(‘For doesn't it always come back?’ demanded Bith.
‘Isn't he the grand feller, chanting away, as if it was only yesterday he called up a spell or two?’)
Pumlumon set his hat more squarely on his head and continued.
Caspar, sending a worried glance to the group around the fire, heard Fenella describing something called Renascia; Twilight Mountains and Seasons with different colours.
Something about an Iron Casket that had held secrets of the Ancient Past…
It might have been extremely interesting if Caspar had not been so worried about Pumlumon's knowledge of the spell.
Oughtn't it to be working by now.)
Fenella, seated by the fire, trying not to flinch from onion-tainted breath and unwashed feet (there was something particularly revolting about the thought of giants' feet and their toenails), thought so as well.
Inchbad had moved across to sit beside her and had taken her hand between his finger and thumb and was exclaiming what a pretty little thing she was and it the shame of the world that her brother had had to ride of land leave her all alone.
‘But I'll console you, my dear,’ he said and Fenella smiled valiantly and tried to quell the nauseous lifting of her stomach.
‘That would be nice, but shan't I tell you about the Fire Country of Fael-Inis now?’
It might be as well to sound a bit childish, and even  slightly simple.
‘Or,’ said Fenella, hopefully, ‘should we save it for tomorrow?’
Goibniu opened his mouth to say something — Fenella wondered what it would have been — when an arrested look came into his small eyes.
Into the great Sun Chamber, the legendary crystal and silver hall, the place the exiled Wolfkings had called Medchuana , stole something so delicate and so strong, and so — so beckoning thought Fenella hazily — that it was almost as if a thin, sugar-spun veil was falling over them.
There was a faint sticky feeling to it, as if it might trap you if you tried to struggle against it — but no one would want to struggle against this, thought Fenella, bemused with delight.
For a moment, she thought she could see it: fragile silver filaments of enchantment, gentle brittle frost-webs of something that was not quite light, but not quite solid, but somehow composed of both.
The Enchantment of Slumber…gentle and strong and wrapping itself about you…
And within the enchantment are dreams, Mortal, within the enchantment are worlds within worlds within worlds and there are no longer boundaries and there are no longer the finite things that bind you …
Surrender now, Mortal, come in a the deep folds of slumber, where your heart's desire awaits you, where all things are possible…
Nuadu! thought Fenella, her mind tumbling with delight.
And Floy!
And all things are possible…
She gave a deep sigh and felt the silver threads spin filaments of pure light about her and the soft folds of slumber enveloping her…like a soft light veil, like a warm, wine-dark sea, like hazy afternoon sunlight…
And then felt, with a rude awakening, Caspar's hands shaking.
‘You can't give in to it,’ he was saying urgently.
‘Fenella, you must wake up —’ Fenella considered this and blinked.
And from a great distance, heard Caspar say with irritation, ‘Damn and blast, I knew we shouldn't have trusted those Gnomes —’
With a huge effort, Fenella said, ‘What's wrong with the Gnomes?’
And then, remembering a bit more, ‘Didn't Pumlumon manage the Enchantment?’
‘Very well indeed,’ said Caspar grimly.
‘Only he forgot to make sure that the gnomes kept out of range.
‘They're all fast asleep!’
‘How did we manage to escape it?’ asked Fenella.
‘Pumlumon was directing it straight at the giants,’ said Caspar.
‘I stood behind him, but you caught the outer edges of it.’
And then, curiously, ‘Did you see it?’ he said.
‘Well, I saw something,’ said Fenella rather uncertainly.
‘And I certainly felt something.
But I don't think it was as strong as it could have been.
I mean, I'm awake, aren't I?’
‘You were only on the outskirts of it,’ said Caspar.
‘But I don't think it was very strong.
I think the giants might wake up quite soon.
We'll have to be quick.
I suppose,’ he said, ‘that we can't just slip out now.
Just the two of us?’
‘And leave the Gnomes?’
Fenella was shocked.
‘No, of course we can't.
We'll have to wake them somehow.’
But the Gnomes could not be woken and, eventually, Caspar and Fenella gave up.
‘But we can't leave them,’ said Fenella worriedly.
‘Caspar, we can't .’
‘We could put them somewhere.’
‘Could we?
Where could we put them?’
‘In a locked room?’ said Caspar, half to himself, and then, with more assurance, ‘Yes, in a locked room.’
‘Won't they wake up and be angry?’
But Caspar said this was unlikely; the Draoicht Suan would probably keep everyone inside Tara asleep until somebody came along with the counter-spell.
‘And,’ he added gloomily, ‘who's to know when that will happen.
It might be a hundred years from now for all I know.’
In the end they hauled the Gnomes into a small ante-room across the galleried landing from the Sun Chamber.
‘Not ideal,’ said Caspar.
‘But it gives them a fighting chance.
I tell you what we'll do, we'll try to find someone on the way who knows the counter-spell and send him back to wake the Gnomes up.’
‘Can we do that?’
‘You never know,’ said Caspar rather vaguely.
‘I've known stranger things happen.’
And then, impatiently, ‘And now do come on, or we shall never get away.’
Chapter Twenty-three
In the end, it was relatively easy to steal through the darkened halls of Tara and out into the night.
‘Although Tara never is really dark,’ said Caspar as they stopped to look back at the great shining edifice outlined against the sky.
Fenella, who had found Tara a place of breathtaking beauty and who would have very much liked to explore it, saw how it gleamed gently against the night and seemed to have some inner radiance of its own.
‘I have seen it brighter,’ said Caspar in a rather expressionless voice.
‘Yes?’
‘When the Wolfkings rule,’ he said, and Fenella remembered Nuadu Airgetlam all over again and had to bite down the ache of loss.
They had stopped briefly in the great sculleries to pack up provisions.
‘For,’ said Caspar, ‘we shall need food and clothes.’
Fenella had gone back to the bed-chamber and pulled on her boots and found the warm woollen cloak she had brought from Renascia while Caspar had raided the sculleries and packed the maps.
‘Were they all asleep?’
Fenella asked as they stole through the quiet Palace.
‘Yes.
Pumlumon's spell must have been better than we thought.’
‘Where are we going?’
‘To the stables,’ said Caspar, sending her a surprised look.
‘You didn't suppose we were going to walk all the way to the Fire Court did you?’
‘I did, as a matter of fact,’ said Fenella, who had forgotten how Floy and Snodgrass had ridden out earlier.
‘I've never actually ridden a horse before.
I've never actually seen a horse until yesterday.’
Clambering on to the horse's back felt odd and briefly unsafe and then, unexpectedly, exhilarating.
Fenella, who on Renascia had walked everywhere, found her breath snatched from her as her mount followed Caspar down the great avenue of beeches that guarded Tara and out on to the Tree-fringed high road.
She thought she would have to hold on extremely tightly if they were to go any faster, but she thought it was a thrilling, intoxicating sensation to be borne along like this.
Moonlight was silvering the countryside as they rode slowly along, draining it of colour, and all about them were rustlings and scurryings and the impression of tiny pattering feet and the beating of small, unseen wings.
‘Only night creatures,’ said Caspar, ‘Squirrels and hedgehogs and owls.’
But he glanced over his shoulder as he said this, as if he was not entirely sure.
The huge mass of the Wolfwood sprawled darkly to their left, black and rather forbidding, a place of thick impenetrable shadows.
As they drew alongside, on the road they had travelled on their way to Tara, Fenella found herself staring into its depths and remembering the ancient Forest Court at its heart…
Croi Crua Adhmaid …the Place of Ancient Enchantments…the Heartwood of the Forest…
But out here, on the high road, it was difficult to recall the purple and blue shadows and the firelight and the long oak table where they had all taken supper.
It was very hard indeed to believe she had walked in there with a wolf creature and that he had drawn her down onto the forest floor and made love to her…
I won't think about it, said Fenella firmly.
I'll think instead about meeting up with Floy and Snodgrass and finding the Fire Court.
Yes, that was a much better way to think.
But the Wolfwood was not entirely in darkness.
As they rode cautiously along, Fenella caught glimpses of movement in between the trees.
Several times, there was the brilliant smudgy turquoise streak of the sidh and, more than once, the impression of gold and green and amber beings, neither quite human nor quite woodland.
Tree Spirits?
Oh I do hope so, thought Fenella, peering into the forest depths, trying to make out the shapes more clearly.
As they skirted the forest and came out on to a stretch of road fringed by slender copper beeches, Fenella had the feeling of something deep and ancient and strong moving all about them.
The Dryads and the Naiads waking?
But then the moon slid behind a cloud and the images vanished and Fenella thought that perhaps she had been mistaken.
She turned to say something about this to Caspar and then stopped and listened, because now — yes, surely — there was the faint eerily beautiful singing of the sidh .
‘Be wary of the sidh ,’ said Caspar as they skirted the Wolfwood.
‘And be very wary indeed of their music.
They are greedy for Humans, the sidh , and if they can once trap you with their music they will carry you down to the caves beneath the sea and steal one of your five senses and tear out your soul.’
But Fenella thought the sounds and the movements were not all the sidh .
Here and there, they caught sight of a fluid red-gold figure in between the trees and once a huge oak tree seemed to bend forward as if inclining its head to inspect them.
Delight rose in her, for surely these were Tree Spirits.
They did not stop to rest, because Caspar thought they should put as much distance as possible between them and the Gruagach.
‘They oughtn't to wake,’ he said, worriedly, ‘but you never know.
Let's get as far away as we can.’
This was clearly sensible so Fenella did not argue.
She had sorted out the reins now and Caspar had explained about just touching the horse's flanks with her heels to spur it to a gallop.
‘I won't try that yet,’ said Fenella, who was rather enjoying riding the horse, but was not sure how she might get on with whatever was a gallop.
‘I'll get a bit more accustomed first.’
And then, ‘Or if we hear the Gruagach following,’ she said.
‘I'll gallop then.’
Ahead of them would be the road that would lead to the Fire Court  of the sorceress Reflection and her daughter Flame.
They had studied the maps very carefully before setting out and Floy had marked out the way that he and Snodgrass would take.
It had looked quite straightforward, thought Fenella, who was not very used to maps and was still adjusting to the vastness of this world after small Renascia.
Floy had said he and Snodgrass would try their best to leave markers on the road as they went, providing that Balor did not catch them at it.
‘We'll leave arrangements of stones,’ suggested Floy, and Snodgrass had said that he believed this had been done on Earth.
‘But many many centuries before the Devastation,’ he said.
‘There was something about a Bronze Age, I believe.
It's a good idea, Floy.’
Floy had said they would do their best, but Fenella and Caspar ought not to rely on it too much.
‘Because although we'll try to outwit Balor, we might have him with us for a goodish while,’ he said.
It was strange to Fenella to know that presently the night would begin to die and that the pale grey and pink streaks of the new day would start to lighten the sky as it had done on Renascia before the Star Maps changed and the Dark Lodestar had sent out its hungry beckoning.
She had always rather liked the very early morning, which had been a little like the liking of a curtain, a thin silver veil, spangled with droplets of moisture.
It was one of the things that had disappeared from Renascia towards the end and it gave Fenella an odd, rather out-of-balance feeling to see dawn light again.
As the sky lightened even more and they began to make out their surroundings more clearly, Fenella and Caspar both found themselves looking out for the signs that Floy had hoped to leave.
‘Stones arranged in heaps,’ said Fenella, frowning, reining her horse in to a slow walk.
‘Boulders.
What they call cairns in the north,’ said Caspar.
‘But very tiny ones.
And they were going to put them in the shape of an arrowhead.
That's if they could put them there.’
‘Floy would have found a way,’ said Fenella firmly.
‘He knew we were going to be following him.’
‘What about Balor?’
‘Oh, he'd have got rid of Balor by now,’ said Fenella.
And then, ‘Wouldn't he?’
‘I hope so,’ said Caspar, gloomily.
As the road lengthened and the sky began to lighten overhead, they were able to see their surroundings more clearly.
Fenella shivered and drew her cloak more tightly about her.
There was a dead, barren feeling to the road now; the trees were becoming sparse and most of them were stunted and twisted.
The grass was shrivelled and blackened and the leafless branches stood out against the grey morning and seemed to reach skeletal fingers towards them.
There were great rocks on the road and thin mist seemed to cling to everywhere.
And it was growing very cold.
Fenella shivered and drew her cloak more closely about her.
There was a dry, raw whiteness to the sky and when, at last, Caspar stopped to consult the maps and discuss with Fenella which road they should take, his breath formed a vapour on the air.
‘Because,’ he said, ‘there aren't any signs from Floy or, if there are, we've missed them.’
‘I don't think we've missed them,’ said Fenella.
‘I think that either Floy couldn't leave them for some reason, or —’
‘Yes?’
‘Or we're lost,’ said Fenella, rather crossly.
‘Let's trace our route on the maps,’ said Caspar, dismounting and tethering his horse to the low branch of a leafless Tree.
‘It ought to be easy enough.’
Fenella slithered down from the horse's back and stood for a moment in the road, feeling the fingers of mist swirl into her face and touch her skin with damp clammy hands.
It was rather a horrid mist; you felt as if it might be concealing peering, grinning creatures who were being very careful to stay just out of sight, but who were creeping after you as you rode along, or who were tiptoeing on ahead of you, rubbing their hands together, waiting until you reached them…
Perhaps the Gruagach had been following them, keeping just out of sight, waiting until they dismounted, ready to reach out and scoop them up and carry them back to Tara and the roasting spits…
I had better stop this, said Fenella to herself very firmly.
I had better remember that there's nothing in the least bit sinister about mists and fogs.
And we should most certainly have heard the Gruagach if they had been following us.
She helped Caspar to spread out the map and, together, they traced the road from Tara along the sides of the Wolfwood and down through a couple of tiny villages.
‘We've done that,’ said Caspar, pointing.
‘Yes, there's the villages we rode through,’ said Fenella, frowning.
‘And that's the fork in the road where you said left and I said right.’
‘Which was it?’
‘Well, it was right, actually,’ said Fenella.
‘We consulted the maps to be sure.’
‘Oh, yes.’
‘We haven't got lost at all,’ said Fenella, who had been secretly rather afraid of this.
‘We're on the right road.’
‘Oh, yes.
It's just that it would have been nice to have seen the signs,’ said Caspar, rolling the maps up and packing them in his saddle bag.
He did not say that he hoped Floy and Snodgrass were all right, because he did not think he had to say it.
Fenella would be thinking it without anybody to suggest it to her.
Fenella was thinking it, but she was trying to be sensible and practical.
It was important to remember that it was only a few hours since Floy and Snodgrass had left Tara, the Shining Citadel, the Bright Palace, and that there was not very much that could have gone wrong for them in those few hours.
We'll be with them in the Fire Court by nightfall.
Or if not tonight, certainly tomorrow.
I'll believe that we will, thought Fenella, firmly.
I'll believe that we'll catch up with them; probably quite soon.
I wish this mist would lift.
Riding on again, down the road which they thought would be the  easiest route to the Fire Court, Fenella began to have the feeling that the twisty Tree stumps were not Tree stumps at all, but horrid, stunted living things and that malicious ancient eyes looked out from their depths.
So strong was the feeling that several times she thought she caught the tail-end of a movement as they passed by several blackened stumps and she turned sharply, expecting to see something leering evilly at them, but there was nothing.
‘And,’ said Caspar, ‘there is a heavy feeling to the air now, can you tell that?’
‘Yes,’ said Fenella in rather a small voice.
‘It's quite difficult to breathe.’
And then, because it would not help to show fear, ‘What would it be?’ she asked and was pleased to hear her voice quite ordinary and sensible.
‘It might be a number of things,’ said Caspar, who was looking about him.
‘But what I think it is, is the Robemaker.’
‘Here?’
Fenella shivered again, but at the corners of her mind, something said: Nuadu!
By finding the Robemaker (or being found by him?) they might somehow rescue Nuadu.
‘I think we are nearing the Robemaker's Workshops,’ said Caspar.
He reined in his horse and made a gesture with one hand that took in the flat dead wasteland and the strangled trees and the black barrenness.
‘Necromancy,’ he said, lowering his voice, ‘Do you know, I never believed in that hoary old tale about necromancy sucking all the goodness and all the warmth from everything, but perhaps I've been wrong.
You'd certainly say the heart has gone from the land hereabouts, wouldn't you?’
‘Yes,’ whispered Fenella, and wished that Caspar had not used the word sucking , because it made you think about coldly evil creatures with grisly appetites, who might leap on to you and cling to you and sink teeth and claws and needle-sharp pincers into you and suck out your blood and your marrow and all your life juices…
‘What ought we to do?’ said Fenella, a bit more loudly than she had meant.
‘We can't turn back.
Can we?’
Because if we turn back, said her mind, then you will be going away from Nuadu, you will be losing what might be the only chance of rescuing him from the Robemaker.
Caspar had said that no one ever escaped from the Robemaker — but I shall not believe that, thought Fenella.
I will not.
If she half closed her eyes, she could still see Nuadu, the thin, rather sardonic smile twisting his lips, his eyes narrowed and mocking.
And there had been that brief time in the Wolfwood — I won't remember it! thought Fenella, but she did remember it.
The mockery fled, the Wolfprince suddenly and disarmingly vulnerable…
Had he loved her at all?
Perhaps just a little.
I'll believe he loved me just a little at least, thought Fenella, sitting quite still on her horse and looking about her.
I'll believe it and I'll believe we can rescue him and then perhaps I shall manage.
It was important to believe, and it was important not to give up.
The early Earth-people had not given up on anything; they had conquered and explored and invented and they had made a marvellous and memorable world.
Caspar was slowing down, his eyes on a dip towards their left, where  the road seemed to fall away into a natural valley.
‘What is it?’ said Fenella.
Caspar said, in a rather flat voice, ‘At least we can be sure of being on the right road.’
‘How can you —’ Then Fenella stopped as well, because the maps had been very explicit.
They had listed all of the places they would have to pass on their way to the Fire Court; they had shown the tiny villages and the Wolfwood and the forks in the road and the long flat road down to Reflection's country and the glittering decadent Fire Court.
They had shown the cluster of dark low-roofed buildings huddled together at the road's side, reaching far back into the hillside.
The Robemaker's dark and evil Workshops.
And they were directly in their path.
To begin with, Nuadu had not found the crimson mask particularly punishing.
The rope-lights were tight-fitting, but they were not cruel; he could breathe easily and he could move.
He did not waste any energy in trying to break free of the mask, because he knew it to be pointless; the Robemaker's dark enchantments were seldom broken and he knew, as well, that there would be far worse torments ahead.
After the winged Soul Eater had gone from the low-ceilinged Workshops, its leathery wings beating on the night, the soul of the mutilated boy held in a merciless grip between its claws, the slaves had scuttled back to their tasks and the Robemaker had conjured up another of the thin, whiplike lights that had lashed out and thrown Nuadu to the floor.
‘Hurry, Wolfprince, for my work does not wait for such as you,’ he said in his sibilant whisper, but now Nuadu detected a lick of pleasure in the voice.
He moved at once, for he would not lie here on the floor before this ancient evil creature and, although it was awkward and painful to stand up because of the ropes that bound his arms, he did so in a swift fluid movement and stood eyeing the Robemaker.
For a moment, the Robemaker did not speak and then he drew nearer, the dark, silken folds of his cloak brushing the floor with a hissing sound.
Nuadu had the sudden impression that, everywhere it touched, the robe left a thick slimy trail; faintly phosphorescent, certainly foul.
A snail's trail.
A slug's trail.
An emission of pure evil.
And this is the creature who is draining Ireland's heart away and this is the creature who holds sway over Tara, he thought.
But he stayed where he was and he continued to regard the Robemaker from over the restricting mask and, presently, the Robemaker said, ‘Does it not irk you and chafe you to be so confined, Wolfprince?’
For the first time, Nuadu caught the briefest hint of discomposure from the necromancer and knew that by remaining calm and apparently indifferent he had succeeded in disconcerting the Robemaker a little.
But the moment passed and the Robemaker had folded his arms, the deep sleeves hanging down.
Nuadu saw that his hands were hidden by dark gloves, but that they were thin and hard-looking.
Emaciated.
What was behind the dark robe and what was within the deep, all-concealing hood?
The Robemaker turned his head and Nuadu felt a sudden white piercing pain deep inside his mind and he knew at once that the Robemaker had made use of the ancient, forbidden Stroicim Inchinn again and that he had pierced into his secret thoughts.
He felt a sudden unwilling awe for this creature who could with such ease summon and bend to his will the terrible Stroicim Inchinn .
‘The paths of your mind are mine to walk if I wish it,’ said the Robemaker.
‘You find that alarming, I think?
Yes, for amongst your own puny sorcerers, there is a code of honour.’
The words came out on a sneer.
‘A code that forbids the Stroicim Inchinn .’
Again the dark hood moved and Nuadu caught the glint of dark, malevolent eyes.
‘I have only contempt and hatred for your sorcerers, Wolfprince,’ said the Robemaker, and again Nuadu had the sense that the Robemaker was gauging his reactions.
He fixed his eyes on the cloaked figure and waited.
‘Your sorcerers cast me out,’ said the Robemaker.
‘Did you know that, Wolfprince?
Did you know that they exiled me —me !
I was the greatest of the spell weavers and I was the most powerful enchanter they had ever known.’
He stopped, breathing harshly, and, within the hood, his head seemed to tilt slyly.
‘I was once at Tara, Wolfprince’ said the Robemaker in his soft insinuating voice.
‘Does that surprise you?
Once I served the High King Erin — oh, long since.
Decades and centuries.’
He made an abrupt gesture, indicating the enveloping cloak, the deep, hanging sleeves.
‘Your ancestors were gracious to their servants, Nuadu of the Silver Arm,’ he said, sneeringly.
‘They were generous.’
He paused, and Nuadu felt the black hatred emanating from him again.
‘I brought immense powers to Tara in those days,’ said the Robemaker after a moment.
‘I sought to increase my powers, for to master the ancient art of sorcery,truly to master it, it is necessary to master all else.
It is necessary to understand and master every pleasure and every pain, every cruelty and every kindness.’
He stopped again, and Nuadu waited.
‘I had mastered the pleasures and the kindnesses,’ said the Robemaker.
‘But it was still necessary to master their counterparts.’
The half-hidden eyes gleamed.
‘It was necessary to explore, to the utmost, pain and cruelty and the dark secret yearning of men's souls,’ he said.
‘And so I did what few dare to do, Wolfprince.
I went through one of the gateways that exist between this Ireland and the Dark Ireland, that other Realm, that mirror-image which is no mirror-image at all, but a land in its own right.
The underside of the Wolfkings’ Ireland, Nuadu of the Silver Arm; the place where the necromancers and the dark Fields of Sorcery lie, where the Black Citadels of the powerful enchanters exist deep in the desolate Mountains of Twilight.’
He stopped again and Nuadu, trying to guard his thoughts, certainly trying to shield his eyes, thought: and once in the Dark Ireland, you were lured to the side of the necromancers!
You were enticed by the dark magicians into their palaces and their dark citadels and you were shown the powers and the sinisterly beautiful rewards of sorcery.
It would not be the first time that a Court sorcerer had been lured away from the strong pure magic of Ireland and sworn allegiance to the Dark Realm.
He remembered the ancient and persistent belief that once any living creature has walked in the Black Fields of Sorcery and dined at the tables of the Lords of the Dark Ireland, he is for ever lost to the true Ireland.
For a terrible moment, something flared in his heart and he felt an insidious tug at his mind:how would it be to enter that Realm, and talk with the Dark Lords and learn their secrets…?
How would it be to walk in the Dark Fields and journey in the Mountains of Twilight and swim in the underground Crimson Lakes …?
And then his mind cleared, and he was looking at the Robemaker and feeling contempt for him again, feeling as well, the dangerous, powerful white spears of the Stroicim Inchinn withdraw, so that he knew the Robemaker had again called up the Stroicim without giving any outward indication of having done so.
Nuadu thought that a glitter of amusement showed from within the folds of the hood.
When the Robemaker spoke again in his soft hissing voice, he knew he had been right.
‘You see, Nuadu Airgetlam?’ said the Robemaker.
‘You see how easily I can influence your mind?
You see how effortlessly I can conjure up the visions and tempt you into that Realm where I, too, am a Prince?’
He turned about abruptly, as if the subject was suddenly painful or an irritation.
‘It was the High King Erin who ruled in those days,’ he said.
‘And he it was who summoned the Court sorcerers to drive me out.
It was those clever, smug Royal sorcerers, who wove the spell of punishment.’
A brief glitter of triumph showed deep within the hood.
‘But they were unable to chain me with their own powers,’ he said, softly.
‘They could not yoke me.
And so they had to harness my own power — mine!
They had to tap the source of my strength and turn it against me, until it formed a carapace, a cage that held me until they were ready to pronounce punishment.’
He turned about, the silken skirts of his robe hissing across the floor's surface.
‘I was caged by my own power,’ he said in his soft, malevolent voice.
‘I was imprisoned and held captive by the very forces I had so long sought to perfect and that I had honed and polished until they were stronger and more glittering than anything ever known at Tara.
He came back to stand directly in front of Nuadu.
‘But it was the High King Erin who pronounced the spell,’ he said and the cold bitterness was in his voice again.
‘He it was who stood in the deepest Sorcery Chamber of tara and read from the Book of the Academy of Necromancers the incantation.
For that,’ said the Robemaker, viciously, ‘I am sworn to inflict every curse and every torment I may summon on his House.
That is why I joined with the Master CuRoi in his quest to possess Ireland.
That is why I stooped to traffic with the Man-greedy Frost Giantess, and why I intrigued with her to drive out the Gruagach and why I helped the Gruagach to vanquish the High King and take Tara.’
A rather terrible bubble of mirth broke from him.
‘The Gruagach did not suspect,’ said the Robemaker.
‘Never once, during our association, did they guess that I was using them to further my revenge against the  Wolfkings.
But the Wolfkings have been exiled and, although the Gruagach are at Tara, it is I who truly rule.
That was always my intention.
It is still my intention.’
He paused, and appeared to study Nuadu.
‘It is why you are here, Wolfprince.
Your half-brother lies deep inside the Dark Realm and, unless he is rescued, you are Tara's heir.
You are a bastard, but you possess the Royal blood and also the Wolfblood.
If you called to the people, they would follow you because of that.’
Deep within the concealing hood, there was a gleam of pure hatred.
‘You are the heir presumptive,’ hissed the Robemaker, ‘and as such you must be quenched and crushed.
‘I shall put you to the treadmills, Nuadu of the Silver Arm, and I shall enjoy seeing you suffer.
I shall enjoy seeing you suffer as I have suffered.’
With an abrupt gesture, the dark, bony, black-clad hands came up and the hood was thrust back.
The flickering light from the furnaces fell across his exposed face.
‘You see?’ cried the Robemaker harshly.
‘You see what it was that the High King Erin pronounced over me!
You see the curse I bear, Wolfprince!
‘Erin pronounced on me the Draoicht Tinneas Siorai .
‘The Enchantment of Eternal Disease.’
Nuadu was glad that he was unable to speak, for to have done so, to have uttered any kind of sound, would certainly have been to betray the utter revulsion that engulfed him.
He thought he made some kind of strangled gasp; he knew his eyes would have expressed his emotions.
He found himself hovering for a dangerous moment between pity and fear and he fought down the pity at once, for it was not to be thought of that he should feel such an emotion for this evil being.
But as he stood facing the Robemaker in the low-ceilinged workroom, the humming of the Silver Looms all about them, the dry heat stifling and the air thick with the red glow of the furnaces, he looked fully into the face of his captor and thought: what did he do to Ireland's Royal House to deserve such punishment?
Seen without the concealing hood, the Robemaker's face was mutilated and eaten away, so that here and there white bone gleamed.
But even the bone itself is eaten away in places, thought Nuadu, sick with horror.
The Robemaker's skin was covered with suppurating sores, great festering, oozing ulcers, leprous growths, cancerous chancres.
In places, the bone was exposed and, in the uncertain light, Nuadu could nearly believe that it had been nibbled.
Yes, Wolfprince, nibbled, gnawed, ravaged by the bone-eating curse of Erin's sorcerers…
The Draoicht Tinneas Siorai…
There was a lipless mouth, their were deep eye sockets from which gleamed the small evil,old eyes of the necromancer.
Nuadu could see that even the pale, jellied part of one eye was partly missing and he had the sudden sickening impression that it had been eaten away from within .
At the centre of the face was a concave portion and Nuadu knew that the jutting bone of the nose had gone.
There were two cavernous  nostrils and Nuadu realised that this was the reason for the hissing whispering voice.
The malevolent smile liked the terrible mouth again.
‘You see?’ said the Robemaker.
‘You see how the Wolfkings reward those who dare to go against them?’
With a swift, savage gesture, he tore off the dark gloves.
‘You see?’ he said, thrusting skeletal hands forward and Nuadu flinched, for the hands were as ravaged and as eaten as the Robemaker's face; the nails hung by shreds, and the remaining skin was matted and crusted.
‘One of the most malicious and vicious curses of the Amaranth sorcerers of tara,’ said the Robemaker and pulled the hood back into place, so that it was once again the forbidding cloaked being who stood there.
‘I have worked for many centuries to lift it, Nuadu, but it is a long hard task, for the punishment was to be eternal.’
He stopped, and Nuadu waited, ‘At last I bargained with the Soul Eaters,’ said the Robemaker softly.
‘I bargained with them to regain my body and my powers.
I traded with them so that the young girls of the country would no longer shrink from me in revulsion,’ he said, and there was a lick of sensuality in the hissing voice now.
‘For,’ said the Robemaker, softly and slyly, ‘if the Geimhreadh has the voracious appetites of all her race and seeks to suck dry every man who comes into her power, then I have the carnal appetites of Men.’
His eyes gleamed redly again.
‘The Gruagach think to buy the daughter of Reflection and Fael-Inis for their King,’ he said.
‘But it is I who will have that one!
I will embrace her and caress her and possess her.’
Lust glowed redly in his terrible face, and then faded.
‘The Soul Eaters know me well by now,’ he said.
‘For I have gone many times to the Cavern of Cruachan.
I have many times entered into the place that is called, and rightly, the Gateway to Hell.
‘I have taken souls to my Masters, Wolfprince, and every one I give them is placed on the Silver Scales of Justice.’
He looked up as Nuadu made a quick movement and Nuadu caught again the amusement.
‘Yes, Wolfprince,’ said the Robemaker in his soft diseased voice.
‘Yes, those Scales that the faithful foolish Gnomes of Gallan wrought for Erin and which disappeared towards the end of his reign.’
He moved closer to Nuadu and Nuadu caught the stench of diseased flesh.
‘The Soul Eaters took them,’ said the Robemaker.
‘Just as they will take everything of any value in Ireland.
The Scales are in the Cruachan Caves, in the Court of the Soul Eaters, and every soul I offer up is placed on the Scales.
And every time that happens, the Scales weigh a little more heavily in my favour.’
He was standing looking down on Nuadu now, the dark, silken cloak swirling.
‘Soon the Scales will tip in my favour,’ he said.
‘Soon I shall have given enough souls to my Masters.
It is then that I shall be restored.’
The Robemaker laughed, and the sound made Nuadu's skin prickle with horror, for it was a sickening bone-against-bone sound.
Lipless mouth…noseless face.
And then:he has rendered up countless souls to the creatures of the Cruachan Caves , thought Nuadu.
Why, then, has he not been released ?
The white shafts of the Stroicim Inchinn darted again and Nuadu felt the piercing brilliance.
‘You are very innocent, Wolfprince,’ said the Robemaker.
‘There is one soul I must still take and give to my Masters.’
And then, as Nuadu tilted his head, waiting, ‘The soul of Ireland's High King,’ said the Robemaker, and again the fleshless chuckle bubbled from him.
‘But you know already that he is held within the Dark Ireland and that he is captive in a deep and subtle enchantment.
You have long since suspected what happened to your half-brother after the Gruagach stormed Tara and killed the King.’
He leaned even nearer and Nuadu stood his ground and managed to withstand the stench of the suppurating flesh and the rotting bones.
‘We fought over him, Nuadu Airgetlam,’ said the Robemaker, and there was a slick lascivious tone to his voice now.
‘The Dark Lords fought over who should have the chaining of him.’
A frown touched his eyes for a moment.
‘And because there are those whose powers are yet greater than mine, I lost him,’ he said.
‘He is held in thrall to the Dark Ireland, but it was not my enchantment that chained him.’
He stared at Nuadu, and Nuadu stared back, and thought: CuRoi!
So CuRoi does have him!
The Robemaker said, ‘I shall reach him, of course.
I shall reach him and when I have done that I shall break him.’
He studied Nuadu for a moment.
‘I shall break him,’ he said.
‘If it takes me seven centuries, I shall do it.’
There was the white gleam of bone as he smiled.
‘I shall give him to the Geimhreadh to play with for a few nights,’ he said.
‘Perhaps I shall watch while she drinks her fill of his manhood and sucks him dry of his accursed wolfseed.
She and I are long since sworn one to aid the other,’ said the Robemaker.
‘And there is much pleasure in watching a virile young creature brought to impotency.’
The lipless mouth leered.
‘Have you never heard of the Geimhreadh's pincer hands that hold her victim's phallus in place and have you never heard of her darting pronged tongue that licks and pierces into the shaft of her victim's phallus?’ said the Robemaker, softly and insinuatingly.
‘Then you, also, must be given that pleasure, for I should not care for you to miss an instant of any pain, Wolfprince.’
He leaned closer and Nuadu regarded him unflinchingly.
‘I shall break you as well, Nuadu of the Silver Arm’ said the Robemaker.
‘You may defy me now, but you will not continue to do so.
Even though I have chained and muzzled you for the wolf you are, still your eyes challenge and your mind defies.’
The lipless mouth smiled again.
‘I shall put you to the treadmills,’ said the Robemaker.
‘I shall make use of you and you will work alongside my slaves here.
You will work until your feet are stripped raw of flesh and until your legs are bowed and your skin is shrivelled.
Only then, Wolfprince, only when you are cowed and submissive, only when I have drawn from you every shred of defiance, when I have extracted every sliver of pleasure I can from your predicament, shall I take your soul.
‘And when you and your royal half-brother have been sucked dry of every drop of accursed wolfseed by the Frost Giantess; when you have been deprived of every drop that might bear fruit in some unknown womb and create another wolfcreatury, I shall give you both to the Soul Eaters.
‘With those two souls placed on the Scales of Sorcery and rendered to the Soul Eaters, my debt will have been paid.
‘My powers will be restored — and I shall rule Ireland for ever.’
Chapter Twenty-four
Floy and Snodgrass had stopped to rest on the outskirts of the Wolfwood.
Floy thought he would have rather enjoyed this journey if it had not been for the nagging concern about Fenella, left behind in the giants' hands.
He would have enjoyed seeing more of this blue and green misty world with the lingering scents of ancient magic everywhere and he would have liked to see some of its people and found out how they lived and what they did and if they were happy.
But the few houses they passed seemed to have their doors locked and bolted and their windows shuttered.
Floy looked with interest at the fields and pastures and thought that, although they were much larger than the ones on Renascia and the crops and vegetables were not quite the same, there was not so very much difference, really.
But they were untended.
They were deserted and desolated and there was a terrible, bleak air of neglect everywhere.
Floy remembered what Nuadu Airgetlam had said about the Robemaker taking sacrifice from the ordinary Irish people and putting the sons to work in the Dark Workshops and guessed that the people had simply lost heart.
How must it be to tend your bit of land and sow crops and vegetables and perhaps rear animals, knowing you were building up a comfortable home and an inheritance for your children and then see your children taken and forced into slavery by the Robemaker?
As they rode farther along the road, Floy glimpsed the occasional peering face at a cottage window and guessed that the sounds of their horses on the highroad and perhaps the sight of Balor's huge menacing figure, had sent them all scuttling indoors for safety.
This was a truly dreadful way for people to live.
Plainly they went in constant fear of the Robemaker and the Dark Realm.
Clearly all the heart was going not only from the land, but from the people as well.
He began to feel extremely glad that they had agreed to help the exiled Court.
He thought they had unquestionably been right to believe Nuadu and Tealtaoich and the others.
With Balor loping along at their side, they could not discuss whether Fenella would be all right, or speculate how soon she and Caspar would catch them up, or even try to spy out a place to stop and wait for them.
Several times Floy cast sidelong looks at Balor, trying to decide how percipient he might be, but Balor simply turned his head and grinned the gap-toothed grin and occasionally nodded amiably.
Once he hummed a snatch of song, which was something about hunting Humans for the Fidchell and about turning  them on spits and serving them up as Manpie.
But although he might not be bright, Balor's head was on a level with Floy and Snodgrass as they sat astride the two horses and he was twice the size of either of them.
He would very easily subdue them if they attempted to escape.
He would certainly notice if they tried to leave signs for Fenella and Caspar to follow.
The Wolfwood was as dark and as secretive as it had been when they journeyed through to the Forest Court with Nuadu, but here and there, deep within the Trees, Floy caught the darting movement of green and gold; the rustling of silver-tipped leaves that looked, for a moment, like the trailing hair of a creature almost Human…
He touched Snodgrass's arm and nodded in the direction of the forest and Snodgrass said, very softly, ‘The Trees.
Miach's spell,’ and Floy thought: so, after all, he woke them.
He wondered whether they would see the Tree Spirits and then he wondered whether they wanted to see them.
They had sounded rather fearsome beings.
‘Puny things, Trees,’ Balor said.
‘Chop 'em down and use 'em for firewood, I say.’
He dealt a nearby Tree a rather contemptuous blow with the flat of his hand and Floy saw the Tree trunk quiver under the impact.
‘And now a bite to eat,’ said Balor, grinning the wide, flat grin of all the Gruagach.
‘A bite to eat and then we'll be getting along again.’
There was nothing for it but to do as he suggested.
As they dismounted it crossed Floy's mind that the longer they could delay, the better chance Fenella and Caspar had of catching them up.
In the same moment, he realised that it would be extremely dangerous for Fenella to join them.
Balor would at once know that they had outwitted Inchbad and Goibniu.
They walked a little way into the Trees, where it would be more comfortable to sit on the thick, dry forest floor and eat their food and rest.
Dusk was beginning to touch the forest and deep shadows lay across the small clearing where they sat down.
Balor leaned back against the nearest Tree and Snodgrass unpacked the food and spread it out.
‘A good spread,’ said Balor, his small eyes lighting.
‘I like a good spread.’
He reached for a half loaf of bread with both hands and said, by the six hairs of his grandmother's beard, they were doing very well out of all this.
‘And it's a fine day for a journey,’ he said.
Floy was still turning over in his mind ideas and schemes for getting rid of Balor.
It was extremely difficult to know what to do with a giant who loped along at your side and who could reach out and pluck you from your horse's back with one hand.
Floy thought that, even if they broke into a gallop (which he was not at all sure about doing), Balor would simply increase his own pace and catch them very easily.
Floy and Snodgrass ate the food without noticing it very much, but Balor snatched great handfuls from the pack and crammed them into his mouth, spraying crumbs everywhere, letting grease dribble down his chin.
‘Pork,’ he said, nodding.
‘Roast pig.
Very nice.’
And then, with a sudden cackle, ‘But not as nice as roast Human.
By the whiskery snout  of the gods, it's nowhere near as good.
But I see there's blood sausage,’ he said, and sent them such a terrible leery grin, that Snodgrass, who had been cutting himself a slice from this, which he had innocently thought was something like the spicy Renascian liver-and-wine-roll, recoiled and snatched his hand back as if he had been burnt.
Balor grinned at Snodgrass and smacked his lips and grabbed the cask of mead and thought that hadn't the Humans strange, mimsing appetites to be sure.
There was nothing so fine as a good meaty portion of best blood sausage.
Floy had been surreptitiously trying to gather up stones which they could arrange at the roadside, perhaps in the form of an arrow for Fenella and Caspar.
But, even as he did so, he knew that such a small sign would almost certainly be missed.
They needed to leave something noticeable, something that could easily be seen and not misunderstood.
And anything noticeable by Caspar and Fenella would also be noticed by Balor.
Balor had unbuttoned his jerkin and brushed the crumbs from his front and was preparing to take a snooze.
He was rather liking this bit of a jaunt, although he had not been very enthusiastic when Goibniu had ordered him to set out.
Accompany a brace of Humans on a journey and not touch hide nor hair nor whisker of either of them! he had said.
There was a thing to make a decent Human-eating giant shiver in his boots and think shame!
Could he not deliver just one of them, he had asked, looking at Goibniu slyly from the corners of his eyes.
But Goibniu had said no, both the Humans must be taken to the Fire Court and Balor must go along with them and, after they had talked with Reflection, Balor must bring them safely back to Tara.
He dropped into a bit of a snooze, which any giant might be pardoned for wanting after so much walking and a bit of eating, never mind a sup of mead.
The Humans were sitting a little way off; Balor would hear them if they tried to get away.
He would be up and after them in the blink of an eye.
As Balor's eyelids closed and snores emitted from his mouth, Floy and Snodgrass exchanged looks.
Dare they try to steal away now?
Floy got up, not furtively, but quite openly and naturally, so that if Balor should open his eyes it would not seem as if Floy had been trying to run away.
It was an eerie feeling to be stealing through the forest like this.
Floy began to have the sensation that he was being watched, not by Balor or Snodgrass, but by other creatures, creatures who lived in this huge, dark forest, and crept out only under cover of darkness…
He glanced back over his shoulder but Balor was still sleeping.
If I can just reach the horses, thought Floy, moving stealthily forwards.
If I can just reach the horses and reach up and untether them, I believe we could be off and down the road and the creature would never catch up with us.
He was strongly aware of the Wolfwood all about him as he walked cautiously under the Trees.
There was a stirring, a sense that at any minute the branches over his head might dip over him and brush his  face, or that the roots that had thrust up out of the earth might wriggle and become alive and twine themselves about his feet.
Several times he stopped and listened, thinking that there had been a movement just behind him or just to the side of him, or that something had padded after him on stealthy feet and was standing watching him.
But each time there was nothing and Floy thought that perhaps, after all, it was simply the half-light of the Wolfwood and the ordinary scurryings of the night creatures.
He remembered that they had forgotten about dusk and about twilight on Renascia and about the strange tricks that the shadows could play.
The light was fading perceptibly now; they had set out in the full glare of the midday sun, but they had ridden for several hours and dusk was creeping across the land.
The Purple Hour, thought Floy, fascinated and a bit fearful.
What had Nuadu said?
The hour when magic is abroad .
I refused to believe it then, he thought, but I believe it now.
Magic, stealing through the ancient forest, lying thickly on the air…
The Trees had thinned out now and he could see the road ahead of him.
Could it be this easy?
Could they simply creep away from Balor and ride out of his reach?
The stirrings and the rustlings were louder and Floy was suddenly and strongly aware of eyes upon him.
He turned sharply, looking back to where the sleeping Balor lay.
Snodgrass was nearby, sitting bolt upright, watching Floy anxiously.
There was a movement within the Trees, the sudden shifting of green and gold and russet, so that Floy knew the dusk had not been playing tricks after all.
There were beings, creatures, strange inHuman presences everywhere in the forest.
He stood, looking, and there was the movement again; the blurring of shapes and silhouettes that were like nothing Floy had ever imagined; inHuman and ancient and filled with wild woodland enchantment…
The Tree Spirits of the ancient Wolfwood were awake and they were creeping through the darkening forest towards them.
Chapter Twenty-five
Balor had never been so rudely awoken from slumber in his life.
At one minute it seemed that he had been having a fine old dream about Humans and banquets and the Frost Giantess frying on a spit.
The next he had been jerked fully awake and found himself at the centre of a circle of strange, hostile creatures, the like of which he had never seen in his life.
It seemed to his slow, sleep-sodden mind, that there were hundreds of the horrid things and that they were all bearing down on him, a rushing curtain of green and gold and brown, with here and there wild, menacing eyes and reaching, clutching hands that were not hands at all, but nasty, skeletal twigs.
He stumbled to his feet and looked frantically about him, because although no self-respecting Gruagach would run from a danger, these creatures were too many and too huge and too angry .
He scrabbled into a half run, going deeper into the Wolfwood, not looking where he was going, not caring overmuch.
He would outrun the horrid things who had stood leering at him, because there was never a being yet created that could catch a Gruagach once he put his mind to running.
By the seven beards of his ancestors, Balor would run, and they'd see who could run faster!
It certainly would not be the sinister Treelike beings who had regarded him with such terrible vengeance in their unnatural faces!
Floy and Snodgrass stared at one another and then Floy said, ‘We'll have to follow them.’
‘Why?
Isn't this the exact chance to escape?’ said Snodgrass.
‘No,’ said Floy.
‘Because supposing they don't catch him and supposing he does escape —’
‘If he came back and found we'd made off by ourselves, he'd go back to Tara and tell them we'd reneged on the bargain,’ finished Snodgrass.
‘And Fenella would be at the mercy of Goibniu and the rest.
Yes.
That's why we'll have to see what happens,’ said Floy.
‘Hurry, and we'll catch up with them!’
They broke into a run, seeing the Tree Spirits directly ahead of them; a pouring, changing, blurring mass of russet and green; a sweep of autumn tapestry, moving and reaching and sweeping through the forest after the giant.
But he won't get far,’ cried Floy, managing to keep the Tree Spirits in sight.
‘He won't get far, because this is their territory!
They have him in their own country!
Come on, Snodgrass!
We mustn't lose them!’
They were going deeper into the green and blue heart of the  Wolfwood and Floy felt his lungs beginning to ache and his chest pound.
At his side, Snodgrass was capering along, occasionally leaping nimbly over a patch of undergrowth, one hand holding his hat on his head, his cloak flying about his ankles, but keeping pace with Floy.
‘He's fallen!’ cried Floy, and they slowed to a walk, gasping and trying to get their breath.
‘But you're fitter than you look,’ said Floy, with a sudden grin at Snodgrass.
‘A touch dishevelled, of course,’ rejoined Snodgrass, who was puffing a bit .
He righted his spectacles which had been knocked askew and straightened his cloak.
Ahead of them, Balor was lying on the ground and they saw that the Tree Spirits had grouped themselves about him, rather in the manner of people arranging themselves to watch some entertainment, or hear some kind of cause being pleaded.
‘He didn't get so far at that,’ said Snodgrass, as they stood rather warily on the outskirts of the group.
Floy glanced over his shoulder, trying to gauge how far they had come and in which direction the road now lay.
The light had almost gone from the day now and the forest was becoming bathed in soft, subtle hues of the Purple Hour, Dark blue and turquoise light slanted in through the trees, turning the Wolfwood to a place of dark secret shadows and heavy ancient magic.
Balor had fallen headlong and was lying on the forest floor, one foot caught and held by the root of a huge old ash Tree that protruded from the ground.
The wild golden eyes and the pitiless faces of the naiads and dryads and hamadryads loomed over him, hands that were not hands but branches, reaching for him, pinioning him down.
The Tree Spirits were wild and beautiful, but rather terrible.
Closer to them, it was possible to make out individual characteristics; to see that they had trailing leaves instead of hair and huge, reaching branches instead of arms.
They looked what they were: creatures, Spirits of Trees, that had emerged from the ancient Wolfwood from a long, long sleep and who were alive and alert and completely without pity towards their enemies…
Floy and Snodgrass stayed where they were, standing quietly, watching from the edges of the clearing.
Floy thought they probably ought to be afraid themselves, because the Tree Spirits were so inHuman and so wild and so clearly filled with strange woodland magic that once they had finished with Balor they might very well turn to the two Renascians.
‘Ought we to try to get away?’ whispered Snodgrass, whose mind had been going along similar paths.
‘I think it's all right,’ responded Floy, warily, but even as he spoke he was wondering whether it was all right , and whether they mightn't be better simply to walk back through the forest and on to the road.
And then he thought: I suppose we shall find the road again, shall we?
The Trees had surrounded Balor; a towering wall of reaching branches and immense trunks and snaking roots, veined with the golden threads of the Beeches and the glossy green Oaks and with the  shimmering, silver rivers of the Birches.
To Floy, they were beautiful and rather frightening and immensely powerful.
Their eyes were ancient, filled with the wisdom of their long lives, and their shapes were not quite Tree and not quite Human, but a blend of the two.
If you looked at the Trees' upper halves; at the streaming leaf-hair and the mischievous faces of the Silver Birches and the wise, implacable solemnity of the Oaks and the cool, wanton beauty of the Beeches, you could very nearly see similarities to Human features and Human characteristics.
The Tree Spirits' bodies did not thicken in the way that the Trees, their homes, thickened, except for the Oaks who had sturdy, rather shapeless trunks.
They had graceful, slender bodies, tapering into root-like shapes where a Human would have ankles and feet.
To Floy, these strange, rootish feet were the most alien feature of all.
‘And they are fibrous-looking,’ murmured Floy, half to himself.
‘They are too graceful for claws, but they are very like claws.
They can almost grip the ground as they walk.’
‘They're strong, as well.
They would break a man's neck easily, those roots,’ said Snodgrass.
They would break a man's neck easily, and they would break a giant's back with hardly more effort…
Balor was still clumsily trying to scramble to his feet, but the twining roots held him firmly.
His brutish, stupid face was blotchy with fear now and his eyes were bolting from his head.
He tore at the roots that were pinioning his ankles, breaking his thick horn nails in the process, but the roots held and it seemed to the two watching Renascians, that the Tree Spirits swayed and murmured with amusement.
Balor let out a bellow of fear and, in the same moment, the Trees closed in.
They did it singly and purposefully, as if a silent command had been given.
They surrounded him so completely that, for a few moments, Floy and Snodgrass could not see him.
As they moved, the Trees sent out a wailing, keening cry, splitting the quiet forest.
‘It's a war cry,’ said Snodgrass.
‘Isn't it?
They're angry with him.’
‘For denigrating that oak where he tethered the horses?’
‘Yes.
Yes, that, and the way the Gruagach ignored the — what did Nuadu and Caspar call them?— the Tree Laws,’ said Snodgrass, his eyes intent on what was happening.
‘Don't you remember how, at Tara, they had those huge, roaring fires and how they had baskets and boxes piled high with logs and branches?’
‘Yes,’ said Floy.
‘Yes, of course.
They're being revenged on Balor for it.’
The Trees were all about Balor now and the Wolfwood was ringing with the shrieks of their blood lust.
Their eyes glittered and their branches reached out.
The fearsome, fibrous roots whipped across the grind.
What happened next was rather terrible.
Floy and Snodgrass, unable to look away, were sickened and awed.
‘It's no more than he deserves,’ said Snodgrass.
‘It's no more than any of them deserve.’
‘Oh no,’ said Floy softly, remembering Fenella and the Fidchell board and Caspar's descriptions of how the Gruagach used Humans.
‘No, they deserve no less.’
Even so, it was terrible.
The Trees reached down to Balor with their branches and spread him flat on the ground, unlashing the ground roots that had held him, replacing them with the strong, clutching roots of two of the largest Oaks.
Two more Oaks lashed their roots to his wrists and the Trees watched, critically.
Balor was bellowing for help; he was calling down vengeance on the Trees and promising that Inchbad and the Robemaker and the Master CuRoi would certainly punish the Trees for this.
‘By the hairs of my ancestors’ beards, you'll be cut into collops and burned in the chimneys of tara!’he cried.
The Trees paid him no heed.
They simply continued to secure him, coldly and efficiently, as if this was just something that had to be done and as if there was no particular feeling in doing it.
The largest of the Oaks, who had the high-domed features of a scholar and a thinker, and who had massive powerful shoulders, made a sign and the four Oaks who held Balor captive moved.
‘Away from one another,’ said Floy, in horror.
‘They are all moving in opposite directions.’
‘They're tearing him into four,’ said Snodgrass.
‘Each of the Oaks is pulling on an arm or a leg and pulling outwards .
This is — I suppose we can't do other than let it happen.’
‘I don't see how we can stop them,’ said Floy, his eyes on the circling Tree Spirits and on the four Oaks who were now hauling on their claw-like roots, dragging Balor's limbs outwards away from his body.
Balor was braying in anger and pain.
As the Trees moved, both his arms and legs were jerked into taut, out-flung positions.
The coiled roots bit into his flesh, dragging against the skin, so that blood welled to the surface.
‘But the roots will hold firm,’ said Floy, unable to look away.
Balor was struggling and writhing, but his limbs were held fast and only his thick, shapeless body could move.
It threshed this way and that, as the giant tried, uselessly, to pull free of the Trees' cruel grip.
They moved again, pulling away, but Floy and Snodgrass could see that it was hard work for them.
But they are gaining an inch at a time, thought Floy, in horror; they are stretching muscle and flesh.
The farthest of the Trees made a sudden jerking, twisting movement and Balor's arm wrenched out of its socket and lay flaccid and limp.
As the Trees bent to their grisly task again, there was a terrible cracking, bone-against-muscle sound and Balor screeched, sweat beading on his face and running down into his thick coarse neck.
His eyes bulged from his head, red-veined and ghastly, and his lips were drawn back from his blackened, stump-like teeth, as the full horror of what the Trees were doing impinged on his dull mind.
The watching Trees showed no emotion.
They simply stayed where they where, circled about their prisoner, their faces implacable, their eyes cold.
The four Oaks were still hauling on their prisoner and Floy and  Snodgrass could see that Balor's arms and legs were all wrenched from their sockets now, twisted at awkward, unnatural angles.
Floy felt a lurch of sympathetic pain, because surely to simply dislocate an arm was purest agony, but to have it then pulled and pulled until the skin began to split and bleed, must be the most exquisite agony ever.
The Elms had moved forward in their stolid fashion and were leaning ponderously over the tortured Balor.
As Floy and Snodgrass watched in silence, the Elms stretched out their hard, lichen-crusted branches and brought them down on the prisoner's shoulders and thighs, at the place where the skin had started to tear.
Balor had let out a screech of purest agony, but the Elms bent over him with serious, heavy-featured faces and sawed partly through each of the pinioned limbs.
They did not make any hurry about it and Balor writhed and flailed helplessly and blood began to run out on to the ground beneath him.
‘They're making it easier for the Oaks,’ whispered Floy.
‘The Oaks couldn't quite pull off his arms and legs, so they're helping them.’
‘It's like something from a medieval torture chamber,’ said Snodgrass.
‘We had a woodcut of one.
Terrible things.
They could wrench their prisoners’ arms and legs from the sockets.
But I don't think even they went this far.’
Balor had stopped struggling, but was moaning and panting shallowly.
His face was the colour of tallow and blood and saliva ran down his chin and the two Renascians saw that his lips were bitten to shreds.
‘Dreadful,’ said Snodgrass, shuddering, but Floy said, ‘It is only what the Gruagach have done to the Trees.’
Dark, sluggish blood was running from the wounds made by the Elms and there was the gleam of whitish bone and of raw muscle.
As the Oaks moved again, the wounds yawned and slowly, slowly, inch by terrible inch, they gaped wider and skin began to tear and the muscle and bone began to part with a sound that made Floy and Snodgrass both feel sick.
It was the sound of flesh being rent from bone, and the sound of gristle and fat and marrow being torn apart.
Floy thought, with sick dread, that it was the exact sound made when you twisted a leg of chicken from the carcase.
Balor gave a last bubbling cry and a sudden ripple of triumph went through the Trees as the farthest of the Oaks pulled free an arm and held it aloft, a bloody stump, a torn-off gobbet of flesh.
‘A trophy,’ murmured Snodgrass.
‘Yes.’
The other three Oaks had redoubled their efforts now and, one by one, the rest of the giant's limbs were torn from their moorings and held aloft, wet, bleeding rags of flesh.
The bloodied torso of what had been Balor lay twitching on the ground, moving clumsily, trying to pull itself along the ground, like a monstrous beetle which has been turned on its shelly back and cannot right itself.
Thick, sluggish blood seeped from the great jagged holes where his arms and legs had been and, with them, a watery pus.
A thick, too-sweet stench lay on the air.
As the Trees moved back, silently watching their victim, Balor's  bitten lips emitted a bubbling moan and saliva and blood dribbled out again.
There was a choking rattle and his eyes turned upwards, so that only the whites showed, red-veined and protruding slightly.
‘Dead,’ said Floy softly, and then looked at the Trees.
The Oak, who had seemed earlier on to be the leader, said, ‘Yes, Human creature, he is dead.
It is no more than he has done to our people.’
‘Yes.
I see.’
‘We shall bury him,’ said the Oak, and Moy saw that already the Tree Spirits were scrabbling at the earth, their roots scraping and shovelling, so that, quite soon, a deep trench was opened.
‘Into the earth with the remains,’ said the Oak, turning to watch.
‘Let his rotting carcase mingle with the forest.’
It was rather dreadful to see Balor's remains flung unceremoniously into the trench, first the mutilated torso and then the arms and legs.
‘Meat for our roots,’ said the Oak, and a rather grim smile touched its features.
‘Yes.’
But Floy was still sickened; he remembered how on Renascia they had tried to follow what they had known of the Earth-people's death rituals and how they had had the large, austere Firehouse with the ornate bronze lamps which were always kept burning in memory of those who had died.
The dead were consumed by cleansing fire at a ceremony which every Renascian was bound to attend and there would usually be a carefully arranged display of the dead person's life and a small booklet telling about his life and his work, nearly always written by Snizort and Snodgrass in gentle and tactful collaboration with the bereaved family.
‘We shall eat the giant as its people ate our people,’ said the Oak and regarded Floy and Snodgrass steadily.
‘And as its people eat your people,’ it said.
‘That must not be forgotten.
It is a fitting punishment, although it may seem harsh to you Humans.’
‘It is not what we have been used to,’ said Floy.
‘But I understand.’
‘The only basis for punishment,’ said the Oak, rather severely, ‘is to fit the punishment exactly to the transgression.
It is a practice which has been followed in Ireland, since the High King Erin introduced it.
He was strong and wise and believed in exact and precise forms of justice.’
‘I see,’ said Floy, who did not completely see, but who understood the premise.
‘And now,’ said the Oak, ‘you will wish to continue your journey, Human creatures.’
Its wise eyes were kindly and interested.
‘We shall wish you Good Speed and Safe Arrival.’
It sounded like some kind of ritual in the way the Oak said it and the other Trees bowed their heads in acknowledgement.
Floy said, ‘We thank you all,’ and hoped that this had the correct formality.
‘And we shall hope to meet you again,’ said Snodgrass and the Trees suddenly looked pleased and unexpectedly Human.
The Silver Birches giggled in a skittish fashion and the Copper Beeches shook out their  rippling manes of glowing leaf-hair and regarded the two Renascians through the red-gold curtains.
‘Perhaps you would do well to rest for the night and journey on by daybreak,’ said the Oak.
‘If you will accept the hospitality of the Wolfwood, we shall assure you of safety and warmth.’
‘Well — thank you very much,’ said Floy.
‘But I believe we must go on.
It is a question of — of meeting up with our people, you see.’
‘Then,’ said the Oak, bowing its wise solemn head, ‘we shall not detain you.’
There was a murmur of assent and the wise, strange heads were dipped in the gesture of acknowledgement they had used earlier and the Tree Spirits moved away, not quite fading into the gloom of the forest, but somehow becoming one with it.
The moon was high above them as they walked cautiously through the dark forest and the pale, eerie light lay across the woodland path, cold and unfriendly.
Over their heads, the trees interlaced their branches so that only tiny patches of the velvet night sky were visible.
‘And the Tree Spirits have retreated,’ said Floy, softly.
‘Yes.
Interesting creatures, those Trees,’ said Snodgrass, trotting along beside Floy.
‘We should perhaps have asked the Trees the best path to take,’ said Floy, presently.
‘It's only that this is such a vast place,’ said Snodgrass, firmly.
‘That's all it is.
Renascia was so small that you hadn't to plan journeys at all.
You could go from one end of Renascia in two days and from side to side in three.
We aren't used to such — such hugeness.
The Wolfwood's immense.’
Floy said, ‘If we could find the path to the Forest Court we could be sure of help.’
‘And food,’ said Snodgrass, rather sepulchrally.
‘We left the food with the horses, in those packs.’
‘Well, we can't be far from either the road or the Forest Court,’ said Floy.
‘I won't believe that we're lost.
And look, if we —’
‘What?’
‘I was going to say if we carve notches on the Trees, at least we shan't go round in circles,’ said Floy, grinning.
‘I don't think we'd better do that, however.’
‘Bless my soul, no,’ said Snodgrass, shocked.
‘We could make a — a circle of stones, though,’ said Floy.
‘At the foot of the Trees.
That's more or less what we were going to do for Fenella and Caspar.
Yes, look, we'll do that, and then at least we shan't go round in circles.’
They walked on, scanning the shadows, leaving markers at the foot of the Trees, trying to gauge their direction by the stars.
‘But the trouble is that we don't know the pattern of the stars here,’ said Snodgrass, who had sent himself quite dizzy by standing perfectly still and craning his neck as far back as he could in order to see the night sky.
‘We could have done it on Renascia, because we knew where the stars where and what their names were.
But here there's so much of  everything.
Stars and forests and paths.’
Floy was becoming uneasily aware of the looming bulk of the Trees and of the scurryings and the rustlings and the patterings of unseen creatures all about them.
Night was all about them and the Wolfwood was a strange, none-too-safe place.
It was very easy to imagine eyes peering from the gloom, or strange beings creeping along the path behind them.
And there is magic abroad here …
I wish Nuadu had not said that, he thought.
Snodgrass said, ‘Do you know, I believe the Trees are thinning.
Over there.’
‘Where?
Oh, there.
Yes, I can see,’ said Floy, with a rush of thankfulness.
‘Yes, you're right.’
And quickened his steps because, of course, they had not been lost at all and, of course , it had been ridiculous to think they had been.
They had simply come a little deeper into the forest than they had realised.
At any minute they would see the two horses and they would mount them and ride on down the road and all would be well.
It might even be rather pleasant to ride through this strange, beautiful world with the silver moonlight.
Floy had begun to get the hang of riding after a while.
It was a question of balance and of bumping when the horse bumped.
And on horseback they would feel so much safer.
They would be able to gallop hard away from anything that might spring out at them.
It was remarkable how unsafe it had felt walking through the forest like this.
They made their way through the thinning trees, the moonlight touching the grass with silver, seeing the shadows changing as they neared the forest's edge, becoming thinner, less mysterious, more like ordinary shadows that lay across ordinary roads at night.
Ordinary roads…
The road ahead of them was narrow and winding, silvery and black in the moonlight.
The forest sprawled behind them and ahead of them and, beyond the Trees, they could see the remote, beautiful outlines of mountains.
‘Mountains,’ said Snodgrass, frowning.
‘But there weren't any mountains when we came along the road earlier.’
‘There wasn't forest on both sides of the road either,’ said Floy.
‘Then — it's a different road.’
‘It must be,’ said Floy, staring about him.
‘I've no idea where we are.’
They unrolled the map which had been tucked in Snodgrass's cloak and spread it out carefully on the ground.
It was important to find out exactly where they were, so that they could get back to where they wanted to be.
It was even more important to do this quickly, because they had no food and they had lost the horses.
Wherever they went, they would have to go on foot, which might take a long time.
‘I think we're here,’ said Floy, after a moment, indicating a spot on the map.
‘D'you see the mountains and the Wolfwood?
And this must be the road.’
He pointed, and Snodgrass nodded.
‘We've simply walked across the Wolfwood and come out where another road runs through it,’ said Floy.
‘Well, at least we aren't lost ,’ said Snodgrass, bracingly.
‘No, of course not.’
Floy frowned at the map.
‘We can go back through the Wolfwood and hope that we reach our original road again,’ he said.
‘Although that might take some time, of course.’
He glanced at the sky.
Was it already streaked with the first faint grey fingers of dawn?
Perhaps not.
‘If we continued down this road here , we'd still reach the Fire Court,’ said Snodgrass, who was quite good at maps and found them interesting.
‘We'd approach it from the south instead of the east, that would be all.
But it looks much quicker than re-tracing our steps.’
He glanced uneasily in the direction of the Wolfwood and then said, ‘What about Fenella?’
But Floy had already faced this one.
‘We have almost certainly missed Fenella by now,’ he said.
‘If they set out from Tara at the hour they intended, they will have gone down the forest road hours earlier.’
‘While we were trying to find our way in the Wolfwood,’ said Snodgrass.
‘Perhaps while the Trees were setting about Balor.
Dear me, yes.’
‘Fenella will go on to the Fire Court, of course,’ said Floy, who had very nearly managed to convince himself of this.
‘Caspar will be with her and he knows the roads.’
He did not listen too closely to the small, cold voice that had persistently asked how far they could trust Caspar.
He thought they could be almost sure about Caspar.
I'll have to believe we can trust him, he thought.
And Caspar helped us to escape.
It's important to remember that Caspar helped us to escape.
I won't believe that he was in a plot against us.
He looked back at the map.
‘I think you're right, Snodgrass,’ he said.
‘This road we're on looks to be the shorter way now.
Let's continue on it, shall we?’
Snodgrass thought this would be best.
‘We might lose our way in the forest again if we go back into it,’ he said.
‘We might wander about for hours and waste a great deal of time.
That's a mountain road ahead,’ he said, pointing to the map.
‘That means going a little way into the mountains and I don't see how you could get lost on a mountain road.
You'd have mountains on each side of you and there'd only be one way to go.’
Floy was tracing the road on the map.
‘We shall have to be careful there,’ he said, pointing.
‘The other side of that mountain road.’
‘Why?
What's there?’ said Snodgrass, adjusting his spectacles the better to see.
‘Just over the peak of the mountain,’ said Floy.
‘It's the City of Gruagach.
The City of the Giants.’
They looked at it in silence.
The giantish city, the immense northern township where the Gruagach Giants had lived and lured Humans to their doom.
‘They're no longer there, though,’ began Snodgrass.
‘They're all at Tara,’ and then stopped.
‘No,’ said Floy.
‘The Gruagach are no longer there.
But something else is.
Something that we must avoid at all costs.’
He looked at Snodgrass.
‘Don't you remember?’ he said.
‘When the  Gruagach came storming down from their city to take Tara, Gruagach was taken by the Geimreadh .
The Geimreadh …
The terrible Human-hungry creature that Fael-Inis had warned them against…
Snodgrass said, ‘But can't we avoid Gruagach?’
‘No,’ said Floy, and traced the route again on the map.
‘If we are to reach the Fire Court, we must pass close to the City of Gruagach.
‘We shall be inside the territory of the Frost Giantess.’
Chapter Twenty-six
Fenella stood very still and stared at the dark, hunched buildings at the side of the road.
The Workshops of the Robemaker…
Dark and imbued with the evil of the necromancer and forbidding beyond anything she had ever seen.
And Nuadu is in there…
She had not expected anything quite so twisted and stunted-looking.
A miasma of despair rose from the cluster of black Workshops and Fenella felt it billow out and engulf them in its sick, cold desolation.
‘And there is a sour sad scent on the air,’ said Caspar unexpectedly, his eyes on the workshops.
‘The scent of despair.’
They were standing on the side of the road, with the forest behind them and the Robemaker's Workshops directly ahead.
It was not quite night, but it was very nearly night.
The Purple Hour…
Fenella shivered, because surely if there were any creeping darknesses abroad here, they would be abroad now, with the twilight stealing through the Wolfwood behind them…
But it was important not to think about things like shadows and creeping, unseen things.
It would be better to concentrate on finding a way into the Workshops and getting to Nuadu and bringing him out.
And I suppose, thought Fenella, with a sidelong glance at her companion, that I shall have to find a suitable way, an acceptable way, of explaining about Nuadu to Caspar.
In the uncertain light, they could see the dull glow that emanated from the Workshops and they could hear the steady thrumming of the Looms.
‘They never cease,’ said Caspar at her side.
‘They must never cease, otherwise the Power they draw down will be broken.’
He frowned.
‘All sorcerers know that,’ he said, ‘but only the Black Sorcerers use Humans to turn the treadmills.’
‘How else can they be turned?’ asked Fenella, partly from interest, but partly because it would be a good idea to know as much as possible about the Workshops.
‘They use water quite of ten,’ said Caspar.
‘Like mills.’
And looked at her questioningly.
But Fenella knew about mills and mill wheels.
‘Or they use minor sorceries,’ said Caspar.
‘The best sorcerers do that.
They create another source of power, a secondary source, to turn the Looms.’
And Fenella remembered the thin, frayed legend of how the Earth-people, at one time in their history, had created a race of machines and how they had then created machines to run the  machines and how it had all got out of hand.
So, after all, there was nothing so very new in the world…
‘Will the Robemaker be in there, do you suppose?’
Fenella was trying to decide how to explain to Caspar about the captured Nuadu.
‘Or might he be out looking for other slaves to turn the Looms?’
Nuadu had said that the Robemaker and CuRoi took sacrifices from the ordinary people of Ireland; strong young sons to work at the Looms, although presumably they would not actually do this work themselves.
Had they servants to do it?
Or was it done by necromancy?
‘They say that, for some of the time, the Robemaker dwells in the heart of the Dark Realm,’ said Caspar and glanced over his shoulder uneasily.
‘But he might as easily be here.
We can't be sure.
That's why we'd better move on without any delay.’
But Fenella, who had twice now seen the terrible hooded and cloaked shape creep up on her, thought that the Robemaker was not here.
There had been a heaviness in the air on the Robemaker's approach those other times; a cold, greasy feel, as if thick, oily fog had swirled out into the clean air.
‘I'm going to look inside,’ she said at length, and Caspar turned to stare at her.
You can stay here or go on without me,’ said Fenella, returning the stare very straightly.
‘I don't much mind, although I'd prefer you stay.
But whatever you do, I'm going to look inside.’
Caspar, genuinely appalled, said, ‘But don't you know that it's almost the most dangerous place in the whole of Ireland?’
And looked at her and said, ‘You don't know, do you?
But it truly is, Fenella. if the Robemaker is there, or even if one of his horrid spells — what they call Sentry Spells — is lurking, we'd be taken up and captured before you could say Gruagach.
I'd be put to work on the Looms and you'd be —; Well,’ said Caspar, who, despite his work for the Court and later the Gruagach, had retained a vestige of delicacy, ‘well, I'd rather not say what might happen to you.
Let's go on to the Fire Court.
We can't be so very far from it now.’
Fenella was trying to be very patient, because it was not in the least unreasonable of Caspar to want to go on and leave the Dark Workshops as far behind them as possible.
She weighed the advantages of telling him about Nuadu and the terrible crimson mask against the matter of his allegiance.
Was there a middle course she could take?
Something to account for her needing to get into the Workshops, but something that did not give away the Beastline people's plans to attack Tara?
Yes, of course there was.
‘Caspar,’ said Fenella, looking at him very intently.
‘We didn't tell you the entire truth, Floy and I.’
‘Didn't you!’ said Caspar, suspiciously.
‘When we arrived here,’ said Fenella, and spared a thought for the absurdity of these words, because the manner of their arriving had been something so remarkable as to defy explanation or description.
‘When we arrived here,’ she said, firmly, ‘we lost one of our — our party.
‘Well?’ said Caspar.
‘He — the Robemaker took him,’ said Fenella.
‘And we vowed to try  to rescue him.’
She looked back at the huddle of low-roofed buildings.
‘He's in there,’ she said, and something so sad and so wistful entered her voice that Caspar, who was by no means insensitive, looked at her more intently.
‘We must get him out,’ said Fenella, abandoning all pretence.
‘Please, won't you help me?’
Caspar hesitated.
As well as not being insensitive, he was by no means impervious to the sudden plea for help from a young and attractive lady.
He had never met anyone quite like Fenella and he found her rather intriguing.
He supposed he was more or less honour bound to help her.
But his eyes went back to the Workshops and he frowned and sought for the right thing to say.
‘If you won't,’ said Fenella, ‘I shall quite understand.
But I shall have to go in by myself, that's all there is to it.’
She studied the Workshops, frowning, and Caspar, who was becoming alarmed by this time, saw that this was no ruse to secure his assistance; Fenella intended to get into the Robemaker's Workshops and rescue whoever it was who was in there.
And whether he went with her or not, she would do it.
This was not something that could be allowed, not by anybody's standards.
So he said that they could perhaps take a look round to see were there any secluded windows anywhere or any openings where they might just squeeze through.
And heard his voice saying these things with appalled horror.
‘That,’ said Fenella warmly, ‘is a very good idea.
You should always inspect the terrain before going into battle.’
And then, ‘I read that somewhere,’ grinned Fenella.
‘Shall we try this side first?’ and was off before Caspar had time to collect his thoughts.
He managed to detain her long enough for them to tether the horses, because there would be no sense in coming out of the Workshops (with, or without the prisoner) and finding that the horses had turned their heads for Tara and that they had to walk the rest of the way to the Fire Court.
He thought, privately, that they might be very glad of the horses, because they might find that they came out of the Workshops much faster than they went in, but he did not say this.
‘Ready?’ said Fenella, having helped with the tethering and fastening her cloak more tightly about her shoulders.
‘No,’ said Caspar gloomily.
‘No, I'm not ready and I wish I hadn't come, if you really want to know.
In fact, if you want the truth, I wish I was back at Tara with the Gruagach.’
‘That's not at all the way to think,’ said Fenella severely.
‘We'll get inside somehow and we'll find the — the person who was captured and be out again before you know it!’
She sent him the sudden grin again and Caspar said, ‘Oh dear me,what optimism,’ but he said it quietly.
Fenella moved down the narrow, steep slope with the stunted trees and the blackened, scarred ground and felt, as she neared the Workshops, a thick, clotted malevolence belching out towards them.
It was rather like going down into a horrid, dark, earthy hole, where dull crimson firs burned and where grinning creatures might be peering at you from the shadows.
But I don't believe there are, thought Fenella firmly.
I truly don't believe there are.
The Robemaker isn't here — I know he isn't here — and we shall find a way to get inside and Nuadu will be there and we shall bring him out.
Caspar walked rather ploddingly along at Fenella's side, but Fenella thought that at least he was at her side and found this unexpectedly comforting.
There had been one or two Earth stories of how warriors going into battle had gone shoulder to shoulder, which had always seemed a rather odd expression, but which suddenly made sense.
Caspar was not the ideal person to be shoulder to shoulder with, because he would probably melt away altogether if there was a real threat.
But at least he is here, she thought, and wondered if she would really have tried to get into the Workshops by herself if she had had to.
Would I?
Oh yes, if it meant rescuing Nuadu.
As they neared the Workshops, Fenella heard the continuous thrumming of the Looms and saw the pulsating red glow of the furnaces.
She thought that the sound and the scent would surely hammer your mind into a state of numbness, eventually.
What must it be like to be imprisoned here, day after day, month after month?
I wonder, does he keep them chained and manacled, thought Fenella, or does he use sorcery?
And, so utterly immersed was she in this strange blue and green land that was not feeling strange any more, that she did not even notice that she was weighing sorcery against steel chains and seriously considering the likely outcome.
Closer to, the Workshops were much larger than either of them had realised.
They seemed to stretch back into the hillside as if they might, at some stage, cease to become manmade buildings of stone and wood and brick and become ancient caves; tunnels that would penetrate deep into the earth's core.
The walls were built of dark, rough stone, almost black, pitted here and there by the heat of the furnaces.
There were narrow high windows, far above them; Fenella thought they would open on to rooms at a higher level than the ground.
The windows had a sly, mean look, and Fenella had the sudden impression that the Workshops were not workshops at all, but a single crouching monster, black and hard-backed and scaly on the outside, but possessed of roaring, flaming innards, so that every breath it took belched out hissing steam and curls and wisps of flame.
The windows are its eyes, she thought, staring upwards.
They are the eyes of the monster, red and evil and calculating, and they are watching us, those eyes, and thinking: oh yes, here are two very useful morsels of Humanity…
And I had better not think like that, said Fenella silently, or I shall be too afraid to go any nearer.
I'll concentrate on getting inside, getting to Nuadu.
‘The Looms generate immense heat,’ said Caspar, as they drew nearer and Fenella flinched from the dry, gusty warmth.
‘It'll probably be quite uncomfortable.’
‘Very uncomfortable, I expect,’ said Fenella and went on studying the black stone buildings to see if there was a small, partly hidden door that they might use to get inside.
As they skirted the western side of the Workshops, they both saw how the grass here was blackened, the walls charred in places, the great smokestacks thickly crusted with cinders.
Fenella, moving ahead, saw, as Nuadu had not been able to see, that there were tiny cracks in the walls, from which the glowing heat threw out threads of fiery light and through which little angry hisses of steam continually escaped.
Caspar was peering along the darkened west wall, when Fenella said in a whisper, ‘Caspar!
See over there?
An open window.
Exactly what we want.’
‘Yes.
Yes, it is.
And,’ said Caspar, ‘there doesn't seem to be any heat coming from it.
There certainly isn't any light to speak of in the windows.
Does that mean there are no furnaces in there, I wonder?’
‘Might it be a storeroom?
Set a bit apart?’
The open-windowed room looked as if it was quite far away from the main body of the Workshops.
And surely there must be fuel of some kind to feed the great furnaces, and surely there would have to be a store-place.
‘It could be a Welhouse,’ said Fenella.
‘Which would make it a good place to try to get in.’
‘They say the Robemaker uses human fuel,’ said Caspar, half to himself, and then, ‘Fenella, do you really think we ought to be doing this?
Wouldn't it be better to raise help of some kind?’
‘What kind of help?’ said Fenella.
And then, ‘Caspar, have you ever actually seen the Robemaker?
Really seen him?’
‘Well, no.’
‘I have,’ said Fenella and repressed a shiver.
‘And he's evil and merciless and terrible.
He'd fell you with an enchantment in an instant.
And he'd never be defeated just by strength.
If you sent a great army against him, he'd simply cut it down with his sorcery.
It's stealth and trickery that's needed to outwit him.’
The place that Fenella thought might be a fuelhouse was a small, added-on section, jutting out from the main body of the Workshops.
Fenella remembered the houses on Renascia and how they had nearly always had sculleries and washing houses jutting out from the main rooms.
This had the same kind of look to it.
It was a part of the main building, but it was not a central part.
Probably it was not used very much and probably they could climb through the window and be inside without anyone even realising.
‘I suppose you want me to go first,’ said Caspar as they stood looking up at the open window, which was grimy and smeary, but much lower than the other windows.
‘I'd go first,’ said Fenella, who would do so unhesitatingly.
‘I'm perfectly capable of climbing through a window.
But I can't reach the window by myself.
You go up first and then help me.’
‘Let's not be hasty,’ said Caspar, moving to the window.
‘Let's just take a look first and wait till we see what's inside.’
He grasped the narrow sill and hauled himself up so that he hung, partly suspended by his hands, his chin level with the lower sill.
‘Can you see?’
Fenella was standing on tiptoe alongside him, but the window was too high and she could not see.
‘What can you see?’ said  Fenella.
And then, as Caspar drew in a shocked gasp, ‘Caspar, what's in there?’
Caspar let go of the sill and slid rapidly to the ground with a bump, looking a bit sick.
‘Oh, dear me,’ he said, standing back from the window and dusting himself down, wiping his face with a handkerchief.
‘Dear, dear me!
I never thought to see such nastiness, not even serving the Gruagach, I didn't.
Well, it's no sight for a lady, that I do know.
I think we'd better forget the whole idea.’
He eyed Fenella uncertainly and Fenella, who was becoming impatient, said, ‘Well, for heaven's sake —’ which was an expression she had picked up from Snizort and Snodgrass and which was as meaningless as most of their expressions, but descriptive of strong emotion.
‘Do come away,’ said Caspar, taking her arm.
‘I promise you we'd be much better to go quietly back on to the road and make our way to the Fire Court.’
‘You can go to any number of Fire Courts,’ said Fenella, crossly.
‘But I'm going in there whether you come with me or whether you run away.
I don't much care which,’ said Fenella, who did not really want Caspar to ride off and leave her alone out here, but who was not going to get so close to Nuadu and then ride away and leave him.
‘And first of all, I'm going to climb through the window,’ she said and reached for a stack of sacking which had been thrown down near the wall and which, piled carefully, might enable her to reach the sill.
‘I wish you wouldn't,’ said Caspar, but Fenella took a deep breath and clambered on to the sacks and grasped the window ledge, rubbing a bit of the window pane clear.
And looked in.
The storeroom (yes, she had been right about that after all) was not very big and not very well lit.
There seemed to be a door cut into the wall that was farthest away from the window; Fenella, trying to get her bearings, thought it would lead more deeply into the Workshops, perhaps even back and back into the cave part.
Odd pieces of broken and split machinery were strewn about or propped against the walls.
The room looked to be what they had thought; a store or perhaps a fuelhouse which might be left unattended for most of the time.
The sort of deserted outbuilding that might easily be forgotten, until a fresh supply of fuel was needed.
The twisted machinery pieces cast shadows on the floor, weird and grotesque, so that, for a heart-stopping moment, Fenella thought that strange beast-things were crouching in the corners and remembered that Caspar had said something about Sentry Spells; minor enchantments that the Robemaker might have left on guard in his absence.
But light was spilling in through the seams of the door at the far end of the room; crimson, glowing light from whatever lay on the other side.
After a moment Fenella's eyes grew used to the dimness and she could see quite plainly into the room.
She could see what had made Caspar turn pale and sick.
A great pile of felled Trees.
Trees which had been hacked and chopped and mutilated, which had had branches torn away so that they could be roughly stacked against the wall.
Fuel for the Robemaker's  roaring furnaces that must never be allowed to cool…
But the Trees were not just Trees.
They were people, beings, half-formed creatures who might have been strange and beautiful and filled with wild, woodland magic.
Beings who were now dead or dying, and who were lying in tangled, dreadfully mutilated heaps.
Fenella, clutching the narrow ledge, standing precariously on the piled sacks, thought, in horror:Miach's spell .
The emerging of the Tree Spirits.
What had Miach called them?
Naiads and Dryads and Hamadryads.
Nymphs and oreads and nereids.
Beautiful, half-human forms, partly emerged from the ancient beeches and oaks and elms and birches and ash Trees, taking shape under the summoning of Miach's magic.
But here were hacked limbs and truncated bodies.
Strange, greenish — gold fluid staining their skin which was not quite skin and not quite leaf.
Tree-blood flowing down, mingling with the rippling bronze hair of the copper beeches and the pale, frond-like arms of the ash Trees and the poor, split, high-arched feet of the silver birches.
There was a deep, thick blood from the old oaks, still trickling slowly out here and there, as if the Trees might not have been cut down so very long since, or — and this was much worse — as if there were still vestiges of life in them.
Branches and limbs and hair and eyes all jumbled and mixed, so that you could not tell where the Tree part ended and the naiad part began.
The ancient Tree Spirits, awakened by magic after their centuries-old sleep, captured and taken by the Robemaker.
Bound and held by his terrible evil magic, thought Fenella, sickened.
Held, perhaps, by the crimson rope-lights, as Nuadu was held, and then butchered and slain and thrown into a dark woodshed, to await burning in the heart of a necromancer's fiery furnace…
‘I'm going to climb in,’ said Fenella, at last, and pointed to a thick chunk of dried-out wood.
‘We can drag that underneath the window and then I'll be able to get through the window.’
‘Best oak,’ said Caspar, looking at the log and shaking his head.
‘The Robemaker must have been taking the Trees for years.’
‘Well, we mustn't think about it now,’ said Fenella in a practical voice.
‘It can't hurt the Oak now if I stand on it to get in, can it?
No, I didn't think it could.
Would you help me up?’
But Caspar, belatedly gallant, said that it was for him to lead the way.
‘I'll go in first and then pull you up.’
‘It would be much easier if I went in first and then you could push me up,’ said Fenella.
‘It doesn't seem right,’ said Caspar, half to himself.
‘It doesn't seem polite if you know what I mean.’
‘We can't worry about manners.
Do hurry,’ said Fenella impatiently.
Fenella clambered cautiously on to the oak log and grasped the ledge.
if the Robemaker had left any Sentry Spells, then surely this was the moment for them to come rearing out to challenge the intruders.
She sat for a moment on the narrow window ledge, scanning the shadows in case shapes, creatures, sentinels should materialise.
But nothing happened and Fenella felt a small, frail spiral of confidence  and thought that the very suggestion that the Robemaker needed sentries at all indicated that he was not as all-powerful as they had feared.
And if he has left any to catch us, then they aren't very good, she thought.
We're partway in already.
‘Hurry up!’ said Caspar urgently, from outside.
He hauled himself after her and Fenella gasped and half fell, half pulled herself over into the Robemaker's wood-store, to be followed, a minute later, by a rather out-of-breath Caspar.
They stood silently together in the dim, rather narrow room, with the sharp scent of the butchered trees all about them and, underneath it, a soft, sad scent that Fenella thought must be the spilled Tree-blood.
In the red-lit dimness it was possible to see the mutilated Tree Spirits more plainly now and Fenella thought there had never been anything quite so dreadful.
They were not all quite dead.
Fenella and Caspar could see this clearly; they could see that some of the Tree Spirits were still breathing, shallowly and painfully, their strange, wise faces shuttered and suffering, their branches torn from their bodies and great, gaping wounds still bleeding.
‘Terrible,’ said Caspar, rather pale.
‘Can't we do anything for them?’
‘I don't think so,’ said Caspar.
‘I think they are too — too cruelly hurt.’
‘We'd better try to find the prisoners,’ said Fenella at last, although she did not really want to leave the comparative safety of the wood-store.
‘Through there, do you think?’
‘As well there as anywhere,’ said Caspar.
The door that Fenella had indicated was the one with ill-fitting seams that permitted the red glow to seep through.
It was wider than it had looked and Fenella thought she had been right to think it led away from the road, deeper into the hillside.
‘Can you hear anything?’ she said as they stood looking round.
‘I can hear the Looms,’ said Caspar.
‘But then, they never stop.’
He listened for a moment.
‘I can't hear anything,’ he said.
‘Ready?’
‘Ready,’ said Fenella.
‘We'll leave this door propped open,’ said Caspar.
‘In case we need to —’
‘Escape quickly.’
‘Yes.’
And then, because there did not seem to be any reason to wait, they moved cautiously to the door at the far end of the wood-store and inched it open.
The noise and the dull angry light of the furnaces poured in.
Chapter Twenty-seven
Caspar and Fenella stood in the Workshops, with the wood-store behind them, their skin shrivelling and flinching and every sense assaulted by what was before them.
The room they were in stretched back and back — Into the hillside, thought Fenella — and far above them.
In the evil, glowing red light they could see that the walls were not of brick or timber or of anything that walls were normally made of.
They were earth; dark, hard-packed earth, here and there cracking with the endless dry heat.
There was the feeling of being in a dark, hot cave and there was the sudden swift impression of ancient malevolent creatures that dwelled here and slept for decades, or sometimes centuries, until they were disturbed…
There are things in here that are sometimes asleep and sometimes not asleep, thought Fenella.
Sentry spells?
Yes, perhaps.
I can feel them, thought Fenella, standing very still just inside the huge, high-ceilinged, firelit room.
I can feel that there are forces in here that could very easily be woken and, if they are woken, they would come crawling and slithering out from their lair and we would not have very much chance against them…
At the far end, huge double doors opened on to the furnace room.
The doors were partly open, showing the great iron stoves and the furnaces and the immense black pipes that disappeared into the floor.
Billowing gusts of heat came from the furnaces and they could see the immense iron hods of wood, waiting to be fed to the furnaces.
I hope their spirits are dead, she thought.
I hope they are not like the ones we found in the store, still a bit alive.
Directly in front of them were the treadmills; huge, fearsome, steel and mesh wheel-cages, stretching far above them, at least twelve or fifteen feet high, great roaring, relentless, nightmare machines which rotated on and on.
Fenella, horrified, her mind tumbling, saw that the treadmills were like huge fly-wheels, like the sides of giant spinning tops.
They gyrated endlessly round and round…
Immense grinding, grating, pounding things…
On and on, and up and up…
And then down again to begin the circle over again.
To watch the ceaseless spinning for too long made you feel sick and dizzy and a bit out of step with everything else.
The noise was dreadful.
It was a continual clanking, rotating sound, a whirring rhythmic, steel-against-steel sound that made your teeth wince.
Fenella and Caspar staring, saw that huge spindles and cogs and pinions protruded from the dark-packed earth of the ceiling and that the motion of the great wheels caused these to turn and rotate and drive  one another into rather horrid, grinding, gobbling motion.
The red glow from the furnaces fell across the treadmills, turning the steel mesh to angry crimson, bathing the creatures inside them to eerie, unnatural life, blending and merging them with the machinery, until it was very nearly impossible to tell where the treadmills ended and the human creatures began…
The human creatures…
Within each treadmill were two workers; chained and manacled.
Affixed horizontally to the inside of the treadmill were stout iron bars for the prisoned workers to grasp.
Fenella, who understood in a vague way about mill wheels and how they had to rotate continually to provide power, saw with horror that the slaves inside the steel mesh cages were forced by the motion of the wheels to tread endlessly forward to keep the treadmills revolving.
Each of them must tread on and on, a ceaseless, bone-grinding trudge, if they did not want to be taken up and up by the gyrating treadmill into the clanking, turning cogs in the roof and ground to dust between the pinions.
They must tread ever forward, regardless of discomfort, heedless of exhaustion.
Sweat poured from their bodies and they wore only the thinnest of breeches.
Their feet were bare and, even from where she stood, Fenella could see the knotting of the leg muscles from the agonising cramp which they must surely suffer almost continuously.
In every case, dried blood caked the mesh cages and the thick iron bars which they used for the momentum of walking.
A look of hopeless desolation, of almost animal acceptance was in their faces; they had long since passed beyond defiance and hope; their life was bounded by the ceaseless rotating of the treadmills which served the Robemaker's Looms.
Their life had become a never-ending trudge to keep the Looms of the necromancer weaving dreadful enchantments.
Sparks flew from the mesh cages and Fenella saw that great black iron pipes ran from beneath each wheel, along the wooden floor and out through a massive, carved silver door at the other end of the Workshop.
She glanced at Caspar and saw that he was staring at the silver door.
Somewhere through that door must be the Chamber of the Looms, the powerhouse of the Workshops, the force field of the necromancer.
The clanking of the machines was almost deafening, and Fenella wanted to clap her hands to her ears and try to shut it out.
But she stayed where she was, her eyes raking the red lit chamber.
Presently, she grew a little more adjusted to the noise and she began to make out the details a little more plainly; she could see that the captives were all young men, some of them not much more than boys, but certainly strong and lithe.
She thought that not one of them could be more than eighteen or twenty, and she remembered how it had been said that the Robemaker scoured Ireland, taking the sons of the ordinary Irish families to work here.
And then Caspar, who had been narrowing his eyes and taking stock of everything and everyone, suddenly gripped Fenella's arm and said, in a voice from which most of the breath had been driven, ‘Fenella — over there.’
‘What —’
‘The Prince,’ said Caspar, softly.
Fenella looked to where he indicated, to the farthest of the treadmills and saw the single creature held captive there, and her heart jumped and missed several beats, and then went on again erratically.
Nuadu Airgetlam.
The Wolfprince.
To begin with, they thought that the Robemaker had injured him in some unimaginable way, for the crimson mask still had him in its grip and in the flickering light, it looked for a moment as if the lower part of his face was covered in blood.
Fenella gasped and then thrust her clenched fist into her mouth, because she would not, she emphatically would not give way to polish emotion.
But she moved at once and stood below the pounding clanking mesh wheel, looking up.
She saw him look down at her and saw that his skin was raw and flayed in places; the arm of flesh and blood was scraped and scorched and the silver arm on the other side was reflecting the tremendous heat, so that it was copper coloured and glinting and must be causing him immense pain.
But his eyes still held the old mockery and the remembered cynicism.
So you have sought me out, Human Child…
Fenella, hardly daring to speak, but knowing she must raise her voice above the treadmills, said, ‘Where is —’ And saw his eyes smile, as if to say: he is not here for the moment.
For the moment, you are safe.
And then there was a warning flare and Nuadu's eyes moved in the direction of the shadowed corners.
Fenella followed his eyes and at once said, ‘Sentry Spells,’ and there was a gleam of acknowledgement above the glinting mask.
‘Yes,’ said Fenella, looking up at Nuadu.
‘Yes, I understand.
And we will be wary.’
And wondered, in the same moment, how they could possibly hope to cheat the Sentry Spells.
Caspar had crossed the room to stand at her side and he said, ‘Sire —’ And stopped in some confusion, because he had known Nuadu at once— he thought every person in Ireland would recognise him, for the wolfblood was unmistakable, and everyone knew the story of the Queen's bastard wolfson and the fierce quarrels that had taken place between her and the King when Nuadu was born.
He understood, as well, why Fenella had been so chary of telling the entire truth.
Because I suppose I must have appeared a bit untrustworthy, thought Caspar, what with working for the Gruagach and everything.
I suppose I can't blame her or Floy for being wary, he thought, rather sadly.
But he was a bit flummoxed at the reality of Nuadu, because nobody had ever told him how to address a bastard of the Ireland's Royal House.
However, it would be better to err on the side of too much courtesy, and so, ‘Sire,’ he said firmly, ‘if there is a way to get you out, we will find it.’
Nuadu's eyes went to the other captives and Fenella at once said, ‘Yes, of course, all of you.
If only there is a way —’ And stopped, because Nuadu's eyes had gone to the silver door.
‘In there?
Do you mean —’ Fenella stopped, trying to read the meaning in the dark eyes above the dreadful mask.
‘Do you mean there  is a — is there a spell we could use?
Oh, but —’ And stopped and felt, with remembered delight, the shower of golden needle lights as his thoughts poured into her mind.
It is the only way, Human Child…
The only thing that will release us is the thing that imprisoned us.
Magic, Fenella.
And in there is the Robemaker's cache of enchantments…
The stockroom of spells…
The necromancer's treasure-house.
But beware the Melanisms, Fenella.
They are the Robemaker's sentinels, the effluence of necromancy, and you must be very very wary indeed of them .
The Melanisms…
Fenella stayed where she was for a moment, still staring up at the imprisoned Nuadu.
The Melanisms…
With the words had come the fleeting impression of dark, sinuous creatures who could slither out of the shadows and wind their cold, serpentine fingers about you, so that you were trapped, who could twine about your entire body, so that you were smothered and suffocating from the cold embrace…
‘But there isn't really any choice,’ said Fenella, firmly, and turned to the ornate silver door at the far end of the room.
Fenella had expected the silver door to feel cool and silvery and solid and was surprised when it actually felt extremely hot.
‘Yes, that'll be the Looms,’ said Caspar.
‘This will be an ante-chamber, mark my words.
It'll be very hot because of being so near to the Looms themselves.
We wouldn't get near to the Looms, of course.
Well, very likely we won't get near to the store house, either.
We'll very likely be burned to a crisp the minute we get in there.
Still, it's all one to me.
As well be fried and roasted on that side of the door, as turned to something very nasty by the Robemaker and fed into the furnaces.
I don't care,’ said Caspar.
There would not be very much time.
They both knew this.
Fenella could feel the shadows stirring already; she could feel a dark, slimy something uncoiling somewhere close by.
The Melanisms, the Robemaker's Sentry Spells, torpid and stagnant for most of the time…?
Sleeping in the darkness until some creature, some reckless, heedless Human should try to penetrate the ancient secrets of their Master…?
They are waking, thought Fenella, struggling with the elaborate handle of the silver door, then standing back to give way to Caspar who seemed to understand the mechanism.
The shadows moved; they seemed to darken and to creep nearer, and long, groping fingers of blackness stretched across the floor.
As they began to turn the silver handle with the strange, serpent-like beasts engraved deeply into it, Fenella felt the Melanisms creep nearer.
They are only shadows, she said firmly to herself.
Not solid things at all.
Effluence.
But the Melanisms did not feel like only shadows.
They did not move like shadows; they did not shift and blur.
They crept, developing rudimentary arms with nasty, elongated fingers as they went, groping across the floor towards the two intruders, as if they might not be able  to see, but might be able to feel or smell their way to Caspar and Fenella.
They were blind, seeking things, reaching out, feeling their way closer with every minute.
It was unspeakably horrid to know that a great, slithering, inchoate mass of effluence was crawling and creeping and smelling its way towards you.
Fenella said, a bit impatiently, ‘Oh, do hurry up, Caspar!
Shan't we be able to open it?
Isn't it just an ordinary door?’
‘Of course it isn't,’ said Caspar, crossly.
‘It's a silver door, guarding something that's strongly magical.
I've seen the same kind of thing in the Sorcery Chambers at Tara.
You have to keep turning until there's a kind of silken click.’
Fenella was standing with her back to the silver door, watching the Melanisms.
They were oozing closer, no doubt about it.
I suppose, thought Fenella, that I was rather innocent to think that we could get in so easily, or that the Robemaker would not in some way guard his secrets.
‘Almost there,’ gasped Caspar.
‘I think we're —’ He broke off abruptly as Fenella let out a cry of purest revulsion and looked down to see the Melanisms at their feet, surging thickly upwards.
Fenella had managed to not quite scream.
She had thought she had been keeping watch on the creeping grey-streaked matter, but it had moved suddenly, the embryonic fingers clutching the ground, pulling the oozing, mucousy river forward until it was bubbling over her feet.
She would not scream and she would not panic.
She tried to back away and, at once, the Melanisms seemed to wriggle and chuckle, to slop forward with a dreadful, glutinous, squelching sound.
Fenella, clinging to self-control, thought that it was a gobbling, lip-smacking sound, as if the soupy fluid was savouring her, as if it was going to enjoy bubbling upwards until it had engulfed her entire body…
She sent a frantic look to where Caspar was now standing and saw that the Melanisms had reached him as well now; his legs and knees were already covered.
This is dreadful, thought Fenella, struggling against the thick, cold viscosity.
This is certainly the worst thing that has happened to me ever.
Am I going to be able to get out?
Am I going to be able to pull free?
as if in answer, the Melanisms tightened their hold, sucking and gobbling, the half-formed arms twining themselves about her thighs, tendrils of grey-streaked black curling upwards to her waist.
The heaving fluid was not cold, as it had looked, but slightly warm, as if somewhere at the centre there might be a heart, and veins, and lungs to breathe with…
To reach down and try to free her legs would be disastrous.
The minute she sunk her hands into the glutinous fluid, her hands would be trapped as well.
She had the dreadful thought that once her hands plunged into the foul greasiness, she would feel reaching, grasping hands under the surface, clutching at her, pulling her down until she was drowning.
Drowning in the effluence of necromancy…
Suffocating and smothering in the gelatinous mucous…
Fenella was using every ounce of her strength to climb free, but the  Melanisms were tenacious and strong.
They held on, tightening their grip, and Fenella felt herself being sucked in.
She thought.
but I can't simply stand here and be drowned by this horrid stuff!
I can't just do nothing!
And looked up at Nuadu, encased in the terrible cage of the treadmill, and saw black, bitter fury in his eyes.
Because she was being slowly smothered by the Melanisms?
Or simply because they had come so close to rescuing him?
I won't think about that yet, said Fenella, silently.
Caspar was shouting to her not to struggle, because it would only mean she would sink quicker, but Fenella was struggling fiercely, because she could not just give in.
She was feeling rather sick at the thought of drowning in the creeping, sucking mess.
It was exactly like standing in a cauldron of lukewarm soup and feeling it inch its way up your body.
There were nameless jellylike things within the Melanisms now; eel-like creatures that brushed against her skin and which felt boneless and yet gristly.
She managed to make a half turn so that she could see the silver door, because perhaps she could reach out and reach over and grasp the elaborate handle and somehow pull herself out.
As she did so, Caspar turned with her, and Fenella knew he had had the same idea.
They were both straining to reach, leaning forward as far as they could, agonisingly aware that the door and its ring handle that might have given them some leverage were out of their reach, when another sound fell on their ears.
They both turned back instantly, scanning the shadows, and Fenella saw Nuadu look up, sudden hope in his eyes.
From the other side of the room, from the shadows of the wood-store where they had entered, something was dragging itself across the floor towards them…
There was nothing any of them could do.
Whatever was creeping towards them through the half-open door would have them completely at its mercy.
Fenella and Caspar were both held fast by the wet gumminess of the Melanisms and Nuadu and the Robemaker's slaves were chained and manacled inside the treadmills.
The sounds came nearer; dragging, crawling sounds, as if not one but several creatures were struggling across the floor.
Fenella, her heart thudding frantically, kept her eyes fixed on the door and a fearful hope began to unfurl.
Through the half-open door, into the dry, shrivelling heat of the great, evil-smelling room, there appeared branchlike shapes and then a fall of blood-stained, leaflike hair.
Caspar said, very softly, ‘The Trees.
Fenella, the Trees.’
The wounded Tree Spirits that the Robemaker had hacked and mutilated were coming to the aid of the two Humans who would free the Wolfprince.
Fenella felt ridiculous tears sting her eyes and brushed them away impatiently because this was no time to be emotional.
The Trees were moving slowly and painfully and it was terrible and marvellous to see them.
But will they reach us before this horrid stuff  covers us? thought Fenella, frantically.
Can they reach us?
There looked to be three or perhaps four of the Tree Spirits.
They were twisted and butchered and maimed and it was difficult to see if they had been Oaks or Beeches or Elms or what.
But there was a glint of green and gold still in them, and their eyes were pain-filled, but determined.
The Tree Spirits were clinging to the black iron pipes that ran along the sides of the floor, using them as levers and pulleys to help them across the floor.
At Fenella's side, Caspar said softly, ‘They are unable to stand, poor things,’ and Fenella felt the pity of it hit hard at the base of her throat.
The Trees had crossed half of the floor now and the nearest one — Fenella could see now that it had been a Larch, elegant and slender — was already inching its way across the slimy black pool of the Melanisms, creating a kind of bridge.
As it did so, the other two Tree Spirits did the same, the branches of the Larch reaching forward, until Fenella could lean over and grasp them.
She thought she gasped, ‘Oh, thank you!’ and she felt the Larch incline its head in acknowledgement.
And then she was holding on to the branches, feeling where the Robemaker had hacked and sawn at them, knowing she must be hurting the Larch even more, and trying to be as gentle as possible.
The surface of the Melanisms heaved and panted, and Fenella felt the suction about her waist increase.
The Robemaker's sentries were not letting go easily…
‘Pull harder!’ cried Caspar.
‘Fenella, you must break free!’
‘Yes,’ gasped Fenella.
‘Yes, of course.’
And then the Larch moved back, and Fenella clung to its poor torn branches and the sticky evil effluence melted back, and there was a horrid oozing clutching feeling, and then she was pulled across the floor, and she was free.
The fact that they were both half covered with the slimy grey Melanism-fluid did not have to matter.
Fenella and Caspar both knelt down, taking a gentle hold of the Tree Spirits' maimed branches, searching for the right words to convey their gratitude.
At length, Fenella said, in very nearly a whisper, ‘Thank you, Trees,’ and there was a ripple of awareness from the Trees and a soft rustling of the trailing leaf-hair.
‘Is there nothing we can do to — to save you?’ said Fenella, and saw the wise ancient eyes regarding her.
‘Nothing, Human Creatures,’ said the Larch at last, in a warm, timbery sort of voice.
‘We shall die in the Robemaker's fires.’
‘Can't you simply — escape from your — your Tree homes?’ asked Fenella, unsure whether she understood the principle of all this, but hoping she had conveyed her meaning.
‘We are bound to our heartwood Trees in death,’ said the Larch.
‘We are the Robemaker's victims.’
Its head bowed over.
‘But you must enter the Robemaker's Storeroom of Spells, and free the Prince,’ said one of the others — Fenella thought it was a cypress.
‘He will lead your armies against the Dark Lords.’
‘If you can do that, then perhaps others will not be sacrificed and tortured and become soul-less,’ said a third.
‘Yes,’ said Fenella, who had not really been thinking in terms of armies and battles quite so definitely as this.
But she said, very firmly, ‘Yes, we will do it.’
She eyed Caspar: ‘All right?’
‘Yes,’ said Caspar, who was not really all right, but who was not going to admit to it.
‘A bit muddied and splattered,’ he said.
‘Yes.
But we'll attend to that later,’ said Fenella, who was also muddied and streaked with the oozing matter.
She looked round.
The Melanisms seemed to have retreated into their dark corners again, but Fenella had the feeling that they were simply mustering their strength again; they had been baulked of their prey and they had retired.
But they would slither out again, and they would probably do so quite quickly.
They had not very much time.
‘We'd better be quick,’ said Fenella to Caspar, taking his arm.
‘Hurry up — did we manage to get the silver door open?’
As they moved cautiously towards it, Fenella saw that it had opened for them just the smallest sliver and that beyond it were shards of light.
They pushed the silver door open warily and Fenella stepped forward.
The door swung to behind them, shutting out some of the noise of the treadmills, but it did not quite close.
‘And we'd better make sure that it doesn't,’ said Caspar, moving back to prop the door open with a stone.
‘We don't want to find ourselves locked in here , that would be extremely nasty.
You'd be forever wondering what might come at you from the shadows.
I suppose the Melanisms have gone, have they?
They aren't slithering around in here?’
‘I don't think so.
But we'd better hurry up.’
They both glanced behind them and then moved into the coloured shadows of the necromancer's storeroom.
Chapter Twenty-eight
They were in a rather long, quite narrow chamber, lined with shelves and with long racks with poles.
And suspended from each pole…
‘Oh!’ said Fenella and stood still and clasped her hands together and for a moment forgot entirely about being in danger in the house of an ancient and evil sorcerer.
Because from each pole there hung a robe, and each robe was of a different hue, and every robe was of a different consistency.
‘The Robes of Enchantment,’ said Caspar in an awed voice.
‘The necromancer's wardrobe of spells.’
The Robes shimmered and gleamed and reflected the dim light.
Each one glowed with its own prismatic brilliance and each one was soaked in pure, living colour, in rainbow light, in fluid iridescence.
Fenella's first thought was that the Robes were the most beautiful things she had ever seen.
Her second was that although they might be beautiful, they were not all good.
There was a darkness, a sinister menace clinging to some of them, as if simply to touch them might call up dreadful visions and evil forces.
Caspar was explaining in a hushed voice that they were looking at the Robemaker's stocks of enchantments.
‘The Robes of Spells,’ he said.
‘People consult him.
And they say he will fashion any spell so long as someone will pay him enough.’
‘Pay?’
‘Living bodies.
Living souls,’ said Caspar rather hurriedly, as if he thought it might be dangerous to say things like this aloud.
‘Bodies for fuel, souls for offering to the Soul Eaters.
They say he has traded with the Soul Eaters for centuries, although I don't know why.
Nasty!
Let's not think about it.
Fenella, we should try to find something —’
‘Yes.’
But Fenella still stood, drinking in the wild, glorious kaleidoscope of colours, seeing the marvellous chequerwork of form and shape.
Surely, oh surely, there would be something here that would rescue Nuadu and the other poor creatures…
‘Only,’ she said aloud, ‘only, we do not really know what we are looking for.’
Caspar was moving forward, frowning, inspecting the robes as he passed them, occasionally reaching out a hand to touch a fold of colour.
Fenella saw, with a thrill of horror, that as his hand went through the colours, the robes shivered as if they were not made of plain cloth, but of some living, breathing substance.
Music and colour and the secrets of Men; the innermost desires of the heart and sunlight and twilight and hopes and dreams …
All here, thought Fenella, walking cautiously in Caspar's wake.
Yes, all here.
I  can feel them all, thought Fenella.
Music and colours and dreams and hopes…
Oh yes.
And she thought: but evil longings and greedy desires and black sour emotions, as well.
She put out a wary hand and felt her fingers sink into the softness of a robe made of albescent whiteness, pouring ivory and soft, glinting pearl.
Something good.
Something pure and hopeful and silken.
Perhaps a love potion?
But the one next to it was veined with crimson and dull purple and, as Fenella touched it, she was instantly aware of a stinging pain, a boiling of hot sourness.
She took her hand away at once.
Caspar was studying falls and swathes of crimson and gold.
‘Something nasty these, I should think,’ he said.
‘Can you feel it?’
And Fenella, coming to stand beside him, did feel it.
She touched it warily and again there was the hot, dark heat, the feeling of suffocation closing about her, the surging upwards of bitter scalding liquid, as if she had drunk something that was too hot which was laced with a bitter and evil drug.
The heavy darkness seemed to hover above the deep magentas and purples and damson-hued gowns and, as they moved on again, to where the paler, gentler robes were hanging, the feeling passed.
‘We can differentiate the evil from the good,’ said Fenella, frowning.
‘But we don't know what any of them mean!’ she said.
‘Oh Caspar, this is going to be impossible.’
‘Well, we'll think,’ said Caspar, ‘See now, if the crimsons and the purples are evil —’
‘Yes, very evil,’ put in Fenella.
‘Then the paler ones must be good.’
‘Does it follow?’ said Fenella.
‘And also, can we be sure that the Robemaker would ever weave a good enchantment at all?’
She regarded Caspar and Caspar, to whom this had not occurred, looked more worried than ever.
But he said, thoughtfully, that he believed the Robemaker would weave anything so long as he was paid sufficiently highly.
‘All right.
And,’ said Fenella, studying the robes and frowning, ‘would it matter if we used a — an evil spell to rescue Nuadu and the others?
Would it hurt anyone?’
But Caspar, who had only the sketchiest knowledge of these matters, did not know.
‘Well, could we try one or two?’ said Fenella.
‘Could we simply take an armful out to the treadmills and put them on and see what happened?
Would the Melanisms leave us alone for long enough, I wonder, or would the Robes themselves keep the Melanisms at bay?
This is much more difficult than I thought it would be.
But we can't get so close to freeing Nuadu and fail now.’
She reached out for a pale, beautiful robe that seemed to be a continual pour of colour, like a mountain river with the sun shining on it and, as she did so, there was a whisper of sound behind them.
Fenella whipped round and saw a long and terrible shadow fall across the floor.
The Robemaker was in the room with them.
Fenella had been standing towards the back of the Robe-room, half  hidden by the racks of shimmering robes, but Caspar had been in the centre of the room, midway between two of the racks.
As the Robemaker's shadow fell blackly across the floor, Fenella ducked behind the nearest rack, but Caspar, caught without hope of concealment, simply turned and made the briefest of bows.
‘Good morning to you, Sir Enchanter,’ he said, and Fenella, crouched behind folds upon folds of living colour, half suffocated, heard at once, that he had put on a slightly simple voice.
Hope sprang up in her, because if Caspar could make the Robemaker believe that he was merely foolish and not an intruder, they might have a chance.
It was rather a good device and one which Fenella admitted to herself she would not thought that Caspar capable of thinking up so quickly.
‘Good day,’ said the Robemaker and Fenella suppressed a shudder, because it was the hissing, whispering voice she remembered from the forest road earlier.
‘I have sought you for many a long day,’ said Caspar, cheerfully, pursuing the rather frail ploy he had thought up earlier in case of precisely this eventuality.
‘Yes, I have sought you,’ he said, nodding, half to himself, ‘for they tell me you are quite the best there is.’
He regarded the Robemaker and Fenella, peeping out cautiously, saw him smile a bit vacantly at the hooded figure.
‘And,’ went on Caspar, ‘I do need the best.
That is very important.’
‘Who are you?’
The Robemaker had not closed the door, but he had pushed it to a little.
The red light from the treadmill chamber spilled across the floor.
‘And how did you get in?’
‘Well,’ said Caspar, and then glanced over his shoulder as if to make sure no one was listening, ‘well, the truth of it is, that I work for the Gruagach.
As a procurer,’ he said, and tucked his chins into his neck solemnly and put on an expression that said: and that is a reasonable thing for a man to do, of course.
‘I am not in the way of trafficking with Humans, but I know of the Gruagach,’ said the Robemaker, standing very still.
‘You do not answer my other question, Human.’
‘Oh, about getting in,’ said Caspar, and chuckled to himself.
‘Well, to tell you the truth, Sir Enchanter, I met one of your nasty, wriggling creatures on the way in.’
‘Yes?’ said the Robemaker, and Fenella held her breath, because this, surely, was a trap.
‘It inspected me,’ said Caspar, sounding as if he had found this amusing.
‘It took a look at me and then melted away into the shadows.
I daresay,’ he added, in a confidential tone, ‘that it could see I was no enemy.’
‘Go on,’ said the Robemaker, and Fenella dared to hope again.
‘The Gruagach sent me here,’ began Caspar, and stopped, and then went on with more assurance, ‘they sent me along to see if you can provide a — well, I don't know what you'd call it really.
A spell of some kind for the King.
Is that possible?
Dear me, do you know, Sir, I had no idea this would be so difficult.’
He frowned and chewed his lower lip quite naturally and Fenella, hardly daring to breathe, saw that the Robemaker appeared to be listening.
‘The King,’ said Caspar, having apparently thought matters over, ‘is wishful to marry Flame.
I daresay you'll know of her, will you?’
‘Daughter of the sorceress Reflection and the creature Fael-Inis,’ said the Robemaker, and a sneer had crept into his voice.
‘I know of the Gruagach King's plans and I know of the charlatan Fael-Inis.’
‘Is he a charlatan?’ asked Caspar, apparently interested in this.
‘Well, of course you'd know about that, far more than I would.’
‘He is an illusionist, no more.
As for Reflection —’ The cloaked figure made a quick movement.
‘A dilettante.
A dabbler in magic.
A greedy, grasping, lascivious creature.’
‘Still,’ said Caspar, ‘Inchbad is quite wishful to secure her daughter's hand in marriage.
The blending of two territories, so they tell me.
I don't understand, really.
Well, I don't need to understand.’
He eyed the Robemaker with wide, ingenuous eyes, and beamed.
‘But the thing is, Reflection is being rather — well,very greedy about the Marriage Settlement,’ went on Caspar, feeling that he was doing really rather well with this random blending of truth and fiction.
‘And she has locked Flame up until an agreement is reached.’
‘Daughters need to be whipped into line anyway,’ said the Robemaker rather dismissively.
‘And Reflection was ever over-reaching.’
‘Yes, but you see,’ said Caspar, feeling his way cautiously now, ‘you see, Inchbad would like to talk to Flame himself.
And he — that is, he and Goibniu, thought that if we asked you — well, consulted you — you might provide a spell to get her free,’ said Caspar.
And stood very still and waited — and prayed to every god he had ever heard of that the Robemaker would not utilise the dread Stroicim Inchinn and read into his mind.
He thought the tale was reasonably plausible.
Well, it was the best he had been able to come up with and, if it was not sufficient, he could not think what else he could do.
Had the mention of the Melanisms lulled the Robemaker's suspicions?
Surely a person who had not been caught and killed by the Melanisms could be considered to have been inspected and found harmless.
The Robemaker was standing with his head bowed, sunk in thought.
At length, he said, ‘And the fee?
The price your masters will pay?’
Caspar managed not to breathe a huge sigh of relief, because this sounding very promising indeed.
He grinned rather slyly, and said, ‘We all know your fee, Sir.
And the Gruagach will pay very well.’
He managed to achieve what was nearly a knowing wink.
‘The dungeons at Tara are always filled with Humans.
That,’ said Caspar, managing to inject a note of pride into his voice, ‘that is my responsibility, you know.’
‘I do know,’ said the Robemaker.
‘I have heard of you, Master Procurer, and I know every one of your duties.’
‘Good,’ said Caspar, meaning it, and Fenella, still curled into her uncomfortable corner, crossed her fingers and tried not to disturb the shining folds of the Robes all about her.
‘It can be done,’ said the Robemaker.
‘But I should require — we will say six Humans.’
He did not say this as if he was asking Caspar as if six Humans might be possible or even negotiable.
He simply said it.
My fee.
Take it or leave it.
Caspar at once said, ‘Certainly.’
And beamed again.
‘You will bring them here to me at the fall of the Purple Hour.’
Again, it was a flat statement.
‘I don't — yes, I could do that,’ said Caspar, who could not do it at all, but could see that there was no other answer to be given.
And then, in return, you shall be given the Robe of Human Hands.’
Malevolent amusement gleamed from the shadowed eyes.
‘You will know of the spell, perhaps?
The incantation that must be chanted with the wearing of the Robe?
Open, locks, to the Human's hand …’
He stopped and Fenella repeated the words in her mind.
‘I see.
Well, no, I don't know it as it happens,’ said Caspar.
‘Could you — would you mind just — running over them for me.
I don't remember things too well,’ he added apologetically.
‘And so if you could —’
For answer, the Robemaker lifted his arms out so that the great black cloak fanned out giving him the outline of a massive bat or a creature of prey.
Open, locks, to the Human's hand…
Schism, latches, and sever, turnkeys…
Fly open, bars, dissolve, untie, unchain, unfetter…
Slash and gash and carve and gnaw.
Pluck the splinters of iron, and slice the thews of steel.
Scission and sunder, steal and plunder.
He lowered his arms and folded them, then stood regarding Caspar.
‘Thank you,’ said Caspar.
‘Yes, I think I can remember that.’
The Robemaker inclined his head and turned to open the silver door again, holding out one robed hand to indicate that Caspar should precede him.
‘The Purple Hour,’ said the Robemaker.
‘And six Humans.’
Caspar went out and the Robemaker followed, closing the silver door.
Fenella emerged from her corner only after the footsteps had died away and she was as sure as she could be that there was no danger of the Robemaker returning.
And I am not really sure of it at all, she thought, standing up and looking about her.
I daresay he doesn't even need to walk.
He can probably simply appear.
Materialise where he likes.
She would not think about it.
She would try to find the Robe of Human Hands, which sounded rather horrid, but which would surely release Nuadu and the others.
She would concentrate on remembering the incantation:Open, locks, to the Human's hand …
And I won't think, said Fenella, even for an instant, that the Robe might not be here, that the Robemaker might need to return to weave it on the great Silver Looms.
How long did it take to weave a spell?
It has to be here already, thought Fenella, trying to quiet the frantic thudding of her heart.
I'll make a proper search, and I'll listen very hard, so that I can hear if the Robemaker comes back.
She would start nearest to the door and work her way along the jostling, glistening, pouring swathes of colours.
She would be quick and quiet and efficient and she would not miss a one.
The Robe of Human Hands…
It was not, after all, quite so difficult to allot a vague identity to the Robes.
The dark red and damson robes were heavy and stifling and they could not possibly be what she was looking for.
There were clusters of robes that seemed to pulsate and breathe, and there were others that slithered sinuously and rather nastily when she approached.
There were rainbow clumps of raw colour which sizzled and suddenly coiled into snakelike forms as she approached and lifted serpentine heads to hiss at her; there were pouring cascades of things that had appeared to be silk or velvet, but which were molten gold when she got nearer and made her remember Fael-Inis and the cascading River and the salamanders.
Was there something here that would help them?
But when she reached out a hesitant hand, the heat from the liquid was so intense that she could not get any nearer to it.
Even if this was the Robe they wanted, they would not be able to touch it!
She hesitated over several, dark, rather unobtrusive garments in one corner, thinking that they looked harmless until two creeping, fog-like hands reached for her and an evil chuckle filled the room, so that she shot back to the room's centre out of their reach.
There were robes where the pouring light suddenly solidified into rather grisly bones that rattled and gibbered and, on the same racks, were robes made of several different kinds of skin.
Others were wet and clingy and had pulsing red veins and stringy muscle cords woven into them.
It began to seem that the entire storehouse was made up of substances which looked harmless and beautiful on the surface, but which changed and blurred and coalesced as you approached them.
Perhaps this was some kind of protection.
Perhaps, thought Fenella, the Robemaker had drawn a veil of colour and light over his spells, rather as people covered their favourite gowns or pieces of furniture with dust sheets.
And I am disturbing the veils, she thought.
Towards the far end of the chamber there were several robes half hidden by billowing folds of grey clouds, but which seemed to be composed of eyes as she drew nearer.
Like a veil lifting…
Yes, I was right about that at any rate, thought Fenella.
They are veiled, and they are covered by something thin and light-filled and magical.
And as I get nearer, the veil dissolves.
This is very remarkable.
There was something rather nasty about the robe of woven-together eyes.
Would it be for seeing into people's minds?
Perhaps this was part of the Stroicim Inchinn .
Fenella stood very still and stared at the Robe, seeing that the lids were closed and that here and there the lashes were matted and sticky-looking.
The Stroicim Inchinn …
The thought that this was something that would be more useful than anything else in Ireland formed itself treacherously and slimily in Fenella's mind.
Because with that, we should be able to hear our enemies' thoughts and we should be able to tell what everyone else was planning…
The knowledge of how easy it would be to just reach out and take the Robe of Eyes and wear it and be able to see into other people s deepest thoughts flooded her mind, scaldingly.
Fenella gasped and felt the sour bitterness of evil magic touching her and remembered that the Stroicim Inchinn was the most strongly forbidden enchantment of all, and that whatever else they were going to be doing here, they were not going to be dealing with forbidden spells.
But she looked at the robe again and several of the eyes opened and blinked and swivelled in their sockets, as if they had heard her thoughts and were rather amused by them.
There was a rather sickening, glutinous sound as the eyes moved, the sort of sound you hear if someone with sore eyes rubs them too hard and they squelch.
I'm having nothing to do with it, said Fenella firmly.
It's evil and forbidden and I'm not even thinking about it!
The Robe of human Hands was probably somewhere here, by the Eyes and the Skins and by the cloak made up of what looked like nail and hair…
It must be here, thought Fenella, nearly in despair.
It must be here, please let it be here, and please let me find it.
Open, locks, to the Human's Hand …
Would Caspar be outside somewhere?
Yes, he would certainly not abandon her.
There was not really time to think about Caspar and there was not really any energy to spare to think about him, either.
And then she saw it.
By itself, half hidden against the far wall, nearly obscured by billowing folds of grey cloud that huffed sweet, damp breath into her face as she approached.
The Robe of Human Hands…the enchantment that would release the prisoners…
Yes.
It could not by any stretch of the imagination be anything else.
It was not, as Fenella had supposed, a cloak in the way she knew cloaks.
It did not have shoulders or long enveloping folds or a hood.
It was rather small and it had been hung, quite casually, on a nail protruding from the wall.
It was rather like a large belt; you could probably fasten it about your waist and it would sit snugly over your hips.
If you pulled an ordinary conventional cloak over it, nobody would even see it.
The hands were not, as Fenella had feared, frightening.
They were rather sad; dead-looking, woven and folded and, in places, plaited together.
They were rather submissive-looking hands, as if they might be waiting, quite patiently and happily, until someone might need to make use of them.
It was quite difficult to believe that there could be any animation in them.
It was very difficult, indeed, to believe that they could snap open the cages of the treadmills and free Nuadu and the others.
Open, locks, to the Human's hand …
Would it work?
It must, thought Fenella, snatching the spell off the wall and holding it between her hands as she stood at the silver door, waiting for an indication that the Robemaker had gone.
In the end, it was much easier than she had thought to push the silver door open by a few inches and to stand listening, trying to see, trying  to hear, trying to feel the lingering dark presence.
Had he gone?
Yes, thought Fenella, drawing in a huge breath of relief.
Yes, he has gone.
She was not sure how she could be so certain of this except, perhaps, that there had been a miasma of heaviness, a cold, black diseased feel to the air which was not there now.
Yes, the Robemaker had gone.
She pushed the door wider and slipped through into the treadmill chamber again.
Nuadu's eyes were on her and, as she stood before the giant rotating wheels, she saw amusement in them.
So you have stolen the Robemaker's spells, have you, Fenella?
Well, thought Fenella, it seems that at least I have found the right spell.
At least, Nuadu seems to think I have.
I have got that far.
But what do I do now?
She had not the least idea of what she should do next, other than perhaps to fasten the strange garment about her waist.
Would that be right?
Yes, yes, Human Child!
His eyes were dark and brilliant above the cruel red mask and Fenella stood looking at him, seeing how the fireglow poured over his half-naked body, seeing how the silver of his left arm gleamed in the flickering light and was clamped about the horizontal iron bar with as much assurance as that other flesh-and-blood and muscle arm.
The dark hair clung to his forehead and his body was flushed and glistening and bathed in the dull crimson glow.
He is caged and caught, thought Fenella, staring at him.
He is caged and he is muzzled — and still he is arrogant and defiant and still there is the cynical mockery in his eyes.
Of course there is, Fenella.
Would you have me cowed and obedient to Ireland's greatest enemy…?
Behind her, the other treadmills still turned and clanked and the captive creatures trudged ever on and on, ever forward.
Fenella looked over her shoulder at them and saw that they were looking at her with such blind trust and with such faith that cold anger rose in her at the evil Lord who had forced them to his work.
I don't think I shall bear it if this does not work, thought Fenella.
I don't know how we shall get them out, because they are exhausted and probably they will find it difficult to walk.
But somehow we have to do it.
She looked back at Nuadu and knew that it had to work.
If I have to tear open the cages with my hands, I shall rescue him.
I shall rescue all of them!
He caught that at once and his eyes above the mask glittered.
Well, Fenella?
Use the spell.
Or are we to stand here all day?
Caged and muzzled, but as arrogant, as imperious, as he always was and always will be…
Fenella fastened the garment about her waist, by no means sure that this would be sufficient, expecting it to feel uncomfortable and even grisly.
But it was neither of these things.
It moulded itself about her waist and it felt warm and rather safe, as if it might be armouring her against the evils in here.
She sent a glance to the corners where the shadows still lay, thick and clotted and sinister, but nothing moved.
Fenella turned back to the treadmills and half closed her eyes, the words of the Robemaker still clear in her mind.