

CHAPTER 9 — MID JUNE
Johnny arrived the following evening as Cassie was working on her usual classroom preparation in the little attic room.
She heard the sound of a key turning in the lock and she sat, the hand holding her pen motionless above the paper, hardly breathing as she strained to catch the slightest of sounds from below.
The front door shut with a click.
Cassie dropped her pen and moved swiftly out of the room and down the steps onto the landing.
Gripping the bannister, she looked down into the hall and saw him standing with his back to the door, looking about him as though wondering if he would find her there.
She half tumbled down the stairs, and Johnny, hearing the sound of her rapid descent, glanced upwards in the direction of the landing.
As he saw her, he stretched out his arms and lifted her up before she had had time to reach the bottom step.
He swung her round and set her on her feet, looking at her as might a desert traveller who had just found water.
Holding her very close, he kissed her gently and then rested his cheek against the top of her head.
‘Oh, Johnny,’ Cassie murmured foolishly.
‘I'm so glad you've come.’
‘I've been looking for you for days, now,’ he said.
‘I'd begun to think that I'd scared you away.
I thought you'd taken off in that spaceship of yours.’
He laughed and kissed her again, and she could sense the relief in his words and in his eyes, as he looked at her with tenderness.
Cassie was content to be held there, so close against him, exchanging whispered words of love.
The anxieties and  misgivings of the past few days disappeared as though they had never been, as Johnny kissed her and touched her and told her of his need for her; of his despair when she had not come to him.
At first, he was infinitely gentle and loving, his fingers moving over her body in an exploratory, almost hesitant manner, lightly caressing her, lingering only for a moment or two on her face or breasts before moving onwards again to touch her skin, most delicately and  teasingly.
His hands were careful and restrained, his mouth tender, and although only a very short while later, Cassie was to realize just how much self-control he had exerted at that moment of their first real physical contact, for those few minutes, she knew only that she was not afraid of him, nor even suspected that there was any need to be.
As his passion grew, to be  answered in kind by her own almost overwhelming desire, his arms tightened their hold and his mouth sought hers with greater urgency.
There was a forceful thrusting kind of need about his actions now, and he began to fumble rather clumsily, with the buttons on the front of her light, cotton dress.
The thin material parted under his fingers and he pushed his hand beneath it to find his palm brushing her naked breast.
He drew in his breath sharply and made a soft silent exclamation of surprise.
Glancing up at his face, Cassie saw his expression change, his face darkening and hardening as his mounting excitement and desire seemed to quicken into something uncontainable, threatening, like the tide of an incoming sea, to engulf them both.
‘Cassie,’ he said huskily.
‘Cassie…
I want you so.
I've thought of nothing else…’
Dimly she understood the reason for this swift surge of excitement.
He had not, of course, expected to arrive at his objective quite so easily.
The women of his time were better protected!
He pushed the fabric of the dress impatiently aside and pressed his lips against her breast, pulling the nipple into his mouth and biting and sucking greedily.
There was a sharp, hard impatience about him, and Cassie, wanting only what he wanted, seeing only the fulfilment of her hopes, and forgetting her earlier feelings of unease, was full of dreamy desire.
She held him closer to her, pressing his mouth against her breast.
His hand moved to her skirt and began to push the material upwards against her thigh until he reached the smooth flesh of her stomach.
Rubbing his palm across her skin, he slipped his thumb under the top of her brief bikini panties, but as he did so, he made that same quick exclamation of surprise and moved away from her slightly, looking at her with his dark brows drawn sharply together.
‘Who are you Cassie?
In God's name, who are you?’ he whispered, and his voice trembled a little.
He's afraid, she thought fleetingly.
He hasn't guessed!
Despite everything, he hasn't guessed!
But she didn't want to explain it all yet.
Not yet, while Johnny's hands and mouth were doing such delicious things.
‘Just a girl,’ she whispered in reply.
‘Only a girl.’
‘You'd better prove it, then, hadn't you, little Martian?’ he demanded, and his eyes were very bright and watchful as he said the words.
He pushed his hand back beneath her skirt and thrust his fingers down inside her panties, pressing roughly between her legs.
He was hurting her a little now, the arm around her waist like steel, so that she was hazily aware of a dull ache in the small of her back.
And yet, in the greediness and fierceness of her own desire, she hardly noticed.
Then, quite suddenly, without warning, or the slightest possibility of misunderstanding, came the sensation of fear.
Like the beam from a lighthouse, it shone out into the darkness saying: ‘Beware!
Dangerous submerged rocks ahead.’
Not since she had walked down her path on that evening when it had all begun had she felt such a sure and unmistakeable feeling of threat and menace.
The certainty that the abnormality of this relationship with Johnny could do her harm was, for a fraction of a second, clear and undisputed in her mind.
The knowledge disappeared as quickly as it had come; but it had come in time to remind her of why she had waited so anxiously for Johnny to visit her; to remind her of why she had longed for his return with such a burning impatience.
She had something to tell him; something so very important that even this delightful consummation of their desire must take second place
With unexpected strength, she pushed Johnny from her.
‘No,’ she said.
‘No, Johnny; not yet.
I've got something to tell you.’
‘Little tease, eh?’ he said, and he smiled.
But his smile was not pleasant, and the dangerous look appeared on his face.
Then, he started to replace his hands but Cassie twisted away from him, shaking her head as she did so.
‘No, Johnny,’ she said again.
‘We must talk.
It's very important.’
He took her by the shoulders and pulled her back against him  sharply.
He said firmly: ‘No, Cassie.
No talk,’ and he pushed his mouth over hers, his hands now on her cheeks, holding her head as though in a vice.
She tugged her mouth away from him, and ignoring the mounting displeasure in his face said: ‘Please, Johnny.
It's something that you've got to know.’
’No !
I can't talk.
Later…
We'll talk later.
I want you.
Now .
I must have you.
And you want it too, don't you, my darling.
I'm not that much of a fool.
You girls are all the same.
You pretend you don't like it…but it's always yes please, in the end, isn't it, sweetheart?’
As he was speaking, he was pushing her relentlessly towards the bottom of the stairs.
Cassie felt suddenly afraid.
She was quite alone in the house with him, and as she realized the extent of his strength and his determination, and the quite deliberate surrender of his self-control, she knew that she was literally at his mercy.
If he were to assault her now, hurt her and rape her, there would be no redress.
How would she compile her complaint to Tommy Makepiece?
How would she bring charges against a man who didn't exist?
‘No!’ she said forcefully.
‘You're wrong, Johnny.
I don't want it.
You're hurting me.
Please stop!’
He ignored her words, exactly as though she had not spoken.
‘Come to bed, Cassie.
Later, you can talk ‘til Kingdom Come.
Not now.’
He spoke matter-of-factly, as if there could be no possibility of any argument.
‘Or here?’ he suggested.
‘Here, if you like.
I could relive it every time I came in through the front door.
It would add quite a new dimension to how I viewed this bloody awful hall.
But definitely no talking, Cassie, my sweet.
Not tonight, my darling.’
She was coldly angry now that he should so calmly assume that what he desired was there for him to take.
She made a grab for his arms and held them firmly away from her, but smiling lazily, and with consummate ease, he twisted his arms so that, this time, he had her own imprisoned in his grasp.
As he held her there, he began to  breathe heavily and there was a disconcerting expression on his face.
He smiled slightly and the beautiful eyes were hooded and secretive.
He held her like this for a few seconds and then, suddenly, the oddly predatory look left his face and his hands dropped to his sides.
He said stiffly: ‘I'm sorry, Cassie.
I forget myself.
I do apologize.
I allowed my feelings to get the better of me.
Forgive me.
I forgot…
Forgot the sort of girl you are.’
He spoke formally, almost curtly.
Cassie wondered hazily whether in Johnny's book it would be considered all right to force himself on the other sort of girl, whoever she may be!
She pushed the thought aside and said: ‘I'm only a pretty ordinary sort of girl’
‘Never that,’ he said, and then: ‘You win, Cassie.
We'll talk.
But I warn you, it will probably be the shortest conversation of your life.’
He laughed, and kissed her hair; and now he was himself again and Cassie found herself quickly excusing his earlier behaviour, finding it all perfectly understandable in the circumstances.
She took his hand and led him into the sitting room.
They sat together on the sofa, and Cassie thought: How do I tell him?
How am I possibly going to explain?
How did you tell a man who had just expressed his undying love for you and his need to remain in your arms for ever and ever that he was separated from you by a distance of fifty years, and that only by some perverse and cruel trick of time had you been allowed to meet at all?
Johnny, disregarding his promise that they should talk, pushed her back against the cushions and slipped his hand inside her dress once more.
It was apparent to Cassie that the discovery that she wore very little beneath her outer clothing had had a powerfully erotic effect upon him, and now he pushed aside the bodice and gazed at her breast, at the same time remarking appreciatively: ‘You're an astonishing girl, Cassie.
Did you know that?
I don't know what to make of you.’
‘Johnny, that's not fair,’ she said sharply.
‘You mustn't do that, I can't concentrate if you keep touching me.’
‘And I,’ he retorted gravely, ‘cannot sit beside you, and not touch you .
So, what are we to do?
Should I leave, do you think?’
She glanced at him quickly, alarmed that he might mean what he said, but he was laughing at her, gently teasing.
‘You may hold my hand,’ she said primly.
So Johnny took her hand in his and lightly began to kiss her fingertips.
Cassie took a deep breath, and said: ‘What do you do, Johnny?’
‘Do?
Nothing much…of any use, that is.
I read Law at Oxford.
The parents’ idea really.
It's not exactly me, y' know, and I never took it any further.
Racketed around, I suppose you might say,’ he added somewhat bitterly.
‘Married the virtuous Isabella…
Raced some motors…
Learned to fly a bit…
Parties…
A spot of travel…
Too much drink.
Too many women.
When this show started, it was a relief really.
Bye-bye Bella, and all that you stand for, don't you know.’
‘No,’ she said ‘I mean…what do you do now?
‘Fighter pilot.
But I thought you must know that.’
‘What's your rank?’
‘Squadron Leader.
What is all this, Cassie?’
‘Where are you stationed?’
A wary look came into Johnny's eyes and he gave her a quick glance of alarm.
‘I say, you're not a spy, are you? he asked nervously.
Cassie laughed.
‘Oh, Johnny, of course I'm not a spy.
First I'm a Martian, now I'm a spy!
Honestly, I'm not your original Mata Hari…
Straight up, I'm not.’
He looked uneasy.
‘Well, you know that I can't tell you things like that.
You must know that, Cassie.
I don't want to keep anything from you but…careless talk and all that.’
She  nodded .
She should have realized.
‘Sorry,’ she said.
‘I'm a stupid nerd to have asked.
‘Walls have ears’ I think you used to say.
Just name, rank and number…wasn't that it?’
He looked even more perplexed, and murmured: ‘Yes, but…’
‘O.K.’ said Cassie quickly.
‘Tell me something different, then.
What do you see in this room?
Describe it for me.’
He laughed out loud then, with genuine amusement.
He said: ‘Do you really think that I've waited for days and days for you to come back here, just to play bloody party games?
My Sainted Aunt!
Whatever next?
If you've truly got nothing better to do, let's forget the charades and carry on where we left off…eh, my love?’
He placed his hand on her thigh and Cassie removed it instantly.
‘I mean it, Johnny.
Just do it, will you?
Describe the room for me.
Please!’
Johnny looked sulky, but something in Cassie's voice made him hesitate and then say: ‘Oh, all right.
If it's really so bloody important to you!
Where shall I start?
Over there is the window.
All the usual kind of things…curtains; a sort of dark blue velveteen stuff; and then the blackout curtains, and lots of silly bits of brown tape on the glass in case Jerry drops a bomb.
Then there's the sofa.
We're sitting on that, of course.
 Grey-ie sort of colour, with large worn patches…liberally covered in hair oil, and a couple of antimacassars to disguise the worst of it.
Extremely tastefully done, as you can see.
Hand-made lace round the edges.
All very genteel.’
A look of horror flitted across his face, and he said with great feeling: ‘I say, Cassie.
You don't think I had anything to do with kitting out this place, do you?’
He looked about him distastefully.
‘It all came in the asking price, by courtesy of Mr P. Noakes Esquire.
Lock stock and barrel.
I don't think I've ever really looked at it properly ‘til now.’
‘I'm not worried about your taste in furnishings.
Go on.’
He shrugged.
‘Well, let me see.
Opposite us is the fireplace; and in the hearth there's one of those thingummies for keeping all the fire tools together.’
He squinted across the room.
‘This one's got brass handles, which could do with a bit of a clean.
Galleons, I believe…yes, galleons in full sail…on the hanging bits.
On the mantelpiece is a clock, and two truly tasteless china dogs with nothing to recommend them.’
He waved his arm towards the back of the house.
‘Over there is an occasional table with a vase of flowers, dried and well past their best, and down there is the piano; and one, may I add, which would try the patience of even the totally tone-deaf.’
He smiled at her tolerantly.
‘Is this the kind of thing you want, old thing?’ he enquired kindly, obviously feeling that she needed to be humoured.
Cassie nodded.
‘You're not nineteen and eleven in the pound, are you, my love?’ he asked, grinning at her affectionately.
No.
Nor fourpence short of it, either, thought Cassie grimly.
Out  loud, she said: ‘What else?’
‘Nothing much.
There's an armchair; and the standard lamp.
Only decent thing in the room, if you ask me; he must have won it in a raffle.
Oh, and of course, the bread oven.
It's genuine, you know.
Clearly Eighteenth century.’
‘Late.’
Cassie found herself saying, but Johnny appeared not to have heard.
‘There you are; home sweet home, with all the comforts.
I'll quite understand if you don't feel you can bring yourself to make love in such unsympathetic surroundings, but the bedroom's a cut above this lot, I can assure you; and if you were to close your eyes, and just think of me …?’
He grinned at her engagingly, and she thought how very attractive he was, particularly when he looked as he did now; happy and smiling.
‘Do I win a prize?’ he asked earnestly.
‘In a minute.
Just one more question, Johnny.’
Seeing his frown, she added quickly: ‘Only one.
And then you can have your prize.’
‘All right then.
Just one.
And don't take all day about it, because I want to kiss you again.
Rather a lot, in fact.’
‘What date is it?’ she asked directly, not able to think of any other means of approach.
‘The twenty seventh of July.’
Odd, thought Cassie.
The month's wrong.
Why should that be?
‘July?
Are you sure?’
‘Of course, I'm sure.
Do you think that I don't know the date?’
‘And the year, Johnny?’
He sighed.
‘Glory Be!’ he said with resignation.
‘Nineteen bloody forty!
The twenty seventh of July, nineteen forty.
And now can we stop this bloody silly nonsense.’
Cassie did not appear to be listening.
‘It isn't for me,’ she said bleakly.
‘What isn't for you?’
‘It isn't nineteen forty,’ she said defiantly, and with a slight break in her voice.
Johnny had just begun to bite her ear.
He raised his head and said: ‘Don't be silly, my darling.’
And then after a moment's hesitation: ‘I really don't understand you, Cassie.’
Tears began to gather in Cassie's eyes.
Her throat ached and she found it quite hard to swallow.
‘You say that it's July, nineteen forty.
But not in my world, it isn't.
It's June, now.
June, nineteen ninety two.’
He roared a great shout of laughter.
‘Cassie…’ he said warningly, but he saw her tears and the amusement died from his face.
‘What do you mean?’ he asked harshly.
‘Why, that's more than fifty years away.
I don't understand.’
‘Do you think I do?
Do you think I know what's going on?
I only know that something is.
Something odd and terrifying…and…and abnormal.
Your time and my time…well they've somehow got all mixed up.
I can see you, Johnny.
I can touch you and talk to you; but I can't see the…your world's surroundings, if you like.
Your Rose Cottage and mine are quite, quite different.
This room isn't as you described it.
Not for me, it isn't.
It's nothing like it.
No blackout curtains; no bits of tape on the window; no china dogs.
Look…
There I've got a television down there.
Not a table with dried flowers.
The bread oven's the same.
And the piano; but that's about it.’
She gazed at Johnny beseechingly, begging him to understand, but she knew that it was going to be no good.
He jumped to his feet, his face darkening with rage.
‘So you are mad, Cassie?
I did wonder about that.
But I preferred to think that you were…well, you know…someone from another planet.
And you don't need to look so bloody superior.
It's no dafter an idea than yours.
Nineteen ninety two!
Absolute tommy rot.
Good God!
You haven't even been born yet.’
There was an hysterical note in his voice as his temper rose.
‘No,’ said Cassie, in a low voice.
‘I haven't.
Not in your world.
I was born in nineteen sixty six.’
Johnny groaned and hit his forehead with his clenched fist.
He strode wildly round the room, and then turned violently back towards her.
‘You must be mad, Cassie,’ he said, slowly and deliberately.
‘No sane person would make up such a tarradiddle.
You're asking me to  believe that I've fallen in love with a nothing.’
He laughed unsteadily.
‘How can I love you?
You're not there.
You're not bloody-well there!’
‘Oh, shit!’ said Cassie despairingly.
‘What did you say?
What did you say?’
Johnny yelled, his eyes nearly starting from his head.
‘Does it matter, Johnny?’ she said wearily.
‘I only know that I'm an ordinary person, living an ordinary life.
And I didn't ask you to come waltzing into it.
And I didn't ask you to fall in love with me, either.’
Johnny was standing with his back to her, gazing blankly out of the window, but at her last words, he wheeled round and said sarcastically: ‘Well, I was wasting my time, wasn't I?
A bit tricky under the circumstances, although I've never actually done it with a raving loony.
Perhaps it's an experience that nobody should miss.
It would have the added advantage of novelty.’
‘I'm not mad,’ she said flatly.
‘I'm telling you the truth.
Surely you must have had some idea that something was wrong?
My clothes, for instance.
I don't look as if I come from your time, for Christ's sake!
Well,do I ?’
‘I should expect,’ said Johnny, with the same destructive sarcasm,’your time to be so very much more advanced than mine.
Nineteen ninety two, you said, didn't you?
I'm sure that by that far distant year, your lot know pretty much all there is to know.
So let me in on the secret.
How do you know all this?
How can you be so sure?
Unless you have some private arrangement with the Almighty that I don't know about.’
‘Because you walked through my garage wall,’ she said simply.
‘I saw you.’
At this disclosure, Johnny became, if possible, more fearsomely angry than before.
‘Really?’ he said silkily.
‘Yes of course!
Why didn't I think of that?
I walked through your wall.’
‘Please be reasonable, Johnny.
I've got a garage built at the side of the cottage.
It isn't there in your time.
When you left, after you visited last, you just walked straight through it.
I watched you do it.’
‘Be reasonable,’ Johnny whispered, and she thought for a moment  that he was going to hit her.
‘Be reasonable!
After you calmly tell me that I walked through a fucking wall!’
Even in his anger and growing fear, the conditioning of his background and breeding rose, if only briefly, above his present distress.
He turned away with a groan and thumped the mantle of the fireplace with his hand.
Cassie winced.
‘God, I'm sorry Cassie.
I'm all at sixes and sevens.
I really don't know what I'm saying.’
She was too distressed herself to explain that that particular expression did not fall upon her ears with any degree of shock, and wondered quickly if she and Johnny would ever really be able to communicate properly.
‘It's no big deal,’ she said ‘You're upset.
Of course you are.’
‘Upset?’ he roared.
‘Christ!’
He put a world of emphasis into this last word.
He tugged at his hair and said half to himself: ‘I've got to think about this.
I'm going for a walk.
I must think.’
He plunged towards the door, and before Cassie could stop him, had wrenched it open and stormed out into the hall, crashing the door shut behind him.
Cassie sat very still.
She knew that there was no point in jumping up and running after him; no use in calling out his name.
She did not pretend to know how the ‘magic’ worked, but she knew this much.
There were no second chances!
She and Johnny could not simply pick up where they had left off.
Time allowed them to meet, but not to part.
The thread which joined them was as light and insubstantial as dandelion seed, and once out of sight of each other, the spell was broken.
Cassie knew that Johnny was now separated from her by a gulf of fifty years.
She could not call him back.
Early the following morning, the planes flew again.
Cassie woke just after first light to hear the drone of their engines fading in the direction of the sea.
Still drowsy and warm from sleep, she lay thinking of Johnny Latimer and whether Time or the house (for she could not decide which it was that played the tricks and pulled the strings) would let him come back to her again.
She thought with compassion and understanding of his anger and his incomprehension; and his fear.
For had she not experienced all of these emotions as she had watched Johnny walk through the garage wall?
Would he be able to come to terms with them, as she, herself, had begun to, albeit reluctantly?
She had come to realize, very early in their relationship, that Johnny liked to dominate; to manipulate.
For all his charm, he was arrogant and egotistical.
He liked to be in charge; to have his own way.
How would he react to a nonsensical situation such as this, and one which was completely outside his own control?
Very badly, she decided ruefully.
Her mind slid over this problem and rejected it, her thoughts returning to memories of Johnny as he had been when he had attempted to make love to her on the previous night.
She longed for him to be with her again.
How much she wanted him there, in the bed beside her.
How happy she would be now, if she could turn her head and see him there, and reach out her arms to hold on to him and pull him close.
She sighed and stretched her body sensuously beneath the sheet, listening dreamily to the almost comforting thrum of the receding planes.
Suddenly she sat upright in bed as though pulled by strings, her brain clearing as if her head had been pushed into a bucket of water.
Every lingering shred of sleep, every  languorous thought of Johnny, was wiped from her mind.
The planes!
Johnny's planes.
For that is what they were.
Not the result of R.A.F. manoeuvres, or the preparations for some local Air Show, as she had previously imagined.
But Johnny's planes, surely?
And as she lay in bed listening, was it the wartime sky which stretched above her head?
Out there in the pale grey dawn, did Mrs Plumptry sleep, a relatively young woman of only forty years or so, or lie with Stanley in her bed and hear the planes as they flew out to sea?
Was Johnny up there now, this minute, doing something that she could not imagine; could not bear to think about?
Her concern, until then, had always been that Time (or the house) would prevent him from reaching her, stop them from being able to meet, remove the opportunity, once and for all, for her to feel again as she had done last night, leaving her for ever empty and unsatisfied.
For all the thought that she had given to his ordinary life, Johnny could have been a milkman, for all she cared, or an Insurance broker  working in the City, whose daily brush with danger was in trying to cross the road.
Johnny was a fighter pilot.
For real!
Not John Mills in ‘Reach for the Stars’.
Her entire knowledge of what he had to do to earn his crust amounted to not a row of beans.
He flew up there on his missions.
Was that what they were called?
In a Spitfire?
Almost certainly, a Spitfire, although there might have been something else called a…
Hurricane; maybe Johnny had a Hurricane, after all.
And they sat around, didn't they, looking devastatingly  blasé and cheery in this sexy gear, all sheepskin and flying boots, and scarf knotted in a debonair fashion at their throats?
And as a special favour, she believed, they were allowed to leave their top button unfastened.
Big Deal!
It must have more than compensated for being shot down, or blown to bits.
So they sat around, then, in deckchairs, waiting to scramble, telling each other bad jokes, and saying things like: ‘Old Bill Ponsonby pranged the jolly old kite, today.’
…and ‘Bloody good show, chaps!’
And Vera Lyn sang ‘We'll Meet Again' on the wireless.
Sometimes one of them didn't make it back to base, or camp, or whatever they called it, and then one of his chums would pop along to tell the girlfriend.
‘Orf'ly bad show, old girl, but I'm afraid Dougie bought it today.’
And she would say: ‘Tell me how it happened, Rupert.
I'd rather know.’
And Vera Lyn sang ‘There'll be Bluebirds Over…’ on the wireless.
And while they were up there in the wide, blue yonder, they jabbered non-stop to each other over the radio.
They were so busy talking that they didn't see the bandits at three o'clock until it was almost too late; or, at least, the newest and youngest arrival didn't.
The Leader would give him a right bollocking, but there were no hard feelings, because everyone knew that really he loved the poor little bugger, with an almost fatherly concern.
Because of all this talking, however, and the staccato of the machine gun fire, you could never really tell which one had bought it; and, anyway, they all looked alike in their flying helmets.
But you knew that somebody had bought it, all right, because the plane would start to nose-dive, and something funny would happen to the engine tone.
There would be a lot of smoke and flames, and the pilot would try  to put out the fire with his flying gloves, but they just weren't up to it; and while he was coping with this emergency, the plane would start to dive and spin.
as if he didn't have enough to worry about already!
In the end, though, it would all be bang on and tickety boo (or was that the wrong war?) because Rupert, the sexiest of the pilots, managed to win through.
His number failed to come up; and Dougie's girl, who had always fancied Rupert, anyway, but hadn't liked to say so, allowed herself to be comforted.
And then the war ended, and Vera Lyn sang ‘There'll always be an England’ on the wireless.
So was that what Johnny had done, fifty years ago; or was doing now, depending on which way you looked at it?
Was he, even now, up there with bandits at every point of the clock face and machine gun fire rattling and stuttering around him?
Did he bank and dive, his finger on the button, his guns blazing from the wings?
Was he , perhaps, Red Leader?
Did he issue urgent warnings to his little band…
‘Look out Jock…
Snowy!
Did he have to tell the others what to do?
‘Come in, number four, your time is up.’…
How could she separate the reality of John Latimer's war from the thin gruel of romantic rubbish with which she had always associated these lighthearted, devil-may-care young pilots, with their positively foolhardy absence of nerves and their propensity for turning the Battle of Britain into something resembling a schoolboy jape!
Johnny's daily life could lead remorselessly to his death.
In fact, as she considered it for the first time, she wondered how any of them had survived to tell the tale.
Whatever Johnny Latimer's weaknesses may be, they did not include cowardice.
He and his heroic companions displayed, in one day, more courage than most were called upon to exhibit in the whole of their lives.
And remembering Johnny's face when he had talked of Dusty Miller, she knew that neither he nor his friends found the whole thing much of a joke, either.
She almost laughed when she reflected that here was she fretting about whether Time would give him back to her or not.
She and Johnny had a much more powerful enemy.
There would be no best pal to break the news to her , she thought bleakly; no telegram, like Mrs Plumptry's.
He just wouldn't come to Rose Cottage again, and she would not know  whether ‘Time’ had been the culprit, or some long ago and nameless enemy.
Nor did she think she would ever have the courage to find out.
It wasn't fair, she thought angrily, in the way that she had done when she was a child.
By nature she was pacific.
She had always avoided books or films which dealt with carnage and its attendant gore.
Her blood did not stir to the tunes of glory, nor quicken at the sound of a military band.
For her, war was something that happened in other people's lives, and even the most recent conflicts had failed to win her to the view that war could be, upon occasions, both right and just.
Her men had not been called upon to go; she knew no-one who was in the army, or who flew the Tornado jets.
She reflected that if Time had needed to deposit its flotsam on her doorstep, could it not have taken the form of a steady young man who caught the 5.30 train home each evening, and played cricket at the weekends?
Did it have to be a fighter pilot, for God's sake?
She could do without the Romance and the Glamour, the heart-stopping uniform and the V.C.
— posthumously awarded!
‘What did Daddy do in the war, Mummy?’
‘He died, dear.’
She found herself wondering in amazement how any of them could have listened to those songs:—
‘We'll meet again, don't know where, don't know when,
But I know we'll meet again some sunny day.’
Had they actually wanted to make themselves feel bad?
Give her a rousing chorus of ‘Roll out the Barrel’ any day of the week.
Her thoughts were interrupted by the sound of planes again, only this time there was a different engine note added to the first, low and heavy, making a rhythmic thrumming inside her head and growing stronger every second.
She jumped out of bed and ran to the window.
She saw them in the sky, just a small group of them, but they brought death, she knew that, as they flew steadily on through the calm of the summer morning.
Three planes swooped in, fast and low.
They banked and peeled away, seeking their hostile prey.
They seemed to Cassie like wasps, skimming above and below the German fighter escort, worrying them, darting from every direction at once.
One of the planes, an  enemy one she thought, suddenly blazed with a great yellow and red light from somewhere just behind its wings, and almost immediately, tiny bright fragments hurtled outwards from the burning plane, and it was gone.
One moment it had been there, and the next?
Nothing!
Only the fragments spinning away towards the ground…and the young pilot, ‘the pride of ‘is mother's ‘eart,’ spinning earthwards with them.
She did not want to watch  any more , but something made her stay, silent at the window.
She knew that she had taken sides.
She was in truth no longer an on-looker, and thought how insidious was this stupid game they called war, that all her principles, all her most passionately held beliefs became as nothing when one person, just one whom she cared about, was a part of it.
For all she knew, the pilot in the Spitfire pursuing his enemy low across the fields was Johnny, and if anyone were to die in that encounter, it must not be him.
She imagined with something like dread, all of his young beauty disintegrating there in the sky; saw the flames lick, felt the fearful impact as his plane nose-dived into the waiting earth.
She shuddered and found herself whispering: ‘Make it back to base, Johnny.
Don't ‘buy it’, this time.
Not yet…not ever.
Make it home safely, my love.’
At that moment she would have traded the lives of all the pilots who were up there now against just his.
Light blazed for a second from the wings of the Spitfire, and the enemy plane began a steady downward flight, unchecked towards the fields below.
It looked graceful, almost beautiful, in its flight of death, the great tail of dark smoke following behind it like a black ghost.
She held her breath, her hands at her mouth, as the dying plane sped out of sight; and suddenly she knew that the pilot in the burning plane was not her enemy.
Just a young man like Johnny, whose life had ended there in the fields of a foreign land, which would be for him, she supposed, forever Germany.
She felt sickened and saddened beyond words and, for the first time, she wished that this thing had not happened to her.
She felt an angry resentment against this intrusion of John Latimer into the contentment of her days; this intrusion of Johnny's  life; of Johnny's war.
As she watched the skies, half fascinated, half terrified, the planes shimmered and were gone.
The noise of their engines merged with the rolling, echoing rumble of distant thunder, and the blaze of fire was replaced by brilliant flashes of lightning until the whole sky was alight with the electric blue of the storm.
The noise of the thunder shook the house, and the little panes of glass rattled in the window frames.
And then it rained; glorious, refreshing rain, washing away the awfulness of what she had just seen.
The rain fell steadily, almost vertically, for several minutes, drops like pearls rolling down the glass and dripping on the sill.
As abruptly as it had started, the storm stopped and the sun shone from a sky the colour of a Ceylon sapphire.
Cassie slipped on her dressing gown and ran outside into the garden.
It was still very early and the village of Axe was quiet, but morning sounds drifted faintly to her ears.
A dog barked in a nearby garden and she could hear the rattle of milk crates and the hum of the float as the milkman began his rounds.
Traffic was beginning to build up on the main road which bypassed Axe, and the sound of one particular car engine could be heard, becoming steadily louder as it approached her part of the lane.
The car turned in at Brier Cottage and Ben climbed out.
He looked surprised to see Cassie standing by the front door but gave her a friendly wave and began to walk up the path.
Cassie crossed the grass and stood by the little gate.
‘Sick cow?’ she asked quietly, aware that others still slept.
Ben grinned but shook his head.
‘Trouble down at Beryl's stables,’ he said, joining her at the gate.
‘The horses got upset during the night, and one of the mares damaged herself.
Apparently they've been a bit disturbed once or twice, recently.’
‘Perhaps it was the storm?’
Ben stared at her blankly.
‘Storm?’
‘Yes.
You know…thunder, lightning, lots of rain.
That kind of thing!’
Ben continued to gaze at Cassie in abject amazement and she began to feel a little irritated.
‘Well,’ she said defensively, ‘I don't pretend to be an expert, but  don't storms upset animals sometimes?
Sort of make them restless?’
‘But there hasn't been a storm.’
‘Oh, but, of course…’ began Cassie, and then following the direction of Ben's gaze, she faltered and said nothing.
The earth in the flower bed in front of the window was grey and powdery, the result of several weeks of drought.
She realized suddenly that the ground on which she stood, barefooted, was stone hard beneath grass barely damp with early dew.
No pearly raindrops dripped from the gutters or lay trapped in the hollows of the leaves.
She laughed nervously, unable to look at Ben.
‘I must have dreamed it,’ she said lamely.
She was rescued from having to say more by the arrival of the milkman.
‘'Morning,’ he said cheerfully, as she walked towards him to take the proffered bottle.
‘Another lovely day by the looks of things.
Don't know how long it'll keep it up, but the forecast says ‘no change’.
Make the most of it, I say.
You never know with our weather; be blowing a gale tomorrow, more than like.’
Cassie murmured a response, and without turning back to Ben, she carried the milk bottle into the house.
Ben stood staring at her across the garden, a puzzled, worried expression on his face.
Cassie was having altogether too many dreams.
Perhaps he should persuade her to see a doctor.
There was no denying the fact that she'd looked terrible, just then.As if she'd seen a ghost, he thought uneasily.
He really must talk to Jenny!
CHAPTER 10 — MID JUNE
Later that day, Cassie walked back from posting some  letters .
Despite the lovely summer weather, she felt quite bleak and depressed.
She contemplated drearily the fact that it was a Saturday; the day when everybody supposedly enjoyed themselves.
They went to discos and nightclubs, out to dinner or to the theatre.
Parties, company, music…fun!
That was what Saturday night was all about.
And what would she be doing with her Saturday? she wondered grimly.
Well, she could answer that one straight off, no sweat!
She'd be sitting at home waiting for this bloody man, who at best thought she was some kind of alien, and at worst, stark, staring mad.
That's if he ever came near Rose Cottage again.
He'd been badly shocked last night.
Frightened, too.
What if he refused to have anything more to do with her?
She walked round the side of the cottage and into the back garden.
Johnny was there, lying on his back under the boughs of the apple tree.
He appeared to be dozing because he did not notice her approach, nor open his eyes, until she had parted the branches and was looking down at him.
He regarded her with lazy, sleepy eyes and said:
‘I'm in Heaven, of course.
And you are an angel.’
She slipped down on the grass beside him and began to cry; ugly, hiccuping sobs of pure relief.
She wept and wept; then Johnny propped himself on his elbow and began to stroke her arm with his free hand.
‘Hey, little Martian?
What's all this?’ he said tenderly.’
I know I'm no end of a brute, and roar like a bear when I lose my temper, but there's no need to be quite so distressed by my presence.
If it would make you happier, I could always go away.’
She clung to him and laughed a little through her sobs, and he said: ‘We shall float away on a tide of your tears if you're not careful.
Here.’
He offered her a large clean handkerchief with the monogram J.E.L. embroidered on one corner.
Cassie sniffed and blew her nose.
‘I'm sorry,’ she said, between sniffs.
‘What a wimp!
Its just that I thought you wouldn't come here any more…not after last night.’
He smiled at her lovingly.
‘Do you think that I could possibly keep away?’
‘I don't know.
You really lost your cool, you've got to admit it; and it was obvious that you thought I was completely off my trolley, so you see…’
‘As it happens, Cassie, no…no, I don't think you're…off your what?…
Trolley?
Barmy anyway, which is what I understand you to mean.
In fact, I think you've got it right, fantastic though it may seem.’
‘What made you change your mind?
Last night, you were dead set against the idea.’
He pulled up a piece of grass and began to chew it thoughtfully.
‘Well,’ he said, between chews.
‘I only stayed in the hall for a couple of seconds.
I was seething, yes, but not enough to keep me away from you .
I'd waited a bloody long time to be with you again, and there I was, behaving like a blasted prima donna and wasting my chances.
As soon as I'd closed, sorry, slammed the door, I realized what a prize idiot I was being, so I returned ‘toot sweet’.
And you weren't there.
Presto!
The original disappearing lady.
Had you flown up the chimney like the wicked old witch? I didn't think so, somehow.
So I took myself off to my billet, feeling bloody frustrated and edgy, might I add, and thence to bed, where I thought about it.
All damn' night in fact.
I began to see that you might have a grain of truth lurking there somewhere, and the more I thought about it the more it made sense.
Really, if such a preposterous notion could ever make sense Everything fitted.
So Bob's your uncle.
I began to agree with you, my darling.’
‘You followed my drift, did you?’ she asked, with a grin, and he raised his eyebrows and said: ‘Yes, Cassie, I'll agree that that was one of my arguments.
There were things that you said that I only half understood; things that startled me sometimes; shocked me a bit, if you like.
Yet when I came to think about it, it was only the slang that I didn't quite understand.
All of your other utterances were readily comprehensible.’
‘I had the advantage there.
I'd heard your slang before.
Lots of times, and I could put a date to it…near enough anyway.
But hadn't you begun to suspect?
Not even just an inkling?
Not even when I kept on disappearing?’
‘I knew that there was something pretty odd about you.
Naturally.
But my mind was stuck on this Martian theory.
You were all wrong, and yet there was nothing  old-fashioned about you, so…
’ He shrugged.
‘Pretty silly idea, really.
Absolutely crackers; but what else was there to think?’
‘I don't think it was silly, Johnny.
Even in my time we tend to think of aliens…you know, people from Outer Space? as being so much in advance of our own civilization.
I suppose the very idea that they have  spacecraft and can zoom about all over the Galaxy at warp seven, leads us to assume that they must be.
So when I appeared on the scene and there were things about me which didn't stack up…well, it was a reasonable conclusion to arrive at.
I think it was quite intelligent of you, my dear.’
He kissed her forehead and said: ‘You're lovely….
I could eat you up.’
Selecting another piece of grass, he said: ‘Anyway, I stayed awake until about four this morning, going over and over it in my mind, and when I woke an hour or so later, I had one almighty headache…bloody brass band playing inside the old brainbox…flashing lights before the eyes…the lot!
So the M.O.
grounded me; and that's why I'm here really.’
‘How d'you mean?’
‘He said: ‘No flying for you today, Johnny, my lad, and that's an order.’
I think he believed I might be going to argue with him.
Amazin'’.
At that point, he grinned at Cassie quite wickedly, and her heart promptly turned a complete somersault inside her chest.
‘He gave me a couple of pills the size of tennis balls and told me to get my head down.
It's a wizard scheme, if you ask me.
I'm supposed to be resting, but after I'd had forty winks, I felt a lot better, so I toddled over here.
Just on the off-chance, you might say.’
Cassie smiled at him and stroked his forehead.
So it hadn't been Johnny up there this morning, after all.
‘Do you feel better now?’
‘Amazingly refreshed and ready for absolutely anything.
And Cassie, my own sweet love, we've got until eight o'clock.
I've got to  see the M.O.
again later this evening, but we can have until then.
That's if you're not doing anything else,’ he added anxiously.
Cassie shook her head, her mind full of his wonderful news.
She looked at her watch.
Six hours.
They had six hours together.
She could hardly believe it.
‘Perhaps he'll give you tomorrow off, as well,’ she suggested hopefully.
‘Not a chance,’ Johnny said.
‘I don't know how many planes we've got, but sure as eggs is eggs, we ain't got many pilots.
They can't spare me, poorly ,though I may be.
If you can walk, then you can fly!’
‘It's funny, but I always thought the R.A.F. did all their flying at night.
But I'm wrong, aren't I?’
‘You are indeed.
Dawn ‘til dusk, that's us.
Jerry likes to be back before the light goes.’
‘But my mother always speaks of sleeping in the shelter.
When London was bombed.’
‘Bombed?’ said Johnny sharply, and his grip tightened on her hand.
‘Yes,’ she said, suddenly alarmed.
Deep inside her was an almost superstitious dread that she would mention Johnny's future.
It was wrong for him to know.
Nobody should know their own future!
‘Well?’ he demanded.
‘You can't stop there.
Tell me.’
There was a long pause and then, somewhat reluctantly, Cassie said: ‘I didn't realize that it hadn't happened yet.
I should learn to keep my big mouth shut.’
But Johnny would not let it rest.
‘I want to know, Cassie,’ he insisted.
‘Please.’
At last, Cassie told him what she knew.
‘They called it the Blitz.’
Johnny sat up quickly and looked at her, a dawning awareness on his face.
‘Guernica,’ he said softly.
‘Blitzkrieg.’
‘You know?’
‘They did it in Spain…oh, about two, three years ago.
They called it Blitzkrieg.’
Cassie nodded.
‘London was bombed, night after night; and lots  of other big cities, too.
People slept in shelters and down in the Underground Stations.
My mother says that, as a very little girl, she remembers my grandfather coming home one night in tears and saying that all London was burning.
She says that they lived some miles from London, but they could see the red glow in the sky and smell the smoke.’
‘So he gets here after all, the bastard,’ said Johnny  sombrely .
He rolled onto his stomach, looking sick and wretched.
‘So all of this; all that we're doing now…it's wasted, isn't it?
Chaps like Dusty…and old George Pritchard.
They've all bought it for nothing.’
He looked up at Cassie and there was a terrible desolation in his eyes.
She did not try to touch him, although she longed to comfort him.
This was his war and she did not understand it; did not understand any more than Bella, what it was like ‘up there.’
‘Mike Lowe,’ he said.
‘D’ y' know, he looked as if he hadn't even started to shave yet.
Fair haired lad…skin like a girl's.
Dead eager and anxious.
‘Sorry, Sir, I'll get it right next time, Sir.’
Well, he didn't get a bloody next time.
He didn't even get the blasted crate back down on the runway, poor sod.
Pranged the thing, while we all stood watching.
There were bits of that sodding plane embedded in his guts; all mixed up with him…or what was left of him; poor little bastard.
And he was only practising.
Putting in hours.
He'd had ten hours in Spits.
Dear God!…
Ten Hours!’
Cassie recalled her thoughts of early that morning.
Here was Red Leader and the new recruit; and he did care; he did have an almost fatherly concern.
Johnny continued to talk, more to himself than to her.
‘…and none of it's worth it.
They bombed London, you say?’
She could not bear to see him so miserable and cast down.
His towering anger was preferable to this.
She said: ‘Stop thinking like that, I'm not going to tell you every thing that happens, because it wouldn't be right for you to know.
Look at you now, with all the fight gone out of you.
But I will tell you one thing.
This battle you're fighting; well, you win it.
We call it now, the Battle of Britain, and think of it as a great victory.
There are still  celebrations on its anniversary, even in my time.
Yes, Johnny, you win.
Your lot…the fighter pilots.
I think it was a close run thing, but Hitler never invaded.
And all the history books say it was because of you…the R.A.F. So there you are.
You can be really proud of yourself, and of all the others…and of Dusty.’
He was silent for a moment.
Then he smiled, and it was as it she had told him the best news there was to tell; and when she thought about it, she supposed that she had.
His eyes were bright as he said: ‘So it'll all be over soon, will it?
How long, Cassie?
How much longer?
Oh, be a sport!
It can't hurt to tell.’
‘The Battle of Britain didn't last long, but I'm afraid you've got about another five years of war, Johnny.’
‘Five years?’
He looked horrified.
‘Yes, ‘fraid so.
But your side wins in the end; or should I say, our side?
I never think of it like that.
The Americans come in too, and in the end the Allies win the war.’
‘The Yanks?
So we don't have to go it alone?
Us and the Empire?’
‘Oh, no,’ said Cassie firmly.
‘I should think that just about everyone was having a go at everyone else by the time it ended.
But I suppose you could say that it was a war that needed fighting; if that can ever be said about any war.’
‘Hey!
What's that you say?’
Johnny demanded fiercely.
‘Of course it's worth fighting.
Bloody Hitler and his crew of cut-throats tramping all over Europe.
What would you have us do?
Sit on our bloody backsides and wish him luck?’
‘I know.
I know.
It's just that once you've started on a war, there's no stopping it.
Its own momentum keeps it going until one side gets completely flattened.
And that's a lot of dead people…and innocent people, whichever side they happen to be on.’
She thought sadly of all the things about his war that Johnny did not yet know.
Yes.
His war had been worth fighting, much as she regretted the admission.
Was nothing ever truly black or white? she wondered sadly.
Would she always have to compromise?
Johnny, however, had no such  misgivings .
He held her hand and  said: ‘Tell me that bit again, sweetheart.
The bit about winning.’
She kissed him and told him all over again, and he was happy.
He said: ‘You make me shiver when you talk like that.
I've suddenly realized how bizarre this situation is.
I mean, here am I, chattering away to you about the outcome of the war…and you actually know , Cassie.
Bloody Hell…you actually know !
I can't properly take it all in.
I truly feel that somebody's going to pinch me in a minute and I'm going to wake up.
You're well-named.
Cassandra Willmott…my fascinating little prophetess.’
His face was grave for a moment and then, unexpectedly, he roared out a great shout of laughter
‘Bella will almost certainly get blown to smithereens while she's in bed with a high-ranking Army Officer, no doubt.
Bound to be high-ranking.
My Bella's very exclusive; except when she's slumming.
It gives her an extra edge to things, you see…in bed with the working classes…all those rough, calloused hands and dropped aitches, don't y’ know?’
Cassie listened in amazement to the languid, aristocratic voice speaking so casually of his acknowledged inferiors.
Things seemed to have changed quite a bit since Johnny's time.
She could envisage stormy waters if their relationship were ever able to develop beyond the ‘Hello, Goodbye’ stage.
He laughed again, seeming to find the idea of Bella being blown away, irresistibly funny.
‘My God,’ he said with feeling.
‘How I wish I could be there to see it!’
Thinking of his earlier remark, Cassie said bluntly: ‘Well, I've only just about got one foot in the middle class bracket, myself, so perhaps you'd be slumming if you made love to me , which is so obviously what you have in mind.’
He laughed delightedly, but said lazily, almost dismissively: ‘Don't be silly.
It's perfectly clear that you're a lady, even if you do use the most shockin'ly vulgar expressions…and wear next to nothing; which is delightful but disturbing…and not quite the done thing.’
Cassie brushed aside these strictures on her behaviour and said: ‘You really hate Bella, don't you?’
‘Bella's a whore,’ he said calmly.
‘Let us talk of better things.’
Dreamily she thought of Bella, and the fact that she was Johnny's wife, and the fact, also, that if she accepted Johnny as real then all these other people were real too and not, as she had liked to pretend, fictional characters in some book that she was reading.
She wondered what Bella was like, and she thought again, this time with a spurt of jealousy, that Bella was Johnny's wife.
She turned her attention back to what he was saying.
‘Sorry, I wasn't listening.’
He gave her a gentle pinch.
‘My words are always worth listening to,’ he said.
‘You must give me your absolute fullest attention.’
‘What were you saying, then?’
‘I was telling you how much I love you, Cassie.
I've honestly never met anyone half as lovely as you.
If I'd only met you in the first place…before Bella, and…well…’
His voice died away and he shrugged.
There was a blank look on his face for a second and then he went on, ‘Well, everything would have been different…everything.
I don't think I shall love anyone else; ever again.
I could never replace you…never find your equal if I were to look until the very day I die.’
There was an unsettling intensity about his expression as he softly spoke the words; an expression at odds with both his cheerful, mischievous look and with the scowl that usually accompanied his angry, impatient moods.
Cassie shifted uncomfortably.
Johnny's words had left her feeling inadequate, as though he were presenting her with some enormous challenge which she did not feel equal to meet.
Johnny's love, expressed with such unvarnished sincerity, made her sharply aware of his vulnerability.
She wasn't sure that she could offer the same kind of commitment in return, or that she wanted so much responsibility.
‘You were  right ,’ she said lightly ‘I should have listened.
I might have missed that, altogether.’
He rolled onto his stomach and stared moodily at the grass.
‘I…
I want to marry you, Cassie.
I want you with me.
Always.’
‘Aren't you forgetting a couple of things?
Bella, for instance, and this other thing.’
Ignoring her initial objection, he said slowly.
‘I've been thinking about this time muddle, Cassie.
We neither of us know how it works.
Perhaps it would be possible to cheat it.
Smuggle me into your time, or vice-versa.’
Seeing her puzzled expression, he groaned and said: ‘Oh Hell!
I don't know.
But I shall have you, Cassie.
I shall find some way.’
He stared at her, and there was an arrogance about him that made her shiver.
‘I like to have my own way, you know.
And what I want, I usually get.’
You got Bella, Cassie thought miserably.
And what good did that do you?
She began to feel wretched.
This wasn't going at all how she had hoped.
All this introspection; the endless examining of the  whys and the  wherefores ; solving the insoluble.
She had done enough of that over the past few weeks, and had found that it led nowhere.
Couldn't Johnny see that they just had to take what was  offered?
Couldn't he see that there was no future for them, no past?
No yesterday and no tomorrow, but only now?
And ‘now’ was slipping away with the hands of the clock.
Johnny laughed again, in the way that Cassie had begun to learn heralded an idea that particularly pleased him.
Gone now, was the sombre look and the scowling brow.
His eyes were bright and mischievous, like those of a young boy's.
‘I've just had a wizard idea,’ he said.
The outdated expression, plus his look of youthful enthusiasm, reminded Cassie briefly of stories she had read as a child.
Midnight feasts in the dorm; but don't tell Matron.
‘When this damn show's over, and we've won.
You did say we win, didn't you?
Well, this is what I'm going to do.
I shall buy a house somewhere near here and I shall live there.
It can't be Rose Cottage, because you're already here, so I can't be, if you see what I mean.
And I'll wait for you, Cassie.
I'll live there and grow prize marrows, and sooner or later you'll come along.’
Cassie's eyes widened in horror.
She began to speak, but Johnny hushed her.
‘Don't you realize, sweetheart?
When I've gone; tonight, say, you can get out your motor and go looking for me.
I won't be far away, I promise.’
‘But Johnny,’ she whispered.
‘For God's sake, think what you're saying.
You'll be nearly eighty.’
She looked at the young, slim beauty of his body, the clear, healthy eyes, the shining hair.
She saw the brown unwrinkled skin, the perfection of his teeth and the fine lines of his face.
And in her mind's eye, she saw Mrs Plumptry.
She felt sick.
Johnny gave an uncertain laugh.
‘Bad idea,’ he said bitterly.
‘I can see that you're not likely to want to take an ancient and decaying heap into your bed.’
Then in an attempt at lightness, he added: ‘But you could come and hold my hand, couldn't you, my love?
And settle the rug more comfortably around my knees.’
‘Shut up.
Stop it!
Stop it!
I won't listen to another word,’ she shouted, covering her ears with her hands.
He held her close and soothed her, brushing her skin lightly with his hands and kissing her gently, until gradually she felt warm again and the bleak sadness of spirit went away.
‘Let's talk of happy things,’ she pleaded.
For a while, however, they did not talk at all.
They were content to lie there in the sun, and it was all as Cassie had wanted it to be.
Johnny began to stroke her, tenderly.
Could it be that this was what he could not get from Bella?
She felt certain that with Bella there had been passion.
Yes.
Johnny hated Bella too much for there not to have been passion.
But tenderness?
Caring?
She very much doubted it.
‘I feel lightheaded,’ he said suddenly.
‘Perhaps no food for hours, and two mega-pills, has got something to do with it.’
‘It has nothing to do with it, whatsoever.
It's quite simply because I do love you…so much.
You make my head spin.
Have I, by any chance, told you that you are beautiful?’
Cassie grinned.
‘About two hundred and thirty seven times in the last half hour,’ she assured him.
‘Then, for the two hundred and thirty-eighth time, you are  beautiful, my Cassandra.
I shall never stop telling you so.’
‘You aren't bad yourself.
Rather hunky, in fact.’
‘Hunky?’
Cassie had been playing absentmindedly with the buttons on Johnny's shirt, and now she brushed the material away and pushed her mouth against his shoulder, biting gently with small sharp teeth.
‘Mmm!’ she said.
‘Quite a dish.
You know.
Tasty.
Appetizing.’
She bit his shoulder again.
‘Good enough to eat, in fact…and sinfully sexy.’
‘I like the things you say, Cassie; though I don't always understand them.
They're…so direct and straightforward, somehow.
And descriptive; very alive, I suppose I'd say.
Although…’
‘Shockingly vulgar?’ she said teasingly.
‘Well, I guess you're right there.
Most of my generation are .
We don't think about it much.
There aren't many taboo words now.
Some I suppose; some that I shouldn't dream of saying; that even I should consider ‘shockingly vulgar’.
Some of the things I say get up my mother's nose a bit.
‘Must you say that, dear?’ she'll murmur.
‘It's such a coarse expression.’’
She wrinkled her nose and put her head on one side.
‘But it turns you on, doesn't it Johnny?’
She prodded his chest.
‘Come on; admit it.
I know it does.’
‘Turns me on?’
‘Mm.
Makes you horny!
Makes you feel very sexy.’
‘Everything about you makes me feel that,’ he murmured.
‘But yes, you're right, I suppose.
It has a refreshingly erotic quality.’
‘And are you always looking for new experiences, Johnny?
New stimulation?’
It had only been a shot in the dark; playing a hunch really, but Johnny's face reddened and he looked momentarily discomfited.
‘I only want one experience with you , Cassie,’ he muttered.
‘Just the perfectly ordinary and acceptable one.’
Nothing was said for a moment or two, and then Johnny sighed.
‘I expect I seem terribly old-fashioned to you,’ he said, a little dejectedly.
She opened her eyes in surprise.
‘Good Lord, no!
I'd say you were pretty stylish.
Right-on!
You know…cool, laid back…and probably macho too; almost definitely macho.’
‘Are you laughing at me?’ he asked, and he seemed genuinely hurt.
She soothed his ruffled pride by saying quickly: ‘Not at all.
No way!
They're all very flattering things to be called…except perhaps macho.’
‘Oh, and what may that mean, pray?’
She thought for a moment.
‘Machismo?
Well…male aggressiveness; and probably an insufferable male chauvinism, too,’ she said at last.
He still looked puzzled.
‘And is that an insult?’
‘In my book, it is,’ she said with absolute certainty.
‘Then I shan't be like it,’ he said, equally firmly.
No chance, she thought sadly.
No chance, at all.
As though to underline her thoughts, and reverting suddenly to a much earlier observation, he said: ‘Do all the women in your time wear next to nothing?’
He indicated the tiny mini dress, backless and with halter neck, which she had chosen to wear because the day was almost insufferably hot.
‘I don't wear next to nothing.
It's only because it's so hot.
When it's chilly I'm positively swathed in clothes.
Multi-layers of them.’
‘And what about that incredible garment you were wearing when I first met you?’
‘My bikini?’
Now it was Cassie's turn to become nettled.
‘It's only a swimsuit.
Didn't you like it?’
He smiled broadly.
‘Like it?
I absolutely doted on it, Old Thing.
I should hate to give the impression that my love for you is but thinly disguised lust.
But when I saw you that first time in the garden, I most certainly wanted you, My Cassie.
My senses were whirling!
I thought you might be a Windmill girl…come to blackmail me about some drunken indiscretion of mine.
I expected you to produce the infant out of the basket.
Yes; it was definitely lust at first sight, if not love.’
‘Have you got many of these drunken indiscretions littering  the nineteen forties?’
Cassie asked frigidly.
‘None that I know of,’ he said.
‘And when did you start to love me then, after you'd got over the shock of my bikini, that is?’
‘Oh; as soon as you put on your robe and I could think of something else.’
‘Well, I'm sorry that you don't like my clothes.’
‘Cassie, love, I adore your clothes.
I think they're wonderful .
They're strange, I grant you; but very exciting and attractive.
I'm not criticizing them, my darling.
It's just that…
’ His voice trailed away uncertainly.
‘Just what?’
‘I don't like the thought of other chaps seeing so much of you, that's all.
Your body is mine.
I don't want to share it with the rest of the bloody world, and I don't intend to.
You're only for me, Cassie.
Don't ever forget that.’
Cassie was deeply shocked.
She sat up very straight and removed Johnny's hand briskly from her breast.
‘I suppose you'd like me to go into purdah?’ she enquired scathingly.
‘Or a nun's habit.
How about that?
There's nothing revealing about that .
Should do the trick, I imagine.
Precious little chance of somebody ogling your property,then !’
It looked as if they had discovered a minefield.
Eyes sparkling, Cassie launched into an explanation of women's rights and their liberation from the bondage of despicable male chauvinists like Johnny.
He received a brisk and bewildering up-date on the progress, so far, in woman's struggle to be a person in her own right, and not the property of some bloody man.
‘And I'll have you know, Johnny Latimer,’ she said furiously, ‘that my body is mine .
And I'll show it to whomsoever I wish.
And what is more, I'll give it or not as I please; and I'll be buggered if I'll ask permission of some pushy little perisher before I do so.’
Johnny looked shattered.
He lay at her side and for a long while he didn't speak.
Then, in a low voice, and rather quickly, he said: ‘I don't pretend to understand your times, Cassie.
I said what I said because that's how I feel.
I can see from what you've just told me that things  have changed rather a lot in fifty years.
But I can't cope with that sort of thinking.’
He rested a hand tentatively on her arm as if expecting it to be snatched angrily away.
‘I could try to learn,’ he said humbly.
When she didn't answer, he went on ‘The way I see it, women need to be protected and loved.
You make it sound like a kind of slavery, but it isn't like that at all.
A man shelters his wife from unpleasantness and danger; he keeps her safe.
He provides for her and his family, and in return she cares for him and is loyal to him…and faithful.
She satisfies his desires…er…physical ones, you understand; children and all that.
He may stray now and then, but it doesn't mean anything…that sort of thing is to be expected, men being as they are, with different needs and…um…appetites?
Of course, the man will take the major decisions, and be supported in them by his wife; and obeyed, if you like.
But this would only be in the major things, Cassie.
The important things.
Most chaps in my time wouldn't dream of trying to lord it over their girl.
You'd be given free rein to run the show how you wanted it.
But the important decisions…well, it stands to reason that these would be the sole responsibility of the man.
A woman doesn't know the ways of the world; she doesn't understand these things…and wouldn't want to.
She…’
His words were interrupted by a derisive snort.
‘It may interest you to learn, oh Wise and Wonderful One,’ said Cassie tartly, ‘that we've only just got rid of a woman Prime Minister.
And what's more she was in power for ten years.
You may have loved her or hated her, agreed with her or violently opposed her, but not even her worst enemy could have accused her of spinelessness or a desire to be shielded from life's little unpleasantnesses.
She was a better man than the rest of them put together!
And what's more, if she'd been about in your time, instead of that man, nice little Neville Chamberlain, she'd have given your old Hitler a few  right-handers below the belt; and seen to it that Britain was armed to the teeth, with an airforce twice the size of the Luftwaffe instead of a few old men with pitch forks and a handful of plucky chaps like yourself to keep the Nazis out.
So there!
Think about that, Laddie.’
She looked down at Johnny as he lay, his hands clasped beneath his head, a defeated expression on his face.
She wondered if the  shredded look was at the almost unthinkable idea of a woman Prime Minister or at Cassie's trenchant dismissal of Britain's wartime defences; but for the moment the confident and very arrogant ‘leave everything to me, I know what I'm about’ look had been most thoroughly squashed.
All at once she began to laugh, and her anger, never very swiftly roused at the best of times, left her entirely.
She thought ruefully that she had been pretty unfair.
If she was stuck with wanting a man whose background and conditioning were alien to her, then that was her problem.
Poor Johnny; wallowing in a mire of  Women's Lib: He was a product of his times, as she was of hers.
Had she really expected him to think like David or Ben, or many of the other men who had been a part of her adult life?
And weren't there plenty of men who still thought as Johnny did, even though the year was 1992?
She turned quickly to him and rested her cheek against his chest.
‘My fault, Johnny,’ she said.
‘Friends?’
He rolled over to lie on top of her and said: ‘Phew!
That was a near thing.
You're a fine woman when you're roused, my darling.
All fire and spirit.
But, do you know something?
I think the women of your time have been allowed to get away with murder.
It sounds to me as if you all need a jolly good thrashing.
That'd help you to mind your P's and Q's.’
He was laughing as he said this, but Cassie was not entirely sure that she found the idea particularly funny.
Although she had made the best of resolutions not to be drawn into talking about her own times, she found it hard to resist Johnny's persistent questioning.
He wanted to know so very much what it was like.
He seemed to view the nineteen nineties as some kind of Golden Age, and Cassie was reluctant to shake his faith in the future.
What should she tell him? she wondered.
About the recent war? the Bomb?
AIDS, acid rain, holes in the ozone; the whole desperate catalogue of gross pollution and senseless waste.
What about lager louts and football hooligans?
Old ladies mugged and beaten for their pitifully small savings?
Would he want to know that everywhere one turned in this Golden Age of the future, there was war and violence and man's dreadful inhumanity?
Perhaps child abuse or the continuing  destruction of family life would make a good starting point?
Shit! she thought crossly.
What was so special about Johnny's time, anyway?
And there was much that was good in her own society.
So she began to speak, choosing her words with care and refusing steadfastly to talk about Johnny's war, or of the little she knew of Johnny's time.
She told him abut television and video, Jumbo Jets and Concorde.
She told him about washing machines and dishwashers, microwaves and compact discs.
She told him about open heart surgery, and lasers; about credit cards and the cost of living, and the vast expense involved when buying a moderately sized residence like Rose Cottage, which he regarded as little short of scandalous, totally unable to begin to comprehend such vast sums of money being paid for such a relatively small return.
She talked about decimal coinage, which saddened him; the European Community, which amused him (What?
All of us?
The Froggies…
Jerry!
It won't last.
You'll never get us and the Frogs to agree on anything.
It's all a matter of principle!).
And the Channel Tunnel, which angered and alarmed him.
She described the Americans on the moon, satellites and space travel, and his eyes widened with delighted wonder, like a child's, as he said: ‘You're pulling my leg.
Oh, Cassie, how wizard!
How absolutely wizard!’
She gave him a brief, run-down on the Pop Music Scene, Rock Festivals, The Swinging Sixties…
Peace and love, Man!
Hippies, Groupies, Greasers, Punks and Acid House raves.
She attempted an inadequate and non-technical account of the development of electronics, and the ascendancy of the micro chip and the computer.
Johnny's questions here were searching and intelligent, and exhibited, thought Cassie, considerably more basic understanding than she possessed herself.
In point of fact, he showed far less difficulty in grappling with the mysteries of electronics than he did in understanding the concept of rappers and street cred, and the multi-racial society, although he experienced no difficulty whatsoever with the problems of racial discrimination.
For Johnny, there were the Brits…and the other lot, all lumped together, and coming a pretty poor second.
Cassie entertained more than a suspicion that John would definitely prove to be very ideologically unsound indeed!
Cassie talked and talked until her throat ached and her mouth was dry; and each time she stopped, Johnny would say: ‘Tell me more.
Don't stop.
Tell me more.’
So fascinated was he, that only occasionally did he remember to touch her, only once or twice interrupt her to bend and kiss her lips, and forgot completely his need for a cigarette.
At last she wound down like an old-fashioned gramophone and rolled onto her back on the grass feeling exhausted.
Never before had she had such an attentive audience.
Johnny fished in his trouser pocket for a somewhat battered packet of cigarettes and a slim gold lighter.
She watched his hands as he pushed open the packet and pulled out a cigarette.
Tiny shreds of tobacco scattered across his shirt front and he brushed them away.
He tapped the cigarette briskly against the packet, placed it negligently between his lips and lit it.
This ritual having been accomplished, he fell back against the grass and took Cassie's hand lightly in his own.
Softly, he sighed, drew in deeply on the cigarette, blew the smoke languidly towards the leafy canopy and said:
‘When this show's all over, I'm never going to fly another damn’ kite.
Not ever.’
‘Unless it's the sort made of paper, with a long string?’
‘Gosh, yes!
When it's all over, we'll go to Bignor Hill.
Do you know Bignor Hill?’
Cassie nodded.
‘And we'll take a kite.
And I'll show little Johnny and little Cassie how to fly it.
And you'll get the picnic ready.’
Cassie prodded him in the chest.
‘Hey!
Hang on!
How about me showing them, and you getting the picnic ready?’
‘Sorry; I forgot.’
He rolled on top of her and began to tickle her ribs.
She giggled and tried to escape his hand.
‘Stop it!’ she said warningly.
‘I can't stand it.
It'll make me wet my pants.’
’ You're priceless Cassie,’ he said, grinning at her in delight.
‘Did I tell you that I love you?
Anyway, don't interrupt.
You're spoiling my story.
I don't care who gets the bloody picnic.
Now, let me see.
Yes, we'll have a picnic.
And we'll both show little Cassie and little Johnny  how to fly a kite.
And they'll learn straight off, because they'll have my brains, and their mother's beauty…’ he added modestly.
She smiled at him, allowing him to continue.
It was when Johnny made plans that she couldn't bear it.
These were just dreams; foolish, romantic dreams; and Johnny had as much need of them as anyone else.
‘There won't be a dry eye in the place by the time you've finished,’ she murmured.
‘What shall we have for the picnic?’ he asked.
‘You choose,’ she said unselfishly.
‘Cream cakes…with all the cream oozing out at the sides.
And  pâté .
Oh, and cheese.
French cheese, I think, and English ham, cut very thick.
Lots and lots of bread, still warm and with a big brown crust.
And butter of course…and those little tomatoes that taste sweet, of the sun.
Peaches, and wine!
Bottles of it!’
He paused to consider whether this would be adequate.
‘All very high in cholesterol,’ said Cassie disapprovingly.
Johnny eyed her doubtfully.
‘I don't quite know what that's supposed to mean,’ he said severely, ‘but sometimes I think you pull rank on me a bit, Cassandra.
You're a bumptious little know-all at times, aren't you?’
He began to tickle her again and she grabbed his relentless fingers and held them fast against her breast.
‘Strawberries,’ she said wistfully.
‘Can't we have strawberries?
They are my favourite.’
‘Crikey!
Didn't I mention strawberries.
Most definitely, we must have strawberries.
Strawberries and wine.
And I shall dip the fruit in the wine and feed them to you.
Your lips will be all red with the stain, and I shall kiss them.’
‘What will little Johnny and little Cassie be doing all this time, while their parents are making love shamelessly?’ asked Cassie with interest.
‘They will be threading daisy chains, or reading a book.
For as well as being beautiful and bright, they will also be good and well-behaved.’
Cassie said ‘I've told you all that stuff; you know, about my time.
What about your world, Johnny?
Tell me about it.
What's it like?’
‘Oh you can read all that in the history books.’
‘History books don't tell it the way it was,’ she murmured.
So he told her a little about the early months of the war; of the friendship and the camaraderie, of the optimistic feeling of the times.
‘People are nicer to each other, and they laugh a lot.
All pulling in the same direction, you know.
Sometimes it seems as if we're all one big family who usually squabble and keep falling out but who suddenly join forces because we're threatened by the family down the road.
And people like me, who've never done one sodding thing worth speaking of, feel…oh, I don't know…somehow alive; useful?
People haven't turned overnight into saints.
Far from it.
It's just comradely, somehow.
It's a matter of survival.’
‘Do you hate the Germans,’ Cassie asked curiously.
‘I mean, you kill them, don't you?’
‘Good God, no!
Of course I don't hate them.
Travelled in Germany on and off since my schooldays.
Spent several weeks there in…when would it be?…‘35?…‘36.
Fine people; a beautiful country.
But the lot in power now…our great Fuhrer…the bloody Nazis; that's another kettle of fish.
And yes, I do kill them.
Because I have to.’
He looked at her quickly.
‘I don't enjoy it, Cassie.
I don't have some dreadful lust to kill my fellow man.
But when you're up there, my darling, its just a case of them or you.
There's no time to feel squeamish.
It's exciting and exhilarating, yes.
But by God, its terrifying, and don't let anyone tell you otherwise.
You do what you have to do.
You just know that you want to be the one who makes it back.
You've got to be better than the other poor sod.
If you're not, you lose.
End of game.’
Cassie reflected, with a terrible cold awareness, that this was almost certainly the only man she had ever held in her arms who had taken the life of a fellow human being.
They lay for a while, their hands lightly clasped, each deeply engrossed in their own thoughts.
Suddenly Cassie said: ‘Johnny you mustn't tell anyone; not about us; not about the things I've said.’
‘Not even a hint?’ he asked, looking disappointed.
‘No.
Not a single word.
It's really, really important.
You see,’ she  went on earnestly, ‘if you were to change the past by so much as a second, do just one minute thing differently, the results could be catastrophic.
It mustn't happen; I know it mustn't.’
This appeared to be an entirely new idea to Johnny and he said: ‘How do you know?
Surely just one little word…?’
‘No; no,’ she insisted, shaking his arm.
‘Of course I don't know for sure.
It's just what everybody says in science fiction stories.
I've never taken it seriously before, because I've known it couldn't happen.
But now it has; which is a bit of a facer.
Can't you see that if you were to say or do something that caused my father, for example, to die when he was still a little boy, then I should never get round to being born, should I?’
‘Oh, but I say, Cassie.
That can't happen.
I mean, you're here, aren't you?’
‘Don't be a prat.
That was only a for-instance.
But you must see what I mean.
Besides,’ she added craftily, ‘if you go back and prattle on about me, you'll certainly be…what did you call it?
Grounded.
Yes, that's right.
Grounded.’
‘You think so?’
‘I'm sure so.
What are you going to tell them?
‘Actually I met this girl.
She comes from the future, and she says…
’ You'd be locked away in no time at all.
Unless you want to be grounded, of course.’
‘Christ, no!’ said Johnny, shocked.
‘Have them think I'm cracking up!’
He was horrified.
Cassie had known that he would be.
To fight for King and Country; to keep a stiff upper lip and a devil-may-care sangfroid, no matter if he were scared shitless.
That was the stuff that Johnny was made of.
And all of the others too, no doubt.
She didn't know whether to feel proud or exasperated.
Reluctantly, and seemingly dimly aware of the importance of extreme secrecy, Johnny agreed to say nothing.
Cassie was content to leave it at that.
She sat, leaning forward a little, her arms around her legs, looking at the leaves on the apple tree and the spatter of shadow and  brightness on the grass.
Johnny was stroking her back, and as she moved slightly, he slid his hands round under her arms to hold her  breasts.
She leaned back against him, covering his hands with her own and pressing them against her.
There was so much she wanted to ask him.
She flinched away from the idea that this might be her only opportunity, but the thought was there, nonetheless, in the back of her mind.
Yet, equally as strong as her need to talk, was her need to make love.
And if this were to be their last meeting, then should they perhaps not waste it all in talk?
She found herself wondering idly whether, if she and Johnny were to make love now, here beneath the apple tree, Ben would be able to see them from his garden, or Mrs Draper from her bedroom window.
And if she took Johnny into the cottage, might this in some way break the spell and spoil the magic?
Would Johnny simply disappear before they could reach the bed?
She was unwilling to take the risk.
She removed one of his hands from her breasts and lifted his palm to her lips.
She kissed his fingers and said:
‘Johnny?’
‘Uh, huh?’ he replied dreamily, replacing his hand at her breast and pushing his fingers beneath the fabric of her dress to rub his thumb against her nipple.
‘Did anything…anything odd happen to you at Rose Cottage.
Before you met me there, that is?’
He thought for a moment.
‘Yes; I suppose it did.
Once or twice.
I thought the old place might have a ghost, you know.
There was one occasion when I was sitting in the kitchen and I heard the front door close, and then footsteps in the hall.
But when I looked…nothing!
No-one!
It was quite spooky.
And then I thought I heard voices once, coming from a long way away, but I couldn't work out where they were coming from; and they were so very faint I almost thought I'd imagined them.
Nothing much else happened, as far as I recall…but then I didn't visit the cottage much, not before that morning when I met you in the garden.
After that, I haunted the bloody place, myself!
Bella had stayed there a bit, though, along with her ghastly cronies.
But they'd have been too sloshed to notice.
Even if they'd been sitting down to breakfast with a headless horseman.’
He laughed derisively and then said: ‘And you, Cassie?
Did you hear any strange groans and creaks in the night .’
‘Yes, quite a few.
I was really scared.
Such odd things seemed to be happening.
And then my friend Stephanie saw you in the garden.
I thought I was being spied on by a right nutter!’
‘Stephanie?
Ah, yes.
I remember.
A very pretty girl.
She was wearing something made out of towelling, I fancy.
I assumed she was one of Bella's lot.
I thought she was quite mad.
She kept twirling round and round on the grass.’
‘She was communing with Nature,’ said Cassie drily.
‘Is that so?’ said Johnny, interested.
‘Extraordinary!
Do much of that sort of thing in your time, Cassie?’
‘Not a great deal,’ she murmured.
He kissed the back of her neck.
Finding this a most pleasant sensation, she wriggled, and laughed softly.
‘Johnny?’ she said.
He sighed.
‘What is it now, my little talkative one?’
‘What can you see?
When you look across the garden.’
She tilted her head back and looked up at his face.
She watched as he narrowed his eyes and squinted as if against the brightness of the sun.
‘Well, I can see the lawn and…’
‘Don't you have to part the branches?’
Cassie demanded, interrupting him.
‘The branches?’
‘Yes, the branches of the apple tree.’
Johnny peered upwards, a puzzled expression on his face.
‘If you wanted me to describe the sky, my love, then perhaps I should need to do so.
But the garden…no!’
‘Oh, I see ,’ she said.
‘Of course; the apple tree is positively ancient by now .
It's branches come right down to the ground,’ she added, by way of explanation.
‘I have to part them if I want to see the house.
Look!’
She stretched out her hand and pulled a few leaves from one of the overhanging bows.
She held them out to Johnny and dropped them into his hand.
‘Apple tree leaves, nineteen ninety style,’ she said, laughing.
He gazed at them in a kind of wonder as though they were some priceless and irreplaceable treasure, then he slipped them in his  pocket.
‘Keepsake,’ he said.
‘I'll press them and keep them between the pages of a book, to remind me of you.’
He had spoken jokingly, but as he fell silent, the happiness left his face and he rested his cheek against Cassie's bright hair and was suddenly very still.
She said gently: ‘Tell me what you can see, then.’
‘Oh, the lawn, if one can grace it with such a title.
At the moment it looks more like a bit of rough pasture…full of dandelions and clover patches.
There's a flower bed of sorts over by the fence but the flowers look to be on their last legs, as far as I can make out.
I don't know a great deal about flowers, to tell the truth.
At home, the gardeners look after all that kind of thing.
Never had to bother, really.
There's a bloody great bramble growing along the fence.
Then there's a water butt up by the back door; and some honeysuckle growing over the porch.
The flowers have a beautiful scent during the evening.
I stand there sometimes and smoke, and think about you and…’
She pressed his hand.
‘I know,’ she said softly.
‘And next door?’
‘Just the field; part of the farm across the road.
Reg Jackson's place.
Is it still there?’
She shook her head.
‘There are a few trees; some cows; usual sort of thing,’ Johnny said vaguely.
‘Black and white ones?’
Cassie asked, with a reminiscent smile.
‘Black and white ones,’ he agreed.
‘Friesians.
Can you see them, Cassie?’
‘No; there's a house there now; and a beautifully landscaped garden.’
They were silent for a moment, and then quite suddenly Johnny pulled Cassie roughly into his arms and held her very tight.
They clung to each other almost fearfully as though they believed that, in the whole of this alien and bewildering world, only the two of them had any real substance; as if all else was an illusion.
‘It's mind bending, isn't it, darling?’
Cassie whispered, her voice trembling a little.
‘I mean, when you think about it properly, Johnny, doesn't it just blow your mind?’
‘Well, I don't know about that,’ he replied cautiously, ‘but it's certainly a rum old do, Cassie, old thing.
A rum old do.’
Cassie giggled.
‘You can say that again,’ she said; and Johnny did.
As the warmth of the afternoon lessened, and the sun moved lower in the sky, and the Saturday afternoon noises of lawnmowers and children's shouts gave way to the tranquillity of the evening, the quiet tenderness with which Johnny had been content until then gave way to a growing passion.
His hand moved more purposefully across her thigh, his mouth sought hers with a more impatient and insistent desire.
Cassie lifted her arms to reach his neck, and from the position in which she lay, she had no need to move her head to read the time on the face of her watch.
Seven fifty five.
Almost zero hour.
She felt like Cinders having to decide whether to overstay the deadline and risk an embarrassing incident or do as Fairy Godmother had instructed and be back by twelve.
Johnny was by now fully occupied with the fastenings on the controversial halter-necked garment.
He was  single-mindedly applying his mind to the task and it was likely that he would forget the time.
She could make quite sure that he did, and then he could stay with her; at least for a little longer.
She knew that she had no choice, really.
What would all those splendid wartime wives and sweethearts have done?
Had Mrs Plumptry used her wiles on Stanley so as to come between him and his duty?
Of course not, she thought dully.
‘I want you,’ said Johnny, stating the obvious.
‘Your timing's not very good,’ she said sadly.
He looked startled, wondering if this was perhaps a nineteen nineties condemnation of his sexual prowess.
‘It's eight o'clock.’
He lay quite still, then rolled over and sat up, glancing at his watch.
He sat for a moment longer, staring across the garden and then, still without speaking, he bent and kissed her.
‘I won't come and see you off,’ Cassie said shakily.
‘I hate these platform farewells.’
He stood up.
Abstractedly he fastened buttons and tucked in his shirt.
He looked, she thought, as though someone had just kicked him hard in the stomach.
Clumsily he began to tug at the heavy gold signet ring on one of his fingers.
He held it out to her.
‘Take it,’ he said
Dumbly she shook her head, the threatened tears making it impossible for her to speak.
‘I want you to have it.
I've nothing else to give.
I want you to have it until I can come back for you.
Please take it.’
Again she shook her head.
It seemed wrong somehow to take the ring.
The exchanging of tokens was, like the exchanging of vows, not to be undertaken lightly.
Confused as she was about her feelings for Johnny Latimer, she knew that she was not yet ready for something as important as this.
Finding her voice, she said: ‘I can't take it, Johnny.
I'm sure it's an heirloom or something.
It looks quite old and rather valuable.
I have no right to it.’
He smiled rather sardonically.
‘It's not my wedding ring, if that's what you're thinking.
It's a family ring.
It was given to me when I was twenty one.’
He rested the ring on her open palm and pushed her fingers closed around it.
‘Take it,’ he repeated.
‘I'll feel better about all this if I know you've got it.’
He hesitated.
‘Safer,’ he said.
‘I've nothing to give you .
This silver ring is much too small now and won't come off my finger.’
‘It's not important.
Wear the ring, Cassie.
Put it on a chain round your neck, or something.
Wear it for me, darling .’
He stood looking down at her as she sat on the grass, clutching the ring.
‘I love you, Cassie Willmott,’ he said.
‘Don't forget.’
She watched as he walked through the branches of the apple tree and strode off towards the house.
Pushing aside the leaves, she saw him stop halfway across the lawn and bend his head to light a cigarette.
The smell of the smoke drifted back towards Cassie across the garden.
He walked on, and without ever looking back, he rounded the corner of the cottage…and was gone.
CHAPTER 11 — MID JUNE — MID JULY
After Johnny disappeared from view around the corner of the house, Cassie wandered disconsolately indoors, realizing that she needed both the bathroom and something to drink.Although she hadn't eaten since lunch time, she had no appetite and the thought of food nauseated her.
She went into the hall and rested Johnny's signet ring on the little table there.
She had a gold chain in her jewellery box upstairs and soon she would fetch it.
She would fasten the ring about her neck and wear it for Johnny, as he had asked her to do.
A little later, holding a mug of coffee carefully in both hands, she walked back to the hall table to retrieve the ring.
The table was of a rich, shining rosewood.
Cassie was fond of it and kept it dust free and well polished.
In the centre of the table was a small bowl of summer flowers, and the ring had rested beside the bowl, its pale gold reflecting in the burnished glossiness of the wood.
When Cassie could not see the ring, she felt a moment of panic.
Johnny's ring…old and valuable and a family heirloom.
And she had been entrusted with its safe keeping.
She knew that she should never have accepted it, she thought, as she knelt on the carpet, placing the mug down beside her and beginning to search the floor for the elusive ring.
She had no clear idea of how it could have rolled from the table, for it had seemed perfectly secure when she had put it there.
But as it was no longer where she had left it, then it must have done, unless someone had shot into Rose Cottage and stolen it while Cassie had been sitting on the loo.
Even Cassie , used now to the small eccentricities of her home, did not think this likely.
She spent several minutes crawling on her hands and knees, rubbing the flat of her palm across the pile of the carpet to locate the wretched ring, before the truth occurred to her and she knew that she was wasting her time.
Johnny's signet ring was somewhere in the hall; there was no doubting it.
But if she were to look for ever and a day, she would not  find it.
The ring had taken itself back to where it rightfully belonged, and Cassie hoped that when Johnny next visited the cottage, he would find it there and understand how it had come to be so.
She thought ruefully of the cigarette butt, and of Johnny's small handful of apple tree leaves.
She hoped he would not be too disappointed when he found them gone.
It would seem that she and Johnny were to be allowed no souvenirs smuggled from that other world; that place which their lives could touch but which they could not see.
‘Time’ had given them each other, and clearly that was as far as it was prepared to go.
She went to sit on the sofa, and there she dreamed of Johnny, tenderly and with affection; she thought of the words that he had said, and they made a warm spot, infinitely sweet, deep inside her where it could not be touched; for just an hour or two, she began to believe that she truly loved him.
Briefly she allowed herself to think that theirs was a normal, everyday sort of thing, with people to meet and places to go; with a life that they could share.
By the next morning, the now familiar, obsessive anxiety had returned.
The hours spent beneath the apple tree assumed a distorted quality as though she were looking at them through an unfocused lens.
As she tried to recall Johnny's face, the open, unclouded expression and the sweetness of his smile, that other face, the face of her dreams, superimposed itself upon the image in her mind, and she shivered.
Rose Cottage seemed oppressive; its atmosphere claustrophobic.
She felt a great surge of depression and a feeling of imminent disaster as though she were very old and death was not far away.
Just as before she had needed to stay inside the cottage, fearful that she would miss Johnny if he should come, now she needed to be away, out there where her world was still turning, and people laughed and played and did ordinary things.
Stopping only to throw a few necessary items into the back of the car, Cassie drove to the sea.
As soon as she was heading out of Lower Axe towards the coast, she began to feel better.
She switched on the car radio and hummed to the beat of the pop music.
She began to feel young and amazingly pretty, like she had felt all those years ago when she had first emerged  from the chrysalis of self-conscious adolescence to spread her butterfly wings.
The road that led to the sea was her own ‘yellow brick road’ leading to excitement and adventure.
She laughed at herself, and at the extravagance of these thoughts, but she felt them nonetheless, and was, for the first time since the beginning of it all, truly lighthearted.
The day was a great success.
She swam and sun-bathed, and watched the family groups on the beach.
Only once did she think of Johnny, when, as the morning wore away, one of the mothers, who was sitting reading while father jumped the waves with the children at the water's edge, closed her book, and spreading a cloth on the sand, began to set out the picnic.
Then Cassie rolled onto her stomach and pushed her face against her towel.
She wept silently; passively; and as she wept she heard Johnny say:
‘I shall dip the strawberries in wine and feed them to you…and your lips will be all red with the stain…’
But the memory did not stay with her, and soon she dried her tears, and packing up her possessions, walked to the pub for lunch.
She sat in the garden with her beer and her Ploughman's and read her book.
She congratulated herself on the enterprise and initiative which had allowed her to cheat Rose Cottage, to outwit ‘Time’, if only for the day.
She seemed not to realize that she had come to regard herself as a prisoner; a hostage perhaps, engaged in some frightening psychological duel.
Glancing up from her book, she saw two young men, at a neighbouring table, eying her appreciatively.
They were quite her style, she thought.
They grinned at her in an easy, friendly way and she returned their smiles.
Their obvious interest warmed and comforted her.
She delighted in their charm and their attractiveness, responded without reservation to these two young men, who would, more than likely, speak her language; who were familiar and reassuring in their dress, their speech, the way they thought.
Who would not disappear like a wraith the moment she turned her back.
She smiled at them again, and one of the young men leant towards his companion and said something which made them both laugh.
Their admiring glances flickered across her slim brown legs, the delicate small-boned shoulders and the curve of her breasts beneath the skimpy summer top.
One made a quick movement with his hands, and his companion laughed again.
Cassie could readily imagine their comments.
They would be explicit, coarse, probably, and almost undoubtedly sexist; but they would also be straightforward and easily understood.
They would be real.
It looked as if they were about to push back their chairs and join her at her table, and only just in time, Cassie remembered that she needed no further complications in an already bewildering and uncontrollable life.
Tempting as they undoubtedly were, she could do without two hunky and red-blooded blokes to add to the plates she was already juggling in the air.
She sensed their disappointment as she closed her book, and without looking at them, left the garden and made her way back to the beach.
Alone once more, she walked and walked, and when she became too hot to carry on, she swam again and dried herself in the sun.
There was salt on her lips and in her hair, and a fine white film covered her limbs, stiffening the skin.
She felt refreshed and renewed, filled with such a healthy glow of well-being that she was ready to take on the world; and Johnny Latimer with it.
Much later, on the homeward journey, she found a restaurant and stayed to have dinner.
She lingered over her meal, putting off the inevitable homecoming for just a little longer.
But in the end, even she could delay it no longer and reluctantly, she headed for Lower Axe.
Rose Cottage was in darkness when she reached the gate and pulled into the drive.
Almost immediately, the fretting, niggling worries and the sense of fearful anticipation began to return.
Resolutely she went inside…
During the next few days, Cassie was immeasurably grateful that she had her work.
At school, amongst the children whom she loved so dearly, she was able to forget her life at Rose Cottage.
Johnny played no part in this world.
To him, a schoolmistress was a crusty Old Maid in a liberty bodice and lisle stockings.
She could remember  his amazement on learning what she did to earn her living; there had even been a hint of surprise that she actually needed to.
There was more than just a matter of fifty years separating her life from that of Johnny Latimer.
‘They weren't like you when I was at school,’ had been his amused reaction when she had told him that she taught in the village.
‘I may have been a more enthusiastic scholar if they had been!’
At school, she worked hard, putting off her return to Rose Cottage for as long as she was able.
Where once she had been desperate not to miss Johnny, now it seemed that she was fearful at the thought of meeting him.
She was dimly aware that she had been treating her friends badly.
She saw less and less of Ben, and missed him in a slightly sad, unfocused kind of way.
With Jenny she was evasive and unforthcoming; and she wondered sometimes whether she appeared unfriendly and withdrawn, and whether she had hurt Jenny by her attitude.
Yet, whenever she contemplated a resumption of the life she had enjoyed before her initial meeting with Johnny, she felt a rising panic and a disinclination amounting almost to hostility at the very idea.
She knew enough, now, to be aware that, although Johnny could see her friends, could talk to them and touch them, he could not see her world.
And it had become increasingly clear to her that some of the more bizarre aspects of Johnny's intrusion into her life would be difficult, perhaps impossible, to explain away.
What would a casual caller at Rose Cottage make of Johnny if he were to walk in uninvited during their visit?
What would they think if Johnny were to sit casually on a chair which, to their eyes, simply wasn't there?
Would Johnny appear to hang in mid-air, suspended on some invisible support hidden from the interested gaze of Cassie's contemporaries?
How would he manage if someone were to hand him a cup of coffee, or to offer him a biscuit?
For, as with the apple tree leaves, Johnny could see only those things from her world which he held within his hands.
Time hid her possessions as well as her surroundings from Johnny's eyes…and his from hers.
And what if Jenny were to call?
Or Paul?
They would talk politely of this and that; of current affairs or items of local interest.
What, in  God's name, would Johnny reply if asked to give his opinion on the Gulf War, for instance, or the state of Charles and Diana's marriage?
He wouldn't even know who Charles and Di were, for Heaven's sake, to say nothing of being able to conduct an intelligible conversation on the state of the Monarchy.
Yes; Jenny would undoubtedly evince a lively curiosity in the beautiful Johnny Latimer.
He would baffle and intrigue her, just as he had done Cassie on their first meeting; and Cassie could think of no way in which she could explain him away.
And Stephanie?
Luck had been on Cassie's side up until now, for Stephanie had been working in Germany for the past few weeks and this circumstance had removed the necessity of proffering an invitation; with, of course, the desirable Martin in attendance.
But Stephie would be home soon, and Cassie knew that she would not then be able to evade her responsibilities and refuse to issue an invitation to Rose Cottage.
With the knowledge, half admitted, that she was treating her friends in a pretty shitty way, and didn't deserve to have them, Cassie resolved to phone Stephanie on her return and arrange a meeting.
To hell with Johnny, she thought angrily.
If he turned up in the middle of Stephie's visit, then tough!
And what's more, she would tell Stephanie all about it.
She should have done so ages ago; and if she knew her friend as well as she thought she did, then she would be intrigued and delighted by the whole affair.
She would find it all knee-bucklingly romantic, and a tremendous giggle.
Maybe that was what was needed, Cassie decided.
A sense of the ridiculous!
A good, satisfying belly laugh.
She recollected, rather sadly, that she and Ben used to laugh a lot.
Once upon a time.
It all seemed such a very long while ago…
As though to underline the validity of Cassie's vague but guilt-ridden conclusions, two separate incidents occurred on the Wednesday of that week, each one seemingly innocent and unconnected with the other.
Cassie, however, was not so sure.
The first of these circumstances was the arrival of an envelope, which she discovered on the hall mat on her return from school.
On opening it, she found that it contained a note from Ben.
‘Dear Cass,’ he wrote.
‘I've got hold of two tickets for the theatre; tomorrow evening (Thursday) 8.15.
Would you care to come with me?
I thought we might have something to eat first.
If you'd like to come, I'll call for you at 6pm.
Let me know.
Ben.’
Cassie's immediate reaction was to think of some reason why she was unable to go.
But part of her wanted to go; wanted to quite badly.
‘Bugger Johnny!’ she said, after several minutes of irresolution.
She wrote Ben a hasty reply saying that she would love to go with him, thank you very much, and posted it through his letter box almost immediately.
About nine o'clock on that same evening, she was in her front garden watering her plants when she looked up to see Jenny and Paul advancing down the path.
‘Hi, folks!’ she said.
‘Good to see you.’
Despite her earlier deliberations, Cassie was indeed pleased to see them.
One could have too much of loneliness and isolation, and Jenny was good company; cheerful and amusingly astringent.
Paul too; for as she had come to know him better, she had grown fond of Paul; dear, tactless Paul, who could be relied upon to mention the unmentionable, but whose kindness and gentle sense of humour were most appealing.
Sometimes she had the oddest feeling that she would have been able to confide in Paul, to pour out to him the whole bloody silly story without causing him to bat so much as an eyelid.
She had never done so, of course, but all the same it was a possibility worth remembering, if things got sticky in the future.
‘'We've come to cadge coffee,’ said Paul, giving her his sleepy smile.
‘You've come to the right place, then, ‘she said cheerfully, leading the way inside.
‘What have you done with the kids?’
‘Both sleeping over with friends,’ said Jenny.
‘We suddenly realized that we were as free as air, and couldn't think of a thing to do with this unexpected liberty.
Ridiculous, isn't it?
Eventually we decided that, as it was such a lovely evening, we'd stroll round the village.
And we ended up here…so we thought: ‘Coffee!’
She shot a swift glance at Paul in case he decided to amend this statement, but he merely smiled quirkily and said, ‘Exactly!’
Cassie left the two of them in the sitting room and hurried into the  kitchen to prepare the coffee.
She was smiling slightly.
Did she detect a conspiracy, or was she becoming a little oversensitive? she wondered.
She heard rather than saw the back door open and close.
She turned swiftly and Johnny was standing there, looking at her in delight.
‘Found you!’ he said, softly but triumphantly.
His hair was untidy, as though it had been blown by the wind, and there were tiny flecks of moisture on the rough Harris tweed material of his jacket.
Cassie stared for a moment at the spots of rain, apparently fascinated by their presence, and then she glanced quickly towards the window and the calm, unclouded summer sky beyond.
She shivered as she considered the implications of this, and for a moment Johnny's world seemed uncomfortably close.
The moment of unease passed and she smiled at him, feeling almost breathlessly happy at seeing him so unexpectedly, yet at the same time full of dismay at his unfortunate timing.
He took two strides across the kitchen and gathered her into his arms, crushing his mouth over hers and kissing her ferociously.
She responded briefly to his kiss before whispering regretfully:
‘Oh, Johnny!
I'm so sorry, sweetheart, but you'll have to go.
I've got someone with me.’
Johnny released his hold and frowned horribly.
‘Oh?’ he said intimidatingly.
‘It's O.K. It isn't a bloke.
It's Jenny, a friend of mine, and her husband Paul.
They've come for coffee.’
‘That's all right then.
You must introduce me.
I'd like to meet your friends, Cassie.’
He was looking at her with a decidedly mischievous gleam in his eye.
He would need careful handling, she thought.
His mood appeared to be unpredictable.
‘Sh!’ she whispered.
‘And no, it isn't all right.
I can't possibly introduce you.
You don't know Jenny!
She'd suss out right away that there was something fishy going on.
And she'd think it was all very odd.’
‘You could say I was your brother.’
‘Don't be ridiculous.
Please, Johnny.
I'm really pissed off about it…every bit as much as you.
But you can't stay.
You'll have to…’
She broke off abruptly as she heard Jenny's voice issuing clearly from the direction of the sitting room:
‘I'll just give Cassie a hand…’
‘Shit!’
Cassie hissed, and Johnny chuckled appreciatively.
She looked around her despairingly and began to push him towards the pantry.
‘You'll have to go in here for the time being.’
‘In where, Cassie?’ he whispered, his laughter threatening to get the better of him.
‘Stop arguing,’ she snapped, although softly.
‘I don't care whether you can see it or not.
Into the pantry with you!
And stay there.’
She was just turning away from the pantry door when Jenny entered the kitchen.
‘Come to give a hand,’ she said, and Cassie was uncomfortably aware of Jenny's round bright eyes upon her, and wished, not for the first time, that her friend were less perceptive.
‘You all right?’
Jenny added, glancing in a somewhat disconcerted manner towards the back door.
‘Sure.
Why shouldn't I be?’
‘I dunno; I thought…’
Jenny blinked rapidly, then smiled.
‘Oh, nothing.
I'll get the cups, shall I ?’
They began to look in cupboards and drawers and to stack a tray with what was needed.
Jenny said: ‘I'm afraid Paul will want sugar.
I've tried to convert him, but I'm wasting my time.
In here?’
She turned towards the pantry and slipped her fingers beneath the slats.
‘No!’
The word punched the air like a bullet.
Jenny hesitated, looking nonplussed.
Cassie smiled weakly and said in a much more normal tone, It's in the cupboard, Jen.
In one of those little wooden bowls.’
Jenny nodded and moved away from the pantry; she looked preoccupied and the tiniest bit uncomfortable.
Cassie, who by now was trembling so violently that she could not trust herself to lift the loaded tray, said lightly: ‘Take the tray, will you, Jenny?
I'll bring the coffee pot.’
As Jenny walked off down the hall with the tray, Cassie shoved the kitchen door partly closed with her foot and darted to the pantry.
When she opened the door, Johnny was standing there, convulsed with silent laughter.
‘I say, Cassie!
This is better than a night at the Follies.
Here was I absolutely totally visible to the naked eye, and your friend looked right through me.
I give you my word…right through me as if I were a bloody ghost.
Gave me a nasty turn, I can tell you!
I thought she was going to touch me.
And whatever were you up to?
It looked like some amazin' mime game.
I nearly split my sides.’
He wiped his eyes with the back of his hand and added, ‘And why did this Paul feller need converting?
Sugar against your principles, or something, Cassie?’
It was obvious that this small incursion into her life had seriously over-excited Johnny, and Cassie wondered uneasily what he might take into his head to do next.
There was a certain bravado about him which she hadn't noticed on previous meetings; a kind of recklessness.
It occurred to her that perhaps he had been drinking again.
She put her finger over his lips, but that proved to be a bad move.
He opened his mouth, and slipping his lips over her restraining finger, he began to suck, his eyes sparkling with wickedness.
He reached down, then gently squeezed her breasts; thrusting the lower part of his body against her, he moved his hips gently from side to side.
He made a low growling sound and began to pant noisily, his eyes still bright with amusement.
Cassie started to feel cross and flustered; and sexy.
She twisted away from him and attempted to step backwards, but Johnny had slipped his hands down to grab her buttocks and was pulling her closer and closer, holding her fast.
She could feel the hardness of him pressing arrogantly against her, and she moved her hand and touched him fleetingly.
‘Cock-sure little devil,’ she said, half-laughing, half-annoyed.
Johnny chuckled and  whispered :
‘Certainly!
And all for you, my sweeting.
Just say the word.’
Speaking very softly and very fast, Cassie said:
‘Johnnie, be an angel and shut up, will you?
This is not the time to subject me to some kind of general knowledge  quiz …or to make love to me, although heaven knows I'd like you to.
I'll explain everything next time.
Now, please go.
As you might say…toot bloody sweet!’
She reached up and kissed him softly on the mouth.
Freeing herself from his arms, she picked up the coffee pot and whisked out of the kitchen before he could take hold of her again.
As she rejoined Jenny and Paul, she was wondering whether or not Johnny had followed her instructions.
She rather thought not.
After all, there was no need for him to do so, was there?
She expected that, after she had left the kitchen, Johnny would have followed her here, to the sitting room.
He was probably sitting here now, on that grey, patchy settee that he had described with so much care.
And he would be thinking of her, and wanting her, and watching the raindrops as they spattered against the window.
As she poured coffee for Jenny and Paul, she felt unbearably sad.
She enjoyed her evening at the theatre with Ben.
She took particular care with her preparations and chose a light, pretty dress and sensational earrings.
She decided to risk of pair of ridiculously high-heeled shoes, which she wore only occasionally.
The shoes were elegant and suited the dress, adding a touch of much-needed sophistication.
She could not escape the thought that she felt exactly as if she were a child being taken out for a treat by a kindly uncle.
Why did Ben always have this demoralizing effect, she wondered irritably?
And recent events hadn't helped much, either.
She felt that she had lost control of her own life and that decisions were being made for her, not by her.
Tonight she would be cool and in command.
She needed the shoes…
That evening Ben, as a companion, was all that she could have wished for.
If the invitation had come as a result of anxious discussion  with Jenny about Cassie's state of mind, and she rather thought that it had, Ben showed no sign of it.
He was attentive and thoughtful, without fussing over her or searching her face for signs of tiredness or ill-health.
There was no hint of the troubling flirtatiousness which had confused her on earlier occasions, yet neither was his manner that of the ‘matey, all good pals together’ variety which he had adopted during the first weeks of their friendship.
He passed one or two cool and entirely acceptable compliments on her appearance, and contrived to make her feel a charming and desirable woman without in any way ruffling her sensibilities by an excess of ardour.
It was all very pleasant, and Cassie began to remember what she had all but forgotten: Just what good company Ben was, and how much he could make her laugh.
Silently, she applauded him.
If he were playing a part, then he was playing the role to perfection.
In the car, on the homeward journey, Cassie found herself reflecting, as she glanced covertly at his profile and at the thin hands lightly gripping the steering wheel…those same brown and capable hands that had figured so prominently in her earlier fantasies…that he would make the perfect lover, if it weren't for his apparent indifference to women; and perhaps, also, to having sex; although this last was only an assumption.
After all, her one and only moment of intimacy with him had suggested that beneath the odd, touch-me-not facade, there was some passion, if rather unnaturally curbed.
She contemplated another and, until then, unconsidered aspect of Ben's character.
Perhaps she had been closer to the truth than she had at first suspected with her taunts about Theo Quinn; and, although she no longer wanted Ben, she felt that, if this were to prove the case, it would be a great waste of promising material.
She was reluctant to lose him to the other side.
as if aware that she was looking at him, he smiled and said: ‘Are you going away somewhere this summer?’
‘No.
I'd love to, of course; but I spent out when I bought Rose Cottage, so I'm on my uppers.
It's economy time this year, I'm afraid.
And you?’
’ Yes; in a couple of weeks.
I'm off to Scotland…just Em and me.
I'm taking my walking boots and a tent, and I shall go where the fancy takes me.’
‘Don't you mind being on your own?’
‘No; the reverse, in fact; for this kind of holiday, anyway.
I rather like it.
Nobody to have to wait for…or to keep up with.
Or does that sound horribly anti-social?’
‘No.
It sounds like Heaven.’
He hesitated a moment, looking more ill at ease than he had done all evening.
Then he said: ‘You could come with me if you wanted, Cass.
You could B&B somewhere, while I pitched my lonely caravan nearby.’
She didn't reply, so he hurried on: ‘If it's the cash…well, I could lend you some.
Or my treat?
I've plenty for two.’
He glanced at her quickly, then turned his attention back to the road.
‘Do you find that suggestion offensive?
If so, I apologize.
But it's only money, isn't it?
And I wouldn't be thinking that I was making an investment, if you understand me.’
He said this last part carefully, his eyes staring at the road ahead.
Cassie could sense his profound embarrassment.
‘I think that's the kindest thing that's been said to me for ages, Ben dear.
Of course I'm not offended.
Thank you, but…’
Neither of them spoke for a moment, then Cassie said: ‘All the same, I think it'll have to be ‘no’.
I've made plans now.
Stephanie's coming to stay…with her new man; and my brother and sister-in-law.’
Ben still remained silent.
Cassie felt compelled to continue to talk, as though her chatter could put right what appeared to be the first wrong note of the evening.
‘My old school friend's just had a baby.
She's invited me to visit.
They live at Ross-on-Wye.
Have you been there?
It's a lovely part of the country.
I thought I might go; perhaps in the first week of the holiday.’
‘It's O.K. Cassie,’ Ben said, the rather grim look disappearing, to be replaced by one of his lovely smiles.
‘As soon as I mentioned walking boots I knew you wouldn't want to come.
Another time perhaps.’
‘Sure,’ said Cassie.
‘I'd like that.’
When they reached home, Ben walked with her to her front porch.
‘Shall I come in with you, or will you be all right?’ he asked, and she wondered if he was remembering that other time.
‘I'll be fine,’ she said.
‘It was lovely.
Ask me again, won't you?’
On a sudden impulse, she reached up to him (but not as far as she might otherwise have had to do, because of the heels) and slipped her hands behind his head.
He moved to touch her arms and she lightly brushed his lips with hers.
As her mouth touched his, she felt the familiar stiffening of his body and his hands fell to his sides.
She sighed a little and turned away.
She entered the hall and frowned slightly.
The door to the sitting room was ajar, and a wedge of light shone out across the stairs.
Surely the house had been in darkness when she and Ben had approached?
She pushed open the sitting room door and walked in.
Johnny was standing with his back to the window, his hands thrust deep into his pockets.
Cassie's first reaction was that the temporal abnormality with which Rose Cottage was afflicted seemed to be worsening.
If things carried on at this pace, she and Johnny would find themselves meeting every day.
The thought was instantly suppressed by her happiness at seeing him again, and she was about to run swiftly across the room and into his arms when she registered his expression.
The dark fury in his face made her falter and stop.
Compared to this, the look of anger he had worn when she had first met him in the garden was merely one of passing irritation.
‘Hello,’ he said dangerously.
‘Where have you been?’
Her gladness at the sight of him turned to annoyance.
It had been such a lovely evening.
Was Johnny going to spoil it all?
When would all this stop? she thought angrily.
When would her home, her life, be free from this casual, intrusive interference?
She said nothing, but the anger was still there, ready to burn brightly if needed.
His gaze travelled slowly over her body, noting the pretty dress, the careful make-up and the extravagant earrings.
It lingered on the shoes.
‘You're looking particularly lovely, tonight, my sweet,’ he said, but it didn't sound like a compliment.
She regarded him coldly, but ignored his remark.
He took one swift stride towards her, his furious gaze making her quake inwardly, and in the same harsh, dangerous tone, said ‘Who was he, my lovely?
You didn't know that I could see you, did you?
You thought that your disgusting behaviour was safe from my prying eyes, didn't you?
Well, I was watching you through the window.
A most touching scene.
Who was he, Cassie?’ he repeated threateningly.
She looked at him levelly, wondering if he could perhaps be mad, after all, as she searched in her mind for evidence of her ‘disgusting behaviour’.
She was still angry with him, but at the same time, she felt a stirring of interest.
So Johnny had been afforded a glimpse of her own time, had he?
Had it been only Ben he had seen, or had he been able to look out, however briefly, on the world of the future; her world?
She longed to ask him, but her feeling of annoyance made her reluctant to enter into friendly conversation.
She wondered if perhaps the ‘magic’ was getting stronger; and if so, then wherever would it all end?
Would they find, one day, that they were able to cheat time, as Johnny had once suggested.
And would that be such a good thing, after all?
All that she said, however, was:
‘His name's Ben Grayling.
He's my neighbour from Brier.
He's a great bloke…and one of my dearest friends.
We've just spent a very pleasant evening together at the theatre.
Is there anything else you need to know?’
‘You and Bella,’ he said, lip curling.
‘Peas in a pod!
Sluts, both of you.’
‘Don't you dare couple my name with hers,’ she said furiously.
‘Then don't behave like her,’ he yelled.
She was really angry now, sufficiently so to lose her caution.
‘Why don't you just piss off,’ she said curtly.
‘Go on.
Fuck off!
’ She waved her hand dismissively.
‘You heard.
Fuck off and leave me alone.’
She had chosen her words deliberately; to shock him; to make him  aware of the strength of her anger.
Too late, she remembered the unsettling effect such comments would have on Johnny.
His look of rage vanished and he held out his arms to her, laughing into her face.
‘Oh, Cassie…’ he said.
But Cassie was far too angry to be wooed.
At that moment, she wanted Johnny Latimer out of her house.
She no longer wanted him there, spoiling things…messing up her life.
‘I mean it,’ she said.
‘Get lost, will you?
I'm tired.
I've got to be up early tomorrow.’
In another of his alarmingly sudden changes of mood, his expression reverted to its former anger.
‘I'll go when I'm ready,’ he said.
‘You seem to forget that it's my house, too.’
‘Well, I don't want you in it.
Look at you.
Macho man!
Arrogant bully!…trying to tell me how I should pass my time and with whom I should pass it.
I don't want…’
He moved suddenly and grabbed her arm, just above the wrist.
‘No?’ he said quietly, raising his eyebrows.
‘Little liar!
You want, all right.’
His hand tightened on her arm, his steely fingers digging into her flesh.
She tried to pull away, and as she did so, the skin burned and a sickening pain shot up towards her elbow.
She drew in her breath sharply and bit down hard on her bottom lip in an effort not to cry out.
She would not give him that pleasure, she thought savagely.
She would not let him see how much it hurt.
She gazed at him implacably, determined not to fight him, or to struggle.
Resistance would only make him worse; would only heighten whatever sort of perverted pleasure he derived from hurting someone so much weaker than himself.
She stood quite still, but said firmly: ‘You're hurting me, Johnny.
Please let go.’
He ignored her words and continued to squeeze her arm until she thought that soon the bones must crunch together and splinter under the pressure of his fingers.
Tears ran from her eyes, but still she would not cry out.
Johnny was regarding her now with a singularly unpleasant smile.
He was breathing rather fast and the strange, amber lights  twitched and jumped in his eyes.
His left arm swung loosely at his side, the hand lightly clenched, and Cassie thought in panic: He's going to hit me.
Dear God, he's going to hit me!
She lifted her free hand to guard her face, wondering where the blow would fall.
Her cheek?
Her head?
Her breasts?
The clenched fist still swung at his side, and without easing his grip, he twisted her arm so that now the pain was terrible to endure.
Surely the bones must break?
And surely Johnny must know that they would?
She cried out, and Johnny laughed.
Slowly he lifted his fist, and hit her.
The blow caught her on the right side of her face, high on the cheek bone, beneath the eye.
Her head rocked, and for the first time in her life, she quite literally saw stars.
The pain was intense, breathtaking; her nose felt blocked and swollen and her eye closed involuntarily and began to stream with water.
She swallowed hard and waited for the ringing in her head to clear and for the room to steady once more, then, summoning all of her courage, she looked at him with icy contempt.
‘You shit!’ she said.
Johnny frowned, reddened slightly and pushed his free hand across his eyes.
He swung his head from side to side like a dangerous animal about to attack, and then abruptly he released his grip.
Dizzy with pain, Cassie sank into the cushions of the sofa and sat supporting her injured arm.
He said truculently, without any attempt at apology:
‘I've been through all this once, Cassie — with Bella.
I thought you were different.
I told you I wouldn't share you.
I warned you.’
Cassie spoke with difficulty, but in the same coldly contemptuous tone.
‘I think that you're too fond of using Bella as an excuse.
She's probably had one helluva lot to put up with.
I don't suppose your behaviour has been all bright and squeaky clean since you got married.’
‘Did you expect me to live like a bloody monk?
Besides, I've not touched a woman for months — except you, of course.
I've done with  all that.’
He moved towards her and she flinched back against the cushions.
He made no attempt to touch her, however.
Instead he said, with that jarring, sarcastic tone to his voice:
‘Of course, I realize that things are different for you , living in 1990 and all that.
We poor savages, way back in the Dark Ages, still think that our women might possibly be satisfied with one man.
But we must remember that things have progressed, mustn't we?
You're…what was your word, my dear?
Liberated?
Yes, you're liberated now, God help us all!
I suppose that the ‘great bloke’ who lives next door…the dearest friend…is used to all that…hands you on like a bloody parcel at the end of the evening.’
‘How can you say such things when your own wife, by your own admission, is screwed by every man in sight…?’
Cassie began venomously.
‘I'm talking about normal people,’ he said scathingly.
‘Not whores and harlots.’
‘Dear me.
Do you know any?
Normal people, I mean.
I'm sure that you know quantities of whores and harlots.’
Almost, he smiled.
Wearily he sat down next to her on the sofa and worried at his hair.
‘Bella wants a divorce,’ he said shortly.
‘Aren't you pleased?
I thought that's what you wanted too.’
‘Yes, it is.
But it's a damn’ bad moment.
This show is beginning to get under way, and they don't like their little boys in blue to have family troubles.
They take a dim view.
It takes one's mind off the job, doncha know?
And that puts everyone at risk — not just yours truly.
So it'll end up with cosy chats in the Beak's office.
All a bit of a bind…and bloody messy,’ he added distastefully.
‘Some awful third rate hotel, and a third rate, cheap little  floozie to go with it.’
‘What are you talking about?
Bella wants a divorce.
So?
Divorce her.
Where does the  floozie come into it?’
For the first time, Johnny smiled at Cassie, but she did not return the smile.
‘It's the way it works,’ he explained.
‘Bella wants a quick divorce.
Adultery.
Ha!
I arrange to spend the night in some revolting  little fleapit with my light o’ love.
Bribe the chambermaid, who swears that I've slept with my inamorata, with of course, lewd and immoral carryings-on; private detective arrives on the scene and catches us it…in flagrante delicto , so to speak.
Result: one divorce…quite easily done.’
‘I've never heard of anything so disgusting in all my life,’ said Cassie witheringly.
‘Oh, you don't actually have to do it,’ said Johnny cheerfully.
‘Just sit there, side by side, like a couple of bloomin' honeymooners…then pay her off, and get to blazes out of it.’
‘Are you trying to tell me that Bella;Bella ?— who according to you has slept with half of London — expects you to go through this…this disgusting pantomime in order to get a divorce?
You must be mad, Johnny.’
‘What do you suggest then?
I couldn't drag your name through the divorce courts, even if we could ever…’
’You divorce her !
Good Heavens, you've got enough evidence, I should think.’
He looked at her in a kind of numb horror.
‘I say, Cassie,’ he said.
‘I can't do that.
It's just not done.’
‘Which is more than you can say for Bella,’ remarked Cassie cattily.
Johnny gave one of his great shouts of laughter, reaching towards her and saying, ‘Oh Cassie, I do love you.
’ But Cassie wasn't hearing him.
Her arm still hurt abominably, and she wondered if the bone was damaged.
She was finding difficulty in seeing out of her right eye.
Johnny's continued presence in the room was threatening, and she was afraid.
She was in no mood for Johnny's love.
‘Don't touch me,’ she said.
He flinched as though she had struck him, and his face suffused with anger.
Jumping to his feet, he stared down at her, his eyes wide with a kind of incredulous contempt.
Arrogantly, with more than a hint of the Grand Seigneur, he said coldly: ‘Not touch you?
I touch what's mine, if I so desire.
Do you think that you could stop me?’
Cassie's face whitened and she said, in a voice every bit as icy and  disdainful as his own:
‘Where did you get hold of the idea that I was yours, John Latimer?
I don't recall handing over the title deeds.
I think you need reminding that I am not your property; never have been and never shall be; and that you have no right at all to touch me if I don't wish it, and none whatsoever to hurt me.
You can save all that for Bella.’
‘In that case,’ he said spitefully, ‘I can do without your assistance on how I should manage my affairs.
You know nothing about how things are done.
Of course, I might have known that you'd have some clever way of dealing with everything, though.
Cassie Willmott, the fount of all knowledge.
Get your problems sorted out here.
Free advice from the future.’
She thought: I really don't have to put up with this any more.
She remembered what she so often forgot.
It was Johnny's house, too.
Either one of them could walk through the door into the hall and end this angry and unhappy meeting.
She stood up and faced him squarely.
Perhaps the shoes helped, but she felt enormously cool and in command as she said coldly:
‘I don't think that I have anything more to say to you, Johnny.
I should like you to leave now.’
When he remained, unmoving, she said again: ‘Please go…or I shall.’
She saw his eyes become unnaturally bright and his lips begin to tremble, but as she faced him across the room, she felt neither pity nor tenderness.
Her arm throbbed and burned and the bruised cheek ached intolerably.
‘If you send me away, I shan't come back,’ he said huskily.
‘Not ever.’
‘I think that might be a very good thing,’ she replied, ‘This…this thing that has happened to us is unnatural and wrong.
We should put a stop to it before any more damage is done.’
He stood very still for a moment and then lifted his hand and gently traced a line across her swollen cheek.
She made no attempt to move away from him.
Suddenly she wasn't afraid of him  any more .
He made an inarticulate sound in his throat and then he turned awkwardly and walked away into her past.
After he had gone, Cassie went to the kitchen to run cold water over her arm and to bathe her cheek.
She rubbed some lotion into the skin, and looked at her arm critically.
It was beginning to swell and there were signs of bruising, but she could move her fingers, although it hurt when she tried to bend her wrist.
She didn't think that there was anything broken…but no thanks to Johnny, she thought bitterly.
As for her face, one thing was sure.
She would have a spectacular black eye by the following morning!
She was shocked to the very roots of her being by what she could only think of as an outrage; a violation of her person.
She thought dully that perhaps she could consider herself fortunate that, until that evening, she had never been hurt deliberately by any man.
But the pain inflicted on her by Johnny had been deliberate, and try as she may to avoid the unpleasant truth, she knew that he had enjoyed it.
Half-formed suspicion had become fact, and Cassie did not think that she could come to terms with it…
Cassie found it necessary to explain, both to her colleagues, and later to Ben, the reason for her bandaged wrist and her blackened eye.
She blamed the shoes.
‘You know me,’ she said airily.
‘I'm not used to wearing them.
I forgot I'd got them on and I slipped on the bottom stairs.
I came down with quite a thud, and hit my head on the stair post.’
She thought that she was becoming rather an accomplished liar.
Stephanie would hardly recognize her, now.
‘Have you been to the hospital?’ asked Jenny.
‘Don't fuss, Jen,’ Cassie said.
‘It's perfectly O.K. It just aches a bit, that's all.
And I didn't knock myself out, you know.
Just bashed my cheek a bit.’
‘A bit?’ retorted Jenny ironically.
‘Let me know when you really hurt yourself, won't you?’
Her arm began to heal, but the sadness and desolation of spirit persisted.
She began to think that she must sell Rose Cottage; move away and start again.
Yet whenever she considered this possibility, properly thought it through, she knew that it was not even a starter.
Despite the anger and the violence, the sorrow and the hopelessness, Cassie found that she could not contemplate the thought that she  would never see Johnny again.
The ‘magic’ as she had called it in those exciting days when it had all begun, had become a curse.
But its enchantment would not release her, and she had no will with which to break the spell.
Even so, there was a developing duality in her feelings towards Johnny, and though she still longed for his presence, she feared it, too.
The term dragged to its close.
Everything became one long dreary goodbye as parents came to thank Cassie for all she had done for their children, and the children themselves became sad and fretful at the thought that soon Cassie would no longer be their teacher.
Staff members said things like: ‘God, I'll be glad when this term's over,’ and…
‘If this term lasts another day, I'll be dead…
I mean dead !’
Ben, whistling happily, serviced his car in preparation for the long drive North.
During the whole of this depressing downward spiral, Cassie felt bleakly sad and lonely, but she smiled equally upon all, and only let the mask slip in the privacy of Rose Cottage.
At last it was all over, and burdened with farewell gifts, Cassie left school on the final day to be faced with the prospect of the long summer holiday.
Despite her tiredness, she did not welcome it.
Why hadn't she accepted Ben's offer?
A chance to escape?
But even as she thought it, she knew she wouldn't go.
Johnny had not come to Rose Cottage during those last days of term.
She thought often of his words, but in her heart she did not believe them.
He was as bound to her as she was to him.
He would not be able to keep away.
She wondered if perhaps Time was behaving properly and that Johnny had visited the cottage, prowling through the rooms, as she found herself doing often enough, but had been unable to reach her.
But there was another possible reason to account for his absence, and one that Cassie was reluctant to face.
Appalled by her ignorance of Johnny's time and of Johnny's war, she had found some books at the library, and bringing them home, had read them with a mixture of fascination and growing horror.
She found herself gazing, for minutes on end, at photographs of young men in their flying kit, waiting for the command to take to the skies.
She searched the hazy, unfocused faces to see if she could find Johnny amongst them, but she could not be sure.
She looked at the pictures of the Spitfire, and trembled to think that his survival depended, in part, on such a little plane, almost like a child's toy to her sophisticated eyes.
Johnny was inordinately proud of the Spitfire…his ‘crate’ or his ‘kite’, or whatever he called it…and it was wizard…absolutely bang on!
Well, Cassie very much hoped so.
It would need to be magic, too, to bring Johnny safely back to base.
She read about the Battle of Britain; and it wasn't any longer an old man's war, dear to her father's heart, and a cause, in earlier days, of much laughter and secret nods and winks between she and her brother.
He's off! they'd say.
Anybody would think that life began in nineteen forty.
This was Johnny's war, and because of it, it was her war too.
She read her books with an intense concentration — and she learned what Johnny had to do, and of the terrible odds that were stacked against him; for as she, in her time, moved towards the middle of July, she knew that, for Johnny, it was August; and in one of her books she learned that it was in August, between the 8th and the 15th, that the most heavily concentrated forces of enemy bombers had been sent against the military installations, and the ports and airfields of Britain.
On August 15th, 1940, her book informed her, one thousand seven hundred and eighty-six missions had flown across the Channel to attack targets in the South of England.
Fighter Command, the book had said encouragingly, had contained them, and had inflicted severe losses on the Messerschmitt B.F.110's.
On the previous Tuesday, she knew that it had been, in Johnny's time, the 15th of August.
Had he been involved in inflicting those ‘severe losses’?
And had he survived it?
She could not help thinking, with great sadness of heart, that perhaps she had sent Johnny to die in his little aircraft, with only the memory of her cold eyes and her hard, unloving words.
But why, oh why then, had he needed to hurt her?
At the start of all this, Cassie had been unable to imagine a reality  where someone who was important to her lived under the shadow of a constant and relentless danger.
Now she could imagine it only too well.
She had more in common with those wartime women than she knew.
School had broken up on the Thursday of that week, and on Friday evening Cassie saw Ben at his car, packing his holiday luggage in the boot.
She strolled out to greet him.
‘Early start, tomorrow,’ he said, throwing the tent, in its green drawstring bag, into the boot.
‘The offer's still open, if you want to change your mind, Cass.’
Yes, she thought.
Oh, yes.
I do want to change my mind; but her voice was saying other things.
‘No, honestly, thanks, Ben.
I'm quite looking forward to having nothing special to do.
Just pottering, you know.’
Early in the morning, she heard Ben leave.
She was woken by one excited bark from Em, sternly quelled, but enough to waken her.
She slept lightly now, in any case, and she reflected that dawn was becoming one of her better known times of the day.
As the sound of Ben's car engine died away, she felt suddenly very alone, the feeling heightened by the knowledge that Jenny and Paul, too, were to leave that morning for Gatwick, to fly off to their holiday destination.
She stifled the inevitable tears of self-pity, only too aware that she had only herself to blame…
That night, after spending the day engaged upon a frenzy of tidying and cleaning, she sat in her shining sitting room, watching television and wondering how on earth she was going to take two days of this, let alone two weeks.
She wished that Ben would come home.
She wished even harder that she had gone with him.
At last the hands of the clock crept towards an hour when Cassie could reasonably get ready for bed.
It was another hot, airless night, and dispensing with her nightdress, she slipped under the single cotton sheet and tried to sleep.
Surprisingly, sleep came more easily than she had anticipated, and soon her eyelids felt heavy and her eyes began to close.
CHAPTER 12 — MID JULY
She must have been asleep for some hours when the sound of her opening bedroom door penetrated her dreams and brought her instantly awake.
Johnny was standing in the doorway, with the light from the landing behind him.
‘It's all right, Cassie.
It's only me’ he said softly, but she had known that it was, and she wasn't afraid.
He walked across the room towards the window and lifted both hands upwards and sideways.
Slowly he began to draw his hands towards each other, giving them an odd little  twitch of the wrists as they met just above his head.
Cassie gazed in fascination, watching this piece of mime as though it were some esoteric ritual.
Then she gave a quick, soft laugh as she realized what he was doing.
‘You're pulling the black-out curtains, aren't you?
It does look funny,’ she said.
He groped his way back towards her, and Cassie laughed again as she watched his stumbling progress around the bottom of the bed he gave it a wide berth, so perhaps the nineteen forties bed, which must occupy the same position as her own, was longer or wider than hers.
He reached her side and his hand moved to her bedside lamp.
It hovered, in an almost disembodied way, slightly above the shade of her lamp, and the fingers made a little pinching movement.
Light flooded the room and Cassie blinked.
It had been unexpected.
How very odd that she could not see the source of the light, but could see the light itself.
Was there no end to the complexities and mysteries of this ridiculous situation?
‘Clever!’ she said lightly.
‘I'm impressed!’
She slid across the bed, making room for Johnny to sit beside her on the mattress.
She kept the sheet firmly pulled beneath her chin, unwilling to let Johnny see her nakedness, remembering their last meeting, and wary of him now.
He had obviously been sleeping; his hair was ruffled and untidy and  his chin unshaven and covered with a short, dark stubble.
He was wearing a pair of crumpled pyjama trousers, tied at the waist with a white cord.
She said: ‘What are you doing here, at this time of night?’
‘I'm staying here.
We've just got through an absolute bastard of a week.
It's been a nightmare.
Then my C.O. gave me a forty eight to sort out this Bella business.
I went up to Town today, but she wasn't there…at the flat.
The couple next door said she hadn't been there for several days.
The flat was in a terrible state.
It looked as if they'd been having a party and had just taken off in the middle of it.
It stank.
I left Bella a note, came back here and went to bed in the spare room.
This is the third time tonight that I've come to look for you.
You weren't here before, but you are now,’ he added unnecessarily.
All the while that he had been speaking, he had used the same flat, expressionless tone.
His voice was entirely without emotion and he looked almost dazed with fatigue.
It occurred to Cassie that he was keeping himself under an unnatural control, like a muzzled animal.
He touched her arm and then her cheek, running his thumb gently over the fading bruises.
‘I'm a sod, aren't I?’ he said flatly.
‘Yes,’ she said.
He lifted her arm and kissed each mark, before saying: ‘If it's any help, I've wanted to die ever since…
I shouldn't have cared, this week, if I'd bought it.
It would have been no more than I deserved.’
He lifted her arm again and then let it fall onto the sheet.
‘I don't think that would have done much good,’ she said.
Cassie began to feel the strength of her will ebb away, and she despised herself.
Despite the crumpled, sleepy look, Johnny was still magnificent; and distractingly appealing.
Her resistance to his physical charm melted into a surge of longing and desire.
Was she a silly adolescent girl to be so confused and seduced by a handsome face? a beautiful body?
Could she really disregard that side of his nature which was so repellent to her?
Oh yes, she thought with honesty.
Almost certainly.
No doubt she was as putty in his desirable hands.
Not looking at her directly, and in that same inflectionless voice, he said: ‘You may find this hard to believe, Little Martian, but I love you.
More than anything…more than life itself.
When I…when I hurt you, I damaged myself far more than you…damaged and sickened myself.
If you say that you won't ever forgive me, then the damage will be mortal, I think.’
Oh, bugger it, thought Cassie.
Ignore that if you can, my girl.
With a sigh, she lifted her arms to reach him and pull him down to her, and the sheet, like her resolve, slipped away.
She moved to switch out the light, forgetting that it was not her lamp that glowed on the bedside table, but he caught her arm, oh-so-very-gently, this time.
‘Leave it,’ he said.
‘God knows when I'll see you again, but tonight I shall…so that I have something to remember, my little Cassie.’
He rolled onto the bed beside her, and his own tightly curbed control began to weaken as he slipped a hand over one of her breasts and bent his head to kiss the other.
After a while, he removed his mouth from her nipple and lay looking at her breasts, as though to memorize every curve and line.
He said: ‘They're beautiful.
Truly, truly beautiful.
If I looked at them all night long, I shouldn't grow tired of the sight.’
She said teasingly: ‘I've always considered them a little on the small side myself.
Quite a good shape, but not full enough.
I quite fancy having really big boobs, but they'd probably look ridiculous.
I haven't got the frame for it.’
He shook his head emphatically.
‘Oh no, Cassie,’ he said.
‘They're perfect.
Look!
I can cover one with my hand.
It's as though I'm holding everything that I want in all the world…there in the palm of my hand.
Or here?
If I touch you here, then I certainly have everything my heart could desire.’
As he spoke, he trailed his fingers gently over her body until he reached her thighs.
He pushed her legs apart, slid his hand between them and began to touch her lightly.
He moved his fingers with a delicate sureness of touch, thereby undermining Cassie's wavering defences even more alarmingly.
As his fingers explored further, slipping inside her, moving rhythmically against her, a drowsy and confused acceptance possessed her mind while, at the same time, her body responded to his touch as though she were made of fire; and the  centre of that hotness burned deep and slow and fierce inside her, tantalizingly with the magic of Johnny's moving fingers.
Dragging her mind with difficulty from this trance-like quiescence, she thought despairingly…but he hasn't even got started, yet.
This is simply the qualifying round.
Johnny kissed her, and the last shreds of his restraint, and hers, were vanquished.
‘Let me,’ he said urgently.
‘Please Cassie, let me.
I need you.
You know how much I need you.’
There was to be no taking, tonight, it would seem; no arrogant demand.
Tonight he was not prepared to rape or ravish.
Tonight he pleaded, although his fingers said other things.
He was trying desperately hard to make amends, she thought.
When the feeling of menace stole back into Cassie's mind, she was unprepared for it — resented it, even.
The awareness of some unrecognizable danger did not spring from the knowledge that Johnny might yet offer her violence.
Restrained as he may now appear to be, his precariously balanced control might well snap as his passion mounted.
She must face that possibility, and take her chance, if their relationship was to progress beyond its present stage.
So, no — it wasn't that.
The warning came, as before, from somewhere inside her head; or maybe from beyond herself; somewhere far, far away.
This relationship with Johnny was abnormal.
It could do her harm.
He was out of bounds; delightful yet forbidden.
The warning was clear and unequivocal; she could not ignore it.
She said: ‘I don't think it would be right, Johnny.’
‘Lots of girls go all the way, now, my darling; girls who would have said no, before,’ he said, not understanding her.
‘Because of…’
‘Because of the war?’
‘Yes.
I don't want to be morbid, my lovely, or for you to think that I'm just seducing you with promises in order to take what I want.
It's not emotional blackmail — but once or twice recently, I've felt that I've nearly bought it.
You know…number up, and all that.’
‘Don't,’ she said, clinging to him.
‘It's bad luck to talk about it.’
‘It's just that there may not be another time, sweetheart,’ he said urgently.
‘What if there's a child?
I'm not protected, you know.
I'm not on the pill, any more .’
The hand that had been caressing her breast, stopped abruptly.
‘Pill?’ he said uncertainly.
‘What…?’
Of course!
He wouldn't know about it.
She hadn't mentioned it on the Apple Tree Day.
‘The contraceptive pill.
It's a type of birth control women can take to prevent conception.’
Johnny smiled broadly.
‘No wonder you're liberated, Cassie,’ he said.
‘It's not all rose and no thorns, I can assure you.
But the point is, I've stopped taking it…
I haven't used it since I left David.’
As soon as she had spoken, she regretted the words.
She hadn't told him about David on the Apple Tree Day, either.
She felt Johnny's body stiffen, and the mellow, languid expression in his eyes was replaced by something infinitely less comforting.
‘Oh shit!’ she said crossly.
Johnny ignored her outburst.
‘I didn't know you'd been married,’ he said, in a low voice.
So that was it.
Cassie felt a sense of relief.
‘I haven't.
We only lived together.
For nearly five years actually, but it didn't work out.
No wedding bells, or anything.’
‘You lived with him?’ said Johnny, in a tone which displayed equal measures of disbelief and fury.
‘Lived with him?
As though you were married?
So you're not a…’
His voice petered out and he rolled away from her and lay on his back, his hands clasped behind his head, staring woodenly at the ceiling.
‘A virgin?
No, no I'm not.
Anyway, does it matter?
Does it make any difference?
Are you one?
Are you a virgin, Johnny?’
‘Don't be ridiculous,’ he said, through lips that barely moved.
‘I'm bloody married.
Besides, I'm a man.’
Cassie sat up with a sudden, sharp indignant movement.
She glared down at Johnny as he lay there, obstinately refusing lo look at her.
‘Oh?
You think that makes a difference, do you?
Could you tell me how, please?
I'd love to know.
If I've got this right, then what  you're saying is that I don't need to feel any jealousy about the multiplicity of your sexual partners, because you're married.
Is that it?
Marriage, I assume, carries with it some sort of carte blanche for endless promiscuity — and a dispensation from the Pope.
No wonder it was so bloody popular in your time.’
He said angrily, dismissively:
‘Don't be stupid.
You're deliberately…’
‘Or is it because I did it from choice?’ she demanded sarcastically, shouting him down.
‘Whereas you, naturally, were forced into it.
A spot of bonking is expected of one when one takes a bride, isn't it, Johnny?
No way out of it.
How frightfully tedious for you, old chap!’
‘You're deliberately misunderstanding me,’ he spat.
‘And there's no need to ridicule my speech, either,’ he added sulkily.
If Cassie had not been so consumed by rage, she would have laughed at this last and patently childish remark.
Instead, she curled her lip and said: ‘And what the hell has your maleness got to do with it.
I suppose, in your time, a man can be as randy as he pleases; it adds to his desirability; proves he's a real man…suitably virile.
Nothing to worry about, there, folks!
No hint of a limp wrist!
But just let the poor little woman open her legs to more than the statutory one, and she's cheap, a woman of easy virtue, a social outcast.
She has to make do with what she's got…that's if she's a nice girl, of course.
I expect the other sort have a ball — like Bella,’ she added unkindly.
‘What bloody awful hypocrisy!
And how quaint.
Remember what I told you, Johnny.
Equal rights and opportunities.
You do it if you feel like it, and so do I. What's sauce for the goose…?’
She felt a prickle of irritation.
Johnny's double standards, and his entrenched belief in the superiority of the male, had led her into an angry tirade of defence designed only to prove that she was exactly the cheap little tart that he so obviously thought her.Their relationship seemed to be increasingly an exercise in one-upmanship: my time's better than yours; so there!
Johnny didn't answer, but simply rolled onto his stomach and buried his head in the pillow.
‘Anyway,’ she went on, after a pause.
‘I'm surprised to learn that you still believe me to be in possession of my cherry, or however you'd  phrase it.
As I recall it, I was a parcel, handed on to the next bloke at the end of the day.
It's the way we live in 1990, I remember you saying.
We're all sluts and harlots, showing our tits to every passing male.’
‘I didn't mean any of it.’
His voice was muffled by the pillow, but it sounded to Cassie as if he were close to tears.
‘I didn't really think you had.
Not your sort of girl.
Try to understand, Cassie.
Please just try .
I saw you with him…and he seemed like…well, like one of the inheritors of the earth.
And you kissed him; and I thought how he could be with you whenever he wished.
He was part of your real life.
I could have killed him.
I know how badly I behaved that night; but I was wild with jealousy.
Just try to understand, Cassie.’
She said: ‘I understand that bit, but I as sure as hell don't understand you when you talk about the sort of girl I am.
I'm not rich, or upper class.
I'm just an average sort of girl, like most others in my time.
What do you mean by ‘my sort of girl?’’
‘Decently brought up; respectable; from a good home.
It's got nothing to do with money…or position, come to that.
It's just that one can tell these things, Cassie.
You're not the sort of girl to…dammit! you're not a slut like Bella, who'll sleep with anyone for a cheap thrill.
And you can go on and on about how it is in your time, and how people have different attitudes towards…towards sexual intimacy.
But I can't accept it, Cassie. I can't bear to think of you doing it with anyone else, even if you do laugh at me, and think I'm old hat.’
‘But Bella…’ she began.
‘I didn't know about Bella when I married her; and I was an innocent abroad where women were concerned.
Perhaps you find that hard to believe, but it happens to be true.
I'd never had a woman when I married Bella.
I've had dozens, now; all cheap sluts, for all their money and family names.
You're different, Cassie.
I don't want you to be like them…like Bella's set.
If I want a whore, I'll bloody pay for one…not marry one.’
His distress was obvious, and Cassie suddenly felt inexpressibly weary.
If they were to talk all night, they would still be no nearer to viewing life from a similar standpoint.
They were light years away from each other.
She sought in her mind for a way to explain, and finally she said  hesitantly:
‘I think the problem lies in the fact that, in your time, words like virtue, decency, respectability are all equated with sexual morality.
My generation's sexual freedom, with the right to choose and to enjoy, is regarded by you as promiscuity; whereas, in reality, it's no such thing.
Most of the women in my time don't screw around indiscriminately, with dozens of different partners.’
She thought briefly of AIDS and added: ‘For one thing, they've learnt that it isn't very wise…but not because it's immoral , Johnny.
For quite different reasons, which I won't go into now.
What constitutes, for me, a virtuous woman…a decent woman…has nothing to do with how many sexual partners she may have had, or whether or not she happens to be single or married.
It isn't that we haven't any standards left in my time; it's just that they're different, don't you see that?
For me, sexual morality is a matter of caring, of lack of greed and selfishness, of wanting to make one's partner happy and fulfilled.
And for Christ's sake, Johnny, how on earth can you justify sexual freedom for men if you deny it to women?
It makes no sense at all.’
With his back still rigidly and unrelentingly turned towards her, he said miserably:
‘If things are as you say, then a man can never be sure of his wife; never be sure that he'll find her there when he comes home at the end of the day.
How can he live like that?
How does he hold up his head if he knows his wife is deceiving him?
He must be a laughing-stock.
A poor sort of chap.’
He was so full of contradictions, she thought despairingly; so nearly describing the marriage he'd got — with Bella — and the one that he would like to have…or thought that he would!
But Cassie could see that Johnny's ears were as unresponsive as his back.
She was wasting her breath.
She would never get through to him.
She said: ‘I don't think we're any good for each other, Johnny.
We'd never hit it off together.
I can never be this…this dream woman whom you've invented for yourself, nor live as you would want me to.
I am as I am, a woman of my times, and I won't pretend.
I think that we should stop this farce, here and now.
One or the other of us should leave Rose Cottage…go right away from here until this…this  time muddle has corrected itself.
We should make an end to it, Johnny.
It's no good to either of us.’
This produced an immediate reaction.
His voice still muffled by the pillow, he said wretchedly:
‘Don't say that.
Don't ever say that.
I can't even bear to think it.
I know there's a way that we can be together.
I just know it.
I need some time to think about it, that's all.’
‘You've got fifty years,’ she said drily.
‘Do you think that's sufficient?’
She no longer felt any animosity towards him and was moved to tenderness by his obvious misery.
She rested her hands gently on his back, massaging the tight, tense muscles of his neck, and said softly: ‘But it's true, my dear.
I don't understand how you think, and I can't  poke up with all this anger and jealousy.
It's not how I want to live.
It's not me .
Oh, sure!
A few rows and some ups and downs are fine.
They add a bit of spice…and I've got quite a nasty temper when it's roused.
But not all the time, Johnny.
All this fighting and emotional turmoil; well, I just can't live with it.
It makes me want out.
Turns me off.’
She watched as he struggled with himself — and with her words.
At last, turning so that she could see his face, he blurted out:
‘I don't care, Cassie.
I don't care.
I don't mind how many men you've slept with.
You can have been had by the whole of Fighter Command as far as I'm concerned; just as long as you add me to the list.’
He pulled her roughly into his arms.
‘Is that what you wanted to hear .
Are you satisfied now?
I don't give tuppence, as long as you sleep with me .’
He held her tightly against him as though he would squeeze the life out of her, and then, remembering, added as an afterthought, and almost humbly: ‘That's if you want it too, my little Cassie.’
Cassie laughed.
The warning voice could go take a rain check, she thought.
She said: ‘Oh Johnny, you idiot!
Of course I want it.’
He pushed impatiently with his feet at some obstacle which seemed to be in his way.
Fleetingly she wondered what Johnny could actually see.
She would be lying on a different bed, of course.
His and  Bella's, she assumed.
And the sheet with which he now tussled?
Decidedly not the one she knew had been bought only recently from Laura Ashley and which now lay abandoned on the floor beside her bed.
Freeing himself at last from the invisible sheet, he rolled over and lay on top of her, covering her with his body, his face very close to her own.
It was beginning to get light and Johnny's bedside lamp glowed dimly, uselessly, against the strength of the rising sun.
He bit her lips and pressed his mouth down hard on hers, his hand slipping back between her legs.
And then the earth moved.
At least, thought Cassie wildly, it wasn't really the earth moving.
More like a terrible, shrieking banshee wail, which rose and fell, bringing with it an almost instinctive feeling of panic, of imminent peril.
She cried out in fear, and beat her hands against Johnny's arms.
He moved from her mouth, and smiled, his eyes full of desire.
‘It's all right, sweetheart,’ he said soothingly.
‘It's only the siren.
There's not likely to be any trouble here.
It's the airfields they're after.’
Finding herself, for the first time in her life, under threat of attack from the skies, Cassie felt enormously exposed and vulnerable.
‘But, stray bombs…’ she whispered in agitation.
‘Hush!
Rose Cottage can't get hit, can it?’ he said reasonably.
‘You live here, don't you?
And the bread oven's still there, so I imagine the cottage escaped any serious damage.
You're quite safe, my love.’
Cassie was forced to see the logic of this and some of her fear subsided.
She thought that although she might one day be able to accept this stupid time hiccup, she would never ever come to terms with these brief glimpses into another world; as though a door had opened and closed and that, for a moment, she had stood with one foot on either side of the threshold.
The fearful noise abated in its intensity, trailed away and was gone.
There seemed to be a dreadful, waiting silence.
Johnny, as though realizing for the first time that he was still wearing his pyjama trousers, began to worry at the knot in the cord at his waist, the trembling of his hands causing him to fumble ineffectively.
‘Shall I help?’
Cassie asked.
‘I'm good with knots.’
They both heard the planes at the same moment; a distant low throbbing.
Johnny lifted his head, listening intently.
Cassie knew that, for all his desire, he was, at that moment, in a place far, far away from her, his thoughts up there in the sky with his comrades, leaving her earthbound and excluded.
He kissed her forehead.
‘Don't stop wanting me,’ he said.
‘I shan't be a tick.’
He rolled off the bed and walked to the window, moving his hands in the same disconcerting manner as before, though in reverse this time.
He stood looking out, his back to her.
The pyjamas, creased and oddly old-fashioned looking, hung about his hips with an air of impermanence.
In the strengthening light, Cassie saw him with all the clarity and shock of their first encounter, and her flesh shivered with excitement, as it had done even then.
She saw him in all his beauty, grace and arrogance — physically the most nearly perfect human being she had ever seen.
She sighed, and turned to pick up the clock on the bedside table.
What time was it?
Would she ever again learn not to wake before the birds?
She turned back to Johnny, impatient for him now, and stretched out her arms to him.
‘Hurry up,’ she said softly.
‘Come to bed.’
But she found herself talking to the empty room, and the sky outside the window was the untroubled blue of a peaceful July morning.
‘I shan't be a tick,’ she said out loud, her voice breaking a little.
‘Absolutely wizard exit line, Johnny, old chap.’
She lay stiffly on the bed, unable to make up her mind whether to scream in disappointed rage or to burst into hysterical laughter.
In the event she did neither, but lay there for a while wondering what Johnny was doing, hidden away from her behind time's misty barrier.
Did he pace the room, beating his fists against the wall?
Was he lying there next to her, staring stonily at the ceiling?
He seemed so close, and yet a million miles away.
She had no difficulty in imagining his sentiments.
It was still early, but she could stay there no longer.
She got up and stumped along the landing to the bathroom, thinking venomously that  never in the whole history of star-crossed lovers could there have been a more frustrating or unsatisfactory relationship than this.
When she reached the bathroom, she took the advice usually offered on occasions such as this, turned on the cold shower and stepped under the cascade of water.
The icy stream took her breath away and she gasped as the water poured through her hair and ran down her face.
Whatever else its effect may have been, the cold shower was certainly therapeutic.
The bombardment of chilly droplets seemed to drive out the blackness of her thoughts.
As she dried herself, she felt clean and almost cheerful.
Shivering inside her bathrobe, she went downstairs to seek the sun.
She took her early morning tea to the garden, and sat at the table to drink it.
Even now, after this short while, she found it hard to remember if Johnny had truly been with her or if it had been only a dream.
Had he really said that he would share her with the whole of Fighter Command, or was that an erotic fantasy born of her own desire?
‘Don't stop wanting me.
I shan't be a tick.’
She heard him say it, and knew that he had, indeed, been there in her bed.
And she had sent him away.
She opened her eyes very wide as this thought slipped into her mind, but as she sat considering this new idea, she knew that she was right.
Why else would she have turned her back on Johnny?
Why else would she have looked away from him to glance idly at the clock?
Right from the beginning she had known this much about how the ‘magic’ worked.
She had been almost obsessively anxious about it.
And yet she had turned her back.
She had sent him away.
With the sun warm on her face, she continued to sit there, a feeling of contentment replacing her earlier distress.
She found that she was able to think of Johnny dispassionately, and she acknowledged to herself with honesty, and a new clarity of understanding, that she did not love him, nor ever could.
She dimly perceived the terrible conflict that went on in Johnny's mind between the dark side of his nature and the knowledge of how he should behave — of the actions expected of him because, as he would have put it,he was a Gentleman.
Gentlemen  didn't clout their womenfolk about, beat them, bruise them, tie them up and whip them…or whatever jolly games Johnny's preferences led him to pursue.
She could readily imagine his feelings of guilt and self-disgust, and his anxiety to lay the blame at Bella's door.
Much of his hatred and contempt of Bella must have stemmed from her involvement in Johnny's fall from grace.
But Cassie strongly suspected that Johnny would have got there in the end, without any help from Bella.
Bella was just an excuse; a scapegoat.
And as certainly as she knew these things, Cassie also knew that however it was that Johnny got his kicks, it was not for her.
The whole sado-masochistic scene seemed to her to have little to do with love.
Well, she supposed, with a slight shrug, whatever turned you on — only it didn't; not really.
Poor Johnny, she thought.
Poor, beautiful Johnny…
As the next day or two dragged by, fear became Cassie's almost constant companion.
She smelled the tang of fear in her nostrils and the taste of it in her mouth.
It moved with her silently from room to room, breathing softly against the back of her neck.
It accompanied her to bed at night and filled her dreams with dread and her sleep with sudden awakenings.
The close stifling feeling of menace, present as she had walked down the path on that evening in May, returned a hundredfold, settling above the little cottage, like an ancient, ugly crone over her cooking pot.
By the Tuesday of the first week, Cassie knew that she could not stay at Rose Cottage any longer.
She considered her fear, and with it the probability that before long Johnny would find her again, and she was shaken by unreasoning panic.
Her parents were due to go away on holiday at the start of the following week.
They were taking a trip to Canada and the States and were to be staying with Cassie's Canadian aunt and uncle.
They planned to visit the Rockies and fly on to Vancouver and then down into the States.
It was to be the holiday of a life-time and they hoped to be gone for two or three months.
Cassie knew suddenly that she desperately wanted to see her mother and father before they left England.
She hadn't realized how short a time it was until their departure.
Johnny had made her forgetful  of even the most important things.
She picked up the phone.
‘Please be in, Mum,’ she said, as she pressed the buttons.
She heard her mother's voice on the other end of the line and felt weak and unsteady with relief.
‘Hi, Mum,’ she said.
‘It's me.
May I come home?’
‘I was just about to ring you , dear, to see if we could pop over for the day, just to say goodbye — but I've been so busy these last few days, what with one thing and another.
Of course you can come to stay.
It will be much, much nicer than us coming over to you.
This way, Dad and I get you for a little longer.
When are you thinking of leaving?’
‘Now,’ said Cassie.
Cassie's mother, used to her daughter's sudden arrivals and departures, showed no surprise.
‘Lovely,’ she said.
‘See you soon.
Drive carefully.’
Just the very fact of being there, with her parents, in the place of her childhood, in the lovely, slightly shabby rambling old house where she had grown up, was sufficient to effect an almost miraculous cure.
Her dreams and fears faded and were gone.
She felt like a convalescent after a long and dangerous illness, her strength returning, her enthusiasm for life rekindled.
If only she were able to stay here for the remainder of the holiday; but perhaps with Mum and Dad away, even here might start to haunt her.
Her mother had never pried into Cassie's affairs, waiting to be told what her daughter wished her to know and was ready to tell.
But she did say on one occasion, after Cassie had been home for about two days: ‘How's that nice young man we met, Cassie?
Ben, was it?
Didn't he live next door?’
‘Really, mother,’ said Cassie tartly.
‘You know perfectly well he's called Ben.
And that he lives next door.
And how old he is, what he does for a living, how much he's got in the bank — and probably whether he's twice divorced with a string of children tucked away somewhere.’
‘Cassie!
What a thing to say!
It's just that your father and I…well, we thought he was a very pleasant young man, and he seemed to like you quite a lot.’
‘You're as transparent as a plastic bag,’ said Cassie, laughing at her.
‘It's only that we'd like to see you happy…’
‘I'm glad you didn't add ‘settled’; happy and settled, like a broody hen.
I'm perfectly happy, mum; and not everybody needs to be married, you know,’ Cassie said, remembering Jenny's words.
‘No, of course not, Cassie dear.
And your father and I thought you did the right thing about David.
Thoroughly nice lad; but not the one for you, in my opinion.
Anyway, how is the young man in question?
Is he well?
That's all I wanted to know, really.’
‘He's fine.
He's in Scotland at the moment, on holiday with Em.’
‘Oh!’ said her mother expressionlessly.
‘I didn't realize.
If you had said…’
Cassie smiled.
‘Em's his dog, Mum.
Remember?’
Mrs Willmott looked relieved.
‘That's all right then,’ she said, before adding: ‘He's a very attractive young man.’
‘Oh,Mum !’ said Cassie, in exasperation.
Cassie stayed at her family home for nearly a week, but on the Monday, with her parents due to leave the following morning, she packed her bags and prepared to go.
This small breathing space had given her time to arrive at several important decisions.
Chief amongst these had been the inescapable fact that she must get rid of Rose Cottage.
She in no way blamed her dear little house for the terrifying events of the past few weeks.
The more she considered the matter, the more she believed that Rose Cottage was as much a victim as she.
Yet it was abundantly clear that only when she was away from the influence of the house was she able to return to some semblance of normality.
Commonsense told her that her safety and her sanity could only be assured if she were to put a considerable distance between herself and the cottage.
This decision filled her with profound gloom; not only because her home had been so special and so very much loved, but also because the selling of Rose Cottage could do nothing but plunge her into financial disaster.
Since buying the cottage, house prices had started on a steady  descent.
This unpalatable circumstance could result in the very real possibility that Cassie would get a lower price for the cottage than she had paid for it, thus resulting in the disastrous situation of owing the Building Society money which she did not possess.
Financial ruin, albeit on a minor scale, sniffed at her heels.
But there again, she reasoned.
What was money in the bank when compared to the retention of her sanity?
And perhaps she would be able to let Rose Cottage, while she herself eked out a miserable existence in some dreary bedsit in Axminton.
Let somebody else take on Johnny and his bloody war, she thought viciously.
I as sure as hell don't want it.
As she drove away from her parents' house, she was still reluctant to return to Rose Cottage; so, delaying the moment of arrival for as long as possible, she decided to return home via Brighton, and to spend the day there, window shopping.
It was mid-evening, therefore, but still light, when eventually she arrived in Lower Axe.
She drove down the lane and past the pub, turning at last into her own drive.
She left her bag in the car and walked across the grass to the front porch.
She stopped to look at the two houses, Brier and Rose, like identical twins wearing slightly different clothing so that one could tell them apart.
They were very alike; so why was it that the windows of Rose looked darker, somehow, the glass heavy and black, not glinting rich gold, like Brier, in the late sunshine?
And why did Rose seem to sag wearily, as though it were tired and feeling its age?
‘Oh Christ, Cassie!’ she thought dispiritedly.
‘Stop being fanciful.
You've got to stick this out until you can make proper arrangements, so get on with it, and keep your sense of proportion.’
Heeding this good advice, she found her key and pushed it into the lock.
It was darker inside the cottage than she had expected, and as soon as she had opened the door, she knew that there was something terribly wrong.
CHAPTER 13 — LATE JULY OR LATE AUGUST 1940
It was the smell that alerted her and gave her that first sudden awareness of danger.
She had not been absent from her home for long enough to have forgotten her own house smell.
As she stepped over the threshold of Rose Cottage, the smell that met her was not that of her own living space.
There was an overpoweringly strong odour of stale tobacco smoke, and beneath that, other smells which were alien to her nostrils and which she could not identify.
The overall effect was one of confusion and a feeling of disorientation, as though she had opened the wrong door by mistake and was trespassing on someone else's property.
And, in truth, she was.
For as she pressed back against the front door, trembling and bewildered, she saw what was in substance her own house.
The stairs and bannisters were the ones she knew, the door to the sitting room and the one into the kitchen were in their familiar places but there the resemblance ended.
Every other aspect of the scene set out before her belonged to another Rose Cottage.
A stranger's home.
She knew what had happened straight away; she didn't need to work it out.
Indeed, she had been half expecting it for some time now.
She laughed hysterically, jamming her fingers into her mouth to muffle the sound.
She was shaking violently and leant against the door for support.
So, Time, you old bugger, she thought grimly.
You've finally gone and done it!
She turned swiftly, reaching out to grab the knob of the front door, preparing to wrench it open and make a run for it back to the safety of the village.
But even as she held the knob in her hand and was about to turn it, she hesitated and her arm dropped to her side.
How did she know what was out there?
How did she know that she could find sanctuary in the familiar and the ordinary?
Did Lower Axe dream in the soft evening sunshine of nineteen ninety two, or was it the wartime village that was out there now, canopied by the  dangerous skies of nineteen forty?
And what if she were to leave the shelter of the house?
Would she then be unable to return, and would she be trapped forever in that wartime world?
She shivered as she recalled the terrible blackness that had invaded her home and had clung to and coated the village on that night when she had heard the voices.
If she were to open the door perhaps the blackness would be out there now, ready to swallow her, as it had almost done on that previous occasion; or would she wander endlessly in a limbo of greyness, forever trapped between Johnny's time and her own?
By comparison the cottage seemed a place of safety.
She decided to remain where she was until she could be sure of what she would find outside the closed front door.
Still trembling she turned back, and with a mixture of fear and fascination, gazed at the hallway of Rose Cottage, nineteen forties model.
Brown paint covered every scrap of woodwork, giving the hall a dingy, sad appearance.
Looking upwards, she saw that no window had yet been built into the end wall at the top of the stairs, and this lack of light helped to emphasize the Stygian gloom in which she stood.
A low wattage bulb glowed half-heartedly beneath a grubby glass lampshade and on the wall to her right was a light switch, round and brown, and set against an embossed biscuit-coloured paper, fading and patchily stained with damp.
Just inside the front door, where Cassie had her little rosewood table, was a large and threatening piece of furniture, far too big for its present position.
An oval  mirror , pock-marked and fly-stained, was set in the top of this extravagant and monstrous contraption and next to it stood a hollow elephant's foot mounted on a wooden base.
For umbrellas she supposed, although at the moment it was empty.
She turned her attention once again to the old fashioned coatstand, for that is what it surely was, and the single garment that it supported; a man's mac, beige in colour; long and belted.
She wondered if the mac belonged to Johnny, and if, perhaps, he was there in the house with her at the moment.
For a few seconds, she regarded the coatstand with its disfigured mirror, and then, creasing her brow in bewildered concentration, she  thought: If I look in the mirror and don't see myself, then I'm a ghost.
But how can I be a ghost when I haven't been born yet?
And if it comes to that, how can I be here at all if I haven't been born yet?
Not being able to find an immediate answer to these questions, Cassie crept towards the mirror and stared in.
Her reflection, pale and tired but quite solid looking, appeared before her in a perfectly normal manner.
‘Jeez!’ she whispered, in surprise.
‘So I'm really here; here in Johnny's bloody awful hall!’
Silently, as though she really were a ghost, Cassie pushed open the door to the sitting room and looked in.
Memories came rushing back of the night when Johnny had described this room; the night she had told him about the time hiccup.
It was all exactly as Johnny had said it was.
Brown, sticky tape latticed the windows where the heavy blackouts hung.
Faded blue velvet curtains, worn in places and with dust lying along the folds, were pushed back to allow the last of the light to enter the room.
Across the room was the table with its powdery dried flowers and next to it the fireplace with the companion set in the hearth and the two tasteless china dogs on the mantel.
At the far end of the room was the piano.
It was old; and the keys were stained and yellowing, like aging teeth.
A thin, grey covering of dust lay on the dark wood.
She crept softly across the room to the piano and touched the keys, although without applying any pressure.
It was here that it had all started, she thought.
Just a handful of badly played notes to have led to all of this.
She moved stealthily down the hall to the kitchen, her hearing sharpened by fear as she strained to detect even the slightest movement in the old house.
Everywhere was quiet, however, and the light was fading rapidly, filling the little house with shadow.
The kitchen itself presented a brighter aspect than the dingy hall and the depressing sitting room, as it had been recently re-decorated in green and cream.
Cassie looked curiously at the door to the hall.
It was hung the other way around from her own, and the door handle was on the right hand side; not on the left as it was in her own time.
The light switch, round and brown like the one in the hall, was on the  wall next to the dresser.
Cassie shivered as she contemplated the knowledge that she had been here in this kitchen once before…or as near as made no difference.
No wonder she hadn't been able to find the door handle.
Or the light switch.
She looked with interest at the kitchen chairs.
They were sturdy and wooden; quite beautiful in their uncluttered, utilitarian lines.
Cassie experienced a strong desire to own them.
She stood behind one of them and rested her hand against  its curved back.
She recognized its feel immediately.
Under the window was the stained porcelain sink with its wooden draining board, blackened marks on the wood showing evidence of forgotten cigarettes.
Standing on the draining board was an old, chipped saucer containing a slab of soap which was yellow as cheese and rock hard, its surface covered in deep cracks and giving the appearance of having been there for ever.
Lying near it were some plates which had been washed and left to drain, and beside them stood the most delicate of porcelain cups.
There was the remains of tea at the bottom of the cup, and a smudge of bright red lipstick on its rim.
Evidence of the lipstick could also be seen on the butts of several cigarettes which lay crushed in a large ashtray on the table.
‘So she's here,’ Cassie whispered, with a prickle of some strong emotion, the cause of which lay only partly in jealousy.
This nineteen forties kitchen, with its absence of tiles and stainless steel, without its usual complement of modern appliances and electrical gadgets, fascinated her.
Cassie could have looked for hours but a slight sound from the garden jolted her back to an awareness of her present danger.
She stiffened, as the sound came again.
She looked around her anxiously for some place to hide.
There was nowhere; not even the pantry into which she had once thrust an amused but resisting Johnny.
Anybody entering the kitchen from the garden door would spot her immediately.
And if that person should be Bella…?
She slipped noiselessly from the kitchen into the hall and waited, with beating heart and racing pulse, for the sound of the opening door.
When it did not come she breathed a little more easily, and looking  upwards towards the landing, considered the advisability of progressing further.
Say they were asleep, or even making love?
She disliked the thought, was surprised at the intensity of that dislike, but knew she must consider the possibility.
She stood for a moment with her head on one side, listening intently.
No, she decided; the silence was too deep; not even the gentlest of movements upstairs could go undetected at Rose Cottage; not with her floorboards.
On the other hand, she thought miserably, what if they had already made love, and were now dozing; before waking to start all over again?
She had reached the landing by this stage of her deliberations, remarking, as she did so, that the fitted carpet, which had covered them in her own time, had gone.
Carpet of the same pattern as that in the hall was laid over only the middle part of the stairway and was held in place by little metal arms which pinned the carpet against the back of each tread.
On either side of this, the wood was stained with a dark varnish.
Cautiously she ventured into her own bedroom first.
It was growing dark and she had to squint to make out the details of the room.
The double bed where she had lain with Johnny occupied much the same position as did her own.
This bed, however, was a splendid one, with brass head and foot; much classier than her own rather functional affair.
A nightdress lay across the unmade bed.
Cassie picked it up and found that it was silk, with a bodice of handmade lace; beautiful and expensive.
Like the woman who wears it? wondered Cassie, surprised at the strength of her animosity towards Bella Latimer.
She did not stay in the room for long; it was too full of Bella.
Her suitcase lay on the floor, the clothes tumbling over its sides.
On the dressing table were bottles and jars, a positive mountain of makeup and potions; and powder, spilled from a bowl onto the cluttered dressing table, coated everything in a fine, cream dust.
There was a large, silver scent bottle with a jewelled neck standing in the midst of all the debris.
Cassie pressed the tasselled atomiser and  was enveloped in a spray of expensive French perfume.
‘Won't be able to get that for much longer, Old Thing,’ she murmured complacently.
‘Or these,’ she added, picking up a gossamer fine silk stocking and crumpling it into a weightless ball in her hand.
But Bella Latimer, she decided, was the kind of woman who would go on getting what she wanted even in the darkest days of the war.
Cassie didn't see Bella troubling her head with clothing coupons and ration books.
If a thing was able to be found then, as likely as not, Bella would have it.
Had this unflattering picture of Bella emerged because of Johnny, she wondered, or because of her own somewhat despicable jealousy?
After all, she knew nothing about Bella Latimer other than what Johnny had told her, and the main burden of that had been Bella's absence of sexual morality.
‘T'is pity she's a whore,’ she said, smiling to herself as she crept along the landing to the second bedroom.
Her spirits rose a little as she opened the door and peered inside.
Johnny was using this room, that much was obvious.
A pair of trousers lay across the back of a chair and his pyjamas were stuffed untidily beneath the pillow.
Some of his possessions were on the top of the chest by the window and she looked at them curiously.
It gave her an oddly unsettled feeling to think that Johnny used these things each day in his ordinary life, and that they were part of that aspect of his life of which she knew nothing.
As she looked down at this small collection of his personal belongings, she realized that she had never thought of him as having any reality beyond the few hours they had spent together at the cottage.
Perhaps she had acknowledged his wartime exploits, up there in his Spitfire inflicting those severe losses she had read about.
But when the dog-fights and the killings were over…what then?
She had never imagined him doing the ordinary things of life: taking a bath, shaving, going shopping, or sitting in a bar somewhere with his friends, laughing and telling jokes.
What did he like to eat?
What were his hobbies and interests?
Did he ever read a book or listen to music?
He brought nothing with him to Rose Cottage, and he took nothing away.
She thought bleakly that Johnny Latimer was a stranger.
She knew  only marginally more about him than she did about Bella.
And perhaps this was why Johnny had been so angry and jealous on the night of the theatre visit.
It was possible that he, too, had not troubled himself with thoughts of her real life until he had seen her in the garden with Ben.
And Ben had been a shadowy figure representing that other world; the world into which Johnny could not pass.
He must have hated Ben, she thought.
Cassie touched the hairbrushes and traced the silver J.E.L. on the backs with her finger.
She picked up the ivory-handled shaving brush which rested next to them, and felt the softness of its bristles against her face.
She opened a small round leather box to find that it contained tiny gold collar studs and several pairs of cuff links.
She had only seen Johnny dressed in what she supposed must be the nineteen forties' version of casual wear; but, of course, when he was formally attired he would have worn starched collars with his shirt, detachable and fastened with one of the studs which she now held in her hand.
Johnny's wallet lay next to the stud box, and feeling more and more like a sneak-thief, she opened it and looked inside.
The old, blue pound notes looked large and important, but not nearly as impressive as the white and over-sized fivers with which Johnny's wallet was comfortably stocked.
She knew that just one of these flimsy sheets of paper could buy for Johnny — and Bella too — a mind-bogglingly large quantity of goodies.
No wonder Bella had silk nighties and scent from Paris.
There was a pile of loose change beside the wallet, and she pushed the coins with her finger.
She had seen this money before, of course, and still had a little collection of it that she had made as a child, yet it was disconcerting to reflect that Johnny would use it as part of his everyday life.
How large and heavy the coins were, giving an air of solidity and reassuring permanence, a memory of that Empire upon which the sun had never set.
She understood why Johnny had felt saddened when he had learned of their passing, and she smiled briefly as she recalled that she had never found the courage to tell him of the passing of that Empire, too — fearing that such knowledge could have precipitated an apoplectic fit!
She picked up one of the coins to look more closely and, in doing  so, sent a ten pence piece spinning and rolling against the floorboards.
Its clatter set alarm bells ringing in her head and, heart in mouth, she bent to retrieve the coin.
Not a ten pence piece!
What did Johnny call it?…a florin? two bob?
As she was replacing it with its fellows, a thought occurred to her, and she wondered why it had taken her so long to arrive at such an obvious conclusion.
It was still not yet fully dark outside, and if she were to look out of the window, she would be able to see at once whether the outside world was part of her own world or whether it, too, was caught in this terrifying time slip.
She would recognize her own garden immediately —and the fence between her and the Rainsboroughs.
In nineteen forty, according to Johnny, a bramble sprawled along the wire mesh fence which separated Rose Cottage from the adjacent fields with their placid black and white cows.
If the world outside the window appeared to be her own dear and familiar one, then she would risk opening the door and going out.
She would make a dash for it and be in the garden before anyone had a chance to walk in on her and take her by surprise.
The thought came disappointingly too late, however, for at the moment of thinking it, she heard sounds from below; and voices; a man's and a woman's.
And one of them was Johnny's.
She glanced hastily behind her but, as in the kitchen, there was no obvious hiding place.
She decided that it would be best to stay where she was.
It was probable that Bella wouldn't bother to come there, and only Johnny was likely to discover her.
Discretion however was overridden by an enormous but incautious curiosity.
She wanted to hear what they were saying.
She wanted to see Bella.
Against her better judgement she crept onto the landing.
Taking great care where she placed her feet, she trod softly down the stairs.
She stopped part way down and crouched on one of the treads, from which vantage point she was able to peer through the rails of the bannister and see directly into the sitting room.
The voices were clearer now, and suddenly the kitchen door opened and light poured into the hall, helping to dispel the shadows thrown by its own dim and sleazy light bulb.
Cassie didn't welcome this brighter light.
Dear God!
What would she do if she were to be discovered?
A woman walked down the hall and into the sitting room, disappearing round the door towards the front of the house.
Cassie found herself looking down on her as she passed and so was not able to see her properly.
What she did see was hair the colour of rich, ruby port wine, swept up, somehow, from the forehead and hanging past her shoulders in a heavy, shining mass that curled under at the sides and bottom like a long page-boy bob.
Redheaded!
Why had she never imagined Bella as a redhead?
If she were truthful, she had never properly imagined Bella as anything, except perhaps a spiteful, over-painted tart, drenched in a cheap scent, who was beginning to put on weight and let herself go.
The woman who had just walked into the sitting room had most decidedly not put on weight; nor had she let herself go…anywhere.
The hair was what Cassie noticed most of all.
She could have stretched out her hand and touched it.
The upward sweep of the rolls at Bella's forehead were held in place by large combs pushed into the hair above the ears.
The backs of the combs glittered and sparkled as she moved her head, as did the gems in her ears.
Cassie knew of only one stone that flashed in that particularly satisfying way.
Diamonds, she thought miserably.
And good ones, too.
Cassie had little time to notice much, other than the magnificent hair and the brilliance of the gems, before the woman moved out of sight.
The little that she had seen, however, was far from reassuring.
The dress Bella was wearing was of a deep and vivid shade of blue, cladding a figure that was anything but fat.
The swing of the hips beneath the clinging fabric of the dress was provocative…almost voluptuous.
She had beautiful legs.
This was enough for Cassie to be getting on with, but soon another of her private fantasies was to be shattered.
She heard the rattle of the curtain rings as the blackouts were pulled across, and then the click of the switch on the standard lamp as Bella put on the light.
At the same time Bella called: ‘Are you coming to the party with me then, darling?’
If, until that moment, Cassie had laboured under the misconception that Bella was an ill-educated, ill-bred and mercenary little tart and that Johnny had married beneath him, as she believed the proper expression to be, then the sound of Bella's voice dispelled any such comforting illusion.
It was clipped and assured, lacking in warmth and softness, maybe, but without doubt, unmistakably sloaney.
Whatever else she may be, Bella was every bit as well-bred as Johnny.
A wave of misery swept over Cassie as she wondered if the last of her little dreams was to be shattered as cruelly as these other two; the dream in which Johnny hated and despised his wife; the one in which he planned to divorce her and marry Cassie instead.
She forgot that she had decided that she did not love Johnny and wanted him out of her life.
He had held her in his arms and told her that he loved her, and she had never doubted him.
Had all of that been simply routine chatting-up?
Had he viewed her as an exciting and unusual lay, and believed that she wouldn't let him screw her without a hard-luck, my wife-doesn't-understand-me line to spin?
She felt cheated and desolate.
The bad feelings turned to relief, and a degree of comfort, when, after a  moment's pause, she heard Johnny answer from the kitchen.
‘I didn't get you to come down here, Bella, so that I could escort you to bloody parties.
You've been here two days now, and we've still hardly discussed the divorce.
Besides, I've got to get back.
There is a bloody war on, you know.’
It wasn't so much his words which comforted Cassie, but rather the tone in which they had been said.
Cassie had heard many shades of emotion expressed by Johnny's voice, indeed it was a powerful weapon and one he knew only too well how to use to good effect, but never had she heard him use the particular tone with which he now addressed his wife.
His words came clearly to her ears, haughty, unemotional and cut by an unmistakable hostility and dislike.
‘You're becoming a terrible bore, Johnny,’ Bella said, a hint of irritation in her voice.
‘Can't you cut ‘getting back’, as you put it.
After all, darling, you're not fighting the whole damn' show single-handed, are you?
We do have an army and a navy, y'know.
Teddy Hargreaves says that all you  RAF boys think…
’ Johnny sliced through her words with icy civility.
‘I'm obliged to Teddy Hargreaves, but his opinion is of supreme indifference to me.
As he rarely lifts his head off the pillow —yours usually, I believe, my sweet — I fail to see how he's qualified to judge.’
‘Well, that's neither here nor there,’ she said impatiently.
‘I still say that you're not indispensable.
Tell them you've come out in a rash, or something.
There's a telephone at the pub.
I'll do it for you, if you like.’
‘I've thought many things about you, my dear,’ Johnny said, in the same tones of blatant dislike, ‘and most of them uncomplimentary.
But only recently have I come to think of you as stupid.
But you are, you know.
You're stupid Bella…
A bloody stupid bitch.’
Cassie nodded in approval.
As he was speaking, he began to walk from the kitchen into the sitting room.
Cassie caught her breath, putting her hand over her mouth to stop herself from crying out.
It was the first time that she had seen Johnny dressed in full uniform.
It had been mainly trousers and shirt, and the pyjama bottoms, she remembered.
In fact she had wondered before why Johnny had always worn civvies, as he termed them, on his visits to the cottage.
Except that once, of course, on the day he had walked through the garage wall.
‘It's not fair,’ she said viciously, inside her head.
‘How can he look like that?
How can he do something like this to me?’
He was hard enough to resist at the best times.
Mrs Plumptry's words came into her head, and she could hear the old lady's delighted cackle.
‘Handsome young devils they was in their uniforms.
Turned all the young girls’ heads.’
Well, me too, Mrs P. Join the club.
Johnny stood just inside the door to the sitting room.
If he had moved his head, only fractionally, and glanced up, he would have seen her there.
In one hand he held his drink.
The other hand was pushed lightly into his trouser pocket, the bottom of his jacket lifting slightly to lie across the edge of his sleeve with its three silver rings denoting his rank.
As he stood there, staring across the room at the invisible Bella, his bearing both haughty and disdainful, he looked every inch  one of the Lords of the Earth, and Cassie supposed that in his way and in his time, he was.
It gave her a buzz just to look at him.
‘You're no fun these days,’ said Bella sulkily, moving back down the room to stand facing Johnny, and fairly close to him.
‘I can't even get you mad.
You're terrible attractive when you're angry, darling.
You make the old ticker go like billy-oh.
Do you know that?’
She looked at him provocatively from under her lashes.
‘But of course you do,’ she went on.
‘You know how to make a girl really want it, don't you, my precious.
Absolutely too, too shivery for words!’
Johnny made no reply, but continued to sip his drink and regard her with the same sardonic dislike.
Now that Bella was back within her line of vision, Cassie could see her clearly and she  couldn't make up her mind whether or not she thought her beautiful.
She was like the photographs of Hollywood film stars that she had seen once in an old copy of Picturegoer.
Her skin was the colour of thick, pale cream of the kind that often accompanies that particular shade of dark red hair.
Cassie couldn't see her eyes, but she was sure that they would be almond shaped and green, to go with the sexy red hair and double-cream complexion.
The heavily plucked eyebrows and the full mouth, thickly and glossily lipsticked, she found a little  distasteful .
But there was no doubting the fact that this woman had a powerful and disturbing sexuality, which she used with an expertness that was almost professional.
In every sense of the word, she was glamorous.
She spoke again, softly, almost caressingly.
‘You've still got bags of the old S.A.,’ she said.
‘Why don't you take me to bed.
There's heaps of time.’
She moved the top part of her body forward and deliberately pushed herself against Johnny's chest.
Her breasts were full and shapely — and Johnny would never be able to hold one of them beneath his hand, Cassie thought enviously.
Bella's fingers reached down and began a slow upward movement on the inside of Johnny's thigh, the long scarlet nails making a faint scratching sound on the material of his trousers.
Without any sign of hurry, or the slightest flicker of emotion, he took hold of her arm and removed it, just as the exploring fingers were about to reach their objective.
He gave her a light push  on her breast and she staggered backwards, almost falling.
She was angry now, and her eyes narrowed spitefully.
‘You little rat,’ she said.
Oh come on , Bella, thought Cassie.
You can do better than that!
Johnny hadn't even flinched at the insult.
He had become used to much worse than that during the past few weeks.
‘Bella,’ said Johnny patiently, almost kindly, Cassie thought.
‘Let me make one thing clear.
You disgust me.
I shouldn't wish to touch you, not even with the proverbial barge pole.
If you were the last woman left alive on this bloody earth, I think I'd rather do it for myself.
At least I know where I've been.’
Cassie had to admit that when you weren't on the receiving end, Johnny had a marvellous line in invective.
He was really very good.
She felt a strong desire to applaud.
The illusion that she was a spectator, and this was the play, was making her lose touch with reality; and making her forget the enormity of her present predicament.
‘If I really were the last woman on earth,’ Bella said nastily, ‘you wouldn't be able to contain yourself.
You wouldn't notice if I grew two heads and a beard.’
They faced each other across the room, their hatred bristling and crackling between them.
Yet Bella still wanted Johnny, that much was clear.
Perhaps the divorce had been a ploy to revive her husband's fading interest; one that had backfired on her.
‘Anyway, that wasn't what you thought when we got married, as I recall,’ she snapped.
‘Even that was a disappointment.
In fact you've been one long disappointment, old bean.’
Bella stood with her hands on hips, her feet placed slightly apart.
Her voice became more strident.
‘Huh!’ she sneered.
‘A disappointment, eh?
And what do you think it was for me?
I'd got a fumbling schoolboy with no more idea of what a girl needed than the man in the moon.
I counted myself lucky if the whole show lasted longer than thirty seconds.
And you say it was a disappointment!’
For the first time, traces of a stronger emotion than dislike appeared on Johnny's face.
‘I soon learnt though didn't I,’ he said, and the dangerous note showed in his voice.
‘I soon learnt what made it all happen…what got you in the mood, eh Bella?
It wasn't love, was it, my little snake?
It wasn't tenderness and touching and soft kisses.
I was a bloody idiot to think that that had anything to do with it.
But, as you say, I was a schoolboy.’
He paused to sip his drink.
‘I soon grew up though, didn't I, my precious?
I soon became a man and learned how to do it properly…
What was expected of me.’
‘Don't pretend you didn't like it.
And you had plenty of good teachers.
I've no recollection of you confining yourself to one .
You make me sick.’
Bella spat the words at him.
Johnny's face became impassive again.
He looked very slightly bored.
‘I've only one more thing to say, Bella, and then I'd best be cutting along.
The divorce.
It's all right and tight as far as I'm concerned.
The sooner the better.’
 Bella moved out of sight once more, saying as she did so: ‘I'll find a private detective.
Sylvia knows of a good chap.
Very reliable and discreet, she says.
Let me know when you've made your arrangements.’
‘Oh, that won't be necessary,’ Johnny said.
‘I intend to divorce you .’
There was a long, long silence.
Cassie held her breath.
Then she heard Bella say disbelievingly: ‘You wouldn't.
You wouldn't dare.’
She laughed, an ugly jeering sound.
‘I'd fight you.’
Johnny said nothing.
He moved to the small table, put down his glass and searched in his pockets for his cigarettes.
He found them and lit one, languidly inhaling the smoke.
‘I'll fight you,’ she repeated.
‘Your sexual exploits will make good reading in the gutter press.’
‘And yours.
Although I doubt anyone will have the temerity to print them.’
‘What about Mumsie…and the dear old Pater?
Do you think they'll enjoy reading about the things their little boy has been up to?’
This last remark seemed to have gone home, as Johnny paled a little and a small muscle twitched at the corner of his mouth.
‘Cow!’ thought Cassie.
Suddenly Bella laughed.
‘There's someone's else, isn't there?
Yes, there is.
Our little Johnny's in love.
How wizard for you, darling.
Who is she then, Johnny?
What's her name?
You haven't been in London for months, so it must be someone from round here.
A silly, simpering village girl?
‘Oo-er!
He's ever so lovely in his uniform,’'she mocked.
She reappeared into Cassie's line of sight, and stood considering Johnny for a moment, her lip curled in contempt.
‘A common little shop-girl?
You'll have a great deal to say to each other, won't you?
But then, I don't suppose you were planning on doing too much talking, were you, sweetie?
Or what about a W.A.A.F.?
That's it, isn't it?
Those dreadful stockings and lace up shoes!
‘Oh, Squadron Leader Latimer, you're so brave.
Marry me, and make me happy ever after.’
She poured out her scorn, and with it her jealousy and frustrated rage.
Johnny remained silent for a time, and then said:
‘Shut up Bella.
Hold your tongue.
I'm not telling you who she is.
But I love her and I intend to marry her.
And she's not the kind of girl to be bothered by any of your smutty revelations…so tell away, old thing.
Tell away.’
He drew on his cigarette, and then added softly: ‘It won't be easy.
There are…there are certain difficulties.
But I shall have her, make no mistake about that.
And I think you know me well enough by now, Bella, to know that I get what I want.’
There was a seriously dangerous note in his voice now, Cassie thought, so caught up in the play that she hardly realized that she was part of the script and it was she whom Johnny was talking about.
Bella heard the note, too, because she flinched slightly and the sneer left her face.
‘My God!’ she said.
‘I need a drink.’
She swept out of the room and Cassie could hear the chink of glass from the direction of the kitchen.
While she was gone Johnny continued to smoke and to sip his drink.
Cassie was tempted to attract his attention but she resisted the temptation and contented herself with gazing at his undoubted magnificence.
Bella returned a few moments later, carrying her drink in one hand  and a lighted cigarette in the other.
‘You haven't picked someone young and sweetly innocent, have you, Johnny?’ she asked maliciously.
‘She'll be in for quite a shock on her wedding night, poor little kid.’
She flicked her fingers contemptuously against the small decoration that he wore above his breast pocket and added brutally:
‘You're not likely to get a gong for loving tenderness, are you, darling?
You'd better take care that the bruises don't show.’
It was Cassie's turn to flinch.
But she had known, she thought.
She had known for a long time now.
Johnny had moved to the far end of the room and she could no longer see him, but she could guess at the expression on his face.
Poor Johnny!
‘I told you, Bella.
I won't discuss her with you.
I'll just make the necessary arrangements for the divorce.
It'll take time, I expect, but I'll get genned up on what I've got to do.
It will be difficult to decide on the co-respondent, of course; one doesn't usually have such a rich and varied choice.
But Teddy Hargreaves will do to be getting on with.’
‘You'll never go through with it,’ said Bella, with confidence.
‘How do you think wifey number two will react when she hears about all the goings-on?
I shall lay it on rather thickly, darling.
How you corrupted a young and lovely woman…and subjected her to the most shatteringly depraved treatment.
Pretty poor show, I'd say.’
Johnny sauntered back to Cassie's end of the room, an unpleasant smile on his face, and for the first time Cassie wondered uneasily if Bella weren't chancing her luck a bit.
Might Johnny get seriously vicious, if pushed too far?
However, he merely said:
‘I should think the boot's on the other foot when it comes to corruption, dear girl.
After all, I was only a stupid, fumbling schoolboy, wasn't I ?
And in any case,’ he remarked pleasantly, ‘you're not so young, Bella.
Several years my senior, I believe.
And it's beginning to show.’
Not true, thought Cassie, fair-minded to the last.
She looks almost as good as new.
‘I'll give you about two more years, my little bunnikin; two more years of your present way of life, and your present consumption of Pink Gins, and I'd say that you'll begin to look quite raddled…quite, well,elderly , don't y'know?
You're already well past your best,’ he added contemptuously.
Bella drew her breath in sharply, almost beside herself with rage.
She swung her arm as if to hit him, but Johnny caught hold of it and pushed her hand away.
‘And that won't work, either, Bella,’ he said.
‘Not any more.
And now, if you'll excuse me, I must be getting back.
Thanks for an absolutely toppin' time, old thing!’
Johnny walked out of the room and into the kitchen.
Exit right, thought Cassie.
Furiously, Bella followed him and reappeared, almost immediately, carrying a short jacket and a handbag.
‘I'll pack my things and go first thing in the morning,’ she called back over her shoulder, her voice like razor blades.
‘Good show!’
Cassie heard Johnny drawl, from the direction of the kitchen.
‘Think about what I've said.
I'll fight you, you bastard.’
What made Bella look up as she passed the sitting room door, Cassie was never to learn.
But look up, she did.
For one fleeting second Cassie found herself looking directly into Bella's eyes.
Bella's mouth opened, but whether in surprise anger or terror, Cassie was unable to say.
For before any sound could issue from Bella's mouth, her face seemed to slip sideways and ripple like a melting wax mask.
The whole of her body appeared to distort and bend, like the image in a Hall of Fun mirror.
And then Cassie felt a vibration which started deep down in the foundations of Rose Cottage and ran vertically through its structure, up to the very roof itself.
There was a terrifying rumbling noise and the stairs shook as though a minor earthquake had passed beneath the house.
Cassie felt herself spinning out and out and down and down, into a thick and suffocating blackness.