

THE MOUNTAIN
Tick, tick, tick, tick.
Tock.
Tick, tick, tick, tick.
Tock.
It sounded like a clock gently misfiring, time entering a delirium.
This might have been appropriate, the Colonel reflected, but it wasn't the case.
It was important to stick to what you knew, right to the end, especially at the end.
He knew it wasn't the case.
It wasn't time, it wasn't even a distant clock.
Colonel Fergusson lay in the cold square bedroom of his cold square house three miles outside Dublin and listened to the clicking overhead.
It was one o'clock in the morning on a windless November night of 1837.
His daughter Amanda sat at his bedside in stiff, pout-lipped profile, reading some piece of religious mumbo-jumbo.
At her elbow the candle burned with a steady flame, which was more than that perspiring fool of a doctor with letters after his name had been able to say about the Colonel's heart.
It was a provocation, that's what it was, thought the Colonel.
Here he was on his deathbed, preparing for oblivion, and she sits over there reading Parson Noah's latest pamphlet.
Actively disagreeing right to the end.
Colonel Fergusson had long since given up trying to understand the business.
How could the child he loved most have failed to inherit either his instincts or the opinions he had with such difficulty acquired?
It was vexing.
If he hadn't adored her he would have treated her as a credulous imbecile.
And still, despite it all, despite this living, fleshly rebuttal, he believed in the world's ability to progress, in man's ascent, in the defeat of superstition.
It was all finally very puzzling.
Tick, tick, tick, tick.
Tock.
The clicking continued overhead.
Four, five loud ticks, a silence, then a fainter echo.
The Colonel  could tell that the noise was distracting Amanda from her pamphlet, though she gave no outward sign.
It was simply that he could judge such things after living so closely with her for however many years.
He could tell she hadn't really got her nose in the Reverend Abraham.
And it was her fault that he could tell, that he knew her so thoroughly.
He'd told her to go off and get married when that lieutenant whose name he could never recall had asked her.
She'd argued about that, too.
She'd said she loved her father more than her uniformed claimant.
He'd replied that this wasn't a sound reason, and anyway he'd only die on her.
She'd wept and said he wasn't to talk like that.
But he'd been right, hadn't he?
He was bound to be, wasn't he?
Amanda Fergusson now rested her book on her lap and looked at the ceiling in alarm.
The beetle was a harbinger.
Everyone knew that its sound portended the death of someone in the house within the year.
It was the wisdom of ages.
She looked across to see if her father was still awake.
Colonel Fergusson had his eyes closed and was breathing out through his nose in long smooth puffs like a bellows.
But Amanda knew him well enough to suspect that he might be bluffing.
It would be just like him.
He had always played tricks on her.
Like that time he'd taken her to Dublin, one blustery day in February of 1821.
Amanda was seventeen, and everywhere carried with her a sketching book as she now carried her religious pamphlets.
She had lately been excited by reports of the exhibition at Bullock's Egyptian Hall in Piccadilly, London, of Monsieur Jerricault's Great Picture, 24 feet long by 18 feet high, representing the Surviving Crew of the Medusa French Frigate on the Raft.
Admission 1s, Description 6d, and 50,000 spectators had paid to see this new masterpiece of foreign art, shown alongside such permanent displays as Mr Bullock's magnificent collection of 25,000 fossils and his Pantherion of stuffed wild beasts.
Now the canvas had come to Dublin, where it was put on view at the Rotunda: Admission 1s 8d, Description 5d.
Amanda had been chosen above her five siblings by reason of her precocity with water-colour — at least, this was Colonel  Fergusson's official excuse for indulging his natural preference once again .
Except that they did not go, as promised, to the Rotunda, but went instead to a rival attraction advertised in Saunder's News-Letter & Daily Advertiser : one, indeed, which ensured that Monsieur Jerricault's Great Picture did not triumph in Dublin as it had done in London.
Colonel Fergusson took his daughter to the Pavilion, where they witnessed Messrs Marshall's Marine Peristrephic Panorama of the Wreck of the Medusa French Frigate and the Fatal Raft: Admission front seats 1s 8d, back seats 10d, children in the front seats at half price.
‘The Pavilion is always rendered perfectly comfortable by patent stoves’.
Whereas the Rotunda displayed a mere twenty-four feet by eighteen of stationary pigment, here they were offered some 10,000 square feet of mobile canvas.
Before their eyes an immense picture, or series of pictures, gradually unwound: not just one scene, but the entire history of the shipwreck passed before them.
Episode succeeded episode, while coloured lights played upon the unreeling fabric, and an orchestra emphasized the drama of events.
The audience was constantly moved to applause by the spectacle, and Colonel Fergusson would nudge his daughter heavily at some particularly felicitous aspect of the display.
In the sixth scene those poor French wretches on the raft were represented in very much the same posture as that in which they had been first delineated by Monsieur Jerricault.
But how much grander, Colonel Fergusson observed, to picture their tragic plight with movement and coloured lights, accompanied by music which he identified quite unnecessarily to his daughter as ‘Vive Henrico!’
‘That is the way forward,’ remarked the Colonel with enthusiasm as they left the Pavilion.
‘Those painters will have to look to their brushes.’
Amanda did not reply, but the following week she returned to Dublin with one of her five siblings and this time visited the Rotunda.
There she greatly admired Monsieur Jerricault's canvas, which though static contained for her much motion and lighting and, in its own way, music — indeed, in some fashion it  contained more of these things than did the vulgar Panorama.
Upon her return she told her father as much.
Colonel Fergusson nodded indulgently at such pertness and obstinacy, but held his peace.
On the 5th of March, however, he jauntily indicated to his favourite daughter a fresh advertisement in Saunder's New's-Letter announcing that Mr Bullock had reduced — had clearly been obliged to reduce, the Colonel interpreted — the price of admission into his immobile spectacle to a mere ten pence.
At the end of that month Colonel Fergusson imparted the news that the Frenchy picture at the Rotunda had closed for lack of spectators, whereas Messrs Marshall's Peristrephic Panorama was still being shown three times a day to audiences rendered perfectly comfortable by patent stoves.
‘It is the way forward,’ the Colonel repeated in June of that year, after attending by himself the farewell performance at the Pavilion.
‘Mere novelty is no proof of value,’ his daughter had replied, sounding a little too smug for one so young.
Tick, tick, tick, tick.
Tock.
Colonel Fergusson's faked sleep became more choleric.
God damn it, he was thinking, this dying business is difficult.
They just won't let you get on with it, not on your own terms, anyway.
You have to die on other people's terms, and that's a bore, love them as you might.
He opened his eyes and prepared to correct his daughter for the several hundredth occasion in their lives together.
‘It's love,’ he said suddenly.
‘That's all it is.’
Amanda's gaze was surprised from the ceiling, and she looked across with brimming eyes.
‘It's the love-call of xestobium rufo-villosum , for God's sake, girl.
Simple as that.
Put one of the little fellows in a box and tap on the table with a pencil and he behaves in exactly the same way.
Thinks you're a female and butts his head against the box trying to get to you.
Speaking of which, why didn't you marry that lieutenant when I told you to?
Sheer damn insubordination.’
He reached across and took her hand.
But his daughter didn't reply, her eyes continued to overflow, the ticking carried on overhead, and Colonel Fergusson  was duly buried before the year's end.
On this prediction the doctor and the death-watch beetle had managed to agree.
Amanda's grief for her father was compounded by anxiety over his ontological status.
Did his obstinate refusal to acknowledge the divine plan — and his careless use of the Almighty's name even on his deathbed — mean that he was now consigned to outer darkness, to some chilly region unheated by patent stoves?
Miss Fergusson knew the Lord to be just, yet merciful.
Those who accepted his commandments were to be judged in punctilious accordance with the law, whereas the ignorant savage in the darkened jungle who could not possibly have known the light would be treated with gentleness and given a second chance.
But did the category of ignorant savage extend to occupants of cold square houses outside Dublin?
Was the pain which unbelievers bore all their lives at the prospect of oblivion to be extended into further pain inflicted for having denied the Lord?
Miss Fergusson feared that it might be.
How could her father have failed to recognize God, His eternal design, and its essential goodness?
The proof of this plan and of this benevolence lay manifest in Nature, which was provided by God for Man's enjoyment.
This did not mean, as some had assumed, that Man might recklessly pillage Nature for what he sought; indeed, Nature was deserving of the more respect because it was a divine creation.
But God had created both Man and Nature, placing Man into that Nature as a hand is placed into a glove.
Amanda frequently reflected upon the fruits of the field, how various they were, and yet how perfectly each was adapted for Man's enjoyment.
For instance, trees bearing edible fruits were made easy to climb, being much lower than forest trees.
Fruits which were soft when ripe, such as the apricot, the fig or the mulberry, which might be bruised by falling, presented themselves at a small distance from the ground; whereas hard fruit, which ran no risk of sustaining an injury by a fall, like the cocoa, the walnut or the chestnut, presented themselves at a considerable height.
Some fruit — like the cherry and the plum — were moulded for the mouth; others — the apple and the pear — for the hand; others still, like the  melon, were made larger, so as to be divided among the family circle.
Yet others, like the pumpkin, were made of a size to be shared amongst the whole neighbourhood, and many of these larger fruits were marked on their outer rind with vertical divisions, so as to make apportionment the easier.
Where Amanda discovered in the world divine intent, benevolent order and rigorous justice, her father had seen only chaos, hazard and malice.
Yet they were both examining the same world.
In the course of their many arguments, Amanda once asked him to consider the domestic condition of the Fergusson family, who lived together with strong bonds of affection, and declare whether they too were the consequence of chaos, hazard and malice.
Colonel Fergusson, who could not quite bear to inform his daughter that the human family sprang from the same impulse which animated a beetle striking its head against the walls of its box, replied that in his view the Fergussons were a happy accident.
His daughter replied that there were too many happy accidents in the world for them to be accidental.
In part, Amanda reflected, it was a matter of how you perceived things.
Her father saw in a vulgar simulacrum of coloured lights and trilling music a true portrayal of a great maritime tragedy; whereas for her the reality was best conveyed by a simple, static canvas adorned with pigment.
Mainly, however, it was a question of faith.
A few weeks after their visit to the Peristrephic Panorama, her father was rowing her slowly across the serpentine lake on the neighbouring estate of Lord F-.
Some connection having been made in his mind, he began to rebuke her for a belief in the reality of Noah's Ark, which he referred to sarcastically as the Myth of the Deluge.
Amanda was not discountenanced by the accusation.
She replied by asking her father if he believed in the reality of Mr Bullock's Pantherion of stuffed wild beasts at his Egyptian Hall in Piccadilly, London.
The Colonel, taken aback, responded that naturally he did; whereupon his daughter exhibited a humorous astonishment.
She believed in the reality of something ordained by God and described in a book of Holy Scripture read and  remembered for thousands of years; whereas he believed in the reality of something described in the pages of Saunder's News-Letter & daily Advertiser , which people were unlikely to remember the very next morning.
Which of them, she insisted upon knowing, with a continuing and unnecessary mockery in her eye, was the more credulous?
It was in the autumn of 1839, after long meditation, that Amanda Fergusson proposed to Miss Logan the expedition to Arghuri.
Miss Logan was a vigorous and seemingly practical woman some ten years older than Miss Fergusson, and had been fond of the Colonel without any zephyr of indiscretion arising.
More to the point, she had travelled to Italy a few years previously while in the employment of Sir Charles B.
‘I regret that I am unacquainted with the place,’ replied Miss Logan when first interviewed.
‘Is it far beyond Naples?’
‘It is on the lower slopes of Mount Ararat,’ Miss Fergusson responded.
‘The name Arghuri is derived from two Armenian words signifying he planted the vine .
It is where Noah returned to his agricultural labours after the Flood.
An ancient vine stock planted by the Patriarch's own hands still flourishes.’
Miss Logan concealed her astonishment at this curious lecture, but felt bound to enquire further.
‘And why might we be going there?’
‘To intercede for the soul of my father.
There is a monastery upon the mountain.’
‘It is a long way to go.’
‘I believe it to be appropriate.’
‘I see.’
Miss Logan was pensive at first, but then brightened.
‘And shall we drink the wine there?’
She was remembering her travels in Italy.
‘It is forbidden,’ replied Miss Fergusson.
‘Tradition forbids it.’
‘Tradition?’
‘Heaven, then.
Heaven has forbidden it, in memory of the fault into which the grapes betrayed the Patriarch.’
Miss Logan, who would complaisantly allow the Bible to be read to her but was not diligent in turning the pages herself, exhibited  a momentary confusion.
‘Drunkenness,’ explained Miss Fergusson.
‘Noah's drunkenness.’
‘Of course.’
‘The monks of Arghuri are permitted to eat the grapes, but not to ferment them.’
‘I see.’
‘There is also an ancient willow tree, sprung from one of the planks of Noah's Ark, which grows there.’
‘I see.’
And thus it was agreed.
They would depart in the spring, to avoid the malarial menace of the later seasons.
Each would require a portable bedstead, an air mattress and a pillow; they would take some Oxley's essence of ginger, some good opium, quinine and  Seidlitz powders; a portable inkstand, a match-box and supply of German tinder; umbrellas against the sun and flannel belts to ward off cramps of the stomach during the night.
After some discussion they decided not to travel with either a portable bath or a patent coffee-machine.
But they counted as necessary a pair of iron-pointed walking sticks, a clasp-knife, stout hunting-whips to beat off the legions of dogs they were prepared to encounter, and a policeman's small lantern, since they had been warned that Turkish paper lanterns were useless in a hurricane.
They took mackintoshes and heavy greatcoats, anticipating that Lady Mary Wortley Montagu's dream of perennial sunshine was unlikely to be fulfilled for lesser voyagers.
Miss Logan understood gunpowder to be the most acceptable offering for the Turkish peasant, and writing-paper for the superior classes.
A common box-compass, she had further been advised, would afford pleasure by directing the Mussulman to the point of his prayers; but Miss Fergusson was disinclined to assist the heathen in his false adorations.
Finally, the ladies packed two small glass bottles, which they intended to fill with grape juice crushed from the fruit of Noah's vineyard.
They travelled by Government steam-packet from Falmouth to Marseilles, thereafter entrusting themselves to the French conveyances.
In early May they were received by the British Ambassador in Constantinople.
As Miss Fergusson explained  the extent and purpose of their journey, the diplomat studied her: a dark-haired woman in early middle age, with protuberant black eyes and rather full, reddish cheeks which pushed her lips forward into a pout.
Yet she was in no wise a flirt: her natural expression appeared to mix prudishness with certainty, a combination which left the Ambassador indifferent.
He grasped most of what she was saying without ever quite bestowing upon her his full attention.
‘Ah,’ he said at the finish, ‘there was a rumour a few years ago that some Russo had managed to get to the top of the mountain.’
‘Parrot,’ replied Miss Fergusson without a smile.
‘Not a Russo, I think.
Dr Friedrich Parrot.
Professor in the University of Dorpat.’
The Ambassador gave a diagonal nod of the head, as if it were slightly impertinent to know more than he did about local matters.
‘It seems to me appropriate and just,’ went on Miss Fergusson, ‘that the first traveller to ascend the mountain upon which the Ark rested should bear the name of an animal.
No doubt part of the Lord's great design for us all.’
‘No doubt,’ replied the Ambassador, looking away to Miss Logan for some clue as to the personality of her employer.
‘No doubt.’
They remained a week in the Ottoman capital, by no means long enough for Miss Logan to become accustomed to the coarse stares she received at the table d'hôte .
Then the two ladies gave themselves up to the Favaid-i-Osmaniyeh, a Turkish company running steamers to Trebizond.
The accommodation was crowded and to Miss Logan's mind far filthier than anything she had previously encountered.
She ventured upon deck the first morning, and was approached by not one but three potential beaux, each with his hair curled and exuding a powerful odour of bergamot.
Thereafter Miss Logan, despite having been engaged for her experience, confined herself to the cabin.
Miss Fergusson professed not to notice such inconveniences and to be positively intrigued by the scrum of third-class passengers  on board; she would occasionally return with an observation or a question designed to stir Miss Logan from her dismal state of mind.
Why, her employer wished to know, were the Turkish women all accommodated on the left-hand side of the quarter-deck?
Was there some purpose, be it of society or of religion, behind such positioning?
Miss Logan was unable to furnish a reply.
Now that they had left Naples way behind them she felt increasingly less secure.
At the faintest whiff of bergamot she shuddered.
When Miss Logan had permitted herself to become engaged for the voyage to Asiatic Turkey, she had under-estimated Miss Fergusson's pertinacity.
The absconding muleteer, the swindling innkeeper and the devious customs-house officer were all treated to the same display of unthwartable will.
Miss Logan lost count of the times their luggage was detained, or they were told that a buyurulda or special permit would be necessary in addition to the tezkare they had already procured; but Miss Fergusson, with assistance from a dragoman whose own brief display of independent thought had been snuffed out early on, harried, demanded and succeeded.
She was tirelessly willing to discuss things in the manner of the country; to sit down with a landlord, for example, and answer such questions as whether England was smaller than London, and which of the two belonged to France, and how much larger the Turkish navy was than those of England, France and Russia put together.
Miss Logan had further imagined that their journey, while devotional in its final purpose, might afford pleasant opportunities for sketching, the activity which had first established a bond between employer and companion.
But antiquities held no charm for Amanda Fergusson; she had no desire to examine heathen temples to Augustus, or half-surviving columns supposedly erected in honour of the apostate Emperor Julian.
At least she evinced an interest in the natural landscape.
As they rode inland from Trebizond, hunting-whips at the ready against the expected dog-packs, they viewed mohair goats on hillsides of dwarf oak, dull yellow vines, lush apple orchards; they heard  grasshoppers whose ringing note seemed sharper and more insistent than that of their British cousins; and they witnessed sunsets of the rarest purple and rose.
There were fields of corn, opium and cotton; bursts of rhododendron and yellow azalea; red-legged partridge, hoopoes and blue crows.
In the Zirgana mountains large red deer softly returned their gaze from an apprehensive distance.
At Erzerum Miss Logan prevailed upon her employer to visit the Christian church.
The impulse proved at first a happy one, for in the graveyard Miss Fergusson discovered tombstones and crosses whose Celtic air recalled those of her native Ireland; a smile of approval crossed her dutiful features.
But this unexpected lenity was short-lived.
Leaving the church, the two ladies noticed a young peasant woman placing a votive offering in a crevice by the main door.
It proved to be a human tooth, no doubt her own.
The crevice, upon further examination, was found to be stuffed full of yellowing incisors and weathered molars.
Miss Fergusson expressed herself forcibly on the subject of popular superstition and the responsibility of the clergy.
Those who preached the word of God, she maintained, should be judged according to the word of God, and punished the more severely if found wanting.
They crossed into Russia, engaging at the frontier post a new guide, a large and bearded Kurd who claimed familiarity with the requirements of foreigners.
Miss Fergusson addressed him in what seemed to Miss Logan a mixture of Russo and Turk.
The days when Miss Logan's fluent Italian had been of use to them were long past; having begun the journey as guide and interpreter, she felt she had dwindled into a mere hanger-on, with little greater status than the discarded dragoman or the newly-appointed Kurd.
As the three of them proceeded into Caucasia, they disturbed flocks of pelican, whose earthbound ungainliness was miraculously transfigured by flight.
Miss Fergusson's irritation over the incident in Erzerum began to calm.
Passing the eastern spur of Mount Alageuz, they gazed intently as the broad bulk of Great Ararat slowly revealed itself.
The summit was hidden, enfolded in a circle of white cloud which glittered brilliantly in the sun.
‘It has a halo,’ exclaimed Miss Logan.
‘Like an angel.’
‘You are correct,’ Miss Fergusson replied, with a little nod.
‘People like my father would not agree, of course.
They would tell us that such comparisons are all hot air.
Literally.’
She gave a pursed smile and Miss Logan, with an enquiring glance, invited her to continue.
‘They would explain that the halo of cloud is a perfectly natural phenomenon.
During the night and for several hours after dawn the summit remains clearly visible, but as the plain warms up in the morning sun, the hot air rises and becomes vapour at a given height.
At the day's end, when everything cools down again, the halo disappears.
It comes as no surprise to…science,’ she said with a disapproving emphasis upon the final word.
‘It is a magic mountain,’ commented Miss Logan.
Her employer corrected her.
‘It is a holy mountain.’
She gave an impatient sigh.
‘There always appear to be two explanations of everything.
That is why we have been given free will, in order that we may choose the correct one.
My father failed to comprehend that his explanations were based as much upon faith as mine.
Faith in nothing.
It would be all vapour and clouds and rising air to him.
But who created the vapour, who created the clouds?
Who ensured that Noah's mountain of all mountains would be blessed each day with a halo of cloud?’
‘Exactly,’ said Miss Logan, not entirely in agreement.
That day they encountered an Armenian priest who informed them that the mountain towards which they were heading had never been ascended and, moreover, never would be.
When Miss Fergusson politely suggested the name of Dr Parrot, the priest assured her that she was mistaken.
Perhaps she was confusing Massis — as he referred to Great Ararat — with the volcano far to the south which the Turks called Sippan Dagh.
The Ark of Noah, before it found its final resting-place, had struck the summit of Sippan Dagh and removed its cap, thereby exposing the inner fires of the earth.
That mountain, he understood, was accessible to man, but not Massis.
On this  subject, if on nothing else, Christian and Mussulman agreed.
And furthermore, went on the priest, was it not so proven by Holy Scripture?
The mountain before them was the birthplace of mankind; and he referred the ladies, while excusing himself with an ingratiating laugh for mentioning an indelicate subject, to the authority of Our Saviour's words to Nicodemus, where it is stated that a man cannot enter a second time into his mother's womb and be born once more.
As they were parting, the priest drew from his pocket a small black amulet, worn smooth over many centuries.
It was, he claimed, a piece of bitumen which assuredly had once formed part of the hull of Noah's Ark, and had great value in the averting of mischief.
Since the ladies had expressed such interest in the mountain of Massis, then perhaps…
Miss Fergusson courteously responded to the suggested transaction by pointing out that if indeed it was impossible to ascend the mountain, then the likelihood of their believing that the amulet could be a piece of bitumen from the Patriarch's vessel was not very great.
The Armenian, however, saw no incompatibility between his two propositions.
Perhaps a bird had carried it down, as the dove had borne the olive branch.
Or it might have been brought by an angel.
Did not tradition relate how Saint James had three times attempted to ascend Massis, and on the third occasion been told by an angel that it was forbidden, but that the angel had given him a plank of wood from the Ark, and there where he had received it was founded the monastery of Saint James?
They parted without a bargain being struck.
Miss Logan, embarrassed by Our Lord's words to Nicodemus, was instead thinking about bitumen: was that not the material used by artists to blacken the shadows in their paintings?
Miss Fergusson, on the other hand, had merely been put into a temper: first by the attempt to thrust some foolish meaning on to the scriptural verse; and secondly by the priest's brazen commercial behaviour.
She had yet to be impressed by the Eastern clergy, who not only countenanced belief in the miraculous powers of human teeth, but actually traded in bogus religious relics.
It  was monstrous.
They should be punished for it.
No doubt they would be.
Miss Logan examined her employer apprehensively.
The next day they crossed a relentless plain of reeds and coarse grass, relieved only by colonies of bustard and the black tents of Kurdish tribesmen.
They stopped for the night in a small village a day's ride from the foot of the mountain.
After a meal of cream cheese and salted salmon trout from the Gokchai, the two women stood in the dark air scented with apricot and looked towards the mountain of Noah.
The range before them contained two separate crescendi: Great Ararat, a bulky, broad-shouldered mass like a buttressed dome, and Little Ararat, some four thousand feet lower, an elegant cone with smooth and regular sides.
Miss Fergusson did not think it fanciful to perceive in the comparative design and height of the two Ararats a bodying-forth of that primal divide in the human race between the two sexes.
She did not communicate this reflection to Miss Logan, who had so far proved dismally unreceptive to the transcendental.
as if to confirm her pedestrian turn of mind, Miss Logan at this point revealed that it had been a matter of curiosity to her since childhood how the Ark had succeeded in resting upon the top of a mountain.
Had the peak risen up from the waters and punctured the keel, thereby skewering the vessel in place?
For if not, how otherwise had the Ark avoided a precipitous descent as the waters had retreated?
‘Others before you have had similar reflections,’ replied Miss Fergusson with distinct lack of indulgence.
‘Marco Polo insisted that the mountain was made in the shape of a cube, which would certainly have explained the matter.
My father would probably have agreed with him, had he given the subject his attention.
But we can see that this is not the case.
Those who have ascended to the peak of Great Ararat inform us that close below the summit there is a gently sloping valley.
It is’, she specified, as if Miss Logan could not otherwise understand the matter, ‘approximately half the size of Green Park in London.
As a place of disembarkation it would be both natural and safe.’
‘So the Ark did not land on the very summit?’
‘Scripture makes no such claim.’
As they approached Arghuri, which lay at a height of more than six thousand feet above sea level, the temperature of the air became more genial.
Three miles below the village they came upon the first of the hallowed plantations of Father Noah.
The vines had just finished flowering, and tiny dark green grapes hung intermittently among the foliage.
A peasant put down his rough hoe and conducted the unexpected party to the village elder, who received their offering of gunpowder with formal thanks yet little surprise.
Miss Logan was sometimes irked by such civility.
The elder was behaving as if parties of white women were constantly presenting him with gunpowder.
Miss Fergusson, however, remained her dutiful and efficient self.
It was arranged that later in the afternoon they would be conducted to the Monastery of Saint James; they would be lodged that night in the village, and would return again to the church the following day for their devotions.
The monastery lay beside the Arghuri rivulet in the lower part of a great chasm which extended almost to the very summit of the mountain.
It consisted of a cruciform church whose stone was hewn from hardened lava.
Various small dwellings pressed against its sides like the farrow of a sow.
As the party entered the courtyard a middle-aged priest stood waiting for them, the cupola of Saint James rising behind him.
He was dressed in a plain gown of blue serge, with a pointed Capuchin cowl; his beard was long, its blackness intertwined with grey; on his feet he wore woollen Persian socks and common slippers.
One hand bore the rosary; the other was folded across his chest in a gesture of welcome.
Something urged Miss Logan to kneel before the pastor of Noah's church; but the presence and certain disapproval of Miss Fergusson, who dismissed as ‘Romish’ a large category of religious behaviour, prevented her.
The courtyard spoke less of a monastery than a farm.
Sacks of corn were piled loosely against a wall; three sheep had wandered in from the nearby pasture and had not been expelled; there was a rank smell from underfoot.
Smiling, the Archimandrite invited them to his cell, which proved to be one of the tiny  dwellings built hard against the outer wall of the church.
As he was conducting them across the dozen or so yards, the Archimandrite appeared to touch Miss Fergusson's elbow by way of courteous but strictly unnecessary guidance.
The monk's cell had stout clay walls and a plaster roof supported by a sturdy central prop.
There was a rough icon of some unidentifiable saint hanging above a straw pallet; the courtyard odours continued here.
To Miss Logan it seemed admirably simple, to Miss Fergusson squalid.
The behaviour of the Archimandrite also provoked differing interpretations: Miss Logan discerned an amiable candour where Miss Fergusson saw only sly obsequiousness.
It seemed to Miss Logan that her employer had perhaps exhausted her stock of civility on the long journey to Mount Ararat, and had now retreated into a stony carelessness.
When the Archimandrite suggested that the two ladies might like to lodge at the monastery that night, she was briefly dismissive; when he pressed his offer of hospitality further, she was brusque.
The Archimandrite continued to smile, and his mood still appeared to Miss Logan a gracious one.
At this point a servant appeared bearing a rough tray on which were set three horn beakers.
Water from the Arghuri brook, thought Miss Logan; or perhaps that sourish milk which they had already received many times on their travels from obliging shepherds.
But the servant returned with a wineskin, and at a signal poured a liquor from it into the horn vessels.
The Archimandrite raised his beaker towards the women, and drank fully; whereupon his servant poured for him again.
Miss Fergusson sipped.
Then she put questions to the Archimandrite which provoked a severe apprehension in Miss Logan.
This feeling was exacerbated by waiting for the guide to translate.
‘This is wine?’
‘Indeed.’
The priest smiled, as if encouraging the women to indulge in this local taste which was still clearly unknown in their distant land.
‘It is made from grapes?’
‘You are correct, lady.’
‘Tell me, the grapes from which this wine has been made, where are they grown?’
The Archimandrite spread both hands and circled to indicate the neighbouring countryside.
‘And the vines from which the grapes were plucked, who first planted them?’
‘Our great ancestor and forefather, parent of us all, Noah.’
Miss Fergusson summed up the exchange so far, needless as this seemed to her companion.
‘You are serving us the fermented grapes from Noah's vines?’
‘It is my honour, Madam.’
He smiled again.
He seemed to expect if not especial thanks, at least some expression of wonder.
Instead, Miss Fergusson stood up, took the untasted wine from Miss Logan, and returned both beakers to the servant.
Without a word she left the Archimandrite's cell, swept from the courtyard in a manner which made three sheep instinctively follow her, and started down the mountainside.
Miss Logan made indeterminate gestures to the priest, then set off in pursuit of her employer.
They traversed lush apricot orchards without comment; they ignored a shepherd holding out a bowl of milk; wordlessly they returned to the village where Miss Fergusson, her calculated civility now restored to her, asked the elder if lodgings could be supplied to them without delay.
The old man proposed his own house, the largest in Arghuri.
Miss Fergusson thanked him, and offered in return a small parcel of sugar, which was gravely accepted.
That evening in their room a low table no bigger than a music stool was set with food.
They were given losh , the thin local bread, cold mutton cut in pieces, hard-boiled eggs taken from their shells and halved, and the fruit of the arbutus.
They were served no wine, either because such was the custom of the house, or because intelligence of their visit to the monastery had reached the elder.
Instead, they drank sheep's milk once more.
‘It is a blasphemy,’ said Miss Fergusson eventually.
‘A blasphemy.
On Noah's mountain.
He lives like a farmer.
He  invites women to stay with him.
He ferments the grape of the Patriarch.
It is a blasphemy.’
Miss Logan knew better than to reply, let alone plead the cause of the amiable Archimandrite.
She recalled to herself that the circumstances of their visit had deprived them of an opportunity to examine the ancient willow tree sprung from a plank of Noah's Ark.
‘We shall ascend the mountain,’ said Miss Fergusson.
‘But we do not know how to do such a thing.’
‘We shall ascend the mountain.
Sin must be purged with water.
The sin of the world was purged by the waters of the flood.
It is a double blasphemy that the monk commits.
We shall fill our bottles with snow from the holy mountain.
The pure juice of Noah's vine we came in search of has been rendered impure.
We shall bring back purging water instead.
That is the only way to salvage the journey.’
Miss Logan nodded, in startled acquiescence rather than agreement.
They set off from the village of Arghuri on the morning of June 20th, in the year of Our Lord 1840, accompanied only by their Kurdish guide.
The elder regretfully explained the villagers' belief that the mountain was sacred, and that no-one should venture upon it higher than the Monastery of Saint James.
He himself shared these beliefs.
He did not try to dissuade the party from their ascent, but he did insist on loaning Miss Fergusson a pistol.
This she displayed at her belt, though she had neither the intention nor the resource to use it.
Miss Logan carried a small bag of lemons, which had also been advised.
The ladies rode with white umbrellas raised against the morning sun.
Looking upwards, Miss Fergusson observed the halo of cloud beginning to form itself around the summit of the mountain.
A daily miracle, she noted to herself.
For several hours they appeared to make little progress; they were traversing a barren region of fine sand and yellowish clay, broken only by a few stunted, prickly bushes.
Miss Logan observed several butterflies and numerous lizards, but was  secretly disappointed that so few of the creatures which had descended from the Ark were manifesting themselves.
She had, she admitted to herself, foolishly pictured the slopes of the mountain as a kind of zoological garden.
But the animals had been told to go forth and multiply.
They must have obeyed.
They dipped into rocky ravines, none of which contained the smallest stream.
It seemed an arid mountain, as dry as a chalk down in Sussex.
Then, a little higher, it surprised them, suddenly unveiling green pasture and rose bushes with delicate pink blossom.
They rounded a spur and came upon a small encampment — three or four rude tents, with matting walls and black roofs made from goats' hair.
Miss Logan was slightly alarmed by the sudden presence of this group of nomads, whose flock could be seen lower down the slope, but Miss Fergusson directed her horse straight towards them.
A ferocious-looking man whose tangled hair resembled the roof of his own tent held up to them a rough bowl.
It contained sourish milk mixed with water, and Miss Logan drank somewhat nervously.
They nodded, smiled, and continued on their way.
‘Did you judge that a natural gesture of hospitality?’ asked Amanda Fergusson suddenly.
Miss Logan considered this strange question.
‘Yes,’ she responded, for they had previously come across many similar instances of such behaviour.
‘My father would have said it was merely an animal bribe to turn away the wrath of strangers.
It would be an article of faith with him to believe that.
He would have said those nomads were just like beetles.’
‘Like beetles?’
‘My father was interested in beetles.
He told me that if you put one in a box and tapped on the lid, it would knock back, thinking you were another beetle offering itself in marriage.’
‘I do not consider that they were behaving like beetles,’ said Miss Logan, while carefully indicating by her tone that this was only her private opinion and in no way derogatory of Colonel Fergusson.
‘Nor do I.’
Miss Logan did not fully understand her employer's condition of mind.
Having come this great distance to intercede for her father, she now seemed instead to be constantly arguing with his shade.
At the first steep slope of Great Ararat they tethered their horses to a thorn tree and hobbled them.
They were to proceed from here on foot.
Miss Fergusson, umbrella aloft and pistol at her belt led the way with the certain tread of the righteous; Miss Logan, dangling her bag of lemons, struggled to keep up as the terrain grew more precipitous; their Kurdish guide, weighed down with baggage, brought up the rear.
They would be obliged to spend two nights on the mountain if they were to reach the snowline.
They had climbed hard all afternoon, and shortly before seven o'clock, with the sky softening towards apricot, were resting on a rocky outcrop.
At first they did not identify the noise, or what it signified.
They were aware of a low rumble, a granite growl, though whence it came, whether from above or below them, was not evident.
Then the ground beneath their feet began to vibrate, and there came a noise like thunder — but internal, suppressed, terrifying thunder, the sound of a primeval, subterranean god raging against his confinement.
Miss Logan glanced fearfully at her employer.
Amanda Fergusson was directing her field-glasses at the Monastery of Saint James, and her face bore an expression of prim pleasure which shocked her companion.
Miss Logan was near-sighted, and consequently it was from Miss Fergusson's features rather than from personal observation that she grasped what was happening.
When the field-glasses were finally passed to her she was able to confirm that every roof and every wall of the monastery church and of the little community they had left only that morning had been thrown down by the violent commotion.
Miss Fergusson got to her feet and briskly began to continue the ascent.
‘Are we not to help the survivors?’ asked Miss Logan in perplexity.
‘There will not be any,’ replied her employer.
Adding in a  sharper tone, ‘It was a punishment they should have foreseen.’
‘A punishment?’
‘For disobedience.
For fermenting the fruit of Noah's vine.
For building a church and then blaspheming within it.’
Miss Logan looked at Amanda Fergusson cautiously, unsure how to express the view that to her humble and ignorant mind the punishment seemed excessive.
‘This is a holy mountain,’ said Miss Fergusson coldly.
‘The mountain upon which Noah's Ark rested.
A small sin is a great sin in this place.’
Miss Logan did not break her alarmed silence; she merely followed her employer who was pushing on ahead up a gully of rock.
At the top Miss Fergusson waited and then turned to her.
‘You expect God to be like the Lord Chief Justice in London.
You expect a whole speech of explanation.
The God of this mountain is the God who saved only Noah and his family out of the whole world.
Remember that.’
Miss Logan grew seriously perturbed at these observations.
Was Miss Fergusson comparing the earthquake which had thrown down the village of Arghuri to the great Flood itself?
Was she likening the salvation of two white women and a Kurd to that of Noah's family?
When preparing for their expedition they had been told that the magnetic compass was useless on such mountains as these, for the rocks were loaded with iron.
It seemed evident that you could lose your bearing here in other ways as well.
What was she doing on Noah's mountain alongside a pilgrim turned fanatic and a bearded peasant with whom she could not communicate, while the rock below them exploded like the gunpowder they had brought to ingratiate themselves with the local chieftains?
Everything urged them to go down, yet they were continuing upwards.
The Kurd, whom she had expected to flee at the first shaking of the ground, was staying with them.
Perhaps he intended to slit their throats while they slept.
They rested that night and continued climbing as soon as the sun rose.
Their white umbrellas stood out vividly against the harsh terrain of the mountain.
Here was only bare rock and  gravel; nothing grew but lichen; all was utterly dry.
They might have been upon the surface of the moon.
They climbed until they reached the first pocket of snow, which lay in a long, dark slash on the mountain's side.
They were three thousand feet from the peak, just below a cornice of ice which encircled Great Ararat.
It was here that the rising air from the plain turned to vapour and formed the miraculous halo.
The sky above them was beginning to turn a brightish green, scarcely blue at all any more.
Miss Logan felt very cold.
The two bottles were filled with snow and entrusted to the guide.
Later, Miss Logan would try picturing to herself her employer's curious serenity of face and confidence of carriage as they started down the mountain; she exhibited contentment bordering on smugness.
They had travelled no more than a few hundred yards — the Kurd leading, Miss Logan bringing up the rear — and were crossing a patch of rough scree, a descent more tiring than dangerous, when Miss Fergusson fell.
She pitched forwards and sideways, sliding a dozen yards down the slope before the Kurd was able to arrest her progress.
Miss Logan halted, initially in surprise, for it appeared that Miss Fergusson had lost her footing on a little stretch of solid rock which should have afforded no peril.
She was smiling when they reached her, apparently unconcerned by the blood.
Miss Logan would not allow the Kurd to bandage Miss Fergusson; she accepted pieces of his shirt for the purpose, but then insisted that he turn his back.
After half an hour or so, the two of them restored their employer to her feet, and they set off again, Miss Fergusson leaning on the guide's arm with a strange nonchalance, as if she were being conducted round a cathedral or a zoological garden.
They made only a short distance in the remainder of that day, for Miss Fergusson demanded frequent rests.
Miss Logan calculated how far away their horses were tethered, and was not encouraged.
Towards nightfall they came upon a pair of small caves, which Miss Fergusson compared to the pressing of God's thumb into the mountainside.
The Kurd entered the first of them cautiously, sniffing for wild beasts, then beckoned them  in.
Miss Logan prepared the bedding and administered some opium; the guide, after making gestures incomprehensible to her, vanished.
He returned an hour later with a few stunted bushes he had managed to prise from the rock.
He made a fire; Miss Fergusson lay down, took some water, and slept.
When she awoke she pronounced herself feeble, and said her bones were stiff in her skin.
She had neither strength nor hunger.
They waited through that day in the cave, trusting that Miss Fergusson's condition would improve by the next morning.
Miss Logan began to reflect upon the changes in her employer since they had arrived on the mountain.
Their purpose in coming here had been to intercede for the soul of Colonel Fergusson.
Yet so far they had not prayed; Amanda Fergusson appeared still to be arguing with her father; while the God she had taken to proclaiming did not sound the kind of God who would lightly forgive the Colonel's obstinate sinning against the light.
Had Miss Fergusson realized, or at least decided, that her father's soul was lost, cast out, condemned?
Is that what had happened?
As evening fell, Miss Fergusson told her companion to leave the cave while she spoke to the guide.
This seemed unnecessary, for Miss Logan had not a word of Turk or Russo or Kurdish or whatever mixture it was the other two communicated in; but she did as she was told.
She stood outside looking up at a creamy moon, fearful lest some bat might fly into her hair.
‘You are to move me so that I may see the moon.’
They lifted her gently, as if she were an old lady, and placed her nearer the mouth of the cave.
‘You are to set off at first light tomorrow.
Whether you return or not is immaterial.’
Miss Logan nodded.
She did not argue because she knew she would not win; she did not weep because she knew she would be rebuked.
‘I shall remember the Holy Scripture and wait for God's will.
On this mountain God's will is quite manifest.
I cannot imagine a happier place from which to be taken unto Him.’
Miss Logan and the Kurd took turns watching over her that night.
The moon, now almost full, illuminated the floor of the cave where Amanda Fergusson lay.
‘My father would have  wanted music with it,’ she said at one point.
Miss Logan smiled an agreement which irritated her employer.
‘You cannot possibly know to what I am referring.’
Miss Logan immediately agreed a second time.
There was a silence.
The dry cold air was scented with woodsmoke.
‘He thought pictures should move.
With lights and music and patent stoves.
He thought that was the future.’
Miss Logan, little better informed than before, considered it safest not to respond.
‘But it was not the future.
Look at the moon.
The moon does not require music and coloured lights.’
Miss Logan did win one small, final argument — by forceful gesture rather than words — and Miss Fergusson was left with both bottles of molten snow.
She also accepted a couple of lemons.
At daybreak Miss Logan, now wearing the pistol at her belt, set off down the mountain with the guide.
She felt resolved in spirit but uncertain how best to proceed.
She imagined, for instance, that if the inhabitants of Arghuri had been unwilling to venture on to the mountain before the earthquake, any survivors would scarcely be ready to do so now.
She might be compelled to seek help in a more distant village.
The horses were gone.
The Kurd made a long noise in his throat which she presumed to indicate disappointment.
The tree to which they had been tethered was still there, but the horses had disappeared.
Miss Logan imagined them panicking as the ground raged beneath them, tearing themselves free and violently bearing away their hobbles as they fled from the mountain.
Later, as she trudged behind the Kurd towards the village of Arghuri, Miss Logan envisaged an alternative explanation: the horses being stolen by those hospitable nomads encountered that first morning.
The Monastery of Saint James had been quite destroyed, and they passed it without halting.
As they neared the ruins of Arghuri, the Kurd indicated that Miss Logan was to wait for him while he investigated the village.
Twenty minutes later he returned, shaking his head in a universal gesture.
As they skirted the wrecked houses, Miss Logan could not help observing to herself that the earthquake had killed all the inhabitants  while leaving intact those vines which — if Miss Fergusson should be believed — were the very source of their temptation and their punishment.
It took them two days before they reached human habitation.
In a hill village to the south-west, the guide delivered her to the house of an Armenian priest who spoke passable French.
She explained the need to raise an immediate rescue party and return to Great Ararat.
The priest replied that no doubt the Kurd was organizing the relief at that very moment.
Something in his demeanour indicated that perhaps he did not quite believe her story of having climbed most of the way up Massis, which peasants and holy men alike knew to be inaccessible.
She waited all day for the Kurd to return, but he failed to do so; and when she made enquiries the next morning she was told that he had left the town within minutes of conducting her to the priest's house.
Miss Logan was angry and distressed at such Judas-like behaviour, and expressed herself forcibly on the subject to the Armenian priest, who nodded and offered to say prayers for Miss Fergusson.
Miss Logan accepted, while wondering about the efficacy of mere unadorned prayer in a region where people yielded up their teeth as votive offerings.
Only several weeks later, as she lay stifling in her cabin on a filthy steamer from Trebizond, did she reflect that the Kurd, in the whole time he had been with them, had executed Miss Fergusson's commands with punctiliousness and honour; further, that she had no means of knowing what had passed between the two of them that last night in the cave.
Perhaps Miss Fergusson had instructed the guide to lead her companion to a place of safety, and then desert.
Miss Logan also reflected upon Miss Fergusson's fall.
They had been crossing a scree; there had been many loose stones, and footing was difficult, but surely at that point they had been traversing a gentler slope, and her employer had actually been standing on a flattish stretch of granite when she had fallen.
It was a magnetic mountain where a compass did not work, and it was easy to lose your bearing.
No, that was not it.
The question she was avoiding was whether Miss Fergusson might not have  been the instrument of her own precipitation, in order to achieve or confirm whatever it was she wanted to achieve or confirm.
Miss Fergusson had maintained, when they first stood before the haloed mountain, that there were two explanations of everything, that each required the exercise of faith, and that we had been given free will in order that we might choose between them.
This dilemma was to preoccupy Miss Logan for years to come.
THREE SIMPLE STORIES
I
I WAS A NORMAL eighteen-year-old: shuttered, self-conscious, untravelled and sneering; violently educated, socially crass, emotionally blurting.
At least, all the other eighteen-year-olds I knew were like this, so I presumed it was normal.
I was waiting to go up to university and had just got a job as a prep-school master.
The fiction I had read predicted gaudy roles for me — as private tutor at the old stone mansion where peacocks roost in the yew hedges and chalky bones are discovered in the sealed-up priest's hole; as gullible ingénu at an eccentric private establishment on the Welsh borders stuffed with robust drunkards and covert lechers.
There would be careless girls and  unimpressible butlers.
You know the social moral of the story: the meritocrat becomes infected with snobbery.
Reality proved more local.
I taught for a term at a crammer half a mile from my home, and instead of passing lazy days with charming children whose actively hatted mothers would smile, condescend and yet flirt during some endless pollen-spattered sports day, I spent my time with the son of the local bookmaker (he lent me his bike: I crashed it) and the daughter of the suburb's solicitor.
Yet half a mile is a fine distance to the untravelled; and at eighteen the smallest gradations of middle-class society thrill and daunt.
The school came with a family attached; the family lived in a house.
Everything here was different and therefore better: the stiff-backed brass taps, the cut of the banister, the genuine oil paintings (we had a genuine oil painting too, but not as genuine as that), the library which somehow was more than just a roomful of books, the furniture old enough to have woodworm in it, and the casual acceptance  of inherited things.
In the hall hung the amputated blade of an oar: inscribed in gold lettering on its black scoop were the names of a college eight, each of whom had been awarded such a trophy in sun-ridden pre-war days; the item seemed impossibly exotic.
There was an air-raid shelter in the front garden which at home would have provoked embarrassment and been subjected to vigorous camouflage with hardy perennials; here it evoked no more than amused pride.
The family matched the house.
The father was a spy; the mother had been an actress; the son wore tab collars and double-breasted waistcoats.
Need I say more?
Had I read enough French novels at the time, I would have known what to expect; and of course it was here that I fell in love for the first time.
But that is another story, or at least another chapter.
It was the grandfather who had founded the school, and he still lived on the premises.
Although in his mid-eighties, he had only recently been written out of the curriculum by some crafty predecessor of mine.
He was occasionally to be seen wandering through the house in his cream linen jacket, college tie — Gonville and Caius, you were meant to know — and flat cap (in our house a flat cap would have been common; here it was posh and probably indicated that you used to go beagling).
He was searching for ‘his class’, which he never found, and talked about ‘the laboratory’, which was no more than a back kitchen with a bunsen burner and running water.
On warm afternoons he would sit outside the front door with a Roberts portable radio (the all-wood construction, I learned, gave better sound quality than the plastic or metal bodies of the transistors I admired), listening to the cricket commentary.
His name was Lawrence Beesley.
Apart from my great-grandfather, he was the oldest man I had ever met.
His age and status induced in me the normal mixture of deference, fear and cheek.
His decrepitude — the historically stained clothes, that dangle of egg-white slobber from the chin — set off in me a general adolescent anger against life and its inevitable valedictory condition; a feeling which smoothly translated itself into hatred of the person undergoing  that condition.
His daughter fed him on tins of baby food, which again confirmed for me the sour joke of existence and the particular contemptibility of this old man.
I used to tell him invented cricket scores.
‘84 for 2, Mr Beesley,’ I would shout as I passed him snoozing in the sun beneath the gangling wisteria.
‘West Indies 790 for 3 declared,’ I would insist as I delivered him his child's dinner on a tray.
I would tell him scores from matches that were not being played, scores from matches that could never have been played, fanciful scores, impossible scores.
He would nod in reply, and I would creep away, sniggering at my tiny cruelty, pleased that I was not quite such a nice young man as he might have imagined.
Fifty-two years before I met him, Lawrence Beesley had been a second-class passenger on the maiden voyage of the Titanic .
He was thirty-five, had recently given up his job as science master at Dulwich College, and was crossing the Atlantic — according to subsequent family legend, at least— in half-hearted pursuit of an American heiress.
When the Titanic struck its iceberg, Beesley escaped in the underpopulated Lifeboat 13, and was picked up by the Carpathia .
Among the souvenirs this octogenarian survivor kept in his room was a blanket embroidered with the name of the rescuing ship.
The more sceptical members of his family maintained that the blanket had acquired its lettering at a date considerably later than 1912.
They also amused themselves with the speculation that their ancestor had escaped from the Titanic in women's clothing.
Was it not the case that Beesley's name had been omitted from the initial list of those saved, and actually included among the drowned in the final casualty bulletin?
Surely this was solid confirmation of the hypothesis that the false corpse turned mystery survivor had taken to petticoats and a high voice until safely landed in New York, where he surreptitiously discarded his drag in a subway toilet?
I supported this theory with pleasure, because it confirmed my view of the world.
In the autumn of that year I was to wedge into the mirror of my college bedsitting-room a piece of paper bearing the following lines: ‘Life's a cheat and all things shew  it/I thought so once and now I know it’.
Beesley's case offered corroboration: the hero of the Titanic was a blanket-forger and transvestite imposter; how just and appropriate, therefore, that I fed him false cricket scores.
And on a wider scale, theorists maintained that life amounted to the survival of the fittest: did not the Beesley hypothesis prove that the ‘fittest’ were merely the most cunning?
The heroes, the solid men of yeoman virtue, the good breeding stock, even the captain (especially the captain!)— they all went down nobly with the ship; whereas the cowards, the panickers, the deceivers found reasons for skulking in a lifeboat.
Was this not deft proof of how the human gene-pool was constantly deteriorating, how bad blood drove out good?
Lawrence Beesley made no mention of female dress in his book The Loss of the Titanic .
Installed at a Boston residential club by the American publishers Houghton Mifflin, he wrote the account in six weeks; it came out less than three months after the sinking it describes, and has been reprinted at intervals ever since.
It made Beesley one of the best-known survivors of the disaster, and for fifty years — right up to the time I met him — he was regularly consulted by maritime historians, film researchers, journalists, souvenir hunters, bores, conspiracy theorists and vexatious litigants.
When other ships were sunk by icebergs he would be telephoned by newsmen eager for him to imagine the fate of the victims.
Forty or so years after his escape he was engaged as a consultant on the film A Night to Remember , made at Pinewood.
Much of the movie was shot after dark, with a half-size replica of the vessel poised to sink into a sea of ruckled black velvet.
Beesley watched the action with his daughter on several successive evenings, and what follows is based upon the account she gave to me.
Beesley was — not surprisingly — intrigued by the reborn and once-again-teetering Titanic .
In particular, he was keen to be among the extras who despairingly crowded the rail as the ship went down — keen, you could say, to undergo in fiction an alternative version of history.
The film's director was equally determined that this consultant who lacked the necessary  card from the actors' union should not appear on celluloid.
Beesley, adept in any emergency, counterfeited the pass required to let him board the facsimile Titanic , dressed himself in period costume (can echoes prove the truth of the thing being echoed?) and installed himself among the extras.
The film lights were turned on and the crowd briefed about their imminent deaths in the ruckled black velvet.
Right at the last minute, as the cameras were due to roll, the director spotted that Beesley had managed to insinuate himself to the ship's rail; picking up his megaphone, he instructed the amateur imposter kindly to disembark.
And so, for the second time in his life, Lawrence Beesley found himself leaving the Titanic just before it was due to go down.
Being a violently-educated eighteen-year-old, I was familiar with Marx's elaboration of Hegel: history repeats itself, the first time as tragedy, the second time as farce.
But I had yet to come across an illustration of this process.
Years later I have still to discover a better one.
II
WHAT WAS JONAH doing inside the whale in the first place?
It's a fishy story, as you might expect.
It all began when God instructed Jonah to go and preach against Nineveh, a place which, despite God's substantial record of annihilating wicked cities, was still — obstinately, unaccountably — a wicked city.
Jonah, disliking the task for unexplained reasons which might have had something to do with a fear of being stoned to death by the partying Ninevites, ran away.
At Joppa he embarked on a boat to the farthest end of the known world: Tarshish, in Spain.
He failed to understand, of course, that the Lord knew exactly where he was, and what's more had operative control over the winds and waters of the  Eastern Mediterranean.
When a storm of rare violence blew up the mariners, being superstitious folk, cast lots to determine which of those on board was the cause of the evil, and the short straw, broken domino or queen of spades was drawn by Jonah.
He was promptly pitched overboard and just as promptly swallowed by a great fish or whale which the Lord had directed through the waters for this especial purpose.
Inside the whale, for three days and three nights, Jonah prayed to the Lord and swore his future obedience so convincingly that God ordered the fish to vomit up the penitent.
Not surprisingly, the next time the Almighty posted him to Nineveh, Jonah did as he was told.
He went and denounced the wicked city, saying that like all other wicked cities of the Eastern Mediterranean it was about to be annihilated.
Whereupon the partying Ninevites, just like Jonah inside the whale, repented; whereupon God decided after all to spare the city; whereupon Jonah became incredibly irritated, which was only normal in one who'd been put to a lot of trouble to bring the message of destruction, only for the Lord, despite a well-known, indeed historic taste for wrecking cities, to turn round and change his mind.
as if this wasn't enough, God, tireless to prove himself top dog, now pulled a fancy parable on his minion.
First he made a gourd spring up to protect Jonah from the sun (by ‘gourd’ we are to understand something like the castor-oil plant or Palma Christi , with its rapid growth and all-sheltering leaves); then, with no more than a wave of the silk handkerchief, he sent a maggot to destroy the said gourd, leaving Jonah painfully exposed to the heat.
God's explanation of this little piece of street theatre ran as follows: you didn't punish the gourd when it failed you, did you; and in the same way I'm not going to punish Nineveh.
It's not much of a story, is it?
As in most of the Old Testament, there's a crippling lack of free will around — or even the illusion of free will.
God holds all the cards and wins all the tricks.
The only uncertainty is how the Lord is going to play it this time: start with the two of trumps and lead up to the ace, start with the ace and run down to the two, or mix them around.
And since you never can tell with paranoid schizophrenics, this element does give the narrative some drive.
But what do we make of that gourd business?
It's not very convincing as a logical argument: anyone can see there's a world of difference between a castor-oil plant and a city of 120,000 people.
Unless, of course, this is the whole point, and the God of the Eastern Mediterranean values his creation no higher than vegetable matter.
If we examine God not as protagonist and moral bully but as author of this story, we have to mark him down for plot, motivation, suspense and characterisation.
Yet in his routine and fairly repellent morality there is one sensational stroke of melodrama — the business with the whale.
Technically, the cetacean side of things isn't at all well handled: the beast is evidently as much of a pawn as Jonah; its providential appearance just as the sailors are tossing Jonah overboard smacks far too heavily of a deus ex machina ; and the great fish is casually dismissed from the story the moment its narrative function has been fulfilled.
Even the gourd comes off better than the poor whale, who is no more than a floating prison where Jonah spends three days purging his contempt of court.
God finger-flips the blubbery jail hither and thither like a war-game admiral nudging his fleet across maps of the sea.
And yet, despite all this, the whale steals it.
We forget the allegorical point of the story (Babylon engulfing disobedient Israel), we don't much care whether or not Nineveh was saved, or what happened to the regurgitated penitent; but we remember the whale.
Giotto shows him chomping on Jonah's thighs, with only the knees and the flailing feet to go.
Brueghel, Michelangelo, Correggio, Rubens and Dali emblazoned the tale.
In Gouda there is a stained-glass window of Jonah leaving the fish's mouth like a foot-passenger stepping from the jaws of a car-ferry.
Jonah (portrayed as everything from muscular faun to bearded elder) has an iconography whose pedigree and variety would make Noah envious.
What is it about Jonah's escapade that transfixes us?
Is it the moment of swallowing, the oscillation between danger and salvation, when we imagine ourselves miraculously rescued  from the peril of drowning only to be cast into the peril of being eaten alive?
Is it the three days and three nights in the whale's belly, that image of enclosure, smothering, live burial?
(Once, taking the night train from London to Paris, I found myself in the locked sleeping compartment of a locked coach in a locked hold beneath the waterline on a cross-channel ferry; I didn't think of Jonah at the time, but perhaps my panic was related to his.
And is a more textbook fear involved: does the image of pulsing blubber set off some terror of being transported back to the womb?)
Or are we most struck by the third element in the story, the deliverance, the proof that there is salvation and justice after our purgatorial incarceration?
Like Jonah, we are all storm-tossed by the seas of life, undergo apparent death and certain burial, but then attain a blinding resurrection as the car-ferry doors swing open and we are delivered back into the light and into a recognition of God's love.
Is this why the myth swims through our memory?
Perhaps: or perhaps not at all.
When the film Jaws came out, there were many attempts to explain its hold over the audience.
Did it draw on some primal metaphor, some archetypal dream known the world over?
Did it exploit the clashing elements of land and water, feeding on our anxiety at the concept of amphibianism?
Did it relate in some way to the fact that millions of years ago our gill-bearing ancestors crawled out of the pond, and ever since we have been paralysed by the thought of a return to it?
The English novelist Kingsley Amis, considering the film and its possible interpretations, came to the following conclusion: ‘It's about being bloody frightened of being eaten by a bloody great shark.’
At bottom, this is the grip which the story of Jonah and the whale still has on us: fear of being devoured by a large creature, fear of being chomped, slurped, gargled, washed down with a draught of salt water and a school of anchovies as a chaser; fear of being blinded, darkened, suffocated, drowned, hooded with blubber; fear of sensory deprivation which we know drives people mad; fear of being dead.
Our response is as vivid as that of every other death-dreading generation since the tale was first  invented by some sadistic mariner keen to terrify the new cabin-boy.
Of course, we recognize that the story can't have any basis in truth.
We are sophisticated people, and we can tell the difference between reality and myth.
A whale might swallow a man, yes, we can allow that as plausible; but once inside he could not possibly live.
For a start he would drown, or if he didn't drown he would suffocate; and most probably he would have died of a heart attack when he felt the great mouth gape for him.
No, it is impossible for a man to survive in a whale's belly.
We know how to distinguish myth from reality.
We are sophisticated people.
On 25th August 1891, James Bartley, a thirty-five-year-old sailor on the Star of the East , was swallowed by a sperm whale off the Falkland Islands:
I remember very well from the moment that I fell from the boat and felt my feet strike some soft substance.
I looked up and saw a big-ribbed canopy of light pink and white descending over me, and the next moment I felt myself drawn downward, feet first, and I realised that I was being swallowed by a whale.
I was drawn lower and lower; a wall of flesh surrounded me and hemmed me in on every side, yet the pressure was not painful and the flesh easily gave way like soft india-rubber before my slightest movement.
Suddenly I found myself in a sack much larger than my body, but completely dark.
I felt about me; and my hands came in contact with several fishes, some of which seemed to be still alive, for they squirmed in my fingers, and slipped back to my feet.
Soon I felt a great pain in my head and my breathing became more and more difficult.
At the same time I felt a terrible heat; it seemed to consume me, growing hotter and hotter.
My eyes became coals of fire in my head, and I believed every moment that I was condemned to perish in the belly of a whale.
It tormented me beyond all endurance, while at the same time the awful silence of the terrible prison weighed me down.
I tried to rise, to move my arms and legs, to cry out.
All action was now impossible, but  my brain seemed abnormally clear; and with a full comprehension of my awful fate, I finally lost all consciousness.
The whale was later killed and taken alongside the Star of the East , whose crewmen, unaware of the proximity of their lost comrade, spent the rest of the day and part of the night flensing their capture.
The next morning they attached lifting tackle to the stomach and hauled it on deck.
There seemed to be a light, spasmodic movement from within.
The sailors, expecting a large fish or perhaps a shark, slit open the paunch and discovered James Bartley: unconscious, his face, neck and hands bleached white by the gastric fluids, but still alive.
For two weeks he was in a  delirious condition, then began to recover.
In due course he was returned to normal health, except that the acids had removed all the pigmentation from his exposed skin.
He remained an albino until the day he died.
M. de Parville, scientific editor of the Journal des Débats , examined the case in 1914 and concluded that the account given by captain and crew was ‘worthy of belief’.
Modern scientists tell us that Bartley could not have survived more than a few minutes in the whale's belly, let alone the half-day or more it took the unwitting sailors on the mother ship to release this modern Jonah.
But do we believe modern scientists, none of whom has actually been inside a whale's belly?
Surely we can make compromise with professional scepticism by suggesting air pockets (do whales suffer from wind like everyone else?) or stomach juices whose efficacy was hindered by some cetacean ailment.
And if you are a scientist, or infected by gastric doubt, look at it this way.
Many people (including me) believe the myth of Bartley, just as millions have believed the myth of Jonah.
You may not credit it, but what has happened is that the story has been retold, adjusted, updated; it has shuffled nearer.
For Jonah now read Bartley.
And one day there will be a case, one which even you will believe, of a sailor lost in a whale's mouth and recovered from its belly; maybe not after half a day, perhaps after only half an hour.
And then people will believe the myth of  Bartley, which was begotten by the myth of Jonah.
For the point is this: not that myth refers us back to some original event which has been fancifully transcribed as it passed through the collective memory; but that it refers us forward to something that will happen, that must happen.
Myth will become reality, however sceptical we might be.
III
AT 8 PM ON Saturday, 13th May 1939, the liner St Louis left its home port of Hamburg.
It was a cruise ship, and most of the 937 passengers booked on its transatlantic voyage carried visas confirming that they were ‘tourists, travelling for pleasure’.
The words were an evasion, however, as was the purpose of their voyage.
All but a few of them were Jews, refugees from a Nazi state which intended to dispossess, transport and exterminate them.
Many, indeed, had already been dispossessed, since emigrants from Germany were permitted to take with them no more than a nominal ten Reichsmarks.
This enforced poverty made them easier targets for propaganda: if they left with no more than their allowance, they could be portrayed as shabby Untermenschen scuttling away like rats; if they managed to outwit the system, then they were economic criminals fleeing with stolen goods.
All this was normal.
The St Louis was flying the swastika flag, which was normal; its crew included half-a-dozen Gestapo agents, which was also normal.
The shipping line had instructed the captain to lay in cheaper cuts of meat for this voyage, to remove luxury goods from the shops and free postcards from the public rooms; but the captain largely circumvented such orders, decreeing that this journey should resemble other cruises by the St Louis and be, as far as possible, normal.
So when the Jews arrived on board from a mainland where they had been despised, systematically  humiliated and imprisoned, they discovered that although this ship was legally still part of Germany, flew the swastika and had large portraits of Hitler in its public rooms, the Germans with whom they had dealings were courteous, attentive and even obedient.
This was abnormal.
None of these Jews — half of whom were women and children — had any intention of revisiting Germany in the near future.
Nevertheless, in accordance with the regulations of the shipping company, they had all been obliged to buy return tickets.
This payment, they were told, was designed to cover ‘unforeseen eventualities’.
When the refugees landed in Havana, they would be given by the Hamburg-Amerika line a receipt for the unused part of the fare.
The money itself had been lodged in a special account in Germany: if ever they returned there, they could collect it.
Even Jews who had been released from concentration camps on strict condition that they left the Fatherland immediately were obliged to pay for the round trip.
Along with their tickets the refugees had bought landing permits from the Cuban director of immigration, who had given a personal guarantee that they would face no difficulties entering his country.
It was he who had classed them as ‘tourists, travelling for pleasure’; and in the course of the voyage some passengers, particularly the younger ones, were able to make the remarkable transition from despised Untermensch to pleasure-seeking tourist.
Perhaps their escape from Germany felt as miraculous as that of Jonah from the whale.
Every day there was food, drink, and dancing.
Despite a warning to crew members from the Gestapo cell about contravention of the Law for the Protection of German Blood and Honour, sexual activity continued as normal on a cruise.
Towards the end of the Atlantic crossing, the traditional costume ball took place.
The band played Glenn Miller; Jews appeared as pirates, sailors and Hawaiian dancers.
Some high-spirited girls came as harem women, with Arab dress made from bedsheets — a transformation which struck the more orthodox on board as unseemly.
On Saturday 27th May the St Louis anchored in Havana Harbour.
At 4 am the klaxon for reveille sounded, and half an  hour later the breakfast gong.
Small boats came out to the liner, some bearing vendors of coconuts and bananas, others containing friends and relatives who shouted up names to the rail.
The ship was flying a quarantine flag, which was normal.
The captain had to certify to the Port of Havana medical officer that no-one on board was ‘an idiot, or insane, or suffering from a loathsome or contagious disease’.
When this had been done, immigration officers began to process the passengers, examining their papers and indicating whereabouts on the pier to expect their luggage.
The first fifty refugees gathered at the top of the ladder, waiting for the boat to take them ashore.
Immigration, like emigration, is a process in which money is no less important than principles or laws, and often sounder than either of them.
Money reassures the host country — or, in the case of Cuba, the transit country — that the new arrivals will not be a charge on the state.
Money also serves to bribe the officials who have to take this decision.
The Cuban director of immigration had made a great deal of money from previous boatloads of Jews; the President of Cuba had not made enough money from them.
The President had therefore issued a decree on 6th May revoking the validity of tourist visas when the true purpose of travel was immigration.
Did this decree apply to those on board the St Louis or not?
The ship had sailed from Hamburg after the law had been promulgated; on the other hand, the landing permits had been issued earlier.
It was a question on which much argument and money could be spent.
The number of the presidential decree was 937, which the superstitious might have noticed was also the number of passengers on board when the St Louis left Europe.
A delay developed.
Nineteen Cubans and Spaniards were allowed to disembark, plus three passengers with authentic visas; the remaining 900 or so Jews waited for news of the negotiations which involved, variously, the Cuban President, his director of immigration, the shipping line, the local relief committee, the ship's captain and a lawyer flown in from the New York headquarters of the Joint Distribution Committee.
These talks lasted several days.
Factors to be considered were  money, pride, political ambition and Cuban public opinion.
The captain of the St Louis , while distrustful of both local politicians and his own shipping line, was convinced at least of one thing: that if Cuba proved inaccessible, the United States, to which most of his passengers had the right of eventual entry, would surely accept them earlier than promised.
Some of the marooned passengers were less confident, and became unnerved by the uncertainties, the delay, the heat.
They had spent so long reaching a place of safety, and were now so near.
Friends and relatives continued to circle the liner in small boats; a fox terrier, sent on ahead from Germany, was rowed out each day and held up towards the rail and its distant owners.
A passengers' committee had been formed, to whom the shipping company gave free cabling facilities; appeals for intercession were despatched to influential people, including the wife of the Cuban president.
It was during this time that two passengers attempted suicide, one with a syringe and tranquillizers, another by slashing his wrists and jumping into the sea; both survived.
Thereafter, to prevent further suicide attempts, there were security patrols at night; the lifeboats were always ready, and the ship was lit up by floodlights.
These measures reminded some Jews of the concentration camps they had recently left.
The St Louis was not meant to leave Havana empty after dropping its 937 emigrants.
Some 250 passengers were booked on the return trip to Hamburg via Lisbon.
One suggestion was that 250 of the Jews could at least be disembarked to make room for those on shore.
But how would you choose the 250 who were to be allowed off the Ark?
Who would separate the clean from the unclean?
Was it to be done by casting lots?
The predicament of the St Louis was not a disregarded, local issue.
The voyage was being logged by the German, British and American press.
Der Stürmer commented that if the Jews chose to take up their return passages to Germany, they should be accommodated at Dachau and Buchenwald.
Meanwhile, in Havana harbour, American reporters managed to get on board what they nicknamed, perhaps too easily, ‘the ship that shamed the world’.
Such publicity does not necessarily help refugees.
If  the shame belongs to the whole world, then why should one particular country — which had already accepted many Jewish refugees — be so frequently expected to bear it?
The world, apparently, did not feel its shame so strongly that it moved its hand to its wallet.
The Cuban government accordingly voted to exclude the immigrants and ordered the St Louis to leave the island's territorial waters.
This did not mean, the President added, that he had closed the door on negotiations; merely that he would not consider further offers until the ship had left harbour.
How much are refugees?
It depends how desperate they are, how rich their patrons, how greedy their hosts.
In the world of entry permits and panic it is always a seller's market.
Prices are arbitrary, speculative, evanescent.
The lawyer from the Joint Distribution Committee put forward an opening offer of $50,000 for the safe landing of the Jews, and was told that the sum might usefully be trebled.
But if trebled, why not trebled again?
The director of immigration — who had already received $150 a head for the landing permits which had not been honoured — suggested to the shipping line a fee of $250,000 to help get decree number 937 rescinded.
A purported intermediary of the President seemed to think that the Jews could be landed for $1,000,000.
In the end, the Cuban government was to fix on a bond of $500 for each Jew.
This price had a certain logic, being the amount of surety which each official immigrant into the country had to post.
So the 907 passengers on board, who had already paid their outward and return fares, who had bought their permits and then been reduced to an official ten Deutschmarks each, would cost $453,500.
As the liner started its engines, a group of women charged the accommodation ladder; they were repelled by Cuban police with pistols.
During its six days in Havana harbour the St Louis had become a tourist attraction, and its departure was watched by an estimated crowd of 100,000.
The captain had been given permission by his superiors in Hamburg to sail for any port which would accept his passengers.
At first he steamed idly in ever-widening circles, waiting to be recalled to Havana; then  headed north for Miami.
When the ship reached the American coast it was greeted by a US coastguard cutter.
But this apparent welcome was a rebuff: the cutter was there to see that the St Louis did not enter territorial waters.
The State Department had already decided that if the Jews were turned down by Cuba, they would not be granted entry into the United States.
Money was a less direct factor here: high unemployment and reliable xenophobia were sufficient justifications.
The Dominican Republic offered to accept the refugees for the standardized market price of $500 a head; but this merely duplicated the Cuban tariff.
Venezuela, Ecuador, Chile, Colombia, Paraguay and Argentina were all approached; each declined to bear the world's shame single-handed.
In Miami the immigration inspector announced that the St Louis would not be allowed to dock in any US port.
The liner, denied entry to the whole American continent, continued steaming northwards.
Those on board were aware that they were approaching the point at which it would have to swing east and head inevitably back to Europe.
Then, at 4.50 on the afternoon of Sunday, 4th June, a news flash was picked up.
The President of Cuba had apparently given permission for the Jews to be landed on the Isle of Pines, a former penal colony.
The captain turned the St Louis round and headed south again.
Passengers brought their luggage up on deck.
That evening, over dinner, the spirits of the gala evening returned.
The next morning, three hours' sailing away from the Isle of Pines, the ship received a cable: permission to disembark had not yet been confirmed.
The passenger committee, who throughout the crisis had been sending telegrams to prominent Americans asking them to intercede, could think of no one else to contact.
Someone suggested the Mayor of St Louis, Missouri, thinking that the consonance of names might perhaps evoke sympathy.
A cable was duly despatched.
The Cuban President had asked for a $500 surety per refugee, plus a subsidiary guarantee to cover food and lodging during the period of transit on the Isle of Pines.
The American lawyer had offered (according to the Cuban government) a total of  $443,000, but further stipulated that this sum was to cover not just the refugees on the St Louis but also 150 Jews on two other ships.
The Cuban government found itself unable to accept this counter-proposal and withdrew its own offer.
The lawyer for the Joint Committee responded by agreeing in full to the original Cuban demand.
The government in return regretted that its offer had already been terminated and could not now be revived.
The St Louis turned round and headed north for a second time.
As the ship began its return voyage to Europe, the British and French governments were informally sounded out to see if their countries might take the Jews.
The British answer was that they would prefer to view the present difficulty in the wider context of the general European refugee situation, but that they might be prepared to consider possible subsequent entry of the Jews to Britain after their return to Germany.
There had been unconfirmed or impracticable offers from the President of Honduras, from an American philanthropist, even from a quarantine station in the Panama Canal Zone; the ship steamed on.
The passenger committee addressed its appeals to political and religious leaders throughout Europe; though its messages now had to be shorter, since the shipping line had withdrawn free cabling facilities.
One suggestion made at this time was that the strongest swimmers among the Jews should jump overboard at intervals, thus forcing the St Louis to stop and turn round.
This would slow its progress towards Europe and allow more time for negotiations.
The idea was not taken up.
German radio announced that since no country would agree to accept the boat-load of Jews, the Fatherland would be obliged to take them back and support them.
It was not difficult to guess where they might be supported.
What's more, if the St Louis was forced to unload its cargo of degenerates and criminals back in Hamburg, this would prove that the world's supposed concern was mere hypocrisy.
Nobody wanted the shabby Jews, and nobody therefore had any right to criticize whatever welcome the Fatherland might extend to the filthy parasites on their return.
It was at this time that a group of younger Jews attempted to  hijack the ship.
They invaded the bridge, but were dissuaded from further action by the captain.
For his part, he conceived a plan of setting fire to the St Louis off Beachy Head, which would compel the rescuing nation to take his passengers in.
This desperate scheme might even have been tried.
Finally, when many had given up hope and the liner was nearing Europe, the Belgian government announced that it would admit 200 of the passengers.
In the days that followed, Holland agreed to take 194, Britain 350, and France 250.
After a voyage of 10,000 miles, the St Louis docked at Antwerp, 300 miles from its port of departure.
Relief workers from the four countries involved had already met to decide the distribution of the Jews.
Most of those on board possessed the right of eventual entry into the United States, and had therefore been ascribed a number on the US quota list.
It was observed that the relief workers competed for passengers with low numbers, since these refugees would leave their countries of transit the soonest.
In Antwerp a pro-Nazi youth organization had distributed handbills bearing the slogan: ‘We too want to help the Jews.
If they call at our offices each will receive gratis a length of rope and a long nail.’
The passengers were disembarked.
Those admitted to Belgium were put on a train whose doors were locked and windows nailed shut; they were told that such measures were necessary for their own protection.
Those admitted to Holland were immediately transferred to a camp surrounded by barbed wire and guard dogs.
On Wednesday, 21st June the British contingent from the St Louis docked at Southampton.
They were able to reflect that their wanderings at sea had lasted precisely forty days and forty nights.
On 1st September the Second World War began, and the passengers from the St Louis shared in the fate of European Jewry.
Their chances rose or fell depending upon the country to which they had been allotted.
Estimates of how many survived vary.
UPSTREAM!
Postcard
c/o The Jungle
Darling
Just time for a card — we leave in half an hour — had our last night on the Johnny Walker now it's local firewater or nothing remember what I said on the phone and don't have it cut too short.
Love you your Circus Strongman.
Letter I
My own darling
Just spent 24 hours on a bus with the dashboard covered in St Christophers or whatever the local version hereabouts is.
Wouldn't have minded if the driver had gone in for some stronger magic — the old Christianity didn't seem to be having much effect on his driving.
When not thinking about puking your guts up round every hairpin bend, scenery magnificent.
Great big trees, mountains — that sort of thing — I've got some postcards.
Crew all a bit over-excited at the moment — if I hear another joke about ‘I was going Caracas back there’ I think I'll strangle someone.
Still, that's normal on a job like this.
Not that I've ever done a job like this before, should be great fun.
It'd better be after all those needles they stuck in me so I won't get beri-beri and co.
It's a relief to get away from people recognizing you as well.
You know, even with the beard and glasses they still copped the face in Caracas.
At the airport, of course, but that's normal anyway.
No, it was funny.
Guess what they'd seen me in?
Not your upmarket angst number with the Pinter script that got the Palme d'Or, none of that.
No, that filthy little American soap I did for Hal Screwyouupalotodos.
It's STILL playing here.
Kids come up in the street and say, ‘Hey Mista Rick, how ya doin'?’
What about that?
The poverty here is something else.
Still, after India nothing will surprise me.
Now what have you done about your hair?
I hope you haven't gone and done anything silly to it just to get your own back for me going away.
I know what you girls are like, you say you'll just have it short to see what it looks like, and then you say Pedro at the salon won't let you grow it just for the moment, and then you say you've got to look your best for some wedding or other and you can't go with it straggly and then you end up not growing it again and if I don't mention it every week you think I've learned to like it and if I do mention it every week you think I'm nagging so I don't mention it and I'm stuck with it.
And it's not fair to say it's because of the beard because the beard's not my fault, they just didn't shave in the jungle in whatever century it's going to be when we get there and I know I grew it early but that's the way I am, I like to start thinking myself into the part as soon as possible.
You know what Dirk says, how he starts with the shoes, once he gets the shoes right he knows what the rest of the character's like, well with me it's the face.
Sorry if it's the first thing you see in the morning, still it's not everyone who can say they've been sleeping with a Jesuit.
A very old Jesuit too.
Weather very hot, laundry problems I expect.
Still taking those tummy tablets.
Had a word with Vic about the script and he says not to worry but they always say that at this stage, don't they?
I told him what I said to you on the phone about shouldn't he be given a bit more obvious humanity because priests aren't great box-office nowadays and Vic said we'd talk about it nearer the time.
Getting on well with Matt — obviously there's going to be some competition once we start work but he's not half as paranoid as I thought he'd be, a bit back-slapping, still I guess  that's Yanks for you.
I told him my Vanessa story and he told me his and we'd both heard them before!
Got stinko paralytico together on our last night in town and ended up doing the Zorba dance in a restaurant!
Matt tried plate-smashing but they said it wasn't the local custom and threw us out!
Charged us for the plates, too.
You know what they call post offices out here?
Our Lady of Communications.
You probably have to get down on your knees for next-day delivery.
Not that we've seen one of them for miles.
God knows if I'll be able to post this before the Jungle starts.
Maybe we'll come across a friendly native with a forked stick going in the right direction and I'll give him the big-screen smile and hand it over.
(Joke).
Don't worry about me.
Love you.
— Charlie
Letter 2
Darling
If you look in your photo album for our flat-smouldering party you'll see there's something missing.
Don't worry — I've got it.
It's the one where you've got your chipmunk face on.
You've got a bit wet out here — terrible downpour couple of days ago — but you still don't mind being kissed last thing at night.
You might get a bit crumpled from here on in as we've seen our last hotel for a bit.
Now it's all Boy Scout stuff and bivouacs and tents.
Hope I get the sleep I need.
It's so hard to work on full glow when you've only had a couple of hours kip.
Anyway we're well into the Jungle now.
Lots of delays.
Usual stuff — you arrange that on such-and-such a day you'll turn up with so many people and so much luggage and he'll transport you to the next place and when you turn up he pretends things have changed and you didn't say fifty but fifteen and anyway the price has gone up and so on and so bloody on until he gets the backhander he  wants.
God, when things like that happen I just feel like shouting I Want To Work in a very loud voice.
I did that one day when things got hairier than usual, went down to where some bandit was trying to rip us off and practically rubbed beards with him and shouted into his face I Want To Work For Christ's Sake Let Me Work, but Vic said that wasn't being helpful.
Later.
Matt was peeing in the river when one of the sparks came up and told him it wasn't a good idea.
Apparently they've got this tiny fish which is attracted by the heat or whatever and can swim up your pee as you're peeing.
Didn't sound likely at first but think of salmon I suppose.
Then what it does is swim straight into your dick and once it gets there it sticks out a couple of spines sideways and just stays there.
Ouch in spades, to say the least of it.
The sparks says you can't get it out, it's like having an umbrella opened up in there, you have to have the whole doings chopped off in hospital.
Matt didn't know whether to believe him but can you risk it?
No one 's peeing in the river at the moment, anyway.
Later.
We were puttering up river late in the afternoon and the sun was beginning to go down over these huge trees and a flight of big birds, herons or something, were taking off like pink seaplanes as someone said and the second assistant suddenly stood up and yelled out This is paradise, this is fucking paradise.
Actually, feeling a bit depressed, love.
Sorry to lay this on you, not fair I know as I'll probably be right as rain by the time you get this.
Bloody Matt getting me down.
What an ego.
You'd think no-one else had ever made a film except him and you can see him coming on all good mates with the crew so they'll make things easier for him when he gets in front of camera, so he looks five years younger and I get the shiny nose.
Vic's not tough enough for this job, to be frank.
You need one of those slave-driving old studio bosses if you ask me, not a sensitive graduate who went into movies because he liked the clouds in Antonioni and then turned himself into a nouvelle vague Deutscher all hot for Truthspiel.
I ask you, forty of us slogging into the Jungle all because we bought his line about  needing to work our way into the reality of a couple of deeply dead Jesuit priests.
How this applies to the crew as well I don't know but I expect Vic's got some theory to cover it.
Us going in on foot and then the equipment being airlifted in is about as arsy-versy as you can get.
He won't even let us use the radio-telephone until after we've made the rendez-vous.
The focus-puller's girlfriend is having a baby and he wanted to call headquarters in Caracas to see if there was any news but Vic said no.
Bloody weather.
Bloody hot all the time.
Sweating like a pig,comme un porco .
Still worrying about the script.
Think I'll have to do some rewrites on my part.
No chance of getting any laundry done unless we meet some tribe of washerwomen waiting for custom outside one of those zinc shacks like we saw in that village in Provence do you remember?
Bloody tin sign for Coca-Cola at a trading post this morning.
I ask you, hundreds of miles from bloody anywhere and the Coke reps have been there before you and shat on the landscape.
Or some chum of Matt's put it there to make him feel at home.
Sorry about this.
Love Charlie
Letter 3
Hey Good Looking!
Sorry about that whingeing on at the end of the last letter.
Everything much better now.
For one thing we've all started peeing in the river again.
We were asking Fish Sparks as we call him how he knew about the fish that swims up your pee and he said he'd seen some fat explorer fellow on the box going on about it, which sounded likely enough.
But then we asked him a bit more about it and he made his fatal mistake.
He said this explorer had said he'd had some special underpants made so that he could pee in the river safely.
He got a cricket protector, the  sparks says, and cut the front bit out and stuck a tea-strainer down it.
Well I ask you.
If you're telling fibs, keep them simple, that's the rule, isn't it?
Never over-egg the pudding.
So we all had a good laugh at the sparks and all of us unzipped our flies and peed in the river whether we wanted to or not.
The only person that didn't was Fish, who had to save face and went on claiming it was true.
So that cheered us up a bit as you can imagine but what really cheered us up was making contact with the Indians.
I mean, if the bandits on the way here were anything to go by (‘here', if you want to look it up in your schoolgirl atlas, is somewhere near the Mocapra) why should the Indians keep their word?
Matt said afterwards he'd half expected the whole thing would turn out to be a wild goose chase and I told him I thought the same.
But there they were, four of them, just where they said they'd be, in a clearing on a bend in the river, naked as nature intended, standing very upright which still didn't make them very tall and looking at us without any fear.
Without any curiosity either, in a funny sort of way, which was odd.
You expect they'll want to prod you or something.
But they just stood there as if we were the odd ones not them, which when you come to think about it is dead right.
They watched us unpack everything and then we set off.
Didn't offer to help carry anything which was a bit of a surprise but then I suppose they're not Sherpas are they?
It's about two days march apparently to the rest of the tribe and the river we're looking for.
We couldn't see the track they were following at all— amazing sense of direction they must have in the Jungle.
You'd be lost here I can tell you angel, especially given you don't know how to get from Shepherd's Bush to Hammersmith without a police escort.
* We marched for about two hours then stopped for the night and ate fish the Indians had caught in the river while they were waiting for us.
Very tired, but quite a day.
Kiss you.
* Joke (not serious)
Later.
A whole day on the move.
Glad I did all that training in the gym.
Some of the crew puffing after only half an hour or so, which isn't surprising as the only exercise they take in the  normal run of things is putting their legs under a table and aiming their snouts at the trough.
Oh yes and putting their hands up to order another bottle.
Matt's pretty fit from all those outdoor movies where they put olive oil on his pectorals (though not as fit as he ought to be) and the two of us gave the crew a bit of a hard time, said union rules didn't apply in the Jungle, and so on.
They certainly didn't want to get left behind!
Fish Sparks, who's been a bit down in the mouth since we rumbled his story, thought it was terrifically funny to start calling the Indians things like Sitting Bull and Tonto, but of course they didn't understand and anyway the rest of us sort of froze him out.
It just wasn't funny, anyway.
They're incredible, these Indians.
Walking starkers through the forest, incredibly agile, never get tired, killed a monkey in a tree with a blowpipe.
Had it for dinner, well some of us did, the squeamish ones had a tin of corned beef.
I had the monkey.
Tasted a bit like oxtail only much redder.
A bit stringy but delicious.
Tuesday.
God knows how the post system's going to work.
At the moment we just give it to Rojas — he's the fourth assistant and a local and he's been appointed postman.
All that means is that he puts the letters into a plastic bag so they won't get eaten by beetles or woodworm or whatever.
Then when we meet up with the copter he'll take the mail out.
So God knows when you'll get this.
Miss you (pause while I do my Circus Strongman howl).
Today we should have met up with the rest of the tribe but we aren't as fit as we might be.
I bet some of the crew thought there'd be wheels right into the Jungle and food trucks parked every few miles and they'd get burgers and chips served by girls wearing flower garlands round their necks.
Fat Dick the sound man probably packed a  Hawaiiiiiian shirt.
You have to hand it to Vic in a way.
Smallest crew-to-budget ratio in years.
Me and Matt doing our own stunts (good old Norman really screwed the dollars up for me on that clause).
Not even daily rushes either — the copter's only coming in every three days because Vic thinks it'll break our concentration or something no doubt posher intellectually than that.
Lab report  over the radio-telephone, the rushes with the copter.
And the studio went along with it all.
Amazing, isn't it?
No it isn't amazing, as you well know sweetie.
The studio thinks Vic's a genius and gave him as much as they could until the insurance boys dug their heels in over big-name leads falling out of a canoe and then they went down the list and found a couple of guys the industry could afford to lose.
* So I've been a bad boy at times but they reckon I can't walk out on a job if I'm in the Jungle and Matt's temperamental which means he doesn't normally work unless they give him a hamper full of white powder but he seems to have kicked it and there aren't too many dealers swinging through the trees like Tarzan out here.
And we agree to Vic's conditions because we bloody need to and deep down we probably think Vic's a genius too.
* Joke.
Well, sort of.
No real danger, I'm sure.
Wondering if it was a mistake to have the monkey last night.
It certainly slowed me down a bit today, and Matt was behind a bush a lot as well.
Later.
Sorry, Wednesday.
Met the tribe.
The greatest day of my life.
Except for meeting you, babe, of course.
They were just there, suddenly, as we came over a hill and saw a river below us.
The lost river and the lost people side by side — amazing.
They're quite short, and you'd think they were plump except it s all muscle, and they don't have a stitch on.
The girls are pretty, too (don't worry, angel — riddled with diseases).
The funny thing is there don't seem to be any old folks.
Or maybe they've left them behind somewhere.
But we did have this idea that the whole tribe went around together.
Puzzling.
Also, I've run out of mosquito stuff — the really powerful one anyway.
Getting bitten quite a lot.
Vic says not to worry — did I think Father Firmin had insect repellent all those years ago?
I said authenticity was one thing but did my devoted fans really want to see me on the big screen with spots a foot across all over my face?
Vic told me I had to suffer for my art.
I told Vic to fuck off.
Bloody Truthspiel.
Thursday.
We've set up camp now on the bank.
A couple of camps actually, one for whites (most of whom are brown with  red spots) and one for Indians.
I said why didn't we have one big camp, for Christ's sake.
Some of the crew were against this because they thought they'd get their watches stolen (I ask you) and some in favour so that they could get a closer look at the women (I ask you).
Vic said he thought two camps were a good idea because there would have been two originally and it would psychologically prepare the Indians for playing their ancestors, which I said was just a  rationalisation of elitism.
Anyway things got quite hot and eventually one of the guides was sent over to talk to the Indians and the word came back that they wouldn't share their camp with us anyway, which is quite funny I suppose.
Here comes the copter so I'll end now.
Love Charlie
Letter 4
Dear Pips,
First rendez-vous!
They coptered in the genny and the rest of the equipment.
Great excitement (except for the Indians who ignored it all).
Food, ciggies.
No mosquito stuff on board— can you believe it?
Another thing — Vic wouldn't let them bring in newspapers, which pissed me off.
I mean we're not kids are we?
Reading a two-week-old copy of The Independent isn't likely to screw up my acting, is it?
Or is it?
I'm amazed Vic allowed us letters.
None for Charlie.
I know I told you not to write except in emergency but I didn't mean it.
Hope you guessed.
Friday.
Look, I know you don't want to talk about it, but I think this spell of being apart will do us lots of good.
In lots of ways.
Really.
I'm getting too old for hellraising anyway.
‘MY HELLRAISING DAYS ARE OVER’ SAYS TV'S ‘BAD-BOY’CHARLIE.
Love you.
Pippa love, I really think it's the effect of the Indians (oh, Saturday).
They're so open, so direct.
There they are, not a stitch on them, they say what they mean, do what they want, eat when they're hungry, make love as if it's the most natural thing in the world *, and lie down to die when they reach the end of their lives.
It's really something.
I don't mean I could do it myself, not straight away, I just mean I get a great sense of comradeship with these people.
I almost feel I've been sent here so they can teach me a lesson about life.
Does that make sense?
It's all right, sweetie, I'm not coming back with a bone through my nose, but I might come back with a bit less of a bone in my head.
All that business about Linda — I know we agreed not to talk about it — but I feel such a shit out here.
Hurting you.
Not telling the truth.
Out here, with the lost river running past my feet, learning the names of birds I don't even know the names of in English, I feel good about us.
* Not personal experience.
Charlie's nose clean.
Sunday.
It's not just distance lends enchantment or whatever.
It's something about being here .
You remember the American astronauts, how they went to the moon and came back totally changed by looking at the earth and seeing it like just any old planet all small and a long way away?
Some of them got religious or went barmy I seem to remember, but the point is they were all different when they came back.
It's a bit like that with me, except that instead of going into the technological future I had to go back in time.
Actually, I don't really mean that, back in time.
All the crew here think the Indians are fantastically primitive just because they don't have radios.
I think they're fantastically advanced and mature because they don't have radios.
They're teaching me something without knowing they're doing it.
I'm beginning to see things a lot more in perspective.
God I'm damn sorry about Linda.
Monday.
A long time setting up, then it rained.
One of the girls is teaching me the language.
Don't worry, chipmunk, riddled with diseases I'm sure.
* Tried to find out what they call themselves, you know, name of the tribe.
Guess what, THEY DON'T HAVE A NAME FOR THEMSELVES!!! and they don't have a name for their language either.
Isn't that  amazing!!
Incredibly mature.
It's like, nationalism out of the window.
* Sort of catch-phrase with the crew.
If anyone starts talking about sex or looking at the Indian women, someone always says, ‘Riddled with diseases I'm sure.’
Probably not so funny in London.
Tuesday.
There's a really good feeling now we've started.
Everyone pulling together.
None of this silly bloody union rules.
Everyone contributing .
I'm sure it's the influence of the Indians.
It's how things should be.
Wednesday.
I think my accent's improving.
There's a big white stork sort of bird called a thkarni .
I think that's how you write it down.
Anyway, I say thkarni when one takes off or lands on the water, and the Indians think this is jolly funny.
They fall about laughing.
Well they aren't any better at saying Charlie.
Thursday.
Not much.
Bitten by 80000000000000 mosquitoes.
Matt makes stupid joke.
If you look closely, he's bandy-legged, I swear.
Friday.
It's amazing when you think about it.
Here's this tribe of Indians, totally obscure, don't even have a name for themselves.
A couple of hundred years ago two Jesuit missionaries trying to find their way back to the Orinoco stumble across them, get them to build a raft and then pole the two Godmen several hundred miles south while the said Godmen preach them the Gospel and try to get them to wear Levis.
Just when they get near their destination the raft capsizes, the missionaries nearly drown and the Indians disappear.
Melt into the Jungle and no-one sees them again until Vic's researchers track them down a year ago.
Now they're helping us do exactly the same thing a couple of hundred years on.
What I'm dying to know is does the tribe remember?
Do they have ballads about transporting the two white men dressed as women up to the great watery anaconda to the south, or however they might put it?
Or did the white men vanish from the tribe's memory as completely as the tribe vanished for the white man?
So many things to think about.
And what will happen when we've gone?
Will  they disappear again for another two or three hundred years?
Or disappear forever wiped out by some killer bug and all that will be left of them is a film in which they're playing their own ancestors?
I'm not sure I can get my head round that.
My blessings on thee, daughter, sin no more.
*
Love, Charlie
* Joke!!
Nothing from you Sunday or Wednesday.
Hope Rojas has something tomorrow.
Didn't mean you not to write whatever I said.
Will send this anyway.
Letter 5
Darling
This priest outfit must be the most uncomfortable garment ever invented for Jungle travel.
Makes you sweat like a pig,comme un porco .
How did old Father Firmin keep his dignity, I ask myself.
Still I suppose you could say he suffered for his religion in the same way I suffer for my art.
Sunday.
My God, guess what?
Fat Dick the sound man was peeing in the river last night when one of the Indians came up to him all agitated, making lots of gestures, sign language, sort of swimming with his hands and so on.
Dick doesn't follow him in fact he thinks the bloke is trying to get off with him which is a bit of a laugh if you've seen the Indian women, until the Indian runs off and fetches Miguel who's one of the guides.
Lots more gestures and explanations and Dick zips up his trousers pretty smartish.
Guess what?
The Indian was telling him about this little fish that lives in the river and — you can guess the rest!!!
Not much chance of this particular member of this particular tribe watching British telly the same night Fish Sparks was.
And not much chance of Fishy learning enough of the local lingo to set up a sting like this.
So we just had to accept he was right all along!
Boy did he have the last laugh.
Monday.
Here's a funny thing.
While the Indians appear to understand roughly what we're doing — they're happy to do retakes and don't seem at all put out by this great big eye being pointed at them — they don't seem to understand about the idea of acting.
I mean sure they're acting their ancestors and they're quite willing (in exchange for some Mickey Mouse presents) to build us a raft and transport us upstream on it and be filmed doing this.
But they won't do anything else.
If Vic says could you stand in a different way or use the pole like this and tries to demonstrate they simply won't.
Absolutely refuse.
This is how we pole a raft and just because a white man is watching through his funny machine we aren't going to do it any differently.
The other thing is even more incredible.
They actually think that when Matt and I are dressed up as Jesuits we actually are Jesuits!
They think we've gone away and these two blokes in black dresses have turned up!
Father Firmin is just as real a person for them as Charlie, though I'm glad to say they like Charlie more.
But you can't persuade them about what's going on.
The crew think this is pretty stupid of them but I wonder if it isn't fantastically mature.
The crew think they're such a primitive civilization they haven't even discovered acting yet.
I wonder if it's the opposite and they're a sort of post-acting civilization, maybe the first one on the earth.
Like, they don't need it any more, so they've forgotten about it and don't understand it any longer.
Quite a thought!
Wednesday.
Ought to have said more about the job.
Not going badly.
Script isn't what I remembered, but then it never is, usually because they've changed it.
Matt isn't too bad to work with.
I asked Make-Up to give him a few mosquito bites but he refused point-blank.
Said he wanted to be the pretty one for a change.
Quite funny that — I mean it's obvious that deep down he thinks he's jolly good-looking!
I suppose I'd better not tell him that thing you said about his face looking as if it was carved out of corned beef.
Thursday.
Terrible thing happened.
Quite terrible.
One of the Indians fell off the raft and was drowned.
Just swept away.
We stared at the water which was pretty choppy and waited for the Indian to surface but he never did.
Naturally we said we'd stop work for the day.
Guess what?
The Indians wouldn't hear of it.
What good old troupers they are!
Friday.
Thinking about yesterday's incident.
We were much more upset about it than the Indians were.
I mean, he must have been somebody's brother or husband or something, but there wasn't any crying or anything.
I half expected that when we pitched camp for the night there'd be some sort of ceremony — I don't know, burning a bundle of clothes or whatever.
Not so.
Same old jolly camp-fire life went on as per usual.
I wondered if they hadn't liked the fellow who went overboard, but that's too obvious.
Maybe they don't distinguish between life and death in some way.
Maybe they don't think he's ‘gone’ as we do — or at least not gone altogether.
Gone to a nicer bit of the river.
I tried this out on Matt who said, ‘Hey man I didn't know you had hippie blood.’
Matt is not exactly the most spiritual and sophisticated fellow you've ever met.
Believes in making your own way through life, walking tall, shooting straight, balling chicks as he puts it and spitting in the eye of anyone who does you wrong.
That at any rate seems to be the sum of his wisdom.
He thinks the Indians are rather cute kids who haven't yet invented the video recorder.
I must say it's pretty funny that a chap like him ends up playing a Jesuit priest having doctrinal disputes in the rain forest.
The fact is, he's one of those perfectly efficient American actors whose careers are decided by their image makers.
I told him about taking six months off and doing rep in the provinces just to get back in touch with live acting and live audiences and he reacted as if I told him I'd had a mental breakdown.
Say what you like, I think the stage is the place you learn to act.
Matt can twitch his face in any direction and crinkle up his eyes knowing that his jailbait fans will be sitting there wetting themselves.
But can he act with his body?
Call me old-fashioned, but I think a lot of American actors just do a sort of swagger and leave it at that.
Tried to explain all this to Vic, who said I was doing fine and Matt was doing fine and he thought we'd gel together on screen.
Sometimes I do wish he'd LISTEN to what I say.
Here comes the post, or rather the copter.
Nothing from you yet.
— love, Charlie
Letter 6
Pippa love
Look I know we said we wouldn't talk about it and maybe it's not fair cos I don't know what state you'll be in when you get this, but why don't we just move to the country and have babies?
No I haven't fallen in the river or anything.
You've no idea how good it's been for me out here.
I've cut out coffee after lunch and almost don't smoke at all.
Well the Indians don't, do they, I say to myself.
The Indians don't need to support the mighty firm of Philip Morris Inc. of Richmond Va.
When things get tough they sometimes chew on a little green leaf, which I reckon is their equivalent of the occasional ciggy one takes when the director is behaving like a prize muffin.
So why not cut it down like they do?
And that Linda thing.
I know you probably don't want to hear her name ever again and if that's what you want that's my promise, but it's all to do with London isn't it?
Not really to do with us at all.
Just bloody London with its grime and filthy streets and the booze.
Well that's not really living, the way we do in cities, is it?
Also I think cities make people lie to one another.
Do you think that's possible?
These Indians never lie, same as they don't know how to act.
No pretence.
Now I don't think that's primitive at all, I think it's bloody mature.
And I'm sure it's because they live in the Jungle not in cities.
They spend all their time surrounded by nature and the one thing nature doesn't do is lie.
It just goes ahead and does its thing, as Matt would say.
Walks tall and shoots  straight.
It may not be very nice some of the time but it doesn't tell lies.
Which is why I think the country and babies is the answer.
And when I say the country I don't mean one of those villages just off the motorway full of people just like us buying Australian Chardonnay from the local wine merchant and the only time you hear an ooo-aarr accent is when you're listening to the Archers in the bath.
I mean the real country, somewhere hidden away — Wales maybe or Yorkshire.
Sunday.
The baby thing.
It's to do with the Indians in a funny sort of way.
You know I said they're all fantastically healthy and yet there aren't any old folks even though we thought they travelled around together in a group?
Well, I finally got Miguel to talk to them about it and it turns out the reason there aren't any old folk around is because they don't live much longer than about 35.
So I was wrong when I thought they were fantastically healthy and a good advert for the Jungle.
The truth is it's only the fantastically healthy ones who can get by at all.
What a turnaround.
But the point is, I'm now older than most of this tribe will ever be and that feels like a chill wind.
And if we lived in the country then it wouldn't be me coming home every night whacked out and wanting to be looked after and having a squawking infant instead.
If I only took the big parts and none of this TV crap I'd just go away to film, and then when I was around I'd really be around.
See?
I could make a playpen for him and buy him one of those big wooden Arks with all the animals in and I could get one of those bags you carry babies around in like the Indians have had for centuries.
Then I'd go striding off across the moors to get the both of us out of your hair for a bit, what do you say?
By the way, I really am sorry I hit Gavin.
Monday.
Bit depressed, love.
Had this ludicrous tiff with Vic about a line.
Six bloody words, but I knew Firmin wouldn't say them.
I mean, I've been living this guy for three weeks now and Vic starts telling me how to speak?
He said OK rewrite them, so I held things up for an hour and at the end of it he said he wasn't convinced.
We tried it out all the same, because I insisted, and guess what?
Bloody Matt wasn't convinced either.
I said he  couldn't tell a line of dialogue from a line of coke and anyway his face was carved out of corned beef, and he threatened to punch me.
Stupid bloody film.
Tuesday.
Still boiling.
Wednesday.
Amazing thing.
You know I said about the Indians not understanding about acting.
Well in the last 2 days Firmin and Antonio have been getting more and more hostile (which isn't hard to do given how Charlie and Matt are currently feeling about one another) and you could really sense the Indians getting involved, following it all from their part of the raft as if their lives depended on it — which in a way they did I suppose because we were arguing about whether they had the right to be baptised and have their souls saved or not.
They sensed this somehow, I don't know.
Anyway today we had the scene where Matt had to hit me with the paddle sort of semi-accidentally.
It was best balsa wood of course, not that the Indians could know, but I duly went down poleaxed and Matt started pretending it was an accident.
The Indians were supposed to look on at what was happening as if these two white men in skirts were barmy.
That's what they'd been told to do.
But they didn't.
Lots of them came rushing over to me and started stroking my face and wetting my brow and making a sort of wailing noise, and then three of them turned on Matt looking really nasty.
Incredible!
What's more they might have done him an injury if he hadn't pulled off his cassock pretty smartish and turned back into Matt, which calmed them down.
Amazing!
It was only old Matt, and that nasty priest Antonio had gone away.
Then I slowly got to my feet and they all started laughing happily as if I wasn't dead after all.
The good thing was that Vic kept running so we didn't miss any of it.
Now he thinks he can work it in, which I'm pleased about because if this is the way the Indians react to me and Matt then maybe that's a pointer to how the fans will go.
Thursday.
Vic says the lab report on yesterday's scuffle wasn't too kosher.
Bet bloody Matt's been getting at him probably knew the camera had caught him looking shit-scared.
I said let's wait and see how it prints and Vic agreed but I didn't  get good vibes.
So much for Truthspiel: when they get it, they don't use it.
Friday.
I don't think the script's up to scratch, and the whole thing's underbudgeted, but one thing I will say for it is that it's ABOUT something.
I mean, it isn't afraid of the big issues.
Most films aren't about anything, are they, that's what I find more and more.
‘Two Priests up the Jungle’(which is what Old Fish Sparks sings from time to time to the tune of Red Sails in the Sunset)— sure, but it's about the sort of conflict running through human life in every time and every civilization.
Discipline v. permissiveness.
Sticking to the letter of the law v. sticking to its spirit.
Means and ends.
Doing the right thing for the wrong reason v. doing the wrong thing for the right reason.
How great ideas like the Church got bogged down in bureaucracy.
How Christianity starts off as the religion of peace but ends up violent like other religions.
You could say the same about Communism or anything else, any big idea.
I think this film could be really quite subversive in Eastern Europe and not because it's about priests either.
Whether they'd distribute it is another matter.
I said to Fish the film has a message for the trade unions as well if they could find it and he said he'd keep looking.
Pippa love, think about the baby thing, won't you?
Your Charlie
P.S. Funny thing happened today.
Not serious, but makes me wonder about the Indians.
P.P.S. Can't think why you haven't written.
Letter 7
Dearest Pippa
Bloody jungle.
It just doesn't give up.
Bloody clouds of flies and biting things and humming whatsits and for the first couple of weeks you think how extraordinary, well it doesn't matter  getting bitten, everyone else is, except Matt with his NASA US-Govt issue personal mosquito repellent and corned-beef face-protector.
But they just go on and on and bloody on.
After a while you just want the Jungle to take a day off.
Go on, Jungle, it's Sunday, knock it off, you want to shout as it rattles on 24 hrs per day.
I don't know.
Maybe it's not the Jungle it's the film.
You can feel the tension mounting.
Matt and me getting edgier with one another off camera as well as on.
The film's all spilling over into the rest of the time.
Even the Indians don't seem so sure that I'm not Firmin all the time and Matt's Antonio.
It's as if they think I'm really Firmin and then from time to time I just pretend to be this white man called Charlie.
Really upside down.
Sunday.
That thing about the Indians.
To tell you the truth I was a bit miffed when I found out, but now I'm beginning to see it from their point of view.
I told you I was learning the language — she's really very sweet and not a stitch on but as I said no need to worry, angel, riddled with diseases I'm sure, apart from anything else, I mean.
It turns out that half the words she's been teaching me are all wrong.
I mean, they're real words except they're not the right ones.
The first thing I learnt more or less was thkarni which means — well she said it meant — this white stork we've been seeing a lot of.
So when we saw one go flapping by I used to shout thkarni and the Indians would all laugh.
Turns out — and I learned this not through Miguel but our second guide who hasn't said much most of the trip — that thkarni is the Indians' name — well, one of their many names, to be precise — for you-know-what.
The thing up which the little fish in the river swims if you aren't careful.
Same goes for about half the words I've been learning from that little minx.
I've learnt about 60 I suppose overall and half of them are duds naughty words or words for something completely different.
I was majorly unpleased as you can imagine at the time but I think what it does show is that the Indians have got a terrific sense of humour.
So I was determined to show them I could take a joke and the next time a big stork went over I pretended not to know what it was called and asked my girl.
Thkarni she said  with a straight face.
I looked very puzzled and shook my head a lot and said No it can't be thkarni because this is thkarni (no I didn't pull it out or anything — just pointed).
And then she knew the game was up and started giggling, and so did I to show there weren't any hard feelings.
Monday.
Getting near the end now.
Just the big scene to do.
Taking two days off first.
I think that's a silly decision by Vic but I expect he's got the unions on his back.
He says it's a good idea to recharge the batteries before the big scene.
I think if you're on a roll you better go with the flow.
It's all right, honey, I don't really talk like that, I do it to irritate Matt, though it usually doesn't because he's so thick-skinned and thinks everyone else talks like that anyway, so I guess I do it for my own private amusement.
‘Hey, Matt,’ I say to him, ‘We're on a roll, let's go with the flow’, and he nods like some old prophet in The Ten Commandments.
Anyway the plan is today and tomorrow off, then two days rehearsal for the capsizing of the raft, then Friday the big deal.
Maybe Vic is right after all, we do need to be at our best.
It's not just doing it right it's covering all the angles.
We've got to have ropes on us as per contract in case anything happens.
Don't worry darling it's not really dangerous.
We're doing some covering footage on a stretch of the river where there are some rapids, but the actual capsizing which is meant to happen there doesn't really.
The crew have got a couple of machines which churn everything up to make white water and the chippie ran up some rocks which they anchor to the bottom of the river and look just like the real thing.
So no need to worry.
I'm quite looking forward to it though naturally we've had a few of the old arguments about it.
What happens is that both the priests get tipped into the water, one of them hits his head on a rock and the other one rescues him.
Point is, who does what?
I mean, here are these two, fighting tooth and nail all the way upstream, there's this huge split of doctrine going on, one of them v. authoritarian and hardline (Me) and the other very permissive and soft on the Indians (Matt).
I think it would be much more effective if the one who was meant to be the hardhat and who might be expected to let the other one drown  in fact saves the other one even though he thinks his ideas about the Indians and his plan to baptise them when they get to the Orinoco are blasphemous.
But no, it has to be Matt who saves me .
Vic says that's what's historically the case, and Matt says that's what was in the script he read back in Dudesville North Dakota or wherever he hangs his hat and that's what he's going to play.
‘Nobody rescues Matt Smeaton,’ he said.
He actually said it, can you imagine?
‘Nobody rescues Matt Smeaton.’
I said I'd remember that if ever I found him dangling upside down by one toe from a ski-lift cable.
So it's all going to go ahead as per the script.
Tuesday.
Another rest day.
Later
Later
Later
— love Charlie
Letter 8
Jesus Pippa.
Jesus.
I just couldn't go on with that last letter.
Jolly bits of news from each day's shooting.
Couldn't go on with it, not after what happened.
But I'm fine.
Really I'm fine.
Later.
Poor old Matt.
Shit, he was a good bloke.
Sure he could get under your skin but so would St Francis of Assisi on a job like this.
He'd have spent all his time looking at the bloody birds in the Jungle instead of reading his cue-cards.
Sorry, love.
Bad taste, I know.
Just can't find the way to put things.
Very low.
Poor old Matt.
I wonder how you'll hear the news and what you'll think.
Jesus those fucking Indians.
I think I'm going to die.
I can hardly hold this biro.
Sweating like a pig,comme un porco .
God I do love you, Pippa, I just hold on to that.
Letter 9
I get out your photo with the chipmunk face and kiss it.
That's all that matters, you and me and having babies.
Let's do it, Pippa.
Your mum would be pleased, wouldn't she?
I said to Fish do you have kids, he said yes they're the apple of my eye.
I put my arm round him and gave him a hug just like that.
It's things like that keep everything going, isn't it?
It's true what they say.
Go into the Jungle and you really find out what people are like.
Vic's a whinger, always knew it.
Whingeing on about the sodding film.
I said don't worry you can always sell your memoirs to the paper.
He didn't like that.
Why did they do it?
Why did they do it?
love C
P.S. Wish you'd written.
Would have helped now.
Letter 10
It could have been me.
It could just as easily have been me.
Who decides?
Does anyone decide?
Hey you up there in the sky, is anyone home?
I've been having this thought all day.
I said to Old Fishy do you have kids and he said yes they're the apple of my eye and we just hugged each other right there in front of everyone and ever since I've been wondering what it means.
The apple of my eye.
What does it mean?
You say words like that and everyone knows what they mean but when you look at them you can't understand them.
The film's like that, the whole trip's like that.
You go along thinking you know exactly what everything is, and then you stop and look at it and it doesn't make any sense and you think maybe it only made any sense in the first place because everyone was pretending it did.
Does this make any sense?
I mean it's like the Indians and the fake rocks that the chippie ran  up.
They looked at them and looked at them and the more they did the less they understood.
They started off knowing they were rocks and they ended up not knowing anything.
You could see it in their faces.
I'm going to give this to Rojas now.
He walked past a few minutes ago and said that's the third letter you've written today why don't you put them in the same envelope and save postage?
I got up and you know I swear I turned into Firmin for a moment and I said, ‘Listen, Our Lady of Communications, I shall write and you will transmit as many fucking letters per day as I happen to feel like writing.’
Well Firmin wouldn't have said fuck of course, but his tone was there.
Sort of austere and pissed off with anything less than perfection in the world.
Oh well, better go and say sorry, otherwise he'll throw them all away.
— love C
Letter 11
Waiting for copter
Pippa love
When we get out, I'm going to do the following things.
Have the biggest fucking Scotch they can pour in Caracas.
Have the biggest fucking bath they can pour in Caracas.
Have the longest phone call I can have with you.
I can just hear your voice answering the phone, as if I've been to the shop for some ciggies and I'm back late.
Then I'm going to the British Embassy and get a copy of the Daily Telegraph and I don't care if it's weeks old and I'm going to read something I never normally look at like the nature notes if they have them.
I want to be told that the house-martins are nesting or you might see a badger if you're lucky.
Ordinary things that go on all the time.
I'll look at the cricket scores and pretend I'm some old member in from the shires with a striped blazer and a pink gin in his fist.
Maybe I'll  read the births column as well.
To Emma and Nicholas, a daughter, Suzie, sister to Alexander and Bill.
Good old Alexander and Bill, I'll say, now you've got little Suzie to play with.
You must be gentle with her, you must protect her all your lives, she's your little sister, you must make her the apple of your eye.
God I'm crying Pippa, the tears are just streaming down my face.
love C
Letter 12
Caracas 21st July
Pippa love, I don't believe it, I mean I just don't believe it.
We finally reach what we laughingly call civilization, we finally reach a telephone which is capable of handling transatlantic calls, I finally get my turn in the queue, I finally get through to home, and you're out.
‘Number no answer, sir.’
Try again.
‘Number sti no answer, sir.’
Try again.
‘OK sir, number sti no answer.’
Where are you?
I don't want to ring anyone else.
I don't want to ring your mum and say look we had a spot of bother but now we're back in Caracas and Matt's dead, yes, you heard it on the news but I don't want to talk about it.
I just want to talk to you, honey, and I can't.
Tried again.
Tried again.
All right, so I've got a bottle of Scotch which costs about 50 quid and if the studio doesn't pay for it I'll never work for them again, and a big pile of this flimsy hotel notepaper.
The others have gone out on the town.
I couldn't face it.
I keep remembering the last night we were here — same hotel and all — and how Matt and I went out and got stinko-paralytico together and ended up doing the Zorba dance and got thrown out and Matt pointing at me and saying to the waiters Hey don't you  recognize Mista Rick from Parkway Peninsula and they didn't and made us pay for the plates.
We'd had our rest days, just three days work left.
The first morning we rehearsed in the white water, pretty gingerly I don't mind saying.
Vic and the crew were on the bank, Matt and I were on the raft with about a dozen Indians paddling and poling.
Just to be on the safe side we had a long rope attached to the raft and tied round a tree on the bank so that if the Indians lost control the rope would pull it to a stop.
Matt and I had ropes on us as per contract.
So we did a run-through in the morning which was OK, then had an afternoon in the shallows with the churning machine.
I thought we didn't need another day of rehearsal but Vic insisted.
So the second morning we all went out again only this time wearing radio mikes as well.
Vic hadn't decided whether to dub or not.
The rope was attached to the tree, the crew set up on the bank, and we got ready to do three or four runs past the camera with Matt and me so busy arguing about baptising the Indians that we couldn't see the danger behind us which the audience could see for themselves.
I've thought about what happened next a million times and I still don't know the answer.
It was on our third run.
We got the thumbs-up, started our argument and then noticed something odd.
Instead of a dozen Indians on the raft there were only two, each with just a pole at the back of the raft.
I suppose we thought Vic must have said try it this way because Matt and I were already into our quarrel and it shows what a pro he was to his fingertips that he carried on as per normal.
So did I for that matter.
Then at the end of the scene we noticed the Indians weren't doing what they normally did which was stick their poles in to stop the raft.
They were just poling away and Matt shouted ‘Hey, fellers, cut’ but they didn't take any notice and I remember thinking maybe they're testing the rope to see if it works, and Matt and I turned at just the same moment and saw where the Indians were heading us — straight into a pile of rocks and foaming water — and I knew the rope must have broken or something.
We shouted but what with the noise of the water and not knowing their language of course it wasn't any use and  then we were in the water.
I thought of you as we capsized, Pippa, honest I did.
Just saw your face and tried to think about you.
Then I tried swimming, but what with the current and the fucking cassock — and then bang I got hit in the ribs like someone had kicked me and I thought I was a goner, it must be a rock I thought and I gave up and sort of passed out.
What happened was that the rope they'd put on me suddenly pulled tight.
I don't remember anything else until I was on the bank throwing up water and puking in the mud while the sound-man thumped on my back and put his fists in my stomach.
My line held, Matt's line broke.
That's how it was, that's my luck.
Everyone was in shock, as you can imagine.
Some of the crew tried getting along the bank — you know how people are sometimes found clinging to the branches of trees overhanging the river a mile or so downstream.
But it wasn't like that.
That sort of thing is strictly for the movies.
Matt was gone, and anyway the crew couldn't get more than 20 or 30 yards beyond where they'd set up because they don't exactly have towpaths in the Jungle.
‘Why were there only two?’
Vic kept saying.
‘Why only two?’
They looked around for the Indians who'd helped them set up but they weren't there.
Then they went back to camp and the only person there was Miguel the interpreter, who'd been having a long conversation with one of the Indians and when he turned round all the other Indians had scarpered.
Then we went to see what had happened to the rope round the tree and there wasn't anything left, it had just gone.
Which was pretty odd as it was fixed with one of those fancy knots which simply can't pull out.
No doubt as per contract.
Bloody suspicious.
Then we talked to Miguel again and it turned out the Indian had started this long conversation with him before we could possibly have had the accident.
So they presumably knew what was going to happen.
And when we looked in the camp they'd taken everything — clothes, food, equipment.
What did they take the clothes for?
They don't even wear them.
It was a bloody long wait for the copter, I can tell you.
The Indians had taken the radio telephones (they'd have gone off  with the genny if they'd had a crane) and Caracas thought they'd just broken down again so came as per normal.
Two days waiting like two bloody months.
Me thinking I'd probably got some filthy fever in spite of the jabs.
Apparently when they pulled me out of the river and bashed the water out of my belly the first thing I said as I came round was, ‘Riddled with diseases, I'm sure’ and the crew broke up in this hysterical laughter.
Don't remember, but it sounds like Charlie.
Thought I might be in for beri-beri and co.
Ouch in spades, I thought.
Why did they do it?
That's what I keep coming back to.
Why?
Most of the others think they did it because they're primitive — you know, not white men, never trust a native and so on.
That's no go.
I never did think they were primitive and they always told the truth (except when they were teaching me the language) and were a damn sight more trustworthy than some of the white men we had on the job.
The first thing I thought of was that we'd offended them in some way we didn't know — done a terrible insult to their gods or something.
But I simply couldn't think of anything.
The way I'm looking at it, either there's some connection with what happened a couple of hundred years ago or there isn't.
Perhaps it's just a chance coincidence.
It so happens that the descendants of the original Indians whose raft capsized were also in charge of another raft that capsized at about the same point in the river.
Maybe these Indians can only take so much of poling Jesuits upstream and just instinctively snap and turn nasty and shove them overboard.
Not very likely is it?
Or there is some connection between the two incidents.
This is what I think anyway.
It seems to me that the Indians — our Indians — knew what had happened to Father Firmin and Father Antonio all those years ago.
It's the sort of thing that gets handed down as the women are pounding the manioc root or whatever.
Those Jesuits were probably quite big in the Indians' history.
Think of that story getting passed down the generations, each time they handed it on it became more colourful and exaggerated.
And then we come along, another lot of white men who've also got two chaps in long black skirts with them, who also want to be  poled up the river to the Orinoco.
Sure, there are differences, they've got this one-eyed machine and so on, but basically it's the same thing, and we even tell them it's going to end in the same way with the raft capsizing.
I mean, it's hard to think of an equivalent, but say you were an inhabitant of Hastings in the year 2066 and you went down to the beach one day and these longships were coming towards you and lots of people in chainmail and pointy helmets got out and said they'd come for the Battle of Hastings and would you rustle up King Harold so they could shoot him in the eye and here was a huge wallet full of money for you to play your part.
First of all, you might be inclined to do it, wouldn't you?
And then you'd get thinking about why they wanted you to do it.
And one thing you might come up with — this is just my idea, Vic isn't so sure about it — is that they (i.e. us) have come back to re-enact the ceremony for some reason that's tremendously important to their tribes.
Perhaps the Indians thought it was a religious thing, like celebrating the 500th anniversary of a cathedral or whatever.
And there's another possibility — that the Indians were actually following the argument between the Jesuits and understanding it a lot better than we thought.
They Matt and me, that's to say — were arguing about baptising the Indians, and at the point the raft capsized it looked as if I was winning the argument.
I was the senior priest, after all, and I was against baptism — at least until the Indians pulled their socks up and stopped some of their filthy practices.
So maybe the Indians understood this and tipped up the raft because they were trying to kill Father Firmin (me!) so that Father Antonio would survive and baptise them.
How about that?
Except that the first time round the Indians saw that Firmin survived and they ran away because they were afraid, and the second time round they saw they'd killed Antonio, which was quite the wrong result for them so they ran away because it had all gone wrong.
Is that right?
I just know it's more complicated than it's ever going to seem in the newspapers.
I shouldn't be surprised if Hollywood sends a plane to bomb the Indians and punish them for the death of Matt.
Or does a remake — yes, that'd be more  bloody likely.
Who gets the part of Matt?
What a career opportunity.
I ask you.
Seem to be stuck here for a week or so.
That bloody studio and its bloody lawyers.
Apparently the movie has to be officially called off in some way and that takes time.
Taking this down to Our Lady of Communications and expressing it.
Makes a change to be giving it to a real postman.
all love, Charlie
Letter 13
Christ don't you do that to me, and I mean ever .
Two days out of the fucking Jungle after nearly dying and you put the phone down on me.
Look, as I was trying to explain to you, she was out here working, it was a complete coincidence.
I know I've been behaving like a pig,comme un porco , for a bit, but please read all my letters from the Jungle and you'll see I'm a changed man.
It's all over between Linda and me, I told you that before I left.
And I can't control where the woman works, can I ?
Yes I did know she was going to be in Caracas and No I didn't tell you and Yes that was wrong but would it have been better if I'd told you?
How on earth did you find out anyway?
No she isn't here, as far as I know or care she's in the West Indies.
For God's sake, Pippa, let's not throw away five years.
— your Charlie
P.S. Am expressing this.
P. P.S. Caracas filthy dump.
Stuck here at least until the 4th.
P.P.P.S. Love you.
Telegram
PLEASE CALL CHARLIE HOTEL INTERCONTINENTAL SOONEST STOP LOVE CHARLIE STOP
Telegram
FOR GS SAKE CALL INTERCONTINENTAL MUST TALK SOONEST STOP LOVE CHARLIE
Telegram
WILL CALL NOON YOUR TIME THURSDAY MUCH TO DISCUSS STOP CHARLIE
Telegram
DAMN YOU ANSWER THE PHONE OR CALL ME PIPPA STOP CHARLIE
Letter 14
Dear Pippa
As you don't seem to be responding to telegrams for reasons best known to yourself, I am writing to say that I am not coming  home immediately.
I need time and space not just to get over the appalling things which have happened to me in which you do not seem to show much interest but also to think through where the two of us are at.
There seems no point in saying that I love you in spite of everything because that only seems to irritate you for reasons best known to yourself and which you choose neither to explain nor comment on.
I will be in touch when I know where I'm at about all this.
Charlie
P.S. I'm expressing this.
P.P.S. If any of this is anything to do with that creep Gavin I will personally break his personal fucking neck.
I should have hit him a lot harder in the first place.
And in case you haven't noticed, he couldn't act his way out of a paper bag.
No talent.
No cojones.
Letter 15
St Lucia
Some bloody day or other
Listen bitch why don't you just get out of my life, go on just get out GET OUT.
You always fucked things up didn't you that was your one great talent fucking things up.
My friends said she's trouble and the last thing I should have done was let her move in and I was a bloody fool not to believe them.
Christ if you think I'm an egotist you should look in the mirror baby.
Of course I'm drunk what do you think it's one way of getting you out of my head.
Now I'm going to get stinko bloody paralytico.
In vino bloody veritas.
Charlie ‘the Hell-Raiser’
P.S. I'm expressing this.
Telegram
RETURNING LONDON MONDAY FIFTEENTH STOP KINDLY REMOVE SELF AND POSSESSIONS FROM FLAT BEFORE THEN STOP LEAVE KEY STOP ENDIT STOP   
Parenthesis
Let me tell you something about her.
It's that middle stretch of the night, when the curtains leak no light, the only street-noise is the grizzle of a returning Romeo, and the birds haven't begun their routine yet cheering business.
She's lying on her side, turned away from me.
I can't see her in the dark, but from the hushed swell of her breathing I could draw you the map of her body.
When she's happy she can sleep for hours in the same position.
I've watched over her in all those sewery parts of the night, and can testify that she doesn't move.
It could be just down to good digestion and calm dreams, of course; but I take it as a sign of happiness.
Our nights are different.
She falls asleep like someone yielding to the gentle tug of a warm tide, and floats with confidence till morning.
I fall asleep more grudgingly, thrashing at the waves, either reluctant to let a good day depart or still bitching about a bad one.
Different currents run through our spells of unconsciousness.
Every so often I find myself catapulted out of bed with fear of time and death, panic at the approaching void; feet on the floor, head in hands, I shout a useless (and disappointingly uneloquent)‘No, no,no ’ as I wake.
Then she has to stroke the horror away from me, like sluicing down a dog that's come barking from a dirty river.
Less often, it's her sleep that's broken by a scream, and my turn to move across her in a sweat of protectiveness.
I am starkly awake, and she delivers to me through sleepy lips the cause of her outcry.
‘A very large beetle’, she will say, as if she wouldn't have bothered me about a smaller one; or ‘The steps were slippery’; or merely (which strikes me as cryptic to the point of tautology), ‘Something nasty’.
Then, having expelled this  damp toad, this handful of gutter-muck from her system, she sighs and returns to a purged sleep.
I lie awake, clutching a slimy amphibian, shifting a handful of sodden detritus from hand to hand, alarmed and admiring.
(I'm not claiming grander dreams, by the way.
Sleep democratizes fear.
The terror of a lost shoe or a missed train are as great here as those of guerrilla attack or nuclear war.)
I admire her because she's got this job of sleeping that we all have to do, every night, ceaselessly, until we die, much better worked out than I have.
She handles it like a sophisticated traveller unthreatened by a new airport.
Whereas I lie there in the night with an expired passport, pushing a baggage trolley with a squeaking wheel across to the wrong carousel.
Anyway…she's asleep, turned away from me on her side.
The usual stratagems and repositionings have failed to induce narcosis in me, so I decide to settle myself against the soft zigzag of her body.
As I move and start to nestle my shin against a calf whose muscles are loosened by sleep, she senses what I'm doing, and without waking reaches up with her left hand and pulls the hair off her shoulders on to the top of her head, leaving me her bare nape to nestle in.
Each time she does this I feel a shudder of love at the exactness of this sleeping courtesy.
My eyes prickle with tears, and I have to stop myself from waking her up to remind her of my love.
At that moment, unconsciously, she's touched some secret fulcrum of my feelings for her.
She doesn't know, of course; I've never told her of this tiny, precise pleasure of the night.
Though I'm telling her now, I suppose…
You think she's really awake when she does it?
I suppose it could sound like a conscious courtesy — an agreeable gesture, but hardly one denoting that love has roots below the gum of consciousness.
You're right to be sceptical: we should be indulgent only to a certain point with lovers, whose vanities rival those of politicians.
Still, I can offer further proof.
Her hair falls, you see, to her shoulders.
But a few years ago, when they promised us the summer heat would last for months, she had it cut short.
Her nape was bare for kissing all day long.
And in the dark, when we lay beneath a single sheet and I gave off a  Calabrian sweat, when the middle stretch of the night was shorter but still hard to get through — then, as I turned towards that loose S beside me, she would, with a soft murmur, try to lift the lost hair from the back of her neck.
‘I love you,’ I whisper into that sleeping nape, ‘I love you.’
All novelists know their art proceeds by indirection.
When tempted by didacticism, the writer should imagine a spruce sea-captain eyeing the storm ahead, bustling from instrument to instrument in a catherine wheel of gold braid, expelling crisp orders down the speaking tube.
But there is nobody below decks; the engine-room was never installed, and the rudder broke off centuries ago.
The captain may put on a very good act, convincing not just himself but even some of the passengers; though whether their floating world will come through depends not on him but on the mad winds and sullen tides, the icebergs and the sudden crusts of reef.
Still, it's natural for the novelist sometimes to fret at the obliquities of fiction.
In the lower half of El Greco's ‘Burial of the Count of Orgaz’ in Toledo there is a line-up of angular, ruffed mourners.
They gaze this way and that in stagey grief.
Only one of them looks directly out of the picture, and he holds us with a gloomy, ironical eye — an unflattered eye, as well, we can't help noticing.
Tradition claims that this figure is El Greco himself.
I did this, he says.
I painted this.
I am responsible, and so I face towards you.
Poets seem to write more easily about love than prose writers.
For a start, they own that flexible ‘I’(when I say ‘I’ you will want to know within a paragraph or two whether I mean Julian Barnes or someone invented; a poet can shimmy between the two, getting credit for both deep feeling and objectivity).
Then again, poets seem able to turn bad love — selfish, shitty love into good love poetry.
Prose writers lack this power of admirable, dishonest transformation.
We can only turn bad love into prose about bad love.
So we are envious (and slightly distrustful) when poets talk to us of love.
And they write this stuff called love poetry.
It's collected into books called The Great Lovers' Valentine World Anthology of  Love Poetry or whatever.
Then there are love letters; these are collected into The Golden Quill Treasury of Love Letters (available by mail order).
But there is no genre that answers to the name of love prose.
It sounds awkward, almost self-contradictory.
Love Prose: A Plodder's Handbook.
Look for it in the carpentry section.
The Canadian writer Mavis Gallant put it like this: ‘The mystery of what a couple is , exactly, is almost the only true mystery left to us, and when we have come to the end of it there will be no more need for literature — or for love, for that matter.’
When I first read this, I gave it in the margin the chess marking ‘!?’ indicating a move which, though possibly brilliant, is probably unsound.
But increasingly the view convinces, and the marking is changed to ‘!!’
‘What will survive of us is love.’
This is the cautiously approached conclusion of Philip Larkin's poem ‘An Arundel Tomb’.
The line surprises us, for much of the poet's work was a squeezed flannel of disenchantment.
We are ready to be cheered; but we should first give a  prosy scowl and ask of this poetic flourish, Is it true?
Is love what will survive of us?
It would be nice to think so.
It would be comforting if love were an energy source which continued to glow after our deaths.
Early television sets, when you turned them off, used to leave a blob of light in the middle of the screen, which slowly diminished from the size of a florin to an expiring speck.
As a boy I would watch this process each evening, vaguely wanting to hold it back (and seeing it, with adolescent melancholy, as the pinpoint of human existence fading inexorably in a black universe).
Is love meant to glow on like this for a while after the set has been switched off?
I can't see it myself.
When the survivor of a loving couple dies, love dies too.
If anything survives of us it will probably be something else.
What will survive of Larkin is not his love but his poetry: that's obvious.
And whenever I read the end of ‘An Arundel Tomb’ I'm reminded of William Huskisson.
He was a politician and a financier, well-known in his time; but we remember him today because on the 15th of September 1830, at the opening of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway, he  became the first person to be run down and killed by a train (that's what he became, was turned into).
And did William Huskisson love?
And did his love last?
We don't know.
All that has survived of him is his moment of final carelessness; death froze him as an instructive cameo about the nature of progress.
‘I love you.’
For a start, we'd better put these words on a high shelf; in a square box behind glass which we have to break with our elbow; in the bank.
We shouldn't leave them lying around the house like a tube of vitamin C. If the words come too easily to hand, we'll use them without thought; we won't be able to resist.
Oh, we say we won't, but we will.
We'll get drunk, or lonely, or — likeliest of all — plain damn hopeful, and there are the words gone, used up, grubbied.
We think we might be in love and we're trying out the words to see if they're appropriate?
How can we know what we think till we hear what we say?
Come off it; that won't wash.
These are grand words; we must make sure we deserve them.
Listen to them again: ‘I love you’.
Subject, verb, object: the unadorned, impregnable sentence.
The subject is a short word, implying the self-effacement of the lover.
The verb is longer but unambiguous, a demonstrative moment as the tongue flicks anxiously away from the palate to release the vowel.
The object, like the subject, has no consonants, and is attained by pushing the lips forward as if for a kiss.
‘I love you’.
How serious, how weighted, how freighted it sounds.
I imagine a phonic conspiracy between the world's languages.
They make a conference decision that the phrase must always sound like something to be earned, to be striven for, to be worthy of.
Ich liebe dich : a late-night, cigarette-voiced whisper, with that happy rhyme of subject and object.
Je t'aime : a different procedure, with the subject and object being got out of the way first, so that the long vowel of adoration can be savoured to the full.
(The grammar is also one of reassurance: with the object positioned second, the beloved isn't suddenly going to turn out to be someone different.)
Ya tebya lyublyu : the object once more in consoling second position, but this time despite the hinting rhyme of subject and object — an implication  of difficulty, obstacles to be overcome.
Ti amo : it sounds perhaps a bit too much like an aperitif, but is full of structural conviction with subject and verb, the doer and the deed, enclosed in the same word.
Forgive the amateur approach.
I'll happily hand the project over to some philanthropic foundation devoted to expanding the sum of human knowledge.
Let them commission a research team to examine the phrase in all the languages of the world, to see how it varies, to discover what its sounds denote to those who hear them, to find out if the measure of happiness changes according to the richness of the phrasing.
A question from the floor: are there tribes whose lexicon lacks the words I love you?
Or have they all died out?
We must keep these words in their box behind glass.
And when we take them out we must be careful with them.
Men will say ‘I love you’ to get women into bed with them; women will say ‘I love you’to get men into marriage with them; both will say ‘I love you’to keep fear at bay, to convince themselves of the deed by the word, to assure themselves that the promised condition has arrived, to deceive themselves that it hasn't yet gone away.
We must beware of such uses.
I love you shouldn't go out into the world, become a currency, a traded share, make profits for us.
It will do that if we let it.
But keep this biddable phrase for whispering into a nape from which the absent hair has just been swept.
I'm away from her at the moment; perhaps you guessed.
The transatlantic telephone gives off a mocking, heard-it-all-before echo.
‘I love you’, and before she can answer I hear my metallic other self respond, ‘I love you.’
This isn't satisfactory; the echoing words have gone public.
I try again, with the same result.
I love you I love you — it's become some trilling song popular for a lurid month and then dismissed to the club circuit where pudgy rockers with grease in their hair and yearning in their voice will use it to unfrock the lolling front-row girls.
I love you I love you while the lead guitar giggles and the drummer's tongue lies wetly in his opened mouth.
We must be precise with love, its language and its gestures.
If it is to save us, we must look at it as clearly as we should learn to look at death.
Should love be taught in school?
First term: friendship; second term: tenderness; third term: passion.
Why not?
They teach kids how to cook and mend cars and fuck one another without getting pregnant; and the kids are, we assume, much better at all of this than we were, but what use is any of that to them if they don't know about love?
They're expected to muddle through by themselves.
Nature is supposed to take over, like the automatic pilot on an aeroplane.
Yet Nature, on to whom we pitch responsibility for all we cannot understand, isn't very good when set to automatic.
Trusting virgins drafted into marriage never found Nature had all the answers when they turned out the light.
Trusting virgins were told that love was the promised land, an ark on which two might escape the Flood.
It may be an ark, but one on which anthropophagy is rife; an ark skippered by some crazy greybeard who beats you round the head with his gopher-wood stave, and might pitch you overboard at any moment.
Let's start at the beginning.
Love makes you happy?
No.
Love makes the person you love happy?
No.
Love makes everything all right?
Indeed no.
I used to believe all this, of course.
Who hasn't (who doesn't still, somewhere below decks in the psyche)?
It's in all our books, our films; it's the sunset of a thousand stories.
What would love be for if it didn't solve everything?
Surely we can deduce from the very strength of our aspiration that love, once achieved, eases the daily ache, works some effortless analgesia?
A couple love each other, but they aren't happy.
What do we conclude?
That one of them doesn't really love the other; that they love one another a certain amount but not enough?
I dispute that really; I dispute that enough .
I've loved twice in my life (which seems quite a lot to me), once happily, once unhappily.
It was the unhappy love that taught me most about love's nature — though not at the time, not until years later.
Dates and details — fill them in as you like.
But I was in love, and loved, for a long time, many years.
At first I was brazenly happy, bullish with solipsistic joy; yet most of the time I was  puzzlingly, naggingly unhappy.
Didn't I love her enough?
I knew I did — and put off half my future for her.
Didn't she love me enough?
I knew she did — and gave up half her past for me.
We lived side by side for many years, fretting at what was wrong with the equation we had invented.
Mutual love did not add up to happiness.
Stubbornly, we insisted that it did.
And later I decided what it was I believed about love.
We think of it as an active force.
My love makes her happy; her love makes me happy: how could this be wrong?
It is wrong; it evokes a false conceptual model.
It implies that love is a transforming wand, one that unlooses the ravelled knot, fills the top hat with handkerchiefs, sprays the air with doves.
But the model isn't from magic but particle physics.
My love does not, cannot make her happy; my love can only release in her the capacity to be happy.
And now things seem more understandable.
How come I can't make her happy, how come she can't make me happy?
Simple: the atomic reaction you expect isn't taking place, the beam with which you are bombarding the particles is on the wrong wavelength.
But love isn't an atomic bomb, so let's take a homelier comparison.
I'm writing this at the home of a friend in Michigan.
It's a normal American house with all the gadgets technology can dream (except a gadget for making happiness).
He drove me here from Detroit airport yesterday.
As we turned into the driveway he reached into the glove pocket for a remote-control device; at a masterful touch, the garage doors rolled up and away.
This is the model I propose.
You are arriving home — or think you are — and as you approach the garage you try to work your routine magic.
Nothing happens; the doors remain closed.
You do it again.
Again nothing.
At first puzzled, then anxious, then furious with disbelief, you sit in the driveway with the engine running; you sit there for weeks, months, for years, waiting for the doors to open.
But you are in the wrong car, in front of the wrong garage, waiting outside the wrong house.
One of the troubles is this: the heart isn't heart-shaped.
‘We must love one another or die’, wrote W. H. Auden, bringing from E. M. Forster the declaration: ‘Because he once wrote ‘We must love one another or die’, he can command me to follow him.’
Auden, however, was dissatisfied with this famous line from ‘September 1, 1939’.
‘That's a damned lie!’ he commented, ‘We must die anyway.’
So when reprinting the poem he altered the line to the more logical ‘We must love one another and die’.
Later he suppressed it altogether.
This shift from or to and is one of poetry's most famous emendations.
When I first came across it, I applauded the honest rigour with which Auden the critic revised Auden the poet.
If a line sounds ringingly good but isn't true, out with it — such an approach is bracingly free of writerly self-infatuation.
Now I am not so sure.
We must love one another and die certainly has logic on its side; it's also about as interesting on the subject of the human condition, and as striking, as We must listen to the radio and die or We must remember to defrost the fridge and die .
Auden was rightly suspicious of his own rhetoric; but to say that the line We must love one another or die is untrue because we die anyway (or because those who do not love do not instantly expire) is to take a narrow or forgetful view.
There are equally logical, and more persuasive, ways of reading the or line.
The first, obvious one is this: we must love one another because if we don't we are liable to end up killing one another.
The second is: we must love one another because if we don't, if love doesn't fuel our lives, then we might as well be dead.
This, surely, is no ‘damned lie’, to claim that those who get their deepest satisfactions from other things are living empty lives, are posturing crabs who swagger the sea-bed in borrowed shells.
This is difficult territory.
We must be precise, and we mustn't become sentimental.
If we are to oppose love to such wily, muscled concepts as power, money, history and death, then we mustn't retreat into self-celebration or snobby vagueness.
Love's enemies profit from its unspecific claims, its grand capacity for isolationism So where do we start?
Love may or may not produce happiness; whether or not it does in the end, its primary effect is to energize.
Have you ever talked so well, needed less sleep, returned to sex so eagerly, as when you were  first in love?
The anaemic begin to glow, while the normally healthy become intolerable.
Next, it gives spine-stretching confidence.
You feel you are standing up straight for the first time in your life; you can do anything while this feeling lasts, you can take on the world.
(Shall we make this distinction: that love enhances the confidence, whereas sexual conquest merely develops the ego?)
Then again, it gives clarity of vision: it's a windscreen wiper across the eyeball.
Have you ever seen things so clearly as when you were first in love?
If we look at nature, do we see where love comes in?
Not really.
There are occasional species which apparently mate for life (though imagine the opportunities for adultery on all those long-distance migratory swims and night flights); but on the whole we see merely the exercise of power, dominance and sexual convenience.
The feminist and the chauvinist interpret Nature differently.
The feminist looks for examples of disinterested behaviour in the animal kingdom, sees the male here and there performing tasks which in human society might be characterized as ‘female’.
Consider the king penguin: the male is the one that incubates the egg, carrying it around on its feet and protecting it for months from the Antarctic weather with a fold of its lower belly…
Yeah, replies the chauvinist, and what about the bull elephant seal?
Just lies about on the beach all day and fucks every female in sight.
It does regrettably seem true that the seal's behaviour is more standard than that of the male penguin.
And knowing my sex as I do, I'm inclined to doubt the latter's motivation.
The male penguin might just have calculated that if you're stuck in the Antarctic for years on end then the cleverest thing to do is stay at home minding the egg while you send the female off to catch fish in the freezing waters.
He might just have worked things out to his own convenience.
So where does love come in?
It's not strictly necessary, is it?
We can build dams, like the beaver, without love.
We can organize complex societies, like the bee, without love.
We can travel long distances, like the albatross, without love.
We can put our head in the sand, like the ostrich, without love.
We can die out as a species, like the dodo, without love.
Is it a useful mutation that helps the race survive?
I can't see it.
Was love implanted, for instance, so that warriors would fight harder for their lives, bearing deep inside them the candlelit memory of the domestic hearth?
Hardly: the history of the world teaches us that it is the new form of arrowhead, the canny general, the full stomach and the prospect of plunder that are the decisive factors in war, rather than sentimental minds drooling about home.
Then is love some luxury that sprang up in peaceful times, like quilt-making?
Something pleasant, complex, but inessential?
A random development, culturally reinforced, which just happens to be love rather than something else?
I sometimes think so.
There was once a tribe of Indians in the far north-west of the United States (I'm not inventing them), who lived an extraordinarily easy life.
They were protected from enemies by their isolation and the land they cultivated was boundlessly fertile.
They only had to drop a wizened bean over their shoulders for a plant to spurt from the ground and rain pods at them.
They were healthy, content, and had failed to develop any taste for internecine warfare.
As a result, they had a lot of time on their hands.
No doubt they excelled at things in which indolent societies specialize; no doubt their basketwork became rococo, their erotic skills more gymnastical, their use of crushed leaves to induce stupefying trances increasingly efficient.
We don't know about such aspects of their lives, but we do know what was the main pursuit of their generous leisure hours.
They stole from one another.
That's what they liked to do, and that's what they celebrated.
As they staggered out of their tepees and another faultless day came smooching in from the Pacific, they would sniff the honeyed air and ask one another what they'd got up to the previous night.
The answer would be a shy confession — or smug boast — of theft.
Old Redface had his blanket pilfered again by Little Grey Wolf.
Well, did you ever?
He's coming along, that Little Grey Wolf.
And what did you get up to?
Me?
Oh, I just snitched the eyebrows from the top of the totem-pole.
Oh, not that one again.
Bo- ring .
Is this how we should think of love?
Our love doesn't help us  survive, any more than did the Indians' thieving.
Yet it gives us our individuality, our purpose.
Take away their joyful larcenies and those Indians would be able to define themselves less easily.
So is it just a rogue mutation?
We don't need it for the expansion of our race; indeed, it's inimical to orderly civilization.
Sexual desire would be much easier if we didn't have to worry about love.
Marriage would be more straightforward and perhaps most lasting — if we were not itchy for love, exultant on its arrival, fearful of its departure.
If we look at the history of the world, it seems surprising that love is included.
It's an excrescence, a monstrosity, some tardy addition to the agenda.
It reminds me of those half-houses which according to normal criteria of map reading shouldn't exist.
The other week I went to this North American address: 2041½ Yonge Street.
The owner of 2041 must at some point have sold off a little plot, and this half-numbered, half-acknowledged house was put up.
And yet people can live in it quite comfortably, people call it home…
Tertullian said of Christian belief that it was true because it was impossible.
Perhaps love is essential because it's unnecessary.
She is the centre of my world.
The Armenians believed that Ararat was the centre of the world; but the mountain was divided between three great empires, and the Armenians ended up with none of it, so I shan't continue this comparison.
I love you .
I'm home again, and there's no mocking echo on the words.
Je t'aime .
Ti amo (with soda).
And if you had no tongue, no celebrating language, you'd do this: cross your hands at the wrist with palms facing towards you; place your crossed wrists over your heart (the middle of your chest, anyway); then move your hands outwards a short distance, and open them towards the object of your love.
It's just as eloquent as speech.
And imagine all the tender modulations that are possible, the subtleties that can be constructed from kissing knuckles, matching palms and playful fingertips whose whorled pads bear the proof of our individuality.
But matching palms mislead.
The heart isn't heart-shaped, that's one of our problems.
We imagine, don't we, some neat  bivalve whose shape encodes the way in which love fuses two halves, two separatenesses, into a whole?
We imagine this crisp symbol scarlet with a powerful blush, scarlet also with the blood of tumescence.
A medical textbook doesn't immediately disenchant us; here the heart is mapped like the London Underground.
Aorta, left and right pulmonary arteria and veins, left and right subclavian arteries, left and right coronary arteries, left and right carotid arteries…it looks elegant, purposeful, a confident network of pumping tubes.
Here the blood runs on time, you think.
 Reverberant facts:
— the heart is the first organ to develop in the embryo; when we are no more than the size of a kidney bean, our heart is visible, pumping away;
— in a child, the heart is proportionately much larger than in an adult: th; of total body weight, as opposed to th;;
— during life the size, shape and position of the heart are subject to considerable variations;
— after death the heart assumes the shape of a pyramid.
The ox heart I bought at Corrigans weighed 2lbs 13oz and cost £2.42p.
The biggest available animal specimen; but also one with human application.
‘He had the heart of an ox’: a phrase from the literature of Empire, of adventure, of childhood.
Those pith-helmeted cavaliers who despatched rhinos with a single well-placed slug from an army pistol while the colonel's daughter cowered behind the baobab had simple natures but not, if this ox was anything to go by, simple hearts.
The organ was heavy, squat, bloody, clamped tight like a violent fist.
Unlike the railway map in the textbook, the real thing proved close and reluctant with its secrets.
I sliced it up with a radiologist friend.
‘It hadn't got long to go, this ox,’ she commented.
Had the heart belonged to one of her patients, he wouldn't have pangaed his way through many more jungles.
Our own small journey was effected with a Sabatier kitchen knife.
We hacked our way into the left atrium  and left ventricle, admiring the porterhouse heft of the muscles.
We stroked the silky Rue de Rivoli lining, poked our fingers into exit wounds.
The veins were stretch elastic, the arteries chunky squid.
A post-mortal blood clot lay like a burgundy slug in the left ventricle.
We frequently lost our way in this compacted meat.
The two halves of the heart did not ease apart as I'd fancifully imagined, but clung desperately round one another like drowning lovers.
We cut into the same ventricle twice, believing we'd found the other one.
We admired the clever valve system, and the chordae tendineae which restrain each valve from opening too far: a tough little parachute harness preventing over-deployment of the canopy.
After we'd finished with it, the heart lay on a stained bed of newspaper for the rest of the day, reduced to an unpromising dinner.
I went through cookbooks to see what I might do with it.
I did find one recipe, for stuffed heart served with boiled rice and wedges of lemon, but it didn't sound very inviting.
It certainly didn't merit the name given it by the Danes, who invented it.
They call this dish Passionate Love.
Do you remember that paradox of love, of the first few weeks and months of Passionate Love (it's capitalized, like the recipe, to begin with)— the paradox about time?
You are in love, at a point where pride and apprehension scuffle within you.
Part of you wants time to slow down: for this, you say to yourself, is the best period of your whole life.
I am in love, I want to savour it, study it, lie around in languor with it; may today last forever.
This is your poetical side.
However, there is also your prose side, which urges time not to slow down but hurry up.
How do you know this is love, your prose side whispers like a sceptical lawyer, it's only been around for a few weeks, a few months.
You won't know it's the real thing unless you (and she) still feel the same in, oh, a year or so at least; that's the only way to prove you aren't living a dragonfly mistake.
Get through this bit, however much you enjoy it, as fast as possible; then you'll be able to find out whether or not you're really in love.
A photograph develops in a tray of liquid.
Previously it's been just a blank sheet of printing paper shut up in a lightproof  envelope; now it has a function, an image, a certainty.
We slide the photo quickly into the tray of fixer to secure that clear, vulnerable moment, to make the image harder, unchippable, solid for at least a few years.
But what if you plunge it into the fixer and the chemical doesn't work?
This progress, this amorous motion you feel, might refuse to stabilize.
Have you seen a picture go on relentlessly developing until its whole surface is black, its celebratory moment obliterated?
Is it normal, this state of love, or abnormal?
Statistically, of course, it's abnormal.
In a wedding photograph, the interesting faces are not those of the bride and groom, but of the encircling guests: the bride's younger sister (will it happen to me, the tremendous thing?), the groom's elder brother (will she let him down like that bitch did me?), the bride's mother (how it takes me back), the groom's father (if the lad knew what I know now if only I'd known what I know now), the priest (strange how even the tongue-tied are moved to eloquence by these ancient vows), the scowling adolescent (what do they want to get married for?), and so on.
The central couple are in a profoundly abnormal state; yet try telling them that.
Their condition feels more normal than it has ever done before.
This is normal, they say to one another; all that time before, which we thought was normal, wasn't normal at all .
And such conviction of normality, such certainty that their essence has been developed and fixed by love, and is now to be framed forever, gives them a touching arrogance.
This is definitely abnormal: when else is arrogance touching?
It is here.
Look at the photo again: study, beneath the happy dentition, the serious self-satisfaction of the moment.
How can you not be moved?
Couples noisy with their love (for nobody has ever loved before — not properly — have they?) may irritate, but can't be mocked.
Even when there's something to make an emotional conformist smirk — some thumping disparity of age, looks, education, pretension — the couple have for this moment a lacquer finish: laughter's bubbling spittle simply wipes off.
The young man on the older woman's arm, the frump attached to the dandy, the hostess chained to an ascetic: they all feel profoundly  normal.
And this should move us.
They will be feeling indulgent towards us, because we are not so evidently, so rowdily in love; yet we should be discreetly indulgent towards them.
Don't get me wrong.
I'm not recommending one form of love over another.
I don't know if prudent or reckless love is the better, moneyed or penniless love the surer, heterosexual or homosexual love the sexier, married or unmarried love the stronger.
I may be tempted towards didacticism, but this isn't an advice column.
I can't tell you whether or not you're in love.
If you need to ask, then you probably aren't, that's my only advice (and even this might be wrong).
I can't tell you who to love, or how to love: those school courses would be how-not-not-to as much as how-to classes (it's like creative writing — you can't teach them how to write or what to write, only usefully point out where they're going wrong and save them time).
But I can tell you why to love.
Because the history of the world, which only stops at the half-house of love to bulldoze it into rubble, is ridiculous without it.
The history of the world becomes brutally self-important without love.
Our random mutation is essential because it is unnecessary.
Love won't change the history of the world (that nonsense about Cleopatra's nose is strictly for sentimentalists), but it will do something much more important: teach us to stand up to history, to ignore its chin-out strut.
I don't accept your terms, love says; sorry, you don't impress, and by the way what a silly uniform you're wearing.
Of course, we don't fall in love to help out with the world's ego problem; yet this is one of love's surer effects.
Love and truth, that's the vital connection, love and truth.
Have you ever told so much truth as when you were first in love?
Have you ever seen the world so clearly?
Love makes us see the truth, makes it our duty to tell the truth.
Lying in bed: listen to the undertow of warning in that phrase.
Lying in bed, we tell the truth : it sounds like a paradoxical sentence from a first-year philosophy primer.
But it's more (and less) than that: a description of moral duty.
Don't roll that eyeball, give a flattering groan, fake that orgasm.
Tell the truth with your body even if— especially if — that truth is not melodramatic.
Bed is one of the  prime places where you can lie without getting caught, where you can holler and grunt in the dark and later boast about your ‘performance’.
Sex isn't acting (however much we admire our own script); sex is about truth.
How you cuddle in the dark governs how you see the history of the world.
It's as simple as that.
We get scared by history; we allow ourselves to be bullied by data.
In fourteen hundred and ninety-two Columbus sailed the ocean blue
And then what?
Everyone became wiser?
People stopped building new ghettoes in which to practise the old persecutions?
Stopped making the old mistakes, or new mistakes, or new versions of old mistakes?
(And does history repeat itself, the first time as tragedy, the second time as farce?
No, that's too grand, too considered a process.
History just burps, and we taste again that raw-onion sandwich it swallowed centuries ago.)
Dates don't tell the truth.
They bawl at us — left, right, left, right, pick 'em up there you miserable shower.
They want to make us think we're always progressing, always going forward.
But what happened after 1492?
In fourteen hundred and ninety-three He sailed right back across the sea
That's the sort of date I like.
Let's celebrate 1493, not 1492; the return, not the discovery.
What happened in 1493?
The predictable glory, of course, the royal flattery, the heraldic promotions on the Columbus scutcheon.
But there was also this.
Before departure a prize of 10,000 maravedis had been promised to the first man to sight the New World.
An ordinary sailor had won this bounty, yet when the expedition returned Columbus claimed it for himself (the dove still elbowing the raven from history).
The sailor went off in disappointment to  Morocco where, they say, he became a renegade.
It was an interesting year, 1493.
History isn't what happened.
History is just what historians tell us.
There was a pattern, a plan, a movement, expansion, the march of democracy; it is a tapestry, a flow of events, a complex narrative, connected, explicable.
One good story leads to another.
First it was kings and archbishops with some offstage divine tinkering, then it was the march of ideas and the movements of masses, then little local events which mean something bigger, but all the time it's connections, progress, meaning, this led to this, this happened because of this.
And we, the readers of history, the sufferers from history, we scan the pattern for hopeful conclusions, for the way ahead.
And we cling to history as a series of salon pictures, conversation pieces whose participants we can easily reimagine back into life, when all the time it's more like a multi-media collage, with paint applied by decorator's roller rather than camel-hair brush.
The history of the world?
Just voices echoing in the dark; images that burn for a few centuries and then fade; stories, old stories that sometimes seem to overlap; strange links, impertinent connections.
We lie here in our hospital bed of the present (what nice clean sheets we get nowadays) with a bubble of daily news drip-fed into our arm.
We think we know who we are, though we don't quite know why we're here, or how long we shall be forced to stay.
And while we fret and writhe in bandaged uncertainty — are we a voluntary patient?— we fabulate.
We make up a story to cover the facts we don't know or can't accept; we keep a few true facts and spin a new story round them.
Our panic and our pain are only eased by soothing fabulation; we call it history.
There's one thing I'll say for history.
It's very good at finding things.
We try to cover them up, but history doesn't let go.
It's got time on its side, time and science.
However ferociously we ink over our first thoughts, history finds a way of reading them.
We bury our victims in secrecy (strangled princelings, irradiated reindeer), but history discovers what we did to them.
We lost the Titanic , forever it seemed, in the squid-ink depths, but  they turned it up.
They found the wreck of the Medusa not long ago, off the coast of Mauretania.
There wasn't any hope of treasure, they knew that; and all they salvaged after a hundred and seventy five years were a few copper nails from the frigate's hull and a couple of cannon.
But they went and found it just the same.
What else can love do?
If we're selling it, we'd better point out that it's a starting-point for civic virtue.
You can't love someone without imaginative sympathy, without beginning to see the world from another point of view.
You can't be a good lover, a good artist or a good politician without this capacity (you can get away with it, but that's not what I mean).
Show me the tyrants who have been great lovers.
By which I don't mean great fuckers; we all know about power as an aphrodisiac (an auto-aphrodisiac too).
Even our democratic hero Kennedy serviced women like an assembly-line worker spraying car bodies.
There is an intermittent debate, in these last dying millennia of puritanism, about the connection between sexual orthodoxy and the exercise of power.
If a President can't keep his pants on, does he lose the right to rule us?
If a public servant cheats on his wife does this make him more likely to cheat on the electorate?
For myself, I'd rather be ruled by an adulterer, by some sexual rogue, than by a prim celibate or zipped-up spouse.
As criminals tend to specialize in certain crimes, so corrupt politicians normally specialize in their corruption: the sexual blackguards stick to fucking, the bribe-takers to graft.
In which case it would make more sense to elect proven adulterers instead of discouraging them from public life.
I don't say we should pardon them — on the contrary, we need to fan their guilt.
But by harnessing this useful emotion we restrict their sinning to the erotic sphere, and produce a countervailing integrity in their governing.
That's my theory, anyway.
In Great Britain, where most of the politicians are men, there's a tradition among the Conservative Party to interview the wives of potential candidates.
This is, of course, a demeaning occasion, with the wife being vetted by the local members  for normality.
(Is she sane?
Is she steady?
Is she the right colour?
Does she have sound views?
Is she a tart?
Will she look good in photos?
Can we let her out canvassing?)
They ask these wives, who dutifully vie with one another in supportive dullness, many questions, and the wives solemnly swear their joint commitment to nuclear weapons and the sanctity of the family.
But they don't ask them the most important question: does your husband love you?
The question shouldn't be misunderstood as being merely practical (is your marriage free from scandal?) or sentimental; it's an exact enquiry about the candidate's fitness to represent other people.
It's a test of his imaginative sympathy.
We must be precise about love.
Ah, you want descriptions, perhaps?
What are her legs like, her breasts, her lips, what colour is that hair?
(Well, sorry.)
No, being precise about love means attending to the heart, its pulses, its certainties, its truth, its power — and its imperfections.
After death the heart becomes a pyramid (it has always been one of the wonders of the world); but even in life the heart was never heart-shaped.
Put the heart beside the brain and see the difference.
The brain is neat, segmented, divided into two halves as we imagine the heart should obviously be.
You can deal with the brain, you think; it is a receptive organ, one that invites comprehension.
The brain looks sensible.
It's complicated, to be sure, with all those wrinkles and frowns and gulleys and pockets; it resembles coral, making you wonder if it might be surreptitiously on the move all the time, quietly adding to itself without your noticing.
The brain has its secrets, though when cryptanalysts, maze-builders and surgeons unite, it will surely be possible to solve those mysteries.
You can deal with the brain, as I say; it looks sensible.
Whereas the heart, the human heart, I'm afraid, looks a fucking mess.
Love is anti-mechanical, anti-materialist: that's why bad love is still good love.
It may make us unhappy, but it insists that the mechanical and the material needn't be in charge.
Religion has become either wimpishly workaday, or terminally crazy, or merely businesslike — confusing spirituality with charitable donations.
Art, picking up confidence from the decline of  religion, announces its transcendence of the world (and it lasts, it lasts! art beats death!), but this announcement isn't accessible to all, or where accessible isn't always inspiring or welcome.
So religion and art must yield to love.
It gives us our humanity, and also our mysticism.
There is more to us than us.
The materialist argument attacks love, of course; it attacks everything.
Love boils down to pheromones, it says.
This bounding of the heart, this clarity of vision, this energizing, this moral certainty, this exaltation, this civic virtue, this murmured I love you , are all caused by a low-level smell emitted by one partner and subconsciously nosed by the other.
We are just a grander version of that beetle bashing its head in a box at the sound of a tapped pencil.
Do we believe this?
Well, let's believe it for the moment, because it makes love's triumph the greater.
What is a violin made of?
Bits of wood and bits of sheep's intestine.
Does its construction demean and banalize the music?
On the contrary, it exalts the music further.
And I'm not saying love will make you happy — above all, I'm not saying that.
If anything, I tend to believe that it will make you unhappy: either immediately unhappy, as you are impaled by incompatibility, or unhappy later, when the woodworm has quietly been gnawing away for years and the bishop's throne collapses.
But you can believe this and still insist that love is our only hope.
It's our only hope even if it fails us, although it fails us, because it fails us.
Am I losing precision?
What I'm searching for is the right comparison.
Love and truth, yes, that's the prime connection.
We all know objective truth is not obtainable, that when some event occurs we shall have a multiplicity of subjective truths which we assess and then fabulate into history, into some God-eyed version of what ‘really’ happened.
This God-eyed version is a fake — a charming, impossible fake, like those medieval paintings which show all the stages of Christ's Passion happening simultaneously in different parts of the picture.
But while we know this, we must still believe that objective truth is obtainable; or we must believe that it is 99 per cent obtainable; or if we can't believe this we must believe that  43 per cent objective truth is better than 41 per cent.
We must do so, because if we don't we're lost, we fall into beguiling relativity, we value one liar's version as much as another liar's, we throw up our hands at the puzzle of it all, we admit that the victor has the right not just to the spoils but also to the truth.
(Whose truth do we prefer, by the way, the victor's or the victim's?
Are pride and compassion greater distorters than shame and fear?)
And so it is with love.
We must believe in it, or we're lost.
We may not obtain it, or we may obtain it and find it renders us unhappy; we must still believe in it.
If we don't, then we merely surrender to the history of the world and to someone else's truth.
It will go wrong, this love; it probably will.
That contorted organ, like the lump of ox meat, is devious and enclosed.
Our current model for the universe is entropy, which at the daily level translates as: things fuck up.
But when love fails us, we must still go on believing in it.
Is it encoded in every molecule that things fuck up, that love will fail?
Perhaps it is.
Still we must believe in love, just as we must believe in free will and objective truth.
And when love fails, we should blame the history of the world.
If only it had left us alone, we could have been happy, we could have gone on being happy.
Our love has gone, and it is the fault of the history of the world.
But that's still to come.
Perhaps it will never come.
In the night the world can be defied.
Yes, that's right, it can be done, we can face history down.
Excited, I stir and kick.
She shifts and gives a subterranean, a subaqueous sigh.
Don't wake her.
It seems a grand truth now, though in the morning it may not seem worth disturbing her for.
She gives a gentler, lesser sigh.
I sense the map of her body beside me in the dark.
I turn on my side, make a parallel zigzag, and wait for sleep.