

‘The greatest man in England, except Lord Mansfield’
THEY HAD STOPPED IN ARBROATH, to view the Abbey.
‘I should scarcely have regretted my journey,’ claimed Johnson, ‘had it afforded nothing more than the sight of Aberbrothick.’
The cobbled forecourt has been defiled with intimidating NO PARKING notices, a mote in the eye of the Abbey's red calm.
Inside, peace reigns, even in driving rain.
Johnson found it full of weeds; today it is tailored and fitted.
A close lawn laps the feet of the giant church's ancient heights, and some of the long-departed community's living quarters are as smoothly preserved as an abbot's jowls.
All such buildings resemble huge ships, the gaping walls like spars awaiting rigging.
Arbroath's south transept even looks as if it has smelt the wind under which it will sail; it is a tall, bare, one-shouldered hulk with a single blank eye at the high gable top where a rose window used to be.
The guidebook, which speaks of lancets, arcades and cusps, says the locals call the eyeless window, with tautological logic, ‘the round O’.
Flemish illuminations in the abbot's house, now a museum, recall the teeming peasantry of Avercamp and Breughel paintings.
On Christmas Eve, 1950, nationalists stole the Stone of Scone from Westminster Abbey and laid it in the grounds of Arbroath Abbey.
In their protest they sought to restore some political coals to Newcastle: the Declaration of Arbroath in 1320 committed the lay and ecclesiastical nobles of Scotland to support Robert Bruce, who stood against proud Edward's army, and sent him homeward to think again.
Always touch the walls of an old abbey — for the currents of  ancient idea coming through from learned men, and for the systems that housed them.
Arbroath's walls offer a well-groomed feel, powdered silk, which must have as much to do with the history of the place as with Historic Scotland's care.
The Abbey was dedicated to the dead Thomas à Becket by William the Lion, King of Scotland, in thanks for the Canterbury saint's supernatural rescue of William from enemies at Alnwick.
The air in these places must be invisibly thick with the old sounds of monks, and their thoughts, and their cloistered politics.
Arbroath was founded in 1178 by an order descended from Abbot Bernard who left Poitiers for Tiron; monks from this Benedictine reform group of Tironensians established Kelso down on the Borders, and two friars came thence to Arbroath.
Did those scribes care for their hands, tend their fingers, in the way classical musicians are reputed to?
If so, would that have been vanity to the point of sin — or merely preserving the Lord's gift?
Did they get excited when a new supply of lapis lazuli came in from Afghanistan?
Who among them caught the badgers and squirrels from which they made their fine paint brushes?
Did the women of the locality — and/or the imagination — constitute a perennial problem?
Perhaps only if you did not have power: Beaton from St Andrews came to Arbroath in 1524: the Abbey contributed to the lifestyle and wellbeing of his mistress, a fecund Miss Ogilvy, and their seven bastards.
The restorers have thoughtfully provided viewing platforms from which to contemplate the fabric of Arbroath, and search for such things as a volute capital, or a corbel; the guide-book mentions an ‘aumbry in the west wall’: it must mean ‘ambry’, a small cupboard, or closet.
In the life-givingness of words, Architecture and Building possess the loveliest vocabularies: chamfer, aedicule, caryatid, quoin, hammerbeam, oriel, newel, mandorla, garth — a music unto itself.
The Arbroath guidebook's glossary has some of these —‘clearstorey: the range of windows in the upper part of a building; Frater: a monastic refectory or dining hall [alas not taken from the Latin for ‘brother’, but from a French reduction of ‘refreshment']; Gablet: a decorative design in the form of a small gable, often above a window; Pend: a vaulted passageway [several pends in St Andrews]; Slype: a passage; Triforium: the arcaded  gallery between the main arcade and clearstorey; Tympanum: the enclosed space within the head of an arched doorway [does that mean it has a space behind like a drumhead — an open space inviting impressions to be made upon it?]’
And always listen to old walls.
Creatures may live within —; small birds, ticking beetles, crickets: no cheeping, nor any active sounds here, just the passive sound of silence.
All is not lost — old walls appeal to four of the five senses, taste alone being inadvisable.
Their antique regularity, the sense that the insides of those outer courses were last touched by human hand eight hundred years ago, reads like a time-travelling adventure story.
They smell of dry dampness, not a readily marketable perfume in the salons of Europe, but an affirming odour, not of sanctity, nor of history — more of the earth, of the quarries from which they were hewn, to be shaped by men who could cut stone as other monks cut the cloth for their grey robes.
Touch, definitely, brings the most rewards: these walls handle like human beings, inviting those with a weakness for the elegiac to enjoy them, and continue rubbing a hand along them.
Johnson wrote to Mrs Thrale that however ruined he found it, the Abbey's ‘fabrick was once of great extent, and stupendous magnificence’.
He may have meant the general composition of what had been the whole great building: who is to say that he did not also intend the look, smell, feel and silence of these stones?
It becomes easy to picture himself and Boswell here, their servant outside holding the horse's head, while Johnson's taxi, his post-chaise, waited: ‘The arch of one of the gates is entire, and another only so far dilapidated as to diversify the appearance,; Sam himself with his famous stick prodding in the weeds, gauging the cut of the stone as he might examine the shoulders of a friend's new frock-coat, measuring distances, tracing nave, crossing, choir, transept — inhaling meaning and implication, and converting it into judgment and knowledge.
How noble these pillars, and how good for the imagination.
Sometimes, people in ancient places, in flashes of paranormal imagination, see once again the Forum in Pompeii as it must have been a few days before Mount Etna's eruption; or — was it Freud's or Jung's story?— musicians in a Rhenish Schloss, playing  clavichords for a duke and his family.
‘Its ruins,’ said Johnson of Arbroath, ‘afford ample testimony of its ancient magnificence.’
The twelfth abbot, according to the guidebook, was the subject of complaints to the Pope, that he had treated his flock, ‘not like a gentle shepherd, but like a ravening wolf, harrying it ‘with the stings of affliction, and the bites of persecution’, bestowing its property upon his kinsfolk and driving from the monastery those who dared to oppose him'.
How it rained in Arbroath; trying to see through curtains of falling water makes a nonsense of note-taking.
Yet, Boswell must have written on the hoof, and in fat detail — a diligence requiring either unstoppable ambition, and an almost morbid discipline — or both.
The Life of Johnson makes plain how Boswell had been staking out the ground since their early acquaintance, making notes immediately after each meeting of what he himself was eventually to ‘consider the peculiar value’ of the Life, ‘that is, the quantity it contains of Johnson's conversation’.
In September 1764, eighteen months after they first met, Boswell told Johnson in a letter from Saxony, ‘It shall be my study to do what I can to render your life happy; and, if you die before me, I shall endeavour to do honour to your memory.’
He grew less oblique — as in May 1768, five years before the Hebrides tour.
Boswell finding Johnson ‘in the kindest and most agreeable frame of mind’ asked him ‘explicitly whether it would be improper to publish his letters after his death.
His answer was, ‘Nay, Sir, when I am dead, you may do as you will.’’
The celebrated modus operandi was more or less specified by Johnson himself.
There is an entry in the Life for Tuesday, 31 March 1772, recounting a conversation the pair had in Boswell's lodgings at Conduit Street in London, having lunched with General Paoli, an Italian military statesman, another of Boswell's scalps, to whom he had introduced Johnson.
Boswell does not say which of them raised the question of biography, and somewhat out of context he leads into a comment from Johnson: ‘Nobody can write the life of a man, but those who have eat and drunk and lived in social intercourse with him.’
I said, that if it was not troublesome and presuming too much, I would  request him to tell me all the little circumstances of his life; what schools he attended, when he came to Oxford, when he came to London, &c., &c., He did not disapprove of my curiosity as to these particulars; but said, ‘They'll come out by degrees as we talk together.’’
A year later, on Tuesday, 13 April 1773, Boswell ‘again solicited him to communicate to me the particulars of his early life.
He said, ‘You shall have them all for twopence.
I hope you will know a great deal more of me before you write my Life.’’
So, by the time they went to Scotland, Boswell had visibly engaged with the project, which accounts for the everyday discipline he displayed in writing his Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides.
At eleven o'clock that Friday night they arrived in Montrose.
The travellers regarded their inn, The Ship (long eroded), as no more than a functional staging-post, an ill-mannered house, too, run by William Driver — an Englishman, as Boswell pointed out to Johnson with some glee.
Johnson's account discusses the hostelry's unsavouriness by contrast with the generally strong composure of the town, which he found ‘well built, airy and clean’, but at the inn ‘did not find a reception such as we thought proportionate to the commercial opulence of the place’.
Some dirty-finger business again took place with the sugar in the lemonade, as had happened in Boyd's at Edinburgh.
The pair then sat and talked desultorily.
For ‘proposing to carry lemons with us to Sky [sic]that he might be sure to have his lemonade’, Johnson ticked off Boswell — on two counts: that he, Sam, did not wish to be viewed as someone who could not do without his preferences; and that it was ‘very bad manners to carry provisions to any man's house, as if he could not entertain you.
To an inferior it is oppressive; to a superior it is insolent.’
They discussed two histories of music recently advertised, and Boswell believed each would suffer from the other.
Johnson contradicted this, believing the comparisons would talk both books into greater prominence.
The intrusive Boswell then took another liberty —; that of pointing out to Johnson ‘that he very often sat quite silent for a long time, even when in company with only a single friend’, at which Johnson reminded Boswell of an acquaintance who had  once observed, ‘Sir, you are like a ghost: you never speak till you are spoken to.’
Boswell's biographical method pulls a double bind: he irritates while he rewards.
On the one hand, his invasiveness of Johnson triggers an immediate cringe: on the other, were not Boswell so crass so frequently, his readers could not get so close to Johnson.
Modern biographers suffer many accusations: that they trawl too widely and deeply; that they pick over entrails insensitively, confirming Dr Arbuthnot's definition of biography as ‘the new terror of death’; that they invade their subject's most intimate quarters and lay all bare, regardless, it is said, of relevance or the feelings of surviving kin.
Boswell conducted his invasiveness while Johnson was still alive, and even though the result seems not overtly lurid, I doubt whether many areas of Johnson remained uncombed.
In general, Boswell's Life of Johnson provides an immortal Pepysian and aromatic sweep of eighteenth-century literary society, recounted in Boswell's lovely candour and flawedness.
The essential triumph comes from the assembly of details, and the most valuable of these is revealed where contradictoriness is introduced, at which point the picture of Johnson always grows clearer.
Thus, at Montrose, Boswell took a sharp likeness, in which we see the other side of the opinionated, often pompous, astonishingly patronising Johnson, the man with a statement on everything, the clumping, farting, knob-faced denouncer; Johnson was also a thoughtful man of good manners and pensiveness, a quiet, reflective, astute man who had been knocked around.
When he arrived in London from Lichfield, Johnson had to use his strapping muscles and burliness: he became a porter in Covent Garden in order to subsist.
Now, the elderly man who endured a waiter's dirty fingers in his lemonade at Montrose could hardly have been more famous or respected, and there he sits in a dirty inn, happy to enjoy a little quiet, and quite at ease to do so, even in the company of one of the most garrulous men in the realm whose nature abhorred a conversational vacuum; Johnson even expressed a simple delight in being thought as silent as a ghost.
A further gloss on this quieter side of his character appears during Johnson's own reflection in (rather than upon) Montrose — where he comments that he has by now had an opportunity to  compare Scotland's beggars with others he has seen.
He makes two points: one, that they are as numerous proportionately in Edinburgh as in London, but in Scottish towns more plentiful than in comparable English locations; and two, on the whole he finds them more quiet, and modest.
He wonders if this be a drawback, perhaps, to their ultimate aim?
‘Though their behaviour may strike with more force the heart of a stranger, they are certainly in danger of missing the attention of their countrymen.’
Next morning, the pair took the air of Montrose; they saw the church, since replaced with another; the town hall had ‘a handsome fabrick with a portico’, wrote Johnson (it still has), while Boswell noted that it had a ‘good dancing-room, and other rooms for tea-drinking’.
Today, it houses municipal authorities, and at ten o'clock last night a bell rang continuously from that direction —‘The curfew,’ said the hotel porter this summer morning in 1991.
A neat museum houses military uniforms of the Johnsonian period alongside a park as tailored as Scottish prudence.
Johnson went into an apothecary's with a prescription he filled out for himself; on account of the Latin, and perhaps on account of his title, the chemist's counter-hand took Dr Johnson for a medical man.
For all his invasive tendencies, Boswell does not tell us why Johnson needed medicine.
The journey from Montrose to Laurencekirk, ten and a half miles, takes three hours and a quarter on foot, on the undulating and awkward A937.
Hugh MacDiarmid, who lived at Montrose, and edited the local newspaper while enjoying a fruitful period of his literary life, described Montrose as ‘a very attractive small burgh with a wide agricultural hinterland’, and these fields now began to materialise.
Distant, forested hills to the left and smaller hills on the right contributed their surges to the surface of the countryside, and these undulations across the land ran under the roadway like energy cables, sapping the strength from the legs.
Johnson found the terrain ‘still naked’ but bountiful, with land so utterly ploughed that he wondered where the grass grew to feed the plough-horses.
Before they headed onwards, Boswell wrote a note at their unappetising inn.
Monboddo was one of eighteenth-century Britain's quirks.
A judge and landlord, he throve on amateur metaphysics and early anthropology, purveying monkey theories almost a century ahead of Darwin.
A tinch less rigorous, though: Monboddo believed that monkeys became men when the practice of sitting down eventually eroded their tails.
An etymologist too: in a study called Origin and Progress of Language, which appeared in six volumes between 1773 and 1792, Monboddo dismissed Johnson's most singular achievement in the same field, saying Johnson ‘had compiled a dictionary of a barbarous language, a work which a man of real genius, rather than undertake, would choose to die of hunger’.
Johnson held a not dissimilar reciprocal opinion, comparing Monboddo to another of his own bugbears, Rousseau.
Four years earlier he told Boswell that the difference between the two was that whereas Rousseau talked nonsense and knew he did — because he talked it so well — Monboddo, who talked an inferior brand, did not know he was talking nonsense.
In other words, for a man to talk lowgrade nonsense, at any time, much less constantly, and never know he was doing it…?
What, thus, may we infer exactly from Johnson's remark that he would go two miles out of his way to meet Monboddo?
Only two?
Laurencekirk has another of those long, long streets; home for four years and by then long gone, of Thomas Ruddiman the grammarian, mentioned by Boswell and admired by Johnson.
They called on the minister in Laurencekirk, who at first refused to  respond to the announcement of their arrival, until Boswell sent in his name.
Then the minister deigned to appear and defended himself by saying he had once come out to a stranger who called, but the man proved to be ‘a little worth person’.
Lord Monboddo's eccentric grandeur has disappeared.
A speculative developer rearranged the ancient house, and in the grounds built several modern houses, so that the original configuration of the mansion's direct surroundings has almost been obscured.
Over the cream pebble-dash and olive grey windows of the great house, some turrets may yet be seen beneath what I take to be the original small roof-slates; and a plaque high on the wall —; ‘1635 RE’ with what looks like ‘ID’; and a couple of lions guarding the door.
No reply from the down-a-step hall door: the new owners have raised a fine hedge of thick honeysuckle; an enormous monkeypuzzle dominates the immediate skyline.
‘Monboddo,’ says Boswell, ‘is a wretched place, wild and naked, with a poor old house; though if I recollect right,[he did]there are two turrets which mark an old baron's residence.’
En route across this bare land, Johnson recited Macbeth's speech on meeting the witches.
‘Say from whence you owe this strange intelligence? or why upon this blasted heath you stop our way with such prophetic greeting?’
His Lordship Monboddo, wearing a little round hat and a farmer's suit, met them at the gate.
The area surrounding Monboddo must have contained an aerodrome at some stage, perhaps during wartime, as evidenced in a few remaining Nissen huts, now filled with old packing cases and pallets, and undistinguished, domestic timber artefacts of all sorts.
Although the landscape did not disappoint me nearly as severely as it did Johnson — subsequent farmers have grown many trees, and in the distance a great house still touches the sky — Monboddo may no longer be considered a classical Scottish fortified house.
Nigel Tranter, in volume four (published 1966) of his series The Fortified House in Scotland, claims that Monboddo merits attention, even if‘decayed’ and ‘in a bad state structurally’.
Since Tranter's description, the renovator has removed any possibility of seeing, for instance, a gaunt and wild building like the House of Shaws in Kidnapped, where David Balfour almost met his death at the hands of his scheming uncle.
Tranter found something like six  hundred of these fortified houses across Scotland, and attributes their presence to a combination of national character and links with France.
When tall, angled, high-gabled and firm, they have perfected the art of looming, and some of their gateways are arched with stone, and some of their tower windows might still have a Mary, Queen of Scots, or a tartan Lady of Shalott roaming soulfully behind their small winking panes, or a Rapunzel leaning out into the sunshine.
They symbolise ‘Adventure-Scotland’, with that certain Gothic-ness of Stevenson again, and Scott even more.
What imagination anywhere could not respond to the image of strangers galloping hard on a moonswept night towards such high turrets?
Not so in Monboddo today.
When Greek met Greek here, they talked of a Greek, Homer —; and of other things, farming, and Virgil, and cider-making, and emigration, and manners, and biography, and learning.
The conversation flowed with the current of many Johnsonian exchanges — a topic raised, a little amplification and a final exegesis, leading to a brief conclusion, in which Johnson habitually dangled one of his bright flashes of learning, catching the sun.
His capacity for controversy in such social encounters had gained Johnson a great deal of his divinity in English letters, but in Scotland, with the good manners of a visitor necessarily prevailing, such intercourse invariably proved pleasant, Lord Monboddo's house typically thus.
Neither man liked the other, but they had strewn eggs in their own pathways towards each other and they walked on them all afternoon.
Except at the beginning, when the eccentric lord immediately clashed with Johnson, even though Johnson says that the magnetism of Lord Monboddo's conversation ‘easily drew us out of our way, and the entertainment which we received would have been a sufficient recompense for a much greater deviation’.
Monboddo opened the game with his belief that our ancestors were greater than ourselves.
Johnson disagreed: ‘No, no my lord.
We are as strong as they and a great deal wiser,’ which, as Boswell points out, ‘was an assault upon one of Lord Monboddo's capital dogmas, and I was afraid there would have been a violent altercation in the very close, before we got into the house’.
Fortunately Monboddo's ‘ancient politesse’ stirred itself, and thereby was social  catastrophe averted.
Johnson thereafter responded to his host's familial hospitality with courtesy and agreeableness.
This is how the afternoon proceeded.
Monboddo led them in, saying that since he was dressed like a farmer, they should have with him a farmer's family dinner.
Remarking that he would not have forgiven Boswell had he not brought Johnson to Monboddo, he showed the travellers a stalk of corn, his laetas segetes, his abundant crop, and remarked that Virgil, to judge from his writings, seemed an equally practical and enthusiastic farmer.
Whereupon Johnson observed that it did not necessarily follow ‘that a man who has written a good poem on an art, has practised it’, citing excellently instructive verses on cider by a man never known to have made any.
Boswell raised the topic of emigration: Johnson distinguished between its value to ‘a man of mere animal life’ and ‘a man of any intellectual enjoyment’: the former content to wait for the earth to produce, the latter unlikely to wish barbarism upon himself and his descendants.
In the next exchange — or, rather, Boswell's footnote to it —; comes another part of the answer to that literary-sleuth question of Boswell's Physical modus operandi.
Today he would have had a tape recorder: did he, like Dickens, at least have shorthand, a not unknown writerly aid since Cicero's time?
In London he sat beside Johnson in their various venues; now he rode beside him in the post-chaise taking them up through eastern Scotland; next he would canter along beside him to the Western Isles.
Did he pause to note the whole lot, or did he have extraordinary recall, writing in his room late at night or next morning, or did he get the bones down on paper, and afterwards flesh out the rest with Johnson's consultations?
Given the unevenness and venereal adventure in Boswell's private life, any recollection in tranquillity would, in general, seem likely to be patchy.
Nowhere so far in my limited knowledge of the pair has evidence of shorthand materialised —; although at law he may have had some awareness of the skill.
But surely too many conversations are recorded in the Life for Boswell to have checked them all in literal detail?
Roadside reading at Monboddo in pleasant  sunshine begins to provide answers to these questions.
‘He and my lord spoke highly of Homer.
Johnson: ‘He had all  the learning of his age.
The shield of Achilles shews a nation in war, a nation in peace: harvest sport, nay stealing.’’
At this point Boswell inserts an asterisk, and his footnote begins, ‘My note of this is much too short.
Brevis esse laboro, obscurusfio.’
(‘I labour to be brief, I make myself unclear.’)
Declaring that he wishes to offer to the public ‘the very Journal which Dr Johnson read’, he says he will not ‘expand the text in any considerable degree, though I may occasionally supply a word to complete the sense as I fill up the blanks of abbreviation in the writing’.
So that is how he did it: as I fill up the blanks of abbreviation in the writing — with ‘wd’, and ‘wl’, and ‘sd’, and ‘J’, and ‘Ld M’, and ‘ystdy’, and ‘Abrdn’, and ‘Mntrse’, and ‘Ednbro’, or some such?
It casts a new light (well — a farthing candle) on Boswell's recordings of Johnson's aphorisms: ‘Whn a mn is tired of Lndn he is trd of lfe.’
And what about that remark —‘the very Journal which Dr Johnson read’?
Surely he meant that Johnson read it all the time, as Boswell wrote it?
Or, since Johnson was dead when the Journal was published, did he mean that Johnson read the later stages of the manuscript as Boswell worked his way through it?
Other questions — did he have a quill pen, and therefore a supply of ink?
Did he have lead and a slate?
Later we learn that he used a pencil: Faber in Germany were already making graphite rods.
All this leads to another question (thesis students, please note)—; the relationship, if any, between the physical form and intellectual product of a writer's trade.
The American novelist Thomas Wolfe wrote standing at a tall refrigerator — a chair and table being too cramped for the big mountain man — and he dropped unnumbered sheets, each with a few scrawled words, into a cardboard box at his feet.
Churchill also stood, at a tall writing desk.
Edgar Wallace dictated at speed.
James Joyce wore a dentist's white jacket in the hope that the reflected light would make the words brighter to his poor hurting eyes.
John Betjeman scribbled verses on the backs of envelopes and read them aloud in his car.
Nigel Tranter writes his novels on small cards while out walking.
Roald Dahl sat in a garden shed with an array of pencils and erasers on a board across his knees.
Vladimir Nabokov squeezed tiny writing on small record or filing cards.
Alan Ayckbourn leaves his new play until  the last terrible moments when the cast has been assembled and the theatre booked and the tickets sold.
No matter how Boswell did it physically — and later it will transpire that he wrote some of it in a notebook Johnson gave him; no matter how he proceeded editorially, whether through a combination of this abbreviated writing, then checking afterwards what was said, and finally choosing — or agreeing — how much of Johnson's commentary and observation he should release, Boswell achieved something at least as important as a legally accurate record — he created, above everything, the feel of a full account.
The conversation at Monboddo that afternoon exemplifies it; they considered how Homer never describes his characters, but permits them to develop themselves.
Such were the exchanges that Boswell, with his (by our standards) imperfect means of record, noted down — and even had time to comment that the two men had begun to ‘agree like brothers,.
They next moaned about the decrease of learning in England, with Monboddo complaining of, in Scotland, not learning's mere decrease, but its extinction.
Johnson attributed such decline in England to the fact that the bishops were now using other, more political rather than intellectual, methods of gaining preferment.
Johnson then ‘examined young Arthur, Lord Monboddo's son, in Latin.
He answered very well.’
Monboddo and Johnson debated ‘whether the Savage or the London Shopkeeper had the best existence,: unamazingly, no firm conclusion was reached, apart from Boswell's recurring delight at how well the encounter went between the two men.
Johnson went to the lavatory — at least, that is presumably what Boswell means when he says, ‘having retired for a short time’—; and Boswell and Monboddo engaged cordially with each other .
Johnson returned, and as the ladies left the table, Johnson, a man who ‘insisted that politeness was of great consequence in society’, stood.
‘Depend upon it,’ he said, ‘the want of it [politeness]never fails to produce something disagreeable.’
Boswell concludes the account of their visit by satisfying a little further his search for concord between Johnson and Monboddo — each had a black servant.
Johnson, having established that Monboddo's servant, Gory, had been baptised — and even confirmed by the Bishop of Durham — gave the man a shilling.
At this point Boswell records having experienced a qualm regarding Johnson's continuance of the journey, because the previous night Johnson had said, ‘If we must ride much, we shall not go, and there's an end on't.’
Seeing him in good spirits now, Boswell teased him for his earlier  hesitancy , called him ‘a delicate Londoner…a macaroni’, and Johnson defended himself with an unserious disingenuousness by saying he had only feared not finding a horse able enough to carry him.
Boswell employs over a thousand words to describe the Monboddo visit, which began around mid-day, and ended when they had to leave for Aberdeen which they did not reach until late that night.
Johnson flits over it all in a sentence, and in his letters to Mrs Thrale he came forth only a little more, alluding only to the success of the visit, and to the debate as to whether the savage or the shopkeeper had the best life.
‘Our opinions were, I think, maintained on both sides without full conviction; Monboddo declared boldly for the savage, and I perhaps for that reason sided with the Citizen.’
This accords with a remark Johnson made to Boswell as they drove towards Aberdeen: ‘I might have taken the side of the savage equally, had anybody else taken the side of the shopkeeper.’
Not a savage nor a shopkeeper to be seen on this windy, sunny afternoon, great clouds pillowing across the sky.
Across the scrubby ground past the Nissen huts runs a main road, with a bus service to Stonehaven on the A94, where it would again pick up  the A92.
Warm scents rose from a honeysuckle hedge at Monboddo, the much-changed home of a man who, according to Sir Walter Scott, went out at night with a candle to inspect his turnips growing in the fields; who, hating to sit behind a horse's backside, would not travel in a carriage and therefore — he was in his eighties — rode to London on horseback; who took a cold bath every day and damaged his children's health by insisting they did the same; and who, when in residence at Edinburgh, gave dinner parties at which his wine-flagons were wreathed in garlands of roses.
‘We came somewhat late to Aberdeen,’ wrote Johnson, ‘and found the inn so full, that we had some difficulty in obtaining admission, till Mr Boswell made himself known.
His name overpowered all objection, and we found a very good house and civil treatment.’
Mr Thrale had written to Johnson care of Boswell at Aberdeen; probably a refreshing fact to Sam who in his final illness observed to his servant, ‘An odd thought strikes me — we shall receive no letters in the grave.’
Handing over the envelope from Mr Thrale, the waiter at the New Inn recognised Boswell's name and likeness to his father: Lord Auchinleck stayed there on circuit.
Thus, Boswell and Johnson found a room at the crowded New Inn, which no longer exists: the corner where it stood, and which it once shared with the city jail, is now occupied comprehensively by a bank.
They stayed in Aberdeen from the night of Saturday, 21 August, to the morning of Tuesday the 24th, venturing forth from the New Inn to see and be seen, to be entertained and, in Johnson's case, to be honoured by the body municipal.
‘As Scotland is little known to the greater part of those who may read these observations, it is not superfluous to relate that under the name Aberdeen are comprised two towns standing about a mile distant from each other, but governed, I think, by the same magistrates.’
Johnson was human too: in writing to Mrs Thrale he contradicted this point and stated more correctly that both towns had separate civil and academic identities.
There are still two towns — in effect, however, the new Aberdeen has all but completely superseded Old Aberdeen, which now exists only in the way many international cities have a Latin Quarter or a Chinatown, only somewhat smaller and — as becomes all  Aberdonians and most east-coast Scots — very discreet.
Johnson's report otherwise remains applicable, with Old Aberdeen the ‘ancient episcopal city’, possessing ‘the appearance of a town in decay’, and New Aberdeen the location of bustling commerce: ‘the houses are large and lofty, and the streets spacious and clean.
They build almost wholly with the granite used in the new pavement of the streets of London…
It is beautiful and must be very lasting.’
Insofar as their Scottish adventure was concerned, Boswell the diarist and biographer, and Johnson the man of letters and lexicographer, had become travel writers.
Aberdeen, whatever its staging-post status in their plans, received the same attention as their eventual western destinations, and Johnson approached it with the attitude he later brought to the Highlands and the west, with Boswell, for his part, consistent in the manner and style of his own reportage — observing Johnson as he observed Scotland.
These arrangements would not have differed had they been in the Fens, or watching Scandinavia's hot springs: Johnson went to inspect the landscape he described: Boswell took his landscape, the lumpy Dr Johnson, with him.
Johnson thereby validated the journey in his reports, and, true enquirer that he was, did not accordingly neglect to report on such a major place as Aberdeen.
Even if it were not a leading objective of his tour, his natural intelligent curiosity, and his conscientiousness on behalf of his readers overcame any notional hierarchy of information.
Scotland he had gone to see, and Scotland they would receive from his eyes and words.
Thus, the Aberdeen report in his book, however he anticipated his Hebridean travels, is the largest so far, with St Andrews a close second: his longest passages are naturally reserved for Skye and the islands.
In so measuring him, another consideration must be taken into account.
Johnson was a proportionate man: his language and thought had balance in them, as had his own spirit.
It is possible to argue that he wrote in the proportion to which each location claimed or received his spans of time and attention — and as he spent more than twice the length of time out on the islands as he did getting there, the greater part of his book addresses the west.
For Sunday, 22 August, Boswell once more makes available their timetable and (almost unrelievedly academic) personnel record.
Professor Thomas Gordon joined them for breakfast at the New Inn, after which they went to a Service at the ‘English chapel’, that is to say, the Episcopalian, that is to say , the Anglican church in Scotland.
The congregation was ‘respectable’, the organist, a Mr Tait, ‘admirable’.
After service they strolled down to the waterside, where they talked about stockings and the weaving of plaid; ‘What particular parts of commerce are chiefly exercised by the merchants of Aberdeen, I have not inquired,’ wrote Johnson.
‘The manufacture which forces itself upon a stranger's eye is that of knit-stockings, on which the women of the lower class are visibly employed.’
Turn to Boswell for the gloss — that it was ‘Cromwell's soldiers taught the Aberdeen people to make shoes and stockings, and to plant cabbages.’
At which information Johnson laughed.
One of Boswell's invaluable moments occurs here.
From time to time in the Life, he describes Johnson's voice as manly, or deep, or sonorous, or loud.
Others have chosen to describe not so much the sound, as the use — to harangue, to interrupt, to hold the floor, to declaim.
Johnson, as he did at Montrose, also employed much silence, and many who had come to one social occasion or another expecting to hear the grand disquisitioner, found him disappointingly reticent and withdrawn, even if making little antic noises to himself.
Perhaps in those preceding silences he took himself through some sort of editing process, preparatory to making an entrance in which not a word would be wasted.
When he chose to speak, he used his voice to argue fiercely and with great precision, and now, on a Sunday morning ramble in Aberdeen, Boswell suddenly became aware, ‘to an extraordinary degree, of Dr Johnson's excellent English pronunciation.
I cannot account for its striking me more now than any other day, but it was as if new to me; and I listened to every sentence he spoke as if to a musical composition.’
Given that Boswell does not record any singularly new form of felicity in Johnson's speech, perhaps he was struck with the contrast between Johnson's mode of speech and the Doric accents of Aberdeen.
Strolling, they pondered public education versus private  schooling; Johnson wondered why boys from England had been sent as far as Aberdeen to be educated, with ‘so many good schools in England’, and they went back to the New Inn, to be joined there by Sir Alexander Gordon, an old friend of Johnson's, who had sent a card in advance, and through Boswell we join their conversation as it drifts back to the stocking-making.
Sir Alexander, Professor of Medicine at the King's College, revealed that in peacetime Aberdeen exported a hundred thousand pounds' worth of stockings a year, and in wartime a hundred and seventy thousand.
When Johnson enquired the cause of the difference, Sir Alexander claimed that there was ‘more occasion for them in war’, but Professor Thomas Gordon (no relation, Boswell?) said, ‘Because the Germans, who are our great rivals in the manufacture of stockings, are otherwise employed in time of war.’
Johnson ate ‘several plate-fulls of Scotch broth, with barley and peas in it, and seemed very fond of the dish’.
When Boswell, hearing his praise of it, said, perhaps enquiringly, ‘You never ate it before,’ Johnson replied that he had hot but did not care how soon he ate it again.
(In a long letter to Hester Thrale on 30 September, written from Ostig on Skye, he remarked with a different emphasis: ‘Barley broath [sic]is a constant dish, and is made well in every house.
A stranger, if he is prudent, will secure his share for it is not certain that he will be able to eat any thing else.’)
In the afternoon they all had tea with the ‘lively, cheerful, sensible’ wife of an Episcopalian minister — Mrs Riddoch, Boswell's cousin, the former Miss Dallas: her husband was unwell and stayed in his sick room.
Johnson met Mrs Riddoch's little niece, Stuart Dallas, and, with his voice deliberately booming and hollow, told her he was a giant, that he slept in a cave, ‘and had a bed in the rock, and she should have a bed cut opposite it’.
Throughout their journey several topics remained alive between them, to be returned to again and again, not so much as if the first discourse had not resolved matters — more as it they remained as life issues, or questions of the day.
These included — in broad, and in aspects — politics, religion, and, one of Johnson's favourite subjects, the law.
On the night he came to Edinburgh, sitting up with Boswell in James's Court until two o'clock in the morning, they talked of a recent case in which a murder, committed twenty years before, became a legal talking-point when the judges of Scotland allowed, as a plea, the length of time elapsed.
Johnson returned to this case now in Aberdeen, saying that even though he understood how difficult it would be to ensure accurate evidence, it still did not make it right that a murderer should go unpunished.
Then, as he frequently did, he took a moral line, based on what he saw as natural law, and said he would not blame, and might even assist, the victim's relatives in such a case, should they wish to exact retribution and then hide.
Then, Boswell and Johnson returned to the New Inn and sat quietly all evening, and (it being Sunday presumably) discussed Christ and Christianity.
‘Never,’ writes Boswell, ‘did I see him in a better frame; calm, gentle, wise, holy’— with Johnson opining that the essence of the Crucifixion lay in showing to the world that even the Son of God suffered on account of sin, and in doing so, displayed how heinous a thing sin must be.
On the evidence of the many religious interpolations reported by Boswell, Johnson could have been a divine, a mystic.
His faith comprised curiously disparate elements — the rough, frightened, humility of the countryman; the thoughtful worshipper; the vigorous enquirer; and even though not a micro-molecule of disrespect ever enters his attitude towards his Deity, his natural radical-ness stood so near at hand one can almost feel its heat.
It never broke out above the surface: he feared heresy and blasphemy too much.
On Monday, more academics swam in Johnson's travelling aquarium: Principal Campbell, Professor Ross and a Dr Gerard, who had ‘come six miles from the country on purpose’.
First of all, they viewed the Marischal College, and at one o'clock went to the Town House, or Town Hall, where the magistrates waited to honour their distinguished visitor.
The place of this ceremony has also disappeared, but a contemporary record describes a fine, high-ceilinged, large-windowed room, hung with candle sconces and more than one crystal  candelabrum.
Johnson took enormous pleasure in the honour, and reported it in both his book and, more touchingly, in his correspondence with Mrs Thrale: ‘I had the honour of attending the Lord Provost of Aberdeen, and was presented with the freedom of the city, not in a gold box but in good Latin.
Let me pay Scotland just one praise.
There was no officer gaping for a fee; this could have been said of no city on the English side of the Tweed.’
He mentions this ‘fee’ in his book, too; he may not have relished the idea of paid officials cadging tips.
Part of the honour in Aberdeen included the conferee's right to wear his citation, or burgess-ticket, all day in his hat.
When the parchment had been read aloud — Samuel Johnson, L.L.D.
receptus et admissus fuit in municipes et fratres guildae prefat burgi de Aberedeen — it was then sealed, rolled like a diploma and fastened to Johnson's hat with a red ribbon.
‘I wore my patent of freedom,’ he told Mrs Thrale, ‘in my hat from the New town to the Old, about a mile.’
Boswell amplifies in a way which casts a slightly different glow on the affair: he comments on how striking it was to hear all the aldermen of Aberdeen drinking Johnson's-health with much exclamation of the great man's name.
Neither Boswell nor Johnson would have been so damningly ungracious as to suggest (as other Scottish cities accused), that in the interests of free drink Aberdeen's city fathers were promiscuous with their honours.
After the walk to Old Aberdeen, Boswell and Johnson ate lunch.
The following seven people sat around the table — both Gordons, that is, Professor Thomas and the host Sir Alexander; Provost Jopp, he of the conferring; Professor Ross and Professor Dunbar; Boswell and Johnson.
After they had eaten, Dr Gerard arrived, as did Professor Leslie and Professor MacLeod.
It all seems to have lacked sparkle; Johnson told Mrs Thrale, ‘Boswell was very angry that the Aberdeen professors would not talk,’ while Boswell says they were afraid to, and as a consequence he and Johnson round themselves ‘barren’— having already spent a morning in which they had scant conversation with anyone.
For whatever reason, they all now sat in some dumbness at Sir Alexander Gordon's table, and it is the only meal so far recorded by Boswell  in which he has no conversation to report, nor argument, nor words of Johnson.
Dr Gerard, from six miles out, he who had come in specially, did try to sling something in.
He told Johnson that Warburton (the combative English divine and man of letters, whose generally controversial national presence made him a common topic of Johnsonian conversation) had a close relationship with an unnamed ‘eminent printer’.
Johnson, never under an obligation to generate social ease, dismissed that by saying ‘The intimacy is such as one of the professors here may have with one of the carpenters who is repairing the college,’ Johnson's point being that the printer, having printed some of Warburton's works, might perhaps have bought the copyright in one or two of them.
Dr Gerard fought back, by saying that he had seen a letter from Warburton to the printer, complaining that one half of Scotland's clergy were fanatics, and the other half were infidels, but Johnson still gainsaid him; Warburton, he believed, wrote as he spoke — without thinking; ‘Sir, the very worst way of being intimate, is by scribbling.’
Other than this exchange, and a desultory extension of it, in which Boswell tried to get his Bear to perform by raising the quality of genius as a conversational topic, lunch and its aftermath proceeded to a dull conclusion.
Unlike Edinburgh, Aberdeen did not groom the fur of Ursa Major.
After lunch they walked in Sir Alexander's garden ‘and saw his little grotto, which is hung with pieces of poetry written in a fair hand’.
Johnson complained of having been rendered exhausted by Sir Alexander's over-zealous efforts to entertain him.
They visited two booksellers' shops, looking for a volume of poems by the Aberdonian Latin poet, Arthur Johnson, who had been Principal of the Marischal College.
They called on the unwell clergyman Mr Riddoch, and again finding the conversation wanting — the poor man was unable to tell Johnson how much a university education cost at Aberdeen — the couple resisted all invitations to supper.
Back at their inn, they sat quietly reflecting how little Aberdeen had offered them in terms of conversational or intellectual stimulation — or, as Boswell reported Johnson's remark, ‘that the Aberdonians had not started a single mawkin [the Scottish word for hare]for us to pursue’.
Fingers across the map to retrace their journey — from the New Inn they went to the English chapel, walked to the shore, saw the Marischal College, were welcomed at the Town House, viewed Old Aberdeen, looked at the Old College, visited the King's College where Sir Alexander Gordon was professor of Medicine, and visited two bookshops.
Not a challenging or penetrating tour of enquiry, especially as the population of Aberdeen at the time must have been not less than twenty thousand.
In Johnson's report, the education offered by the city takes precedence over any popular descriptions or concerns, beginning with an interest in the fact that Hector Boece or Boethius became the first President of the King's College, in 1494, at the instigation of Bishop William Elphinstone, effectively the founder of Aberdeen University — whose tomb may still be seen.
Johnson admired Boece, not for his historical accuracy, but for his prose and intellectual style, ‘formed with great diligence upon ancient models, and wholly uninfected with monastic barbarity’.
He excuses Boece's historical inventions — on account of which his Latin History of Scotland and others have been long dismissed, and now have only curiosity value — by saying that Boece wrote in an age when all men, owing to lack of true knowledge, were credulous, and, dazzled with the light of discovery after such long dark ages, could not see distinctly.
Johnson also enjoyed catching sight of ancient texts in Aberdeen — a Hebrew manuscript ‘of exquisite penmanship’, and ‘a Latin translation of Aristotle's Politicks by Leonardus Aretinus, written in the Roman character with nicety and beauty, which, as the art of printing has made them no longer necessary, are not now to be found’.
He also interested himself in the administration of this seat of learning, the colours of the students' gowns — scarlet; and the professors' — black.
The eating and sleeping arrangements of the students, whether in college or abroad about the town, caught his attention; the length of the courses; the kind of degree available, and all the curricular paraphernalia of learning.
He had addressed such matters in Edinburgh, St Andrews, and would in Glasgow, with an awareness that he was reporting Scotland for an English audience as he might have reported Bavaria or Sweden.
Johnson  therefore knew in advance the principal social and economic demography of his readership — the professional and/or wealthy classes in and around London.
Aberdeen has a feeling of true foreign-ness, a different flavour —; Scottish, undoubtedly, and therefore brisk and organised, but not without a feel of Norse and beyond.
The quayside had as many ferries lined up as a Greek port, big-snouted vessels bound for Orkney or the Shetland islands, and perhaps distant Ophir.
It feels more like Trieste, though, than Piraeus: the sounds of the voices in the streets murmured similarly of exotica.
In Trieste a number of nations converge — Albanian and Yugoslavian, as well as Italian and Venetian; here the Scandinavians and the Calvinists and the hard Canadian men of the oil lift the city's atmosphere out of a local milieu.
All things sparkle in bright light: a dowdy creature will gleam in a ballroom.
The stone they used to build Aberdeen may be built for endurance rather than seduction, but when it catches the sun it offers a lively spirit as well as a safe haven.
Much of the Aberdeen they saw is now no more.
The strongest and oldest main parts of the current Granite City suggest Victorian wealth, not-very-old money — long Union Street, and Albyn Place and Albyn Terrace, Queens Gardens, Prince Arthur Street: behind these façades live a class who, a century and more ago, would have populated the novels of an Aberdonian Trollope or Thackeray.
The firmness of the houses has not changed; a few may have become offices, or been sub-divided into what must surely be splendid apartments, but the depth of the society persists.
Stout merchant and professional cash built these statements of position and status all over these islands.
If one may suspend conscience, and forget the conditions and costs of labour which allowed them to create this wealth, then these streets — as they do in London and Edinburgh, and still to be seen in Dublin — define the comfort of the eighteenth- and nineteenth-century middle classes.
With haughtily reassuring windows, tall, regular, gleaming, discreet, and vivid brass bellpulls, and deep steps of extraordinary cleanliness, a poor man might walk here as a Dickensian child put its face to a windowpane.
Turn left at the end of Union Street for the Marischal College, a tall and wide building of white-grey stone, with many windows and pinned down by several bus-stops.
Other than at Oxford and Cambridge, educational buildings seem generally to have become disappointing.
Their great preserved facades give way to the necessities of low-budget modern living — poor furniture, inhibited taste, as at St Andrews, and a disappointing lack of the glories of old lecture theatres.
The Marischal College has an attractive staircase, and that curious atmosphere of university colleges — a busy air, yet with few people in evidence.
A person, perhaps a porter, said there was not a lot to see at the Marischal College.
Any College treasures, any old manuscripts for example?
He said, no, nothing like that, all gone, that occasionally the place held exhibitions of Mankind and so-forth and they were quite interesting.
Any portraits of interest?
No, no.
Any beautiful rooms?
That would be a matter of opinion; he had a newspaper which he kept looking at, and shaking out.
How many students attended the Marischal College?
Quite a lot, but they come and they go.
Anybody to whom one could talk about the place?
Depends on what you want to find out.
Any record of Dr Johnson's visit?
He doubted that.
Well, maybe somebody would know.
But he's away.
‘We often get tourists here,’ he said.
Well — Boswell and Johnson found Aberdeen a place where conversation had not proved stimulating.
Then, like a host who becomes most animated when his guests are leaving, this leader of the campaign against garrulousness gave me succinct directions to Old Aberdeen.
Johnson's ‘about a mile’ takes twenty minutes on foot, quite a downhill journey, and, if Old Aberdeen be small, it is also pleasing.
Colleges on one side, sweet-cheeked houses on the other, and ahead an old municipal building; the architecture of the larger properties, though varied, is still Sir Walter Scott-gothic.
The stretch called College Bounds becomes High Street, crosses the busy St Machar's Drive and forks: to the right, Don Street, to the left, the discreet Chanonry.
Both rows converge upon St Machar's Cathedral, and then wander their separate ways through Seaton Park to the River Don, and eventually the Brig o' Balgownie —; although Johnson does not seem to have walked that far.
He did visit the King's College and Boswell name-dropped regarding the chapel, wherein lies the fifteenth-century Bishop Elphinstone, ‘of whom I shall have occasion to write,’ declared Bozzy, ‘in my history of James IV of Scotland, the patron of my family’: Auchinleck was granted to the Boswells in return for favours rendered.
The delightful chapel had no other callers; the afternoon light turned the stained-glass windows to kaleidoscopes, and outside, the westering sun gilded the tiles and eyebrows of the roofs and high old buildings.
A wedding had begun at St Machar's — gowned shenanigans and excitements, the cars, and the relatives, and the best feet forward.
Brides do not tremble, they fuss; bridesmaids even more so, and men stand about sheepishly, collies waiting for a whistle telling them what to do.
How was Johnson at Aberdeen?
Bored, and humane, and gentle with the little Dallas girl, to whom he said he was a giant.
His capacity for addressing children impressed all who saw it.
When the Thrale children played games he participated — racing them barefoot, or pleased to be cast as the elephant in their zoo of animals.
He retained many child qualities of his own, including a liking for an excellent roll downhill, witnessed by one of his friends, a Mr Langton, who had walked with Johnson to the top of a very steep height.
‘When we understood what he meant to do, we endeavoured to dissuade him; but he was resolute, saying he had not had a roll for a long time; and taking out of his pockets whatever might be in them — keys, pencil, purse, or pen-knife — and laying himself parallel with the edge of the hill, he actually descended turning himself over and over till he came to the bottom.’
At night, the streets of the Granite City proved astonishingly full.
Crowds of people roistered along, chattering and sometimes cheering, of all ages and types.
A waitress in the hotel said they all remembered the day of the big Piper Alpha rig disaster ‘in the same way that we remembered where we were when Kennedy was shot’.
The police, patrolling numerously, said this midnight populousness was not uncommon in Aberdeen, but was perhaps unique in Scottish cities.
No such nightlife or streetlights here in August 1773; moments in Boswell's Life fix a fleeting glimpse: ‘When he walked, it was like the struggling gait of one in fetters’— even in Aberdeen?
Even with a diploma pinned to his hat, its red ribbon-seal fluttering in the breeze?
This large man, ‘whose countenance was the cast of an ancient statue’, says the concluding passage of the Life, tolerated unstimulatedly the hospitality of the silent professors, and wandered through Old Aberdeen looking for a book of poetry, then back to his inn.
The ear being the truest witness, Boswell's remark about Johnson's voice is very arresting.
It introduces the thought that in his speech as well as in his writing, Johnson understood that the essence of art lies in the perfect marriage of form and content, therefore, Boswell may have reached for an accuracy beyond sycophancy.
If Johnson did speak as he wrote — economically, pithily and with a gift of great accuracy — Boswell's Aberdeen observation means that he also sounded beautifully.
But again the questions — was Boswell telling the truth about Johnson, or was he presenting him in the best possible light?
Did this biographical relationship grow out of Johnson himself?
Who was manipulating whom?
Boswell had by now made it plain over a number of years that he wished to write Johnson's Life.
Ought we to think less of Johnson for agreeing because he knew full well that he could influence Boswell?
Another question: did Boswell write so glowingly of Johnson in Scotland in order to obtain Johnson's biographical blessing?
When Johnson, as we know he did, dipped into Boswell's Hebrides Journal, its tone cannot have put him off the notion of Boswell writing a Life.
In a footnote to an observation made in Mull, Boswell writes, ‘It is no small satisfaction to me to reflect, that Dr Johnson read this, and, after being apprised of my intention, communicated to me, at subsequent periods, many particulars of his life, which probably could not otherwise have been preserved.’
Johnson, however, fully aware of the likely number of biographers he might attract before and after his death, found here a biography in which he could have a say, thus not only securing his immortality, but controlling it.
They left Aberdeen at eight o'clock on the morning of Tuesday, 24 August, and, climbing to high ground above the city, headed north-east along the coast through insignificant country —‘naked’, observed Johnson, ‘of all vegetable decoration’.
Coastal erosion, the advance of the sands, had interested him insofar as it had destroyed the estate of a landowner who then chose to relinquish the property rather than pay the requisite taxes.
At Ellon, where the modern road forks right over the bridge on the A92, and a pretty walk runs along by the river Ythan, the landlady of an inn where they breakfasted wished she had remembered to show to this great doctor (of whom they had heard) a child of hers with a chronic lump in his throat.
Useless for Boswell to point out that notwithstanding the title ‘Doctor’, physick did not belong in Johnson's otherwise comprehensive repertoire, and here it was that the landlord made a distinction which so pleased Johnson: ‘They say he is the greatest man in England, except Lord Mansfield.’
Without the qualification, Johnson felt the remark would have been devoid of enjoyable meaning.
He understood the depth of the compliment: the landlord had compared him favourably with that greatest of heroes, a local boy made good (so long, of course, as he makes good far away).
Mansfield, from Perth, progressed through the law to a political career of unusual prominence at Westminster.
Some miles beyond Ellon, the A92 bifurcates: the right-hand fork becomes the A952 which eventually leads to Peterhead and its gaol by the sea.
Boswell and Johnson took this road to Cruden Bay, in order to fulfil an invitation put in train by a lady they had met at worship in Aberdeen on Sunday morning.
Lord and Lady Errol owned Slains Castle, a wide pile on the land's edge: the pair arrived as the dinner bell rang at three in the afternoon.
This timing gives some idea of how long their travelling habitually took: still in a post-chaise, and allowing an hour, say, for breakfast, they required seven hours or so to travel a distance of about twenty-eight miles.
The variations within that calculation are not extreme — perhaps an extra half-hour at breakfast; perhaps they did not leave Aberdeen precisely (Boswell says ‘about eight in the morning’), perhaps the road wound around to make thirty miles.
Even with the wind of generosity at their back, why did they travel at a man's walking pace?
It seems likely that the condition of the roads had begun to grow uneven after Aberdeen: today, upon leaving the main road, the castle, now ruined, may  only be approached on pockmarked and muddy lanes, and if these approximate to the surfaces upon which Johnson had to travel once he entered a remoter Scotland, his pace may be understood and excused, and his courage further applauded.
Whether viewed from the high road, or across the low fences and stone ditches and grassy banks of the surrounding farms, the ruin of Slains looks familiar.
Not so much in appearance as in mood, a fact which could owe to the Gothic-ness of another literary association.
This is where Bram Stoker reputedly completed his novel Dracula, which was published in 1897.
His lore says that Abraham Stoker, a graduate of Trinity College, Dublin, had given faithful service as general amanuensis to Sir Henry Irving, the fearsome Victorian actor-manager — for whom Stoker had given up his civil service career.
When Stoker approached him with a play intended for his master, Irving, taking no thought of the devotion shown by his factotum, reacted along a scale from dismissiveness to contempt.
Whereupon Stoker, gifted with Dublin's malice, wrote instead a novel — about a bloodsucking, ennobled gentleman whose business was carried on at night, in or around grand dramatic buildings.
If the cap fitted Irving, presumably he could wear it.
Slains may be approached in two ways: comfortably by means of a long quiet climbing lane from the trees on the edge of Cruden, or more adventurously, once alighted from the bus on the upper road, between stone walls, along that wide lane of sticky brown clay, perilously full of holes.
As I walked by, someone's car stuck there and would not move, and a neighbouring farmer, irritably habituated to such incident, hauled it to the road with his tractor.
Just inside the entrance proper, the sea slices a vicious swathe inland, describing almost a half-circle.
Boswell says, ‘We walked round the house till stopped by a cut made by the influx of the sea.
The house is quite built upon the shore; the windows look upon the main ocean, and the King of Denmark is Lord Errol's nearest neighbour on the north-east.’
Note — the King of Denmark, not a farmer, or a Danish crofter: Boswell the consistent upward aspirant.
Confusion may arise regarding Slains, where two castles exist.
One, a little farther up the coast, is called ‘Old Slains’ and was built several centuries earlier: it is now ruined far beyond the one in which Boswell and Johnson stayed.
Old Slains stands even more perilously close to the North Sea cliffs, and in high weather the waves climb and spray the windows of the people who live in the houses under the shadow of Old Slains's remaining high wall.
A cannon or two have been placed around a modern Scandinavian-type house, more for ornament than effectiveness.
At that eighteenth-century mid-afternoon table in ‘new’ Slains, sat Lady Errol, Charles Boyd — Lord Errol's brother whom the visitors first mistook to be the earl — and some of the Errol children with their tutor and governess.
Acquaintance was renewed between Mr Boyd and Dr Johnson: they had met ‘at Cumming the Quaker's’(whose principles Johnson once called upon to illuminate an argument with Boswell.
Tom Cumming, on account of his religious denomination, said he would not fight in the 1745 Rebellion, but would drive an ammunition cart: Johnson's point had to do with the difference between religious texts meant to be taken literally, and those intended for general guidance.)
After lunch, Lady Errol paraded all her children — six girls, two boys.
Johnson soon wished to leave, and pressed Boswell, who, of his very nature, did not want to go until he had met the Earl.
Lady Errol intervened through her brother-in-law, informing Johnson, in the hyperbole of hospitality, that she would never allow him to enter Slains again if he left now, and, with the daylight of the long summer evening available, she provided her coachman so that the travellers could view a couple of local geological curiosities, the Buller of Buchan and the rock of Dunbui.
When his Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides appeared, Boswell's reflections caused him some trouble, including threats of actual bodily harm from people he mentioned.
As all third parties do, we may delight in his indiscretions — but Charles Boyd did not, nor did any Scots of allied sympathies.
‘Mr Boyd was engaged, in 1745 — 6, on the same side with many unfortunate mistaken noblemen and gentlemen’— meaning he was among those on the Stuart side at Culloden and elsewhere.
Nor did Boswell the North Briton confine himself to political toadying to London, as he swung from compliments to conveyed slights: ‘[Mr Boyd]entertained us with great civility.
He had a pompousness or formal plenitude in his conversation, which I did not dislike.
Dr Johnson said ‘there was too much elaboration in his talk.’’
Mr Boyd had escaped to France after the ‘45, had married a French wife, who now lived with him in Aberdeen, and he tried his best to cure the local people using the knowledge he had gained from some medical text-books he found in a house on the island of Arran while on the run.
The wind coming off the North Sea along here can skin your lips, even on a day when the sun appears to be shining.
Some of the fields surrounding Slains castle had unkempt crops in them, awaiting tending, prior to lifting.
The sea's cut into Slains's yard is as deep and threatening as a wound, and on the far side, only a little sward exists between the front of the castle and the cliff standing over the water.
Inside, the ruin is elaborate, a warren of old rooms and passages.
The house's former importance can be measured according to its size, exquisite, courageous location, and the remains of huge fireplaces.
‘From the windows’ wrote Johnson, ‘the eye wanders over the sea that separates Scotland from Norway, and when the winds beat with violence must enjoy all the terrifick grandeur of the tempestuous ocean.
I would not for my amusement wish for a storm; but as storms, whether wished or not, will sometimes happen, I may say, without violation of humanity, that I should willingly look out upon them from Slanes [sic]castle.’
This is a formidable ruin.
From here, Norse longboats were sighted, ever before a castle was raised: fishing-boats must have perished within earshot; the sunlight on the water (to paraphrase Louis MacNeice's poem) hardened and grew cold.
It is possible to see the weather from a long way off, but as the people at Old Slains know, the weather then arrives at such speed over the surface of the North Sea that seeing it approach seems hardly sufficient warning.
Bram Stoker may have been a genial enough fellow externally, but he knew how to find a place which would match the chill in the soul of his novel.
When they drove out from the castle, Johnson found little in Dunbui's yellow rock to engage his attention, other than the remarkable fact that the Guillemot, known locally as the Coot, while as small as a duck, lays eggs as large as those of a goose.
The Buller of Buchan had more appeal, and he summarised it with glittering accuracy: ‘It has the appearance of a vast well bordered with a wall.’
Here, the sea has eroded a cavity, which could only be refilled with a deep plug of rock, a column pegged into the hole.
Johnson wrote, ‘The edge of the Buller is not wide, and to those that walk round, appears very narrow.’
Johnson braved the walk.
‘He that ventures to look downward sees, that if his foot should slip, he must fall from this dreadful elevation upon stones on one side, or into water on the other.
We however went round, and were glad when the circuit was completed.’
Boswell felt discomfort, albeit at the sight of Johnson striding irregularly along.
Johnson then insisted on descending to the shore and boating into the basin itself, which was entered by means of vigorous rowing to the very entrance, then, oars shipped, by Gliding the rest of the way, as the extended oars would not squeeze through the opening — although they might today, after two centuries of further erosion.
Mr Boyd told them that the name ‘Buller’ derived from the French bouloir, reduced by local folk to ‘the Pot’, in which cauldron Dr Johnson now gambolled with a certain heartiness, speculating upon the depth of the caves, and their uses for smugglers and pirates, or shelters for boatmen: Mr Boyd also told them of people from Peterhead holding picnics in one of the caverns.
They returned to the castle for tea and coffee in the drawing-room.
Mr Boyd had patients waiting, a fact I do not quite understand, since he had just told Boswell and Johnson the story of one of Lord Errol's tenants.
Too far from Aberdeen for convenient medicine, the Earl, in order to have his own surgeon, had the son of one of his tenants thus educated.
Came a day when the man revealed that he had kept an exact account of all the money laid out on him, and could now, in his unexpectedly good situation in life, Pay every penny back to his benefactor.
‘The earl,’ reports  Boswell, ‘was pleased with the generous gratitude and genteel offer of the man; but refused it.’
By the bow-window Johnson, probably inspired by the potential fury of the sea, recited Horace's ode Iam satis terris.
I wish Boswell had thought fit to quote as much as Johnson uttered, if only to observe Johnson's intimate, word-perfect familiarity with Horace, and whether he also added a translation.
How far did he go?
The entire fifty-two lines?
Or only down as far as the moment when the Tiber is hurled back violently from the Etruscan shore?
The glimpse of Johnson reflecting on the position of Slains Castle in relation to the perilous sea, displays a man with a capacity for the learned mot juste, surely a gift which Johnson polished, having discovered how he might impress with it.
With Mr Boyd ministering, and Lady Errol attending to her children, Boswell and Johnson passed the time — it will have been close to, or even after, seven o'clock by now— chatting quietly, admiring the sea view, inspecting the pictures, including a portrait of Lord Errol by their ‘amiable and elegant friend’, of whom Johnson observed, concluding some complimentary remarks, ‘Sir Joshua Reynolds is the most invulnerable man I know; the man with whom if you should quarrel, you would find the most difficulty how to abuse.’
Being in a noble house, they discussed inheritance of land by means of‘entails’, the settling of land upon members of a family in a predetermined order to prevent any one owner or inheritor bequeathing it outside the family.
Three years later, this question would much trouble Boswell.
When his father raised the question of who should inherit the estate after him, and whether he should choose ‘heirs general’, that is to say, include females in the vexed question — in an earlier generation, four sisters had been passed over in favour of a Boswell nephew — Boswell consulted Johnson repeatedly, before the matter was resolved to Boswell's general satisfaction.
(He subsequently became an excellent landlord at Auchinleck.)
It also troubled Peggie Boswell, and arose in those memorable letters between herself and Johnson.
Johnson declared himself in favour of such prescribed succession: ‘His opinion was that so much land should be entailed as that families should never fall into contempt, and as much left free as to give them all the advantages in case of any emergency.’
In this cake-and-eat-it arrangement, no one possessor could sell off the estate, yet in Johnson's view, the landowner should have enough over and above the inheritance to bargain with, should he need to raise cash by sale or mortgage, but never so much as to disinherit his succeeding generations.
Works by Hogarth hung in the gallery at Slains: the library contained ‘a valuable numerous collection’, and Boswell renders one of his usual excellent off-the-cuff services to our understanding of eighteenth-century domestic arrangements: ‘The noble owner has built of brick, along the square on the inside, a gallery, both on the first and second story, the house being no higher; so that he has always a dry walk, and the rooms, to which formerly there was no approach but through each other, have now all separate entries from the gallery.’
The noble owner returned around nine o'clock, and renewed his acquaintance with Dr Johnson, with whom he had once dined in London.
Here, Boswell raises again the widest of smiles, at the sight of his heart, pulsating with snobbery, on his sleeve: ‘I was exceedingly pleased with Lord Errol.
His dignified person and agreeable countenance, with the most unaffected affability gave me high satisfaction.
From perhaps a weakness, or, as I rather hope, more fancy and warmth of feeling than is quite reasonable, my mind is ever impressed with admiration for persons of high birth, and I could, with the most perfect honesty, expatiate on Lord Errol's good qualities; but he stands in no need of my praise.’
(Just as well in all the circumstances.)
Time to leave Slains.
Even a warm sun could not mellow the North Sea breeze, and falling stones here and there warned against following the outlines of the gallery too closely.
On that night, Tuesday, 24 August 1773, they talked of murderers being hanged — Lord Errol must have had a fund of such stories: he was the Lord High Constable of Scotland; then they drank port, and were seen to their rooms by their host himself.
Boswell had a fire in his ‘most elegant’ room overlooking the sea, but he did not sleep well because the sea made its wild noises, and the pillows were stuffed with the feathers of ‘some sea-fowl, which had to me a disagreeable smell’.
He also called to mind the noble Earl's father, Lord Kilmarnock, beheaded in London for his part in the '45; the son who hosted Boswell and Johnson broke with the family's rebellious tradition and sided with the King and London.
On the field at Culloden, the last of the Boyd clan horse had been disarrayed and the strength reduced to footsoldiering.
The old earl had raised his army on account of a personal admiration for Bonnie Prince Charlie, and Kilmarnock's Horse Grenadiers rode south with the Jacobites on their foray to Derby.
One of his two sons who served in the British Army fought on Culloden Moor with the Royal Scots Fusiliers.
Kilmarnock was held in reserve, but, as the day collapsed, he rode forward into the Stuart Second Line, which soon became a bedraggled ribbon neither in the van nor the rear.
The Earl lost his men in the mist and the smoke, and mistakenly appealed to those near him — not only Cumberland's soldiers, but Scots Fusiliers, who took him prisoner.
The old man had lost his hat, and wept tears of shame at his forced surrender.
In one of Culloden's many poignant legends, a tall and impressive Fusilier officer came forward and, bowing low, offered the Earl his own hat; it was, of course, his own son, James, the noble Lord Errol who entertained Boswell and Johnson.
A Gothic castle on the edge of the cold waters, on treeless cliffs where boats founder, where villages vanish ghostlily in shifting  sands, and a reef where once a year appear the ragged bodies of all ever wrecked thereon — it begets legend.
How it suited Bram Stoker for his Transylvania.
The red stone gleamed in the sun; the white birds floated on the thermals, wheeling in silent inspection; on the rocks below, other birds screamed now and then.
Reconstruction in Victorian times may have rendered the building even more forbidding.
Wolves may not howl here in the moonlight, as they did in the journal of Jonathan Harker, but I have no difficulty in seeing Slains as he saw Count Dracula's castle in Bukovina, the tall black windows from which not a glimmer of light came, and the jagged battlements glimpsed when the moon came out from behind the fitful clouds.
Stoker had a poorly childhood in Dublin, and he grew up in the city of Sheridan Le Fanu who took opium and drank green tea, and wrote a truly dreadful tale about a lamia by name of Carmilla, who, as lamias often do, set out to suck the blood from a virginal girl called Laura.
It interests me not a little that Sheridan Le Fanu should have found in Dublin sufficient inspiration to write the story of a horrendous shark-like sorceress: Carmilla's real name was, with appropriate euphony, Countess Karnstein, and when her grave was excavated, her body was found to float in many inches of blood.
Anything else would have been inappropriate.
Before he wrote Dracula, Stoker, by then a civil servant, published a rather different book: Duties of Clerks of Petty Sessions in Ireland, and in the year of its publication, 1878, began his business association with Irving.
Whatever influence Le Fanu's works may have had on Stoker, the young Dublin boy must have known that in the prevalent Celtic legends the graves open all over the Irish  countyside on All Souls’ Night and the dead walk across the fields — and Irving's performances and demeanour sealed the future of his fictional imagination.
Stoker watched Irving on stage night after night.
Contemporary accounts recorded Irving's capacity for the eerie.
Prone to throwing the stage into complete darkness, he then allowed a single candle, or dancing firelight, to illuminate his face, while the stage manager cast a white calcium beam on the actor's head.
Max Beerbohm described Irving as having ‘an incomparable power for eeriness, for stirring a dim sense of  mystery; and not less masterly was he in invoking a dim sense of horror’.
Having seen all of this, Stoker, they say, told Irving he wished not only to administer Irving's theatrical affairs, but to write for the great man.
Hence the laughter, hence the wounded feelings, hence the novel about a man who works in darkness and lives off the lifeblood of others.
A guest of the Errols at Slains, Stoker later retired to Whinnyfold, southwards a little along the coast.
The original ‘new’ castle began here at the end of the sixteenth century; developments a century later added the bow window in which Johnson stood looking out at Norway, and repeating the words of his ancient star, Horace — in the same room as Boswell wished for an introduction to the King of Denmark.
Its outline may still be traced despite the extensive Victorianisation of 1836, which clad the original structure with granite facings and extended upwards and sideways.
From 1925, when the roof was taken away, ruin took over and spread throughout.
It was just past mid-day, and noon does not dim the ruin's eeriness.
The journey immediately ahead held little of interest from the Johnson and Boswell point of view, and nothing much, therefore, to look forward to until the Forres of Macbeth's witches.
Along the road, another glimpse of the Buller of Buchan: they claim that in stormy weather the waves crash over the top of the Buller, a full two hundred feet.
Now the slanting sun struck deep into the Buller's shark-angled mouth, and a tongue of almost Mediterranean blue slavered at the rocks far below.
‘All was rudeness, silence and solitude’
JOHNSON FOUND THE LAND after Slains ‘neither uncultivated nor unfruitful: but it was all still arable.
Of flocks or herds there was no appearance.’
Playing his new-found tune, he wrote, ‘I had now travelled two hundred miles in Scotland and seen only one tree not younger than myself.’
Many lands in Scotland may then have lain more fallow than they should; however, new, post-Culloden initiatives led to ever greater cultivation in this quiet territory north-west of Slains towards Inverness.
‘We dined this day,’ writes Johnson, ‘at the house of Mr Frazer of Streichton, who shewed us in his grounds some stones yet standing of a druidical circle, and what I began to think more worthy of notice, some forest trees of full growth.’
Boswell has a different spelling —‘Strichen’, and so it is today: and he gives a direction to the place: ‘we went four miles out of our road, after passing Old Deer, and went thither.’
Which means that from Slains they took some old route perhaps across the Moss of Cruden, then crossed where the A92 runs now, and from the modern A950, or a comparable road, went up to Strichen through the Forest of Deer: today's byroads may have been old lanes or drovers' trails.
Strichen, so orderly and serene, was a ‘planned village’, established to lure tradesmanship and manufacturers to Lord Strichen's estate.
Newspaper advertisements hailed the convenience and amenities of the place; specifications were laid down as to the length and style of houses.
The imposed regularity of the architecture gives the village its still pleasant air, an unexpected oasis of prosperous history, almost a tiny Edinburgh among the trees.
Odd that Johnson did not take note of Strichen, whose  development was in full swing when he called there for his Wednesday lunch.
That a village should be created, rather than grow from an organic root, such as a river ford, or a crossing of forest paths, would surely have drawn a mot from him.
In the early eighteenth century, rural management in Scotland had begun to change.
The estate owners tightened their systems, with a view to greater productivity — new breeds, crops, implements and methods.
They founded two germane organisations in the 1720s — the Honourable Society of Improvers in the Knowledge of Agriculture, and the Board of Trustees for Fisheries and Manufactures in Scotland.
So the ‘planned village’ emerged — designed to keep people within the realm of the estate but not necessarily dependent on it.
Estate owners had begun to find the grazing of animals more profitable per acre than the tenanting of farmers.
In theory, the planned village would absorb the people displaced by the new, more commercial economics of farming; the population would be kept in the countryside, thereby impeding an early flight from the land.
Instead of tenanting, the locals would become the focus of rural manufacturing.
Village foundation was to be yet another example of developing the total resources of the estate, and in such enterprises the landowner was supposed to display concern for his former tenants newly displaced.
The broadest classification of this development fell into three categories of village — estate, textile and fishing.
Estate villages provided houses for tradesmen, foresters, and other estate workers; they would be paid wages rather than be allowed to take their own living from estate lands, no more grazing of their own sheep and cattle.
Textile villages (the most numerous) and factory villages were founded on water-power sites.
Flax mills and handweavers — also useful generally because they helped at the harvest and other farm-intensive moments — came to these villages which were advertised as having little plots of land, enough to sustain a cow, and enough peat to keep a family fireplace burning, and enough life in general to support those married, or intending to marry.
The advertisement placed by Lord Strichen in an Aberdeenshire newspaper in November 1763 offered stone to build with; lime for the land; ‘a weekly market and four great fairs annually; the  situation is within six miles of nine fish towns and would be a most convenient receptacle for all persons concerned in the linen manufactureys, and there is already plenty of yarn spun in the country…’
When Johnson and Boswell visited Strichen, Mr Fraser had a wealthy and palatial mansion.
Its Victorian replacement, with long drives and a portico of columns, has fallen into disuse.
The druidical temple which Johnson saw would have proved extremely difficult for me to find, were it not for the presence in Strichen of one of the most useful guiding systems on earth — a group of local schoolboys idling on their bicycles.
One boy had been taken there by his grandfather, and he knew the way exactly.
The formal directions of a local guide book say, ‘Turn off A981 Fraserburgh/New Deer Road 1.3 km S of Strichen and fork right in 250m.
Park on track to cottage and pass along right hand side of house and uphill for 400m.’
Technically speaking, this will certainly lead to the semi-recumbent stone circle of Strichen in the district of Banff and Buchan — but the dry guidebook makes no mention of a long, glorious stone wall, part of an old kitchen garden boundary; in the distance loomed the huge ruined house of the Frasers.
The gardens are gone; herds of cattle grazed in the forecourt.
Erected in the third or second century B.C., the circle now sits in its original position once again.
Not long after Johnson saw it, a tenant farmer demolished it, wishing, perhaps, to use the stones for his own building, like the Greeks who lived near Delphi, or the old villagers of Avebury — but the landowner, presumably the same Mr Fraser, had him rebuild it.
The farmer cannot have known of ancient alignments, and his reconstruction did not accord with the circle's original orientation on the southern moon.
In due course, another demolition took place, and then in the late 1970s, archaeologists on an excavation returned the stones to their original precise locations.
On the cold hill, a fence now surrounds the circle, and it interferes not at all with the mood or countenance of the rocks.
They march in a track of the moon, and one flat stone, shaped like a tall and very thin rhinoceros, lies between two uprights.
Strichen  circle is a smaller, domestic version of the great stone rings.
A few men at a time could have manipulated each of these stones into position, yet the collective force of the place feels not reduced accordingly.
This owes as much to the location of the ring, as to the size of the stones: given the view across the countryside, with nearby lower hills, and distant smooth green fields, a full moon over Strichen will have conveyed powerful mystery.
Neither Boswell nor Johnson recorded much here.
It may be that depredations had occurred before they got to Strichen; Boswell, who had visited fifteen years earlier, clearly expected more from the druidical circle, although whether to impress Johnson further, or to avoid being thought an inaccurate provider of anticipations, is difficult to tell, as he does not expand beyond saying, ‘…
But I had augmented it in my mind; for all that remains is two stones set up on end, with a long one laid upon them, as was usual, and one stone at a little distance from them.
That stone was the capital one of the circle which surrounded what now remains.’
Strichen lies a little way down from the left shoulder of Scotland along which they travelled to reach Inverness.
After they left the druids' circle at Strichen, Boswell and Johnson exchanged a number of observations, the first of which had been an expression of compassion for Mr Fraser.
Boswell here lets fly with a breath-taking assumption that country folk had a lonely, miserable time: ‘I had a most disagreeable [that is to say distressing]notion of the life of a country gentleman,’ and he left Mr Fraser, he said, ‘as one leaves a prisoner in a jail’.
Johnson, who should have known better, believed Boswell right in assuming such folk unhappy, ‘for that they had not enough to keep their minds in motion’.
They seem to have disregarded one immediately evident aspect of Mr Fraser's life; it being Fair Day at Strichen he had guests at lunch, one of whom had at least been sufficiently energetic to have attended a lecture Dr Johnson gave at Lichfield.
To enliven their dull stretch to Banff, Boswell had started a conversational entertainment, into which Johnson entered merrily — that their famous Literary Club in London should take over St Andrews university, and thereby rebuild the city.
Founded in  1764, the Club was not (as is often assumed) Johnson's brain-child: Boswell's Life makes it clear that the idea came from Joshua Reynolds; and once a week they met at seven in the evening, in the Turk's Head, a Soho hostelry.
The original dozen members, who included Goldsmith and Edmund Burke, grew to thirty-five members by 1773, and, according to Boswell's footnote, had moved premises more than once — but always to a place where liquor could be had.
They also changed their rules of gathering, confining themselves to a fortnightly meeting during Parliament's sessions.
The membership comprised lords, writers, debaters, academics, men of opinion and strong mind, some bishops, dukes and gentlemen.
Garrick joined, and Adam Smith, thereby ensuring that Johnson did not always have the discourse his own way.
Now, on the chaise to Banff, Boswell planned with Johnson that they would regenerate the University of St Andrews according to the abilities or conceits of the Club members, each of whom would be granted a Faculty or two.
Garrick would teach public speaking; ‘Goldsmith, poetry and ancient history…
Reynolds, painting, and the arts which have beauty for their object.’
Johnson at first declared ‘I'll trust theology to nobody but myself,’ then gave way a little to Bishop Percy, but held on to logic, metaphysics and scholastic divinity.
This was not a conversation they could safely have had within earshot of any educated Scot.
After Strichen, Banff, where verification of their visit takes little time; a plaque on a wall reads: ‘Site of the Black Bull Inn visited by Johnson and Boswell, 1773’.
Although Johnson twice found the hillocky little town lacking —‘At night we came to Bamff [sic], where I remember nothing that particularly claimed my attention’; and ‘Finding nothing to detain us at Bamff, we set out in the morning’— he yet managed to write a short exercise in observation of Scottish small borough architecture.
Intrigued by the means of domestic entrance —‘often by a flight of steps, which reaches up to the second story, the floor which is level with the ground being entered only by stairs descending within the house,— lie compares their dwellings with the architecture of England, and inevitably, when he draws such comparisons, a little bee flies into his bonnet.
In Banff, he sounded off about windows.
He did not like that  leaded panes rarely featured here; nor that, instead of hinges, they had a sash-and-pulley arrangement, meaning the windows did not easily stay open.
Ever a man for taking the particular to exhibit the general, this allowed him a global crack at the Scots: he claimed that they were not interested in doing anything unless it had natural awkwardness in it: ‘What cannot be done without some uncommon trouble or particular expedient, will not often be done at all.
The incommodiousness of Scotch windows keeps them very closely shut…even in houses well built and elegantly furnished, a stranger may be sometimes forgiven if he allows himself to wish for fresher air.’
Too sniffy and cursory for today's friendly Banff with its many tractors and willing hospitality: the hotel being closed, the lady behind the counter in the newsagents offered to make me Dr Johnson's pleasure, a cup of tea.
Johnson and Boswell both pay little attention to this leg of the journey, and skip quickly on.
At breakfast next morning in Cullen the Great Bear met Arbroath smokies.
When served with ‘dried haddocks broiled’, Boswell reports, ‘Dr Johnson was disgusted at the sight of them, so they were removed.’
From Cullen, where they got a fresh chaise ‘and very good horses’, to Elgin is a distance of about twenty-five miles, through whiskified Speyside.
It rained upon them at Elgin and Johnson again ran into culinary difficulty with a lunch he could not eat at the Red Lion inn.
He complained, not at length: ‘This was the first time, and except one, the last, that I found any reason to complain of a Scotish [sic]table, and such disappointments, I suppose, must be expected in every country, where there is no great frequence of travellers.’
Boswell echoed briefly; ‘We fared but ill at our inn here.’
When Johnson's Journey appeared, sensitivities combusted spontaneously in Scotland.
His negative comments, however accurate, were converted into slights, compounded by Johnson's nationality and famous stature.
Reactions divided typically — between outright rebuttal, angry repudiation of the invader, and reasoned explanation.
Elgin became a good example of the reaction to Johnson in Scotland.
Regarding the Red Lion lunch, the town searched its soul, and more than a century later was still justifying the inedible  meal.
It seems that the landlord of the Red Lion, called Leslie, and held up as an elegant fellow, instigated enquiries as to how such food came to be served to Johnson, and the following explanation emerged.
One of the inn's habitués, a commercial traveller named Thomas Paufer, bore an uncanny resemblance to Johnson.
This Paufer preferred drinking to eating, and spent his slim budget proportionately.
The staff of the Red Lion became habituated to Paufer's arrangements; accordingly they mistakenly served Johnson the kind of secondary food doled out to drunken Paufer.
That is their story.
The faithful in Scotland called Elgin Cathedral ‘The Lanthorn of the North’, drawing them to the peace and Christian power of the place, and its light still shines through the ruined windows and stone crosses: moss, whether on old garden walls, or as here, in ancient grounds, encourages reflection.
Johnson pondered the ruin of the building: ‘The church of Elgin had, in the intestine tumults of the barbarous ages, been laid waste by the irruption of a highland chief, whom the bishop had offended.’
Two centuries later, a second dilapidation occurred, when the roof leads were stripped to make coinage for military upkeep.
In later times, castles and great houses in Ireland, the possession of absentee landlords, suffered likewise when local plunderers exploited the international need for lead in the manufacture of munitions.
Elgin's roof-leads, with those of Aberdeen Cathedral, went to the bottom of the sea when the ship foundered on a voyage to Holland, and Johnson invited every reader to ‘rejoice that this cargo of sacrilege was lost’.
Notwithstanding the former grandeur of the Cathedral, Johnson wrote no more than a page on Elgin, concluding with an attractive clue to a traveller in his wake: ‘In the chief street of Elgin, the houses jut over the lowest story, like the old buildings of timber in London, but with greater prominence: so that there is sometimes a walk for a considerable length under a cloister, or portico.’
Although, long before Johnson, Daniel Defoe found Elgin ‘a very agreeable place to live in’— those gentry not wishing to venture as far as Edinburgh or London came in from the Highlands  for the winter — Elgin's time came later: a half-century after our heroes' visit, it became a little classical Victorian market town whose streets and suburbs echoed Edinburgh's New Town in elegance and spaciousness.
Boswell dismisses Elgin in a couple of paragraphs, partly though boredom, partly embarrassment at Johnson's bad meal there; but again — the invaluable gloss on Johnson's version —; Boswell liked the jutting arcades, which he called ‘piazzas’; he approved of ‘such structures in a town, on account of their conveniency in wet weather’, and then reports Johnson's dislike of them on account of the way in which they made ‘the under story of a house very dark, which greatly over-balances the conveniency, when it is considered how small a part of the year it rains.
In the grounds of the Elgin Cathedral, I mentioned to a passing man, a local, with whom I had fallen into conversation, ‘Dr Johnson had a meal here, that was so bad he couldn't eat it.’
‘When was that?’ he asked.
‘In August 1773.’
‘Ach,’ he said.
‘He could have had the same yesterday.’
On the road from Elgin to Forres, about twelve miles long, Johnson quoted: Boswell says that Johnson's recitation —‘he repeated a good deal more of Macbeth’— was ‘grand and affecting’, after which Johnson, in a parody of the witches, aimed a pleasant dart at Boswell.
‘I had purchased some land called Dalblair; and, as in Scotland it is customary to distinguish landed men by the name of their estates, I had thus two titles, Dalblair and Young Auchinleck.
So, my friend in imitation of ‘All hail Macbeth! hail to thee Thane of Cawdor!’ condescended to amuse himself with uttering ‘All hail Dalblair! hail to thee, Laird of Auchinleck!’’
Johnson treats the same Thursday afternoon as follows: ‘We   was travelling, when he met the weird sisters on his way.
This to an Englishman is classic ground.
Our imaginations were heated, and our thoughts recalled to their old amusements.’
Shakespeare transfixed Johnson all his life.
When he was nine he read Hamlet, no doubt a copy from his father's bookshop, and, as he told Mrs Thrale later, when he came to the ghost scene he left the kitchen fireside and stood reading at the street door in Lichfield in order to ‘have people about’.
Fanny Burney said to Johnson that Shakespeare ‘could never have seen a Caliban’, and Johnson told her that having seen a man Shakespeare knew how to vary one; ‘A man who would draw a monstrous cow, must first know what a cow commonly is; or how can he tell that to give her an ass's head or an elephant's tusk will make her monstrous?’
On his deathbed, he quoted to his physician Macbeth's own words to the doctor attending Lady Macbeth for her ‘thickcoming fancies’; Johnson never loved uncritically.
‘Shakespeare,’ he told Boswell in 1769, ‘never has six lines together without a fault.’
He had studied the plays exhaustively, and published in 1765 a new edition whose Preface has been called the most famous Shakespearean essay ever written.
To equip the definitions in his Dictionary, one third or so of nearly a hundred and twenty thousand quotations come from Shakespeare — many, it seems, chosen as much for their philosophical or moral point as for their usage value.
Of the plays, Macbeth appears to have received his greatest attention, and, in 1745, while still in his thirties and making his literary way, he produced his ‘Miscellaneous Observations on the Tragedy of Macbeth’, which begins: ‘In order to make a true estimate of the abilities and merit of a writer it is always necessary to examine the genius of his age and the opinions of his contemporaries.’
It is an astonishing essay, full of large generosity to the reader, delivered by way of glosses and fearlessly-held, warmly-offered opinions.
It contains no pretentiousness, has scarcely dated, and throws out many lessons — not least Johnson's writerly good manners: if he uses a Greek tag he gives the translation.
The Preface fetches information from other ages and brings it forward, and hands it to us, cleansed and ready for consumption, and presented in a style that makes it clear Johnson wished to be read.
Through it all runs the most noble assumption — that no human need be daunted by the stature even of a genius such as Shakespeare, that his wisdoms and magics are for us all and that Johnson himself is an eager and willing guide.
If, in Nabokov's assertion, a writer may be a storyteller, a teacher, or an enchanter, and a great writer all three — Dr Johnson, even in this academic territory, long rendered prosaic and often inaccessible by other writers, was already a great writer at the age of thirty-five.
To read Macbeth with Johnson's ‘Miscellaneous Observations’ open alongside is a great pleasure.
Example: ‘The arguments by which Lady Macbeth persuades her husband to commit the murder afford a proof of Shakespeare's knowledge of human nature.
She urges the excellence and dignity of courage, a glittering idea which has dazzled mankind from age to age and animated sometimes the housebreaker and sometimes the conqueror.’
To this gloss on the idea that even a thief should have to screw his courage to the sticking-place, Johnson adds the argument that if all else he had written were lost, Shakespeare should have become immortal for the way in which he shows Macbeth ‘distinguishing true from false fortitude in a line and a half’: In Johnson's footsteps, these roads across Scotland's shoulder become Shakespeare country.
The travellers each commented only on the ‘admirable’ inn where they stayed overnight in Forres.
‘At Fores,’ writes Johnson, ‘we found good accommodation, but nothing worthy of particular remark, and next morning entered upon the road on which Macbeth heard the fatal prediction; but we travelled on not interrupted by promises of kingdoms.’
Sueno's Stone, or ‘King Duncan's Monument’, as Boswell calls it, stands on the edge of the bypass.
Once thought to commemorate a Viking encounter, but now believed to be a Class III Pictish monument, centuries older, Sueno's Stone has panels and friezes of headless corpses, horsemen, battles or skulls.
I saw nothing of them: the eight-yard-high obelisk was swathed in wooden bandages, as impenetrable as Scott's Monument had been in Edinburgh.
Beyond Forres, in the open countryside, stands Brodie Castle, now a National Trust property, a tall sixteenth-century building on a long-inhabited site, direct from the frames of a Disney film of Rob Roy or Alan Breck.
Groves of trees, carefully planted, give shelter.: Brodies of Brodie date back nine centuries.
Turn right off the road to Nairn, by the castle, then past woods by a duck-thronged mere, turn to the west, that is, left, off the lane into a similarly tight by-road and, around a corner, stands Macbeth's Hillock.
Macbeth fought King Duncan in 1040, and killed him, perhaps near Elgin, not far from Lossie Forest.
Presumably Shakespeare researched his play in Holinshed's histories — but how could he have known of the eeriness of atmosphere available all around here?
The folk of these towns and villages took their convicted witches, stood them in pitch-filled barrels and set them afire: in Forres stands a witches' stone, site of such burnings — in thunder, lightning, or in rain?
At Macbeth's Hillock, the grue rises a little cold on the nape of the neck.
A round, gradual, shallow cone, the Hillock has, at first sight, no context: it stands in the middle of a field, growing scrabby grass, an egregious lone breast.
Unlike the ‘fairy forts’ in Ireland, it bears no evidence of fortification, and seems not to have been inhabited.
From its easily-reached little summit not much of a view — therefore, it cannot have been a hill-fort: in the tradition of Maiden Castle, or the great Heuneberg in Danubian Germany, this is not even a bungalow.
Yet, to the north, a couple of hundred yards away, lie a series of long, barrow-like earthworks.
Maybe they are recent, agricultural bulldozings — or, in this gathering dusk, antiquities, entirely consistent in shape, length and intensity with ancient burial places from Poland to Galway, early European shapes.
Which would mean that Shakespeare had Macbeth meet the witches in as moody a place as a writer could conceive — an ancient cemetery.
Locally this area is known as the ‘hard muir’, with the term ‘Macbeth's Hillock’ thought to be a Victorian fancy.
Might a dig at Macbeth's Hillock, in concert with textual sleuthing, yield exotic fruit — the skeletons, perhaps, of three witches in one coffin, with a shrivelled newt or toad nearby?
Whatever the reticence of archaeologists on the matter — perhaps they fear being thought fanciful by their academic colleagues — excavations have begun to confirm the details in legends and myths.
The ‘Celtic Tutankhamun’ in Stuttgart Museum, a chieftain from the fifth century B.C., was decked out head to foot in the kind of gold hero-gods wear in Celtic myth.
In Shakespeare too, the art mirrors the life.
Sir Peter Hall, researching a new production of The Merchant of Venice, discovered in the archives that the Bard's father was prosecuted twice for usury.
‘At Nairn we may fix the verge of the Highlands, for here I first saw peat fires and heard the Erse language.’
To reach this point Johnson has taken up a third of his Journey to the Western Islands, and one can now sense the lift of excitement in him, a man about to broach the exotic.
So unlike the attitude of his equally famous French contemporary: nine years earlier, Boswell ‘mentioned our design to Voltaire.
He looked at me, as if I had talked of going to the North Pole.’
Johnson said of the royal burgh of Nairn, ‘If once it flourished,[it]is now in a state of miserable decay.’
It has evidently come on since then.
I intended to stay longer than their short breakfast stop — because this is the town of David Thomson, who spent part of his childhood here; his late adolescence and young manhood in Ireland; his maturity as a writer and BBC radio producer.
The fascination of writing is the attempt to render personal experience into objective beauty and understanding, how to take the fleeting run of life and suspend it, turn it to something tangible, capable of being perused, of being learnt from by others, beginning with the passionate subjective, ending in the dispassionate objective.
Discovering Johnson raises the issue of whether this is best done in fiction, where the imagination would seem to have freer rein, or in non-fiction, a more finite, circumscribed form.
In Samuel Johnson and David Thomson, Nairn created a happy conjunction of two men who turned the factual stuff of their lives into beauty: not by great timeless plot, nor by intricate, archetypal and immortally-spoken characterisation, as Shakespeare did, but by felicity of spirit and language.
Thomson, born in India in 1914, had Scottish parents, and until 1929 spent fourteen years of summer holidays and many other times in his grandmother's family home, Newton, now a hotel, on the edge of Nairn.
He grew to be a knobby-faced, large-headed, academic-looking man, loving and thoughtful, who overcame great difficulties in his inner life — depressions and other emotional waylayings — to produce a small body of-exquisite and delicate work in print and on radio.
The focus of his concerns seem to have lain close to tradition, and although what he wrote may be called natural history and social history, such definitions trammel  him.
When he wrote about seals, as in The People of the Sea; and when he discussed the personality of the hare; and when, in books such as Woodbrook and Nairn in Darkness and Light, he traced the fading and departing of old ways — he might have been writing poems or novels.
He was an artist who viewed the passing of wider tradition as part of his own, and the century's, ageing process.
I met him once, in the late 1980s, a year or so before his death, in a pub in Camden Town: he was a quick, if ageing, inquisitive and half-bolting creature: more for his thick spectacles than his literary associations, other drinkers in the pub called him ‘The Professor’.
In an obituary, Seamus Heaney wrote, ‘There was about him a delicate wildness, and he often thought that the hare, about which he had gathered so many entrancing stories, was his proper, total animal.
Shy, vivid and capable of swift epiphanies.’
In common with Johnson, Thomson had poor eyes.
Their first soreness and troubles led him to Nairn.
After a robust game of rugby football in London — although his sight had never been excellent — his family sent him to his grandmother's up here to give him some rest.
The Newton Hotel is quite easily found, and from Thomson's book I had anticipated its view of the sea, if not quite the shaggy russet Highland cattle grazing in front of the Victorian house.
Before that, I recognised the building under the trees, de luxe bedroom suites now, but still the same structure, on the left-hand side of the drive, just before the sweep around to the hotel steps: ‘The stables which formed part of the rectangle of low buildings out of which that archway to the henyard led, had long been disused but somebody swept them now and then, dusted the curved metal hay racks, wiped manger and woodwork and shone the brass tethering rings so brightly than whenever we pushed a door open and looked into the dusky twilight we were welcomed by a small round gleam of light.’
Light was where he found it: in my room I open Nairn in Darkness and Light at random: windows, lamps, doorways, the sky, night, fire.
And things that mean, or attract, light — flowers, clouds, uniforms with shiny buttons, horse-harness, railway  stations, the waves on the shore, the kettle dancing on the stove.
And things that shut out light: small boxrooms, closed doors; ‘when I snuffed out my bedside candle’; a local history of appalling sandstorms; unfriendly adults of grim, dour mien, with tight acerbic mouths, the ‘grey granite’ stare of a harsh grandmother: he says, ‘I cannot remember ever hearing her use my Christian name in the vocative.’
A colour brochure I picked up in the hall speaks of the ‘27 acres of secluded grounds with magnificent views over the Moray Firth and the Ross-shire hills beyond…imposing combination of Georgian and Scottish Baronial architecture…four course table d'hôte menu of very high class plus an à la carte menu including a range of steaks charcoal grilled…’: no mention of David Thomson.
I also found a modest typed item: ‘Newton or Easter Newton, as it was sometimes designated, was a possession of a branch of the Roses of Kilravock, having been rebuilt in about 1650…’
A bit more promising, it traces the possessors of Newton — Colonels, and Lords, and then the Thomson connection, but this I glean only from Nairn in Darkness and Light: ‘In 1887 Newton was acquired by R. B. Finlay, Q.C.’:
this must be Uncle Robert who said ‘a lengthy grace in Latin, perfectly enunciated’: clearly the same Mr Finlay who was ‘a generous friend to the Golf Club, the new clubhouse, as well as the Newton ground being given to the club in free occupancy’.
The hotel leaflet ends a few paragraphs on: ‘The Newton has had many celebrities who have stayed with us over the years, including the late Harold Macmillan and Charlie Chaplin…’
No mention still of dear David Thomson: the world of publicity does not quickly recognise celebrities (and celebrants) of the inner life.
The hotel is a large, rambling building and I strain my ears to hear the laughter and running feet of the young Thomson, the boy version of the man with the thick glasses and the white cantilever-domed head.
Nairn in Darkness and Light gives us Thomson set in his own history, a man observing his personal continuity in the context of his ancestral surroundings.
He quotes from local antiquarians and contemporary records; ‘Alexander Brodie of Brodie, the Laird of the lands adjoining the Barony of Culbin, kept a detailed diary throughout the years from 1651 until 1680, when he died.
His  public interests were religion, politics and law’; leading to ‘In 1640, on Thursday December the 28th, this Alexander Brodie was one of a party which included my ancestor, the Laird of Innes, that came to the grand old cathedral of Elgin and destroyed every object in it.’
When I first read Nairn (it was published in 1987) I had not been contemplating Johnson: now, in the late sunlight coming through my bedroom window, I rushed to him and Boswell.
No, not enough of a clue as to whether these were the same depredations Johnson had deplored: Elgin had suffered marauders more than once.
A pity: I should have been delighted if the two writers, Johnson and Thomson, could achieve a time-machine meeting over the vandalising of Elgin Cathedral.
In fact, had Johnson been made aware, in any sort of detail, of the destructiveness of Thomson's ancestor, he would have written much more heatedly: Thomson's account continues, ‘They tore down and ripped medieval paintings, smashed the screen which was beautifully carved, probably gilded like most ancient screens, and adorned in patterns of blue, red and green.
The screen and the ornamental woodwork of pulpit, font lid and choir stalls they chopped up for firewood.
All this they did to please God, who had since the foundation of the Christian Church, been plagued by the gaudy contrivances of man.’
In the 1930s, at the age of eighteen, David Thomson went to tutor the children of an Irish ‘Great House’, Woodbrook, on the road between Carrick-on-Shannon and Boyle, in County Leitrim.
All those lands have water, either acknowledged as lakes, or in winter pools throughout the poor, snipe-grass farmland; how lovely the light must have been to his eyes.
Down the road from Woodbrook lay a little affinity.
In Kilronan churchyard lies the blind harper who, it is said, wrote the music for the tune that became ‘The Star-Spangled Banner’— Turlough O'Carolan, led across Ireland on a white horse by his servant, and sleeping with his harp in the bed so as not to let the instrument's wood warp in damp rooms.
In Leitrim, David Thomson began twin love affairs that took his life along a particular direction — with Phoebe Kirkwood, his young charge; and with Ireland, later the focus of many of his  broadcasts.
He arrived when the life of the Anglican gentry such as the Kirkwoods was changing forever, as the newly independent nation called in all its old slights and insults, and willingly saw off ‘the Protestants’.
In a miniature echo of Tsarist Russia, those of the Ascendancy who were dwindling, Goldsmith's children, and Swift's, were permitted to carry on fading; those more vigorous were not made to feel welcome in the new Ireland of ‘the Risen People’.
Secondly, at the time when the flight from the land became a cultural European fact, a time evoked in rural England by Laurie Lee in Cider with Rosie, David Thomson witnessed the same poignant development in Ireland, but with undertones of old scores and the curious mixture of religion and politics that has taken so long to biodegrade.
The Kirkwoods had to sell their horses, had to endure the slow oncoming tread of gentility in all its shabbiness, to watch the encroaching, ever-drawing-near of the Irish natives who had long been in the tenure and service of the Great House, and now never would be again.
It matters not that these natives were the people who had the original rights, and Thomson's own humanity would never let his reader forget that fact; all he lamented, as he always did, was the passing of an old way, especially when the future replacing it felt less sound.
The book he gleaned from all of this, Woodbrook, his masterpiece, draws a beautiful parallel between personal destiny and ineluctable social forces.
As David watches events that can never take place again, such as the Woodbrook dance, and observes the cloaked distress of the family at their growing impecuniousness, he falls deeper and deeper in love with Phoebe, his Venus rising up through adolescence into womanhood.
All ends in tragedy: David's tragedy, the Kirkwoods' tragedy, above all Phoebe's, and by implication, tragic loss of all the old Irish ways.
Nairn, as a holiday resort, has the name ‘the Rye of the North’, and along the shore and near the golf clubs — one of them built on that land donated by David Thomson's great-uncle — people park caravans hoping for mildness from the Moray Firth.
The ‘small hard town’ as Thomson called it, whatever his loving reminiscences of its Fishertown or nearby magic streams, has, alas, no  Johnsonian or Boswellian relevance, and therefore no reason — this time anyway — to linger.
They did visit Cawdor Castle, which lies about six miles south-south-west of Nairn, reached by the B9090 and linking with the B9191 to the village of Cawdor.
Unexpectedly peaceful gardens with Delphinium called Johnson's Blue , some mauve-white and cobalt Campanula ; peonies; poppies; trefoils in brilliant mauve; scents of lavender and musk rose; four phallic cypress bushes, two of acid-green-yellow, two of dark green; on the tower, eyeless turrets each with a little pennanted wind-vane, the wind is from the west and the flag flies, brilliant yellow predominating, a ship with sails filled, a cross in black and red, and an antlered deer's head; in the bright, southern lee of the castle's core, long buildings roofed with tiny slates, stepped corners; the comfort of a loosely-enclosed, highly aromatic rose-garden; a peony walk, a wall of Euphorbia; in the reaches of the garden, oasal recesses, stone steps leading up to stone seats; a bee visited along thick heavy honeysuckle; rectangular stone troughs, abundant and velvet with flowering plants; old walls placid with centuries of absorbed heat from the sun; a holly tree: did Cawdor once contain all the seven sacred trees from the Celtic grove?
Somewhere, they told me in Nairn, is a hawthorn tree carbon-dated 1372 which I must find, because Boswell mentions it; the ‘hawthorn-tree, which rises like a wooden pillar through the rooms of the castle; for, by a strange conceit, the walls have been built around it’.
I count again the different growths: Hosta, Ehryngum, Thalictrum, giddy lupin, Astilbe, goldenrod.
‘The draw-bridge is still to be seen,’ wrote Johnson, ‘but the moat is now dry.
The tower is very ancient: its walls are of great thickness, arched on the top with stone, and surrounded with battlements.’
Sir Dracula Irving, Bram Stoker's boss, copied the entrance façade for a production of Macbeth.
The Thane of Cawdor's family name is Campbell, and they own other estates in south Wales, at Bosherston, where ponds with a curiously cool water temperature from the underground springs, breed lovely expanses of water lilies.
Boswell failed to have them meet the Earl: presumably the ‘prosperous gentleman’ was examining his  water-lilies in Wales when they called.
Nevertheless, Boswell enlightened his readers regarding ‘The thickness of the walls, the small slaunting windows, and a great iron door at the entrance to the second story as you ascend the stairs, all indicate the rude times in which this castle was erected.’
A sage advised a northern Thane to load his donkey with gold; the castle of Cawdor should be built where the animal stopped from fatigue — by a hawthorn-tree, as it happened: hence its preservation.
Sleekness, an attention to detail, and obvious continuing care have made Cawdor a model property.
This, regrettably, is not the castle where Lady Macbeth did her sleepwalking.
Shakespeare gave the play five castles: Forres; Inverness in which the assassination of Duncan ‘were done quickly’ with the dagger Macbeth saw before him; Macduff's castle in fife; the King's palace in England, and Dunsinane where —‘Enter Lady Macbeth with a taper: Out, out damned spot! out, I say!’
In Forres that morning, Johnson and Boswell argued about evil.
Johnson: Moral evil is occasioned by free will, which implies choice between good and evil.
With all the evil there is, there is no man but would rather be a free agent, than a mere machine without the evil; and what is best for each individual, must be best for the whole.
If a man would rather be the machine, I cannot argue with him.
He is a different being from me.
Boswell argues back that ‘A man, as a machine, may have agreeable sensations; for instance he may have pleasure in music.’
With the usual kindly swat, and again directing his intellectual energy towards moral concerns, Johnson replies, ‘No sir, he cannot have pleasure in music, at least no power of producing music; for he who can produce music may let it alone; he who can play upon a fiddle may break it: such a man is not a machine.’
At the end of the avenue, the village of Cawdor looks as kempt as a pinafore.
Johnson and Boswell, who both called the village ‘Calder’, stayed at the manse, now burnt down.
Their host, the Rev Kenneth MacAulay, great-uncle of Thomas Babington of that name, had sent a letter explaining that he could not meet them in Nairn: his priestly duties detained him in Cawdor — to which Boswell adds a footnote.
When they arrived at the manse, between  twelve and one o'clock on the Saturday, the Reverend, according to Mrs MacAulay, had gone to the church distributing tokens —; ‘little pieces of tin, stamped with the name of the parish’.
Each token, a seal of approval awarded by the minister to those of whom he approved morally that week, had to be handed up on Sunday; those without tokens could not receive the sacrament.
Boswell adds a tantalising footnote: ‘This is a species of priestly power, and sometimes may be abused.
I remember a lawsuit brought by a person against his parish minister, for refusing him…’
Facts, Boswell!
What case?
The name, the name!
Give us dates!
Places!
Boswell had two fears for the sociability of their stay at Cawdor: that his eminent companion might quarrel with their host who had revealed a penchant for speaking ‘slightingly of the lower English clergy’, and that ‘a whole evening at Calder-manse might be heavy’.
Neither materialised.
A neighbouring minister joined them, a Mr Grant (his grandson, Captain James Grant, accompanied John Hanning Speke to trace the source of the Nile): ‘intelligent and well-bred’ sniffs Boswell of Reverend Grant.
They talked of hereditary occupations in the Highlands; the rigour of church rules and creeds; they looked at Latin books, and tiptoed around a delicate matter — whether Johnson the Anglican might wish to hear Mr MacAulay say their Presbyterian prayers in the household, which Boswell doubted.
The Reverend offered to forgo the proceedings, and Boswell advised Johnson of the ‘over-delicate scrupulosity of our host’.
Johnson tushed, and so the other clergyman, Mr Grant (being well-bred), said the prayers, evoking a comment from their distinguished visitor who upbraided him just a little for not including the Lord's Prayer.
The stay of Johnson and Boswell at Cawdor manse captures Johnson in a neat capsule.
We see his professional disdain: before he arrived he spoke disparagingly of his impending host, doubting that Mr MacAulay had himself authored the history of the island of St Kilda, which bore his name.
Johnson's superiority complex goes on show: while there, he used the power of his frown and his supervening wit to silence MacAulay's disregard for the English clergy: ‘This is a day of novelties: I have seen old trees in Scotland, and I have heard the English clergy treated with disrespect.’
Intellectual snobbery: he dismissed the bookshelves of the manse upstairs as ‘rather a lady's library, with some Latin books in it by chance’.
A liberal spirit: he listened courteously and placidly to Presbyterian prayers.
And, a definition of the excellent guest, one who keeps promises given during the hospitality: as well as giving the lad his own Sallust, Johnson promised to create the introductions by which young MacAulay could enter university, and he kept his word, although the boy eventually chose not to avail himself of it.
They stayed at Cawdor from Friday lunchtime to Saturday late morning.
The village can have changed little, although many of the houses feel Edwardian rather than Georgian, and the new manse is Victorian.
On Friday night, the factor of the estate, drinking tea with them, wrote a letter of introduction to nearby fort George.
Their detour to Fort George crossed what is how the main road from Nairn to Inverness, and they arrived some time in the late morning.
A gossipy exchange developed between Boswell and a Major Brewse, or Bruce, of the Engineers, regarding the Major's surname.
At this point, ‘Dr Johnson observed that there had been great disputes about the spelling of Shakespear's [sic]name: ‘At last it was thought it would be settled by looking at the original copy of his will; but, upon examining it, he was found to have written it himself no less than three different ways.’
Touring the fort, commanded by Sir Eyre Coote of the 37th Regiment, an unexpected knowledge surfaced: ‘Dr Johnson talked of the proportions of charcoal and salt-petre in making gunpowder, of granulating it and of giving it a gloss’— although he admitted to Boswell afterwards that he had ‘talked ostentatiously’.
Boswell enjoyed the martial ambience of the fort: ‘At three the drum beat for dinner.
I, for a little while, fancied myself a military  man, and it pleased me.’
If the flavour of his text so far is to be believed, Bozzy was as much a soldiering man as Coleridge, which is saying less than very little.
At dinner a military band played; the governor's wife was ‘a very agreeable woman, with an uncommonly mild and sweet tone of voice’, and the governor told Johnson and Boswell that ‘the Arabs could live for five days without victuals, and subsist for three weeks on nothing else but the blood of their camels, who could lose so much of it as would suffice for that time, without being exhausted.’
Discussion moved to matters of the stage, to comparisons of great performers, to criticism of Garrick's pronunciation of certain words in Hamlet, and the qualities of Mrs Cibber's expression.
The conversation, the ‘dinner of two complete courses, variety of wines and the regimental band of musick playing in the square’ all enchanted Boswell, and according to him, Johnson too, whom he reports as saying, ‘I shall always remember this fort with gratitude.’
Johnson, however, devotes one mere paragraph to a description — or rather a non-description — of their visit.
‘Of Fort George I shall not attempt to give any account.
I cannot delineate it scientifically, and a loose and popular description is of use only when the imagination is to be amused.
There was every where an appearance of the utmost neatness and regularity.
But my suffrage is of little value, because this and Fort Augustus are the only garrisons that I ever saw.’
By visiting Fort George, and by going straight from there to Inverness — they said goodbye to the officers between six and seven o'clock — Johnson and Boswell made a revealing choice.
They elected to bypass Drummossie Moor, site of the battle of Culloden in 1746, twenty-seven years earlier.
Neither mentions the battlefield.
It seems impossible that they could not have known where they were; they can only have ignored it deliberately, and therefore perhaps for political reasons of their own.
Boswell needed the good opinion of the Establishment as a lizard needs the heat of the sun.
Johnson was receiving a pension from the King whose brother was the Duke of Cumberland, the butcher of the day.
Yet Boswell and other Johnsonians report that, long  before the pension, Johnson wondered aloud if holding up his right hand would have secured victory for the Stuarts at Culloden to Prince Charles's army, he was not sure he would have held it up; so little confidence had he in the right claimed by the house of Stuart, and so fearful was he of the consequences of another revolution on the throne of Great Britain'.
Had Johnson walked Drummossie he would have had to contemplate the events there, and the long reverberations of 1746, and the gloatings and celebrations that took place annually in Inverness long afterwards, and since he was chronically and constitutionally unable not to give an opinion, whatever he said would have landed him in difficulty with somebody.
Again, I hear the smack of collusion between Johnson and Boswell in their separate accounts of their Highland jaunt.
It may simply be the case that Boswell, seeing that Johnson chose not to mention Culloden, took the same course of action.
After all, Boswell's Life of Johnson derives from what Johnson said: but do we know what proportion Boswell reported of what Johnson said?
And I cannot believe that the two did not exchange at length here, passing the very threshold of such a dominant historic occasion, an event which still burnt into the consciousness of all Scots at the time.
In Sir Walter Scott's time — and he was, after all, born twenty-five years after Culloden — Scotland still uttered the name Cumberland ‘with an infant hatred’.
Johnson was in his thirties in 1745, and well aware that the Duke of Cumberland mustered his armies on Clapham Common, while London waited and wondered whether the Stuart Pretender would truly drive on south and attack the capital.
A year later, in that one heart-wrenching day at Culloden, Scotland capitulated.
Yet many subjects throughout the whole island of Britain retained an affection — partly romantic — for the Stuarts.
Johnson's writings and conversations indicate a highly politicised man, and nobody, unless an apolitical hermit, could have been uninterested in, unaware of, the Stuart Rebellion of 1745 — 6, and the Cause behind it.
Furthermore, Boswell reports Johnson's clear sympathy with Jacobitism.
In the Life, he makes a number of references — to Johnson's high regard for a man he knew to be in hiding in London  on account of having borne arms in the ‘45; to the curious fact that Johnson wrote almost not at all during the year 1745 — though Boswell, a windblown reed at best where politics were concerned, attributes this to preparation for the great Dictionary, rather than to any politically-induced melancholia.
He also refers to Johnson's condemnation in 1760 of the fashion for defaming and decrying the House of Stuart; and he reports a violent argument between Johnson and a Whig called Taylor, during which Johnson not only insisted that the Stuarts owned the true right to the throne of England, but that people disliked the Hanoverians (as Johnson himself did) and were so disaffected by them that they had generally lost interest in the monarchy altogether.
Again, observing the conversation of a rainy night in July 1763, Boswell wrote of Johnson's perceivable affections, ‘He no doubt had an early attachment to the House of Stuart; but his zeal has cooled as his reason strengthened…
Yet there is no doubt that at earlier periods he was wont often to exercise both his pleasantry and ingenuity in talking Jacobitism.’
This was the same evening on which Johnson wryly said that now the Hanoverian King had given him a pension, he could hardly drink Stuart health with the wine thus bought.
‘I think that the pleasures of cursing the House of Hanover, and drinking King James's health, are amply over-balanced by three hundred pounds a year.’
Incontrovertibly, therefore, Johnson had embraced Jacobitism to some degree of sympathy at some stage, and perhaps even quite vehemently, and perhaps for quite a long period of his life — but, as with the formation of many political tastes and stances, the dalliance owed as much to what he disliked (the Hanoverian kings) as to what he espoused and idealised.
A traditionalist, he was guided by the natural right of succession and in his view, ‘the house of Stuart succeeded to the full right of both the houses of York and Lancaster, whose common source is the undisputed right.’
So how can it be that Johnson and Boswell passed this woeful and apocalyptic place, faces averted?
Although the story has been long and widely recounted (John Prebble's heartbreaking book, Culloden, brings the event to life), nothing compares with walking the field, seeing the small cairns  marking where clansmen fell, measuring the rides of the horse-troops.
Wednesday morning, 16 April 1746, rained, it was chilly, and the citizens of Inverness came out from the town to view this spectator sport.
The armies saw each other for the first time at just after eleven o'clock.
Another heavy shower swept across the marshy ground.
The English with their Scottish support had breakfasted well; the Highlanders had left their supplies at Nairn, and were cold and unfed.
They had no chance — perhaps they had no chance from the beginning.
Right cause, wrong leader: Prince Charles has come to be viewed as a drunken, disorganised fop.
Departing Brest on a French frigate on 16 July 1745 he landed on the island of Eriskay saying, ‘I am come home.’
Alexander MacDondald of Boisdale, the Highland chief who met him on arrival, begged him to go back to Europe.
Bonnie Prince Charlie refused, and many of the clans rallied to his support; others ratted and joined the King's forces.
Although the romance has powered many a writer, notably Stevenson, some latter-day Scots take the harder, colder view of the pretender — such as the novelist and poet Iain Crichton-Smith, who, in his novel The Dream, has one of his characters muse, ‘He was an evil ghost who had drifted into the Highlands, like some kind of vaporous poison, with his powdered hair and his boyish rapacity for adventure, intoxicated by the new air, the mountains, the lochs, the heather, and by his selfish opportunism he had brought tragedy on the Highlands.
And later he was cruel, a wife-beating drunkard, after he had destroyed the Highlands in a storm of hailstones and fire.’
Bonnie Prince Charlie was also a Catholic, another of the facts for which he was never forgiven and another contribution to the ambivalence he excites.
Charles and Cumberland were as ill-matched personally —; the unrealistic poseur versus the eighteen-stone professional soldier — as they were ill-matched militarily.
The Duke had powerful artillery and trained soldiers; the Prince had lesser firepower and undisciplined goodwill.
prebble quotes the Chevalier de Johnstone who fought with the Glengarrys: ‘What a spectacle of horror!
The same Highlanders who had advanced to the charge like lions, with bold and determined countenance, were in an instant seen flying like trembling cowards in the greatest disorder.’
Such blood, and the mud of Culloden, were the last Gaelic colours to fly over Scotland; the clans looked straight into the mouths of Cumberland's cannon and died, and with them expired a way of life — the Stewarts of Appin, and the Maclarens, and the Camerons, and the Atholl Brigade, and behind them Ogilvies, and behind them the prince himself.
The wind was blowing hard at the Highlanders' faces, according to the literature given out at the Culloden Visitors' Centre, and the two armies were in position at one o'clock, approximately four to five hundred yards apart.
‘The battle was over in less than an hour,’ says the leaflet, and eventually the Prince's message went out, ‘Let every man find his own way to safety the best way he can.’
Two days later seventeen Highland officers, held prisoner at Culloden House (where the Prince slept the night before the battle), were murdered: Cumberland lost five hundred men: the Jacobites two and a half times as many.
It is a wide field, and a road crosses part of it; there is no shelter here and the ground is still soft, especially in the winter.
In the summer, even when the sun is shining, it can still be cold, whether from the weather or the ghosts of the dead.
Paraphrasing Tacitus and Byron, the Visitors' Centre has the last word on Bloody Cumberland: ‘he created a desert and called it peace.’
All tragedies have cruel footnotes.
An unreliable horseman on the Stuart side, witnessing the first charge of the clans on the Cumberland army, believed no troop could withstand such an onslaught, and he rode south to Edinburgh declaring victory, causing the Jacobites of the city to dance and sing.
Their position was reversed when the truth circulated; they went into hiding — as did Scots and Catholics in London: not only did the King's supporters crow and celebrate, they also took revenge.
Inverness, a likeable city, is visible from a distance.
In this town of bridges, Johnson stayed at Mackenzie's Inn, now a supermarket, and on Sunday morning went to the English chapel, long since gone: it was a coarse little place anyway, and Mr Tait preached a sermon on Love Your Enemies.
Boswell felt depressed for a brief time, and homesick: no letters had arrived for him, the cause of a little worry.
In Inverness, Johnson held forth on the  benefits Scotland had derived from the Union, and after church they saw the Quay and Macbeth's Castle, and had lunch with Mr Keith, the excise collector, whose wife quizzed Johnson about his ‘drinking water’.
Johnson volunteered some information about the size of the excise duty his friend Thrale the brewer in Streatham had paid the previous year and, says Boswell, ‘after this there was little conversation that deserves to be remembered.’
One interesting nugget gleams on this page of Boswell's Journal of a Tour.
When he and Johnson got back to their inn, Boswell ‘begged permission to leave him for a little while, that I might run about and pay some short visits to several good people of Inverness’.
Boswell does not divulge any names or addresses: was he in search of sport among the streetwalkers of the north?
If he had bumped into anyone worthy of half a mention he would have told us.
Johnson said to him, ‘You have all the old-fashioned principles, good and bad.’
That night, Sunday, Mr Grant, the well-bred reverend gentleman they met at Cawdor manse, joined them, and Mr Keith the excise man, and they ate roasted kid ‘which Dr Johnson had never tasted before.
He relished it much.’
Maybe they should have collaborated on a book, instead of writing separate accounts.
In Johnson's company, you leave Inverness with a full impression of its contemporary military, social and commercial importance.
He asserted that the good people of Inverness owed all they had to the previous conquest and occupation by Cromwell.
‘Yet what the Romans did to other nations, was in a great degree done by Cromwell to the Scots: he civilized them by conquest, and introduced by useful violence the arts of peace.’
Interesting euphemism: ‘useful violence’— leading perhaps to the creation of terms such as‘constructive murder’ or ‘helpful massacre’?
Johnson had travelled hopefully and was about to arrive: the following day he would leave the comparative comfort he had hitherto enjoyed, and head into the wilds, and not in a coach but on horseback.
He wondered, in his Inverness passage, whether it was ‘peculiar to the Scots to have attained the liberal, without the manual arts, to have excelled in ornamental knowledge, and to have wanted not only the elegancies, but the conveniences of common life’.
He goes on to make the point that the Scots  possessed advanced tastes and understanding in literature, with a Latin poetry that ‘would have done honour to any nation’, but then ponders aloud — no wonder he offended them so — why ‘men thus ingenious and inquisitive were content to live in total ignorance of the trades by which human wants are supplied, and to supply them by the grossest means.
Till the Union made them acquainted with English manners, the culture of their lands was unskilful, and their domestic life unformed; their tables were coarse as the feasts of Eskimeaux, and their houses as filthy as the cottages of Hottentots.’
Thus did, and do, travellers in other countries offer huge insult.
He continued even more offensively: ‘Since they have known that their condition was capable of improvement, their progress in useful knowledge has been rapid and uniform…
But they must be for ever content to owe to the English that elegance and culture, which, if they had been vigilant and active, perhaps the English might have owed to them.’
In his account of their two-night stopover at Inverness, Boswell left out of his Journal of a Tour one enchanting detail.
An incident at dinner on Sunday night became part of the Reverend Mr Grant's conversational furniture, a story he told for many years later.
Johnson, it seems, began to regale the table concerning some extraordinary creature recently discovered in New South Wales, and began to imitate the animal, the kangaroo.
Suddenly, he stood upright, held out his hands like paws, then bunched up the tails of his huge brown coat in front of his stomach to convey an impression of the kangaroo's pouch, and began to bounce about the room.
What a pity the kangaroo had been discovered too late for Johnson s Dictionary: Captain Cook makes the first reference to it three years earlier, in his Journal for August 1770.
I like to think Johnson would have gloried in the most likeable derivation of the word ‘kangaroo’, even if lacking evidence for its provenance.
The philological folklore claims that the animal was named when an English explorer (Cook himself?) asked an Aboriginal, ‘What in Heaven's name is that?’ as the exotic animal bounced across his view.
To which he allegedly received the reply, ‘Kangaroo’—; native tongue for ‘I don't understand what you are saying.’
When they left Mackenzie's Inn at Inverness early on Monday, 30 August, two Highland guides ran along ahead of them, John Hay and Laughland Vass; Johnson told Mrs Thrale they were ‘active, officious, civil and hardy’.
Other than a girl he had seen at a spinning-wheel and singing a song in the Gaelic at Nairn, this was Johnson's first true contact with the Scots of the west.
The timbre of his text begins to alter just east of Inverness: his explorations were about to begin.
On their right, Loch Ness beamed at them: a glorious day.
Johnson reported the lake water, so often gunmetal and brooding, as remarkably clear and pleasant, and is imagined by the natives to be medicinal'.
This, in itself, ought to quieten speculation about a Loch Ness monster; the water's reputation for healing clearly belongs to ancient traditions, and when a place so powerfully atmospheric generates one legend, it is surely capable of throwing up several more.
When he gets to Iona, Johnson will walk for the second time in footsteps he does not yet know about, those of the man who caused the folklore — Columba was here.
In 565 he came down from the islands to try and convert a Pictish king.
On the way, he met a distressed group of Picts: one of their number had just been eaten alive by a monster in the lake.
Columba sent one of his companions into the water, and just as the creature opened its jaws for its second course, Columba with a wave of his hand banished it: Nessie, all humps and coils, fled whining.
Boswell says, ‘The scene was as sequestered and agreeably wild as could be desired, and for a time engrossed all our attention.’
Johnson's ‘low trees’— or their grandchildren — are now grown to great green heights.
They ignored a Druid's temple — Johnson said, ‘one is quite enough’— and then came to ‘a little hut, with an old looking woman at the door of it.
I thought, here might be a scene that would amuse Dr Johnson; so I mentioned it to him.
‘Let's go in,’ said he.’
Johnson devotes a long paragraph to the old woman's but as Dr Livingstone might have described an African kraal.
His word-picture also describes the typical Bronze- and Iron-Age European small dwelling developed from the wooden buildings of the Hallstatt and La Tène periods, from 700 B.C.: ‘The wall, which is commonly about six feet high, declines from the perpendicular  a little inward.
Such rafters as can be procured are then raised for a roof, and covered with heath, which makes a strong and warm thatch…
No light is admitted but at the entrance, and through a hole in the thatch, which gives vent to the smoke.
This hole is not directly over the fire, lest the rain should extinguish it; and the smoke therefore naturally fills the place before it escapes.’
The woman was boiling a goat, one of her herd of sixty, when the riding party arrived; the two Highland guides interpreted her Gaelic.
She had an interesting marital structure.
Johnson calls her an ‘old woman’, and true, her husband was eighty years old.
But the eldest of her five children was thirteen — therefore Boswell's observation of ‘an old looking woman’ had a truer ring.
She invited them to be seated and offered them a drink.
Their reports of this encounter highlight the difference between Johnson and Boswell as human beings.
Johnson's account acknowledges the woman's pastoral existence, and he dignifies her with a detailed report, pointing out that her circumstances were by no means on the lowest and most impoverished social scale.
He does his readers the service of conveying to them the life and living of a family they might never encounter, or have had occasion to consider.
Boswell struggles, sometimes unsuccessfully, against an instinct to disparage.
He calls the hut ‘a wretched litle hovel of earth’, and makes comparisons only on a social scale, as distinct from Johnson's genuine anthropology.
He even manages a lewdness.
‘Dr Johnson was curious to know where she slept…
She answered with a tone of emotion, saying she was afraid we wanted to go to bed with her.
This coquetry, or whatever it may be called, of so wretched a being, was truly ludicrous.’
Johnson and Boswell later bantered on the matter, each playfully accusing the other of being the one the woman feared —‘the wicked young fellow, the wild dog’ or the ‘terrible ruffian’fortunately accompanied by ‘a civil decent young man’.
As he so often does, Boswell missed the point — or two.
How natural for a woman sensible of her humble circumstances not to wish to unveil the total intimacy of her house to passing strangers.
Secondly, he ignored folk memory of the English and the noble Scottish and their depredations: à propos, a story came to light  much later, and recurs in local annals and in the works of many Johnsonian students
In 1746, one of Cumberland's officers on his way back from victory at Culloden had invaded the very same hut and raped a girl (his troopers held her down) then strangled the grandmother to command her silence.
The ‘old looking’ woman whom Boswell and Johnson met took over that house the following year, by which time the crime had been punished.
Even though the story reverberated through the Highlands, there is no evidence that either Boswell or Johnson knew the tale — had they done so, Boswell might have been less merry with his lubricious reasons as to why the woman would not show them the bedroom.
Indeed, Boswell's insensitivity went further.
Against the woman's express wishes, he lit a piece of paper and went into her bedroom anyway, and reported a ‘bedstead of wood with heath [heather]upon it by way of a bed; at the foot of which I saw some sort of blankets of covering rolled in a heap’.
Johnson did not drink her proffered dram, but Boswell and the two guides did, and when she asked them for snuff, her great luxury, they had none, but gave her money instead.
Boswell's rendering of the Loch Ness day skips ahead to lunch in a pub then their overnight stay with the deputy Governor of Fort Augustus.
Johnson's account pauses at the Fall of Fiers, today called Foyers, a little more than halfway down the south-eastern length of the Loch.
Opposite a café and shop, a tall, sparse wood leads down to a dramatic view of the Falls, a cataract powerful enough to feed a local hydro-electricity station.
Johnson observes that ‘the country at the bridge strikes the imagination with all the gloom and grandeur of Siberian solitude.’
Not today; two pathways, both of soft going, lead to the Falls — the right-hand one for a good, distant view, the left-hand, less comfortable and over risky stones, for a close-up.
Johnson took this latter and soon ‘began to wish that our curiosity might have been gratified with less trouble and danger’.
All he saw was the ghost of the waterfall: ‘we visited the place at an unseasonable time, and found it divested of its dignity and terror.’
I cannot say whether they travelled on this good modern road.
More likely, they followed a route now reduced: like Kipling's road through the woods, ‘weather and rain have undone it again and now we shall never know there was once a road through the woods.’
Full of sky, the landscape gleams with distant water.
This road swoops.
Past little stands of foxglove in the green foreground before a copse, the floor of the wood swerves sharply down to a fast stream the colour of nickel.
The party lunched on mutton, bacon and eggs, with rum, whisky and wine — Johnson again drank water — in a house called The General's Hut, named for that good strong Irishman, George Wade, to whom the Highlands owe their road system.
General Wade built forty bridges up here inside a decade: and he carried the metaphor of his construction over into his administration —; under his command, military rule in the wake of an insurrection proved less brutal, more instinctively communal, than the savagery of the butcher Cumberland who followed him.
At dark they arrived in Fort Augustus.
They had made the length of Loch Ness in one day, not bad going for an old man on horseback; ‘when he rode,’ says Boswell at the end of the Life, ‘he had no command or direction of his horse, but was carried as if in a balloon.’
Even if they followed an older, slightly more direct road, it still amounted to a total of about thirty-three miles.
Any Johnsonian interest Fort Augustus once had has disappeared: the travellers tried an inn here, found it ‘wretched’ and stayed with the deputy governor at the fort, a gentleman of French extraction named Trapaud.
A monastery occupies the foundations today, the military buildings having been largely pulled down long ago.
At breakfast, having walked the governor's garden, they talked to a couple of officers who had fought the Indians in America, making Johnson wish he lived there so that he could write a book about them.
In their separate entries for Fort Augustus, it is the fleeting observation that once again gives such valuable illumination.
Johnson displays almost no preoccupation with the place, which he summarises as ‘much less than that of St George…
It was not long ago taken by the Highlanders.’
Not the building Johnson stayed in: he slept in a new fort built to replace the one  destroyed by the Jacobites.
‘But its situation,’ continues Johnson, ‘seems well chosen for pleasure, if not for strength’; and then in half a sentence he gives us a glimpse of local life and activity: ‘It stands at the head of the lake and, by a sloop of sixty tuns, is supplied from Inverness with great convenience’— which description immediately conjures the vessel plying up and down Loch Ness with provisions, armaments, soldiers' wives.
Fort Augustus offers two things worth relishing: that its canal provides a waterway down to Loch Oich and Loch Lochy and into Loch Linnhe and therefore out to sea and to Mull and Manhattan and Newfoundland.
Secondly, it conjures the Wild West by virtue of its position as the middle of a line of three forts, Fort William to the south, and Fort George to the north.
They resisted Mr Trapaud's invitation to lunch.
According to Boswell, ‘Between twelve and one we set out, and travelled eleven miles, through a wild country, till we came to a house in Glenmorison [the modern spelling adds a ‘t’— Glenmoriston: Johnson calls it Glenmollison]called Anoch, kept by a McQueen.’
To hit this road they had to go north a little from Fort Augustus and then swing to the west.
Just beyond Fort Augustus a trace of their road may still be found; now impassable, it must have been a fearful route: the climb up to any height of it is ferociously demanding — or else I hit it at the wrong spot.
Johnson comments, ‘To make this way, the rock has been hewn to a level with labour that might have broken the perseverance of a Roman legion.’
Therefore, unless hiking with considerable fortitude, the only way to approximate their journey is to take the normal road up as far as Invermoriston and then continue on its south-western fork, the A887, and in time it becomes the road — or so I presume —; Johnson and Boswell travelled, the one cut by General Wade, straight across the rising land and emerging a little over half-way along the present road through Glenmoriston.
They then followed a path in the lee of the mountains to Loch Cluanie (near which the upper and lower roads converge) and thence Glen Shiel.
Other than the hope of eagles, there is nothing in these tense high glens, north or south of Fort Augustus, to detain the traveller.
Johnson says he saw no animals.
I saw a bird of prey, a hen harrier, as intent as an osprey, beating her wings at early evening against  a stand of firs, hunting like a cruise missile along the edge of a windbreak.
Where Johnson found a country totally denuded of its wood' — how he loved the confirmation of his prejudices —; forestry now swathes the unpromising terrain.
In one of those asides, Johnson with the eye of a painter gives the last glimpse of these high ways in 1773: ‘Once we saw a corn field, in which a lady was walking with some gentlemen…’
Both writers make light of this crossing from Fort Augustus to the middle of Glenmoriston, even though it must have proven their most arduous stage so far — eleven miles of high, hard going, ‘cut in traverses’ as Johnson says, ‘so that as we went upon a higher stage, we saw the baggage following us below in a contrary direction.’
They came to Anoch in the early afternoon, having to break their journey early, because the opportunities for food and lodging were not evenly distributed between Fort Augustus and Glenelg: Johnson says, ‘the only house, where we could be entertained, was not further off than a third of the way’.
That night, they had plenty of opportunity for conversation, and here they had one of their most memorable encounters.
McQueen, a genuine Highlander, kept the inn (such as it was) at Anoch and he brought Johnson the closest he had yet been to the controversies of the recent Stuart cause.
This cultivated man, McQueen, had fought at Culloden.
He spoke accentless English with excellent grammar, proved civil and hospitable and well-read: in his stone-and-wattle premises he possessed a volume of The Spectator, a volume of Humphrey Prideaux's The Old and New Testament Connected in the History of the Jews, and, judging from Boswell, the man reflected annoyance when Johnson expressed surprise at finding books in his house.
Johnson dwells on McQueen's diction, complimenting him upon it and being told in return that the man had ‘learned it by grammar’, and Johnson goes on to contemplate that such good English must have been acquired while such people served in the armed forces.
Evidently it did not occur to him that it could also have been a case of the mastery of English becoming a kind of weapon in the mouths of the dispossessed.
The pair stayed overnight at Anoch, where the McQueens possessed some small acres of turnips and potatoes, a fact which, as  with so much of such crofting, mystifies; these fields, very little flesh of earth on the bones of rock, seem only capable of mosses and heathers.
On that afternoon of Tuesday, 31 August, McQueen's daughter served them tea; she wore a print linen dress, and had been to Inverness for a year's education in reading, writing, sewing, knotting, lace- and pastry-making.
(A decade later, Johnson, on a journey to Oxford, sat in the stage-coach beside a Mrs Beresford and her daughter; the girl was passing the time in knotting, a kind of tatting, in which coloured threads are knitted into decorative knots.
Miss Beresford, in a hero-worshipping whisper to Boswell, said of Johnson, ‘How he does talk!
Every sentence is an essay!’
Johnson, who was looking askance at Miss Beresford's occupational therapy, said, ‘In the scale of insignificance, I think knotting is to be reckoned next to mere idleness —; though I once attempted to learn knotting…but I made no progress.’)
Neither Boswell nor Johnson states Miss McQueen's precise age, but she seems to have passed sufficiently beyond pubescent embarrassment to converse relaxedly with the great Englishman, and Johnson made her a gift of a book, an act of generosity which later caused not a little controversy.
Many of Johnson's readers wished to know what kind of reading Dr Johnson thought suitable for young ladies, and it transpired, to much amusement, that he had given young Miss McQueen an arithmetic.
The laughter which this caused proved irritating to Johnson, but usefully stimulated a response which gives a good insight.
He resented the implied criticism, and defended himself by saying he merely gave her a book which he happened to have with him, rather than one he felt suitable for such a person.
It was not a book that he had packed when leaving London: he had bought it a day or two earlier in Inverness, and to Boswell, years later, he gave, not unmemorably, his reasons for buying it at all: ‘Why, Sir, if you are to have but one book with you upon a journey, let it be a book of science.
When you have read through a book of entertainment, you know it, and it can do no more for you; but a book of science is inexhaustible.’
We have no record of whether Miss McQueen —‘not inelegant in either mien or dress’, as Johnson found her: Boswell calls her ‘a modest, civil girl, very neatly  dressed’— found Cocker's Arithmetick equally absorbing.
Johnson hoped that his gift would ensure she did not forget him.
Within the inn at Anoch, walled with thick turves of earth, wainscotted with wicker, and by its chimney distinguished from the other two huts nearby, the landlord and his daughter — no mention of a Mrs McQueen — served them a meal of eggs, chicken, sausage and mutton, with rum.
Mr McQueen joined them at table, and gave Johnson the kind of local knowledge he loved — the economics, way of life, problems of such an existence.
Already, seventy men had emigrated from the glen to America, and McQueen intended to follow them within the year.
All the difficulty sprang from high rents; for his own farm, the landlord now paid four times more than he had twenty years ago, and he found this unfair: he would have been happy to go from five pounds a year to ten, but not to twenty.
Johnson took McQueen's side and observed acidly that it was the Laird who should be forced to emigrate, at which McQueen respectfully and loyally demurred, knowing that the laird, to quote Boswell, ‘could not shift for himself in America’.
A party of soldiers arrived at the inn; the travellers had earlier met them road-building between Fort Augustus and Anoch and in deference to the hospitality they had received from Mr Trapaud, Johnson and Boswell gave the men cash to buy drink — which now they did.
Johnson gave them more money, the not inconsiderable sum of a shilling each, for which generosity they hailed him, addressing him as ‘My Lord’.
The soldiers stayed up all night, brawling their guts out.
The pair of travellers slept in a somewhat makeshift room, where a woman's dress hanging on a rope acted as a partition between two beds.
Mrs Boswell had packed sheets in her husband's luggage, and Joseph Ritter laid them on both beds.
Boswell feared vermin; Johnson anticipated the chill as if stepping into a cold bath, and tied a coloured handkerchief around his head.
In merry companionship both men braved the hardship of the landlord's sleeping  arrangements and settled for the night, chatting idly and humorously across the partition like schoolboys in a dormitory.
Copiousness of detail excepted, a fundamental difference in the  attitude of each traveller again lies deep within and beneath their texts when they write of Anoch and Mr McQueen.
Johnson was warm, Boswell uncertain.
Johnson responded to this courteous, gentlemanly Highlander; Boswell failed to see beyond the Gael, the Jacobite.
After his initial gaffe that McQueen should own books, Johnson opened out to a man of culture, a man who understood his own problems and who had thought a way through them to a solution, however sad emigration might prove.
Boswell, contrarily — and patronisingly — feared danger.
‘Wednesday, 1st September: I awaked very early.
I began to imagine that the landlord, being about to emigrate, might murder us to get our money…’ and claims that Johnson had entertained the same fears, although Johnson never mentions such thoughts.
Neither writer gave McQueen the credit of his own history; neither enquired into, or assessed, the status he might have had before the ‘45 Rebellion, in which he had participated, and by which he had most likely been reduced to keeping this crude but hospitable inn.
It may have been a stopping-place for drovers — but he could still do Dr Johnson the honour of making lemonade from fresh lemons.
And he still practised sufficiently the ways of the Highland families to send his daughter to Inverness for as good an education as a girl could get within reach at that time.
Next stop, the boat to Skye from Glenelg, and after an early breakfast, they left Anoch at eight o'clock.
Mr McQueen walked some miles with them into the mountains.
He gave Johnson his economic statistics, a hundred each of sheep and goats; twelve milch cows; twenty-eight dry beef cattle ready to be sold, ‘awaiting the drover’.
He also cited a local laird's wealth — or lack of it: from a hundred square miles of property, sixty thousand acres, he could raise only four hundred pounds a year, no matter what rent pressure he put on his tenants.
In the final conversation he had with them, McQueen told Boswell and Johnson of his adventures in the 1745 Rebellion, when he had been part of Bonnie Prince Charlie's invasion force of England and got as far as Derbyshire, and fought at Culloden.
Boswell sometimes stinks faintly of hypocrisy.
No doubt can exist of his Anglophilia, yet he now says that when he heard  McQueen tell the story of the ‘45, ‘I could not refrain from tears,’ and qualifies his response by discussing a set of feelings not a million miles from sentimentality; ‘The very Highland names, or the sound of a bagpipe, will stir my blood, and fill me with a mixture of melancholy and respect for courage; with pity for an unfortunate and superstitious regard for antiquity, and thoughtless inclination for war; in short, with a crowd of sensations with which sober rationality has nothing to do.’
Two guides: one very tall servant: Boswell and Johnson on horseback; the quaint party pressed on beneath these lovely forbidding mountains to Glenshiel.
Johnson remained relatively unimpressed, even by a glimpse of snow that had persisted to this, the first day of September.
His eye measured these impressive heights coolly, relating them always to sea level rather than to their own grandeur, and correcting Boswell's exultation over ‘another mountain I called immense: Johnson: ‘No; it is no more than a considerable protuberance.’’
Little by little, however, the force of this long glen beneath the austere greyness of the Five Sisters touched Johnson, and he moved his position from that of first considering the political role of such remoteness, and the opportunities it gave for military strategies and subsequent escapes — Glenshiel had been the scene of a battle fifty-four years earlier in which local Highlanders unsuccessfully reinforced a Spanish invasion force — to being lulled by the sight of so many waters, brooks, burns, and silver rivulets, ‘which commonly ran with a clear shallow stream over a hard pebbly bottom’.
Now that he had arrived at the wildest part of Britain, he wished to use his adventure in the same spirit as that in which Montaigne wrote his famous Essais — as trials of himself, as investigations of the ideas that arose in the non-stop chatter of his mind.
At noon, in a narrowing part of the glen, a stretch which offered a little more greenery than the earlier reaches, the Highland guides, knowing of the climb ahead, halted to feed, water and rest the horses.
Johnson grasped hold of some solitude and became for an hour or so a noble savage and a member of the armies of medieval romance, communing with nature on the bank of a stream: ‘The day was calm, the air soft, and all was rudeness, silence and solitude.
Before  me, and on either side, were high hills, which by hindering the eye from ranging, forced the mind to find entertainment for itself.’
That passage and the two meditative paragraphs which follow, constitute the high point of his adventure in the wilds so far, and the first true narration of the adventures of his mind among remoteness.
When his Journey was published two years later, this quiet moment received great acclaim, hailed by one reviewer as ‘a fortunate event in the annals of literature…we congratulate the public on the event…’
The critic was reacting to Johnson's capacity for inventive response.
Time after time on his Scottish travels he conjured original ideas from his encounters with the unfamiliar.
But when the published version is contrasted with his more mundane conclusions, as in his letters to his friends, an element of performance can be seen in the formal account.
For example, to Mrs Thrale he described the scene of this famed moment of quietude briefly —‘on a green bank, with a small stream running at my feet, in the midst of savage solitude, with Mountains before me, and on either hand covered with heath’— then commented, ‘I looked round me, and wondered that I was not more affected, but the mind is not at all times equally ready to be put in motion.’
However, in his Journey to the Western Islands he takes a much more elaborate position: ‘The imaginations excited by the view of an unknown and untravelled wilderness are not such as arise in the  artificial solitude of parks and gardens, a flattering notion of self-sufficiency, a placid indulgence of voluntary delusions, a secure expansion of the fancy, or a cool concentration of the mental powers.’
He contrasted these with the force of the wild where ‘man is made unwillingly acquainted with his own weakness, and meditation shows him how little he can sustain, and how little he can perform’.
A puzzle solved itself out here.
On several occasions, and in many places, it had surprised me that Johnson made no comment: Strichen, the planned village, in particular, and the Pictish ancestry of Forres.
These and other similar resonances seemed to me hand-fashioned for Johnson's interest — but time and again, no comment.
Now I knew the reason.
When he sat down on his romantic bank by his crystal brook, the thought of turning the journey into  a book was born: ‘Whether I spent the hour well I know not; for here I first conceived the thought of this narration.’
After their rest, they began the last push to the islands, the most difficult part of their journey yet.
At Shiel Bridge, at the head of Loch Duich, the road climbs west up into Ratagan Forest and up through Glen More, emerging out onto a short Jack-and-the-Beanstalk plateau, and then hard and drearily down to Glenelg from whose shore the Isle of Skye across the Sound of Sleat may almost be reached by fingertip.
Although Ratagan was beclouded, the sun shone through behind me, putting a shine on the slate-coloured waters below.
I knew in advance that I would have to retrace my steps on this road, to get to the Skye boat at the Kyle of Lochalsh, as there is nowadays only a summer ferry to the island from Glenelg.
The physical aspect of my journey had collapsed: a heel injury became aggravated, with a cut almost in as far as the bone, and the rest of the tour found me on wheels or afloat more than on foot.
Before Boswell and Johnson began this ascent, which in parts feels almost vertical, they made one more stop — at the hamlet of Auchnasheal or Auknasheals, ‘consisting of many huts’, wrote Johnson, ‘perhaps twenty, built all of dry stone, that is, stones piled up without mortar’.
No trace of Auchnasheal exists, although somewhere beneath the moss the stones must still lurk.
The place gave Johnson another whiff of anthropology: here he stood as if in Africa or Arabia, greeting wild natives in their habitat: these Macraes might have been Xhosa tribesmen, or Tuaregs: ‘The villagers gathered about us in considerable numbers, I believe without any evil intention, but with a very savage wildness of aspect and manner.’
An extra man, says Boswell, had joined their little party, ‘Evan Campbell, servant to Mr Murchison, factor to the Laird of Macleod in Glenelg ran along with us today.
He was a very obliging fellow.’
Evan Campbell, or John Hay, or Laughland Vass, or perhaps all three Highlander guides, knew that milk could be had from the Macraes of Auchnasheal; the travellers sat down outside a house and were brought wooden dishes — Johnson calls them ‘pails’— of milk.
Boswell: ‘One of them was frothed like a  syllabub.
I saw a woman preparing it with such a stick as is used for chocolate, and in the same manner.’
For this largesse the tourists replied in kind, and in the manner of explorers.
They distributed in paper twists small parcels of snuff and tobacco, bought at Fort Augustus for this very purpose at the instigation of Mr Trapaud, and Boswell also gave them their leftover wheaten bread, a substance unknown among the oats and barley eaters of the Highlands.
Next, they offered to pay the woman of the house for the milk, and she asked a shilling, at which some of the men goaded her towards more; when she refused to raise her price, Boswell gave her a half-crown (influenced, I feel, not so much by her honest generosity, but by her shapeliness which he described as ‘comely almost as the figure of Sappho’).
Johnson makes less of his stop among the Macraes than one might have expected.
Auchnasheal merits no more than three paragraphs, two short and one long.
His letter to Mrs Thrale contained more detail, expressed with greater pungency, and it confirms the ‘Dark Continent’ feel of his experience: ‘The Inhabitants, a very coarse tribe, ignorant of any language but earse [sic], gathered so fast about us, that if we had not had Highlanders with us, they might have caused more alarm than pleasure.’
However, he does use his recollection of the journey over Ratagan, his eyes filled with mountains, to reflect in the Journey generally upon the condition of remoteness as it affects human beings, and thereby touches the core of his reasons for travelling.
Accordingly, we are treated to an immediate and excellent example of Johnson's mind at work.
He begins by summarising that for the obvious reasons of inaccessibility and defences, the peoples who reside among mountains are the last to be conquered: he progresses to consider similarly-caused impediments to civilisation: he deduces the part remoteness plays in the preservation of ancient languages.
From his discussion of how such isolated clans as the Macraes, in such hollows of the world as Auchnasheal, repel all boarders, Johnson opens up a discussion of how mankind in this condition regulates itself.
Having decided that the rude manners and customs of an outback community ‘are rather produced by their situation  than derived from their ancestors’, he examines first how they regulated themselves traditionally; then, the introduction and enforcement of the country's general body of legislation — for instance, theft of cattle from drovers had long been a problem in the Highlands; now their passage was growing safer.
And he moves up the scale from the creation of individual regional statutes, to address the law enforcement problems caused by peculiar geography, to the place of the law in the body politic.
At the lower end of his debate he describes how ‘in the Highlands it was a law, that if a robber was sheltered from justice, any man of the same clan might be taken in his place’; at the upper end, close to his conclusion, Johnson summarises: ‘As government advances towards perfection, provincial judicature is perhaps in every empire gradually abolished.’
In effect, he is tracing the means by which anthropologically quaint units decline.
The over-running and Anglicising of the Highlands after Culloden, when even the traditional form of dress was banned, would soon lead to assimilation, and even though‘the inhabitants of mountains form distinct races, and are careful to preserve their genealogies’, Johnson concludes without emotion that ‘while their rocks seclude them from the rest of mankind, and kept them an unaltered and distinctive race…they are now losing their distinction, and hastening to mingle with the general community.’
The passage, some three pages long and called ‘The Highlands’, is a masterly performance — notwithstanding the implicit condescension that such a wide region could be thus briefly treated.
It becomes a great pleasure to read this passage, another justification of those who assured me that A Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland remains one of the fundamental works in the literature of travel.
Of climbing Ratagan (which they spelt in different ways: Boswell, ‘Ratakin': Johnson, ‘Ratiken’) in the early afternoon, Johnson confided in Mrs Thrale (to whom he spells it ‘Rattiken’)‘more difficulty than we had yet experienced’, a formidable demur, given the harshness of the ride out from Fort Augustus to Anoch.
To begin with, they left it too late — but, measuring the distance from Shiel Bridge way below and behind me, and  judging the terrain, even though this modern road has been impressively built, I do not know how they might have bettered their arrangements.
They could hardly have camped, and without exact locations for Anoch and Auchnasheal, I cannot say whether they would have improved their lot by aiming for Auchnasheal when leaving Fort Augustus, instead of breaking the journey at Anoch.
In any case, they breasted the height of Ratagan, and now the difficulty began in earnest.
Dr Johnson's weight interfered with his equestrian comfort, and ‘upon one of the precipices, my horse, weary with the steepness of the rise, staggered a little, and I called in haste to the Highlander to hold him.
This was the only moment of my journey, in which I thought myself endangered’— a surprising comment, given what lies ahead.
On the steep descent, things deteriorated further.
The guides suggested that Johnson, so as not to tire one horse wholly, should alternate between mounts.
But when he opted for either of John Hay's horses, they argued: Johnson had to settle for the grey owned by Laughland Vass.
They moved forward, Joseph Ritter bringing up the rear, Hay and Vass either side of Johnson's bridle, the great man clearly frightened.
John Hay, seeing Johnson's fear, talked to him all the time as to a child, trying to keep him cheerful, but this measure only excited Boswell's scorn, especially when he heard Hay trying to distract Johnson with the antics of the local goats.
‘Here now was a common ignorant Highland clown imagining that he could divert, as one does a child,— Dr Samuel Johnson!
The ludicrousness, absurdity, and extraordinary contrast between what the fellow fancied, and the reality, was truly comick.’
So they rode on through the twilight, the guides either side of Johnson soothing him forward.
At this point, Boswell decided he would hurry on ahead to secure their food and accommodation at Glenelg.
To his astonishment, Johnson yelled angrily at him and there broke out the most serious row the pair is reported ever to have had in their long association.
They even let the sun go down on their wrath.
As Boswell began to move off, Johnson called him back heatedly.
Boswell explained, patiently enough to judge from his text, that he merely intended to see that all was well at Glenelg, to which  Johnson replied, ‘Do you know, I should as soon have thought of picking a pocket as doing so?’
Boswell hit back: ‘I am diverted with you, sir,’ and Johnson laid him low: ‘Doing such a thing makes one lose confidence in him who has done it, as one cannot tell what he may do next.’
Matters did not improve when they got to Glenelg and found an appalling inn — although it did draw from Johnson one of his best remarks of the entire tour.
Reflecting that the place lacked milk, bread, eggs, and wine, he observed, ‘Of the provisions the negative catalogue was very copious.’
Someone sent somebody out to kill two hens; a local gentleman, knowing the lie of the land, sent his servant to the inn with rum and sugar and an apology for not knowing of their arrival in  sufficient time to put them up, and he had to leave for Inverness at the crack of dawn; Boswell still had some bread despite the amount he had doled out to the Macraes.
The landlord of this slate-roofed building cooked them mutton chops which proved inedible, and Johnson's supper, later traced in Boswell's notes, consisted of bread and a lemon.
When they got to the bedroom, further surprises awaited them: ‘Out of one of the beds, on which we were to repose, started up, at our entrance, a man black as Cyclops from the forge.’
Boswell found the room ‘damp and dirty, with bare walls, a variety of bad smells, a coarse black greasy fir table, and forms [benches]of the same kind’.
The guides, unable to find livery for the horses, found fresh hay for the beds and the quarrellers, still sullen with each other, retired.
Johnson slept on the hay in his huge-pocketed greatcoat; Boswell laid the sheets his wife had packed on top of the hay and, observed Johnson, ‘lay in linen like a gentleman’.
Eighteen days out of Edinburgh, they perched at the edge of the Hebrides.
‘The inquirer is kept in continual suspense’
FOR THE NEXT SEVEN WEEKS they moseyed around the Western Isles, often encountering rough weather: Skye, Raasay, Coll, Mull, Ulva, Inchkenneth and Iona.
Of Glenelg they saw little; after breakfast on Thursday, 2 September, having parted company with their guides John Hay and Laughland Vass, they walked down to the shore and were ferried to Skye.
Johnson and Boswell made up their quarrel when they rose, with Johnson saying he would not have turned back, as he had threatened, and headed for Edinburgh.
The weather cleared too, and they were rowed diagonally south-west across the Sound of Sleat.
Boswell measured the water journey from Glenelg as twelve miles; the boatman called it six miles, confusing old logical Johnson with the assertion that a mile on the land equated to two on the sea.
Their hosts for the first few days, the Lord of the Isles, Sir Alexander Macdonald, and his wife Jane, a relative of Boswell's, waited on the shore at Armadale, a small, dirty, sandy horseshoe of a bay, to greet them.
A portion of the original stone jetty still stands at Armadale, within sight of the modern ferry port linking Skye to Mallaig on the mainland.
Trees on the upland behind the harbour cloak the Macdonald estate.
At the pier, shops sell batiks and woollens to the ferry travellers: families with packed cars and roof-racks; men with sheepdogs on the way to trials at Mallaig; bikers on some kind of round robin according to their luggage tags —‘Genève-Edinburgh-Brugge-Genève’.
The distant mountains form the backcloth of an opera set.
Skye is called the winged, or flying, island.
On the map, or from high in the air, it looks like a proud bird, profiled like a phoenix.
On my first visit, several years ago, I saw — and they   are unmistakable — eagles.
Near Portree, ‘the harbour of the king’— James V, rather of Mary, Queen of Scots, once sailed in — I lay on heathland and watched first one, then another, high against the clear blue sky.
Such grace: they soar and wheel, the lions of the air.
One Skye man told me how, sitting on his lawn one afternoon, he heard a sudden great beating of wings and like passing royalty an eagle swooped low across the trees.
Although not the only outsiders to record the place — Johnson's favourite travel writers Martin Martin and Thomas pennant made copious observations — the visit of Johnson and Boswell to the isle became a significant part of Skye's history, on account of the extent of their commentaries and the literary distinction they have retained.
Johnson considered as many aspects of life here as he could possibly think of, or so it seems: and Boswell recorded Johnson with similar energy.
Their experience of the island became comprehensive; they visited the south, then the east, then the north-east, then the north-west, the west and back to the south  again.
Weather did not deter them; it rained most of the time and they traversed ground that had little or no trace of thoroughfare.
On Skye, Johnson hit his anthropologist's and historian's strides.
In the Macdonald household at Armadale, he asked questions busily and settled himself to a general spirit of enquiry, the fruits of which he then presents in his Journey.
He begins with a complimentary description of the walled orchard, which had survived the destruction of the castle in the years following the ‘45.
A visiting fossilist from Aberdeenshire drew Johnson's attention to a species of ash tree, enabling the great man to support his recurring arboreal obsession: ‘The present nakedness of the Hebrides is not wholly the fault of Nature.’
Johnson heard bagpipes at Armadale, and a story to accompany them — of a past Macdonald aggression against a family in Culloden, whom the Macdonalds locked in their church one Sunday morning and torched, this being the tune played while the flames danced.
Johnson's commentary upon this tale airs his willingness to take in everything and give it back out again: ‘Narrations like this, however uncertain, deserve the notice of the traveller, because they are the only records of a nation that has no historians, and afford the most genuine representation of the life and character of the ancient Highlanders.’
He next examines the Hebridean footwear —‘Brogues, a kind of artless shoes, stitched with thongs so loosely, that though they defend the foot from stones, they do not exclude water.’
The wearing of Highland dress, the speaking of Erse, the weather —; his observations begin with the commonplace and are taken by his mind up on to the plateau of thought.
In this, his value always exceeds Boswell's; Johnson the writer has no need to grind the axe of his ego, and thereby feels no qualms in conveying how confusing he finds the native Scots, who, decisive and firm in their answer to his first question, are likely to contradict it entirely in answering the second question.
He observes, not unamusedly, ‘such is the laxity of Highland conversation, that the inquirer is kept in continual suspense, and by a kind of intellectual retrogradation, knows less as he hears more.’
Boswell's reflections upon their first four days on Skye ring with a different clang, and behind his final edition of his Journal  of a Tourlies a curly history.
He disliked Sir Alexander Macdonald, a view shared by many: it originally stemmed from unfavourable comparison with Alexander's older brother, the late, much-loved, James.
On his own account, though, Alexander possessed the opposite of generosity, had a pompous air, offensive self-importance and had embraced his Eton education and all things southern too warmly (not a word he otherwise inspired) for the liking of his fellow-Scots.
Boswell loathed him so much that his first edition of the Tour to the Hebrides had to be amended  on account of the unflattering position he took on Sir Alexander.
Excisions, notes and actual published first edition refer to Sir Alexander's reputation for racking up his tenants' rents unfairly and harshly; and to noticeable meanness —‘he has disgusted all mankind by injudicious parsimony’; Boswell originally told of Sir Alexander asking a visitor whether the punch-bowl on the table in front of them were not indeed very handsome.
The guest replied, ‘It would be — if it were full.’
When he read the remarks in the first edition, the Lord of the Isles wrote angrily to Boswell; a duel might have been fought had Boswell not agreed to edit out offending passages next time around.
At the Clan Donald centre in Skye, near whose grounds stood the house in which the pair stayed, some relevant legalistic correspondence between the two may be seen.
Thomas Rowlandson capped the matter — which had become public knowledge — in his final Boswell cartoon, called ‘Revising the Second Edition’, which shows a terrified Boswell being grabbed by the throat; Lord Macdonald is pointing with his stick to the offending pages of the first edition and Boswell is complying in terror.
The edition of Boswell's Tour now generally available only refers obliquely to a lack of warmth, and to Boswell's own ‘spleen’ while staying there — all this notwithstanding that the beautiful (and pregnant) Lady Macdonald was a cousin of Boswell's.
Although the clan is diffuse now, a cohesion lingers: Macdonalds all over the world contribute to the funding of the Clan Donald Centre, a well-run and surprisingly unembarrassing tourist, residential and archival institute for the celebration of the name.
On Monday, 6 September 1773, Boswell and Johnson left the home of Sir Alexander Macdonald and set off on horseback to a staging-post near their embarkation point for Raasay.
Beyond Broadford (which Boswell calls ‘Broadfoot’), past today's electricity installations, down a long roadway, lies the farm at which they stayed, and some remains of the original house still stand.
The Mackinnons lived here, on land owned by the Macdonalds, ‘of the first rank of tenants’, Johnson wrote to Mrs Thrale, ‘where we were entertained better than the landlords’.
Shortened to ‘Corry’ nowadays, known locally as ‘old Corry’, the pair's spelling again differed, with Johnson calling it ‘Coriatachan’and Boswell ‘Corrichatachin': the Ordnance Survey calls it ‘Coirechat-achan’.
(The Mackinnons hosted them here twice, the second time being at the end of September after the pair had crossed the island to catch a boat for islands south of Skye.)
‘From Armidel,’ writes Johnson, ‘we came at night to Coriatachan, a house very pleasantly situated between two brooks, with one of the highest hills of the island behind it.’
as if it had happened a few years ago, Mr Donal John MacLennan, leaning on his metal gate as his sheep thronged the pens of today's farm at Corry, knew that Johnson and Boswell had been guests in this place, and that they had had good times here.
On their first stay the Mackinnons gave them ‘the comfort of a table fully furnished’, and a party that night with songs in Gaelic, in whose choruses even Boswell joined.
Other buildings have taken over at Corry, and at their rear the blond old wall of the original house stretches under the shade of a tree in this hollow full of little rivers.
The travellers' response to this place was positive and warm, and this does not simply derive from the contrast with the pompous inhospitality they found at Armadale, where they were perhaps disgruntled at staying only in an estate official's house (the mansion had been burnt down), even if the laird and his lady stayed with them.
At the Mackinnons they entered the true spirit of the west of Scotland, the ‘kindly and tooty’ people of the song ‘Westering Home’.
Alexander Macdonald had clearly abandoned much of that hospitable tradition, perhaps owing to his embrace of southern education, or perhaps as a reaction to the affection in which his  late brother had been held.
The Mackinnons belonged closer to the ground of Skye, an open house where all strata mingled easily.
Johnson wrote, ‘We were treated with very liberal hospitality, among a more numerous and elegant company than it could have been supposed easy to collect.’
The Edinburgh effect had begun to work again, the great man come to visit, a fact which Johnson pleasedly concedes a couple of paragraphs earlier, when he observes, ‘The arrival of strangers at a place so rarely visited, excites rumour, and quickens curiosity.’
In Skye, Johnson's text begins to grow denser, and he gives the appearance, almost, of wishing to record every moment.
An impression also grows that when he reached Skye, having ‘conceived’, during his little mountain idyll, ‘the thought of this narration’, Johnson, emulating Boswell, has now begun to take notes.
He made his eighteenth-century reader aware of the travel difficulties, and how they were surmounted — on steep hills by precipices the Highlander and his horse go carefully, the rider sometimes walking, always with a guide: ‘The horseman has always at his side a native of the place, who, by pursuing game, or tending cattle, or often being employed in messages or conduct, has learned where the ridge of the hill has breadth sufficient to allow a horse and his rider a passage, and where the moss or bog is hard enough to bear them.’
To Mrs Thrale he wrote, ‘No part that I have seen is plain; you are always climbing or descending, and every step is upon rock or mire.
A walk upon ploughed ground in England is a dance upon carpets, compared to the toilsome drudgery of wandering in Skye…
The use of travelling is to regulate imagination by reality…’
He summarised continuously — the manners and mores of the people, the scale of hospitality, the diet, and the disposition of the household in which he stayed, the more ‘ordinary’ the folk the greater Johnson's detail.
When all the consequences of his account are added up, it transpires that he created a permanent and invaluable record of an ancient way of life — not at first as antique as he had hoped, but he was not ungratified at the glimpses of the past that he caught.
Johnson's reflections under the heading of ‘Coriatachan in Sky’ amount to only eighteen hundred words or so, yet they constitute  the clearest view of him I have had so far, the best opportunity to try and assess what made him.
If great writing may principally be a matter of fine and large spirit expressed in outstanding technique, to my eye, as I still acquaint myself with him, Johnson triumphs by combining a welcoming mind with an economy of expression, so that he shares the maximum of observed experience in the minimum of words.
In this, so difficult to achieve, he towers.
Never leaving us to feel that he has short-changed us, each observation complete in itself, as if it has been roundly considered before utterance, he manages to accommodate the following items of interest in that eighteen hundred words: a comparison between Hebridean manners of burial and Roman funeral rites; the weather (repeatedly); the literacy of the Hebrideans; how travellers are accommodated, there being no hotel system; diet — wild-fowl, fish, venison, beef, mutton, goat, poultry, bread; whisky for breakfast (the morning dram, known as a ‘skalk’); the availability of tea, coffee, marmalade and other preserves, honey and cheese; trading practices — wine from the French in exchange for wool; culinary variety, short on vegetables other than potatoes, not good on custards; napery, crockery and cutlery; the abating fervour of the clans in the wake of Culloden; and he believed he saw the slow rise of prosperity under the ‘unpleasing consequences of subjection,.
The ‘Coriatachan in Sky’ passage, the first of the great Hebridean discourses in Johnson's Journey, displays a writer confident that he is imparting information and reflection in sufficient quantities to excite both the reader's thought and imagination — and yet not so lengthy as to bore them, nor so brief as to frustrate them.
Boswell's counterpoint to this recitative divulges that among their books the Mackinnons had the shorter version of Johnson's own Dictionary, and that, notwithstanding the merry and warm respect they received from the household, the place began to feel like a prison on account of the adverse weather.
By contrast, while Boswell fretted and twitched, Johnson wrote a brace of Odes, one to honour the Isle of Skye, the other for his friend Hester Thrale.
Both in Latin, they received much admiration when they entered the wider world.
In conversation at Corry, Johnson heard the stories he longed for — of men seeing visions, of examples of ‘second sight’ on Skye; Mrs Mackinnon's father had once met some women who, while working in a field, heard ghostly voices, signifying imminent death; he later met two funerals at the predicted place.
Behind Boswell's published account of his fidgety stay at the Mackinnons' — he felt so lethargic that he did not encourage Johnson to talk so that he would not have to write it down — lies some oddity.
Bearing in mind that after the stinginess of Armadale he had gone to the house of this ‘hearty welcome’, and had been pleased with ‘a numerous and cheerful company’— why did Boswell prove less forthcoming than one might have expected about the Mackinnons?
Snobbery may provide one answer: in his supposed solidarity with his own kind, he may not have wished to suggest that a tenant farmer could prove more generous of spirit than the laird.
Fear may have contributed — fear of Sir Alexander's wrath.
He could have been forgiven had he waxed much more lyrical.
Indeed, he cut from his published version his original account of the hospitality they experienced — a pity because it constituted a valuable little sliver of social history, describing their arrival in ‘a low parlour’ of this two-storeyed house, to be greeted with tea from a silver service.
Supper was as lavish as they had yet had in Scotland: ‘A large dish of minced beef collops, a large dish of fricassee of fowl, I believe a dish called fried chicken or something like it, a dish of ham or tongue, some excellent haddocks, some herrings, a large bowl of rich milk, frothed, as good a bread-pudding as I ever tasted, full of raisin and lemon or orange peel, and sillabubs made with port wine and in sillabub glasses.
There was a good table-cloth with napkins; china, silver spoons, porter if we chose it, and a large bowl of very good punch.’
When Boswell awoke on Wednesday, 8 September, the wind had died, but the rain persisted.
It eventually cleared and after breakfast they prepared to go to Raasay; they would see the Mackinnons again in two weeks or so.
Boswell's account says they rode two miles to the shore to find a herring-boat which would take them out to Raasay.
Today, a ferry crosses from the shore of Loch Sligachan, considerably  more than two miles from Corry; waiting on the simple pier at Sconser, the vessel can be seen leaving Raasay, preceded by a small bow-wave.
The Raasay ferry takes only a handful of vehicles and rather more passengers, and travels frequently, and if the ferryman finds that he has no room for you on his last run of the day from Raasay back to Sconser he will return.
On a fine mid-morning, the water at Sconser is glowingly clear, a kind of northern coral sea, and with boats bobbing on moorings near the back-gardens of their owners' cottages; a few lobster pots, a net drying in the light sunshine.
Boswell's and Johnson's footsteps can no longer be seen around Armadale and Sleat; so far, only Corry retains their memory, in that old stretch of white crumbling wall.
Johnson found the whole island harsh and barren; to Mrs Thrale he wrote, ‘though I have been twelve days upon it, I have little to say.’
Yet his journey from the beautiful south to Corry took him through scenery which is today lovely.
This part of Skye, wooded and lush, benefits from any warmth lingering in the North Atlantic Drift.
Can it have changed much — or did it rain so pre-emptively that he cannot have noticed the lovely inlets at Isleornsay, their green banked lands sloping to soft-coloured waters?
He ignites the imagination, nevertheless, with glancing observations of Skye ‘…so much indented by inlets of the Sea, that there is no part of it removed from the water by more than six miles’.
Before they left for Raasay, there arrived at the Mackinnons' a card and two visitors.
The card was written by the Reverend Donald McQueen and told them that the Laird of Raasay had sent his own boat for them; the reverend gentleman himself arrived shortly afterwards; ‘an elderly man,’ says Boswell, ‘with his own black hair, courteous and rather slow of speech, but candid, sensible and well-informed.’
Mr McQueen, who would be with them for some weeks, was accompanied by one of the Macleods of Raasay to pilot them, Malcolm Macleod, aged sixty-two.
To judge from Boswell's description, Macleod cut as representative a figure of Hebridean or Highland imagery as any folklore could have created, a hero straight out of Scott or Stevenson or Tranter: bearded, ruddy-cheeked, lively-eyed, wearing brogues, tartan  stockings, ‘a black waistcoat, a short green cloth coat bound with gold cord, a yellowish bushy wig, a large blue bonnet with gold thread button’.
He also wore ‘a purple camblet kilt’: sartorial defiance: the kilt had been banned after the ‘45 in which the Macleods played a significant part, not least in assisting Bonnie prince Charlie to escape.
‘Camblet’, a word as old as Marco polo, or even springing from earlier Arabic associations, connects into ‘Camelot’, fine cloth, finer than camelhair with which it became commonly associated, finer than wool, as fine as silk itself and perhaps a combination of camel and wool and silk.
To wear a kilt of camblet denoted a singular man — such as Malcolm Macleod of Raasay.
The boat had been made in Norway.
‘The water was calm,’ says Johnson, ‘and the [four]rowers were vigorous.’
Boswell, who says the high wind blew in their faces, described one of the oarsmen, ‘a Macleod, a robust, black-haired fellow, half-naked, and bear-headed, something between a wild Indian and an English tar.
Dr Johnson sat high on the stern, like a magnificent Triton.’
On Skye, Boswell's writing changed character, and became lyrical, more poised, vigorous and clear, as if the elements and the landscape lifted him.
Perhaps his heart and mind leaped together at the daily realisation of his dream to take his beloved Johnson on this tour to these parts.
The short journey to Raasay proved vivid.
Malcolm Macleod sang a heroic song in Gaelic, with the boatmen and the Reverend Mr McQueen taking up the chorus.
Passing Scalpay, Johnson suggested to Boswell that they buy the island, ‘found a good school’ on it, and an episcopal church, ‘and have a printing-press where he would print all the Erse that could be found’.
Rounding the corner of Scalpay, the weather of the open sea hit the boat and their faces, and Johnson, though uncomfortable, again reached for, and found, the humorous and positive: ‘This is now the Atlantick.
If I should tell at a tea table in London, that I have crossed the Atlantick in an open boat, how they'd shudder, and what a fool they'd think me to expose myself to such danger.’
Johnson increases in delight; how many edges he gives to an observation.
A small boat journey becomes a crossing of the ocean; and continuing the mimicry of aggrandisement, he  anticipates satirically the throwing-up of London's hands at his folly — and by implicit contrast, how much more adventurous and un-foppish he appears, while yet mocking himself.
In the open sea, Joseph Ritter — always there beneath the text or in the shadows of Boswell's narrative — mystifyingly lost Johnson's spurs overboard.
How?
Had he laid them in the bottom of the boat, or on the seat beside him — and a little wave swept them away?
And why not have placed them for safe keeping in a pocket, satchel or valise?
Johnson, after a moment of being stung at this carelessness, dismissed it as ‘rather an inconvenience than a loss’, and went on to use the incident to defend his views on the second sight.
He had dreamt the night before of losing his walking-stick on the current of a stream.
The Reverend McQueen countered, and spoke with the authority of one who, in order to rout the local belief in witchcraft, had had to preach aggressively from his own pulpit.
Near Raasay, a charming gleam comes from Boswell —‘the singing of our rowing was succeeded by that of reapers’, the same song heard in a differently enchanting place by the Lady of Shalott.
They must have had such a pleasing approach to Raasay House; the bay of their arrival seems unlikely to have changed, a wide and gentle place, now full of windsurfers — the mansion where they stayed now houses an Adventure School.
The modern ferry comes in a good deal farther south, beneath slabs of World War Two concrete fortifications.
A welcoming party of six walked down to the shore as the boating party disembarked not without difficulty; Johnson, after his six or seven hours on the Atlantic, found the rocks ‘irregularly broken, and a false step would have been very mischievous’.
More intensely than Skye, the smaller canvas of Raasay plunged Johnson straight into the life of the islanders.
The men greeting Johnson included the Laird, his doctor brother, and four other Macleod relatives, including one, known as Sandie, who had been exiled for his part with the Jacobites in 1745.
It becomes clear from Boswell's descriptions that this family were considerably less Anglicised than the Macdonalds on Skye, and still remained on the side of the Gaels.
In keeping with Sandie Macleod's fighting  on behalf of the clans, the Laird himself, although straitened by low incomes from his estates, had never racked his rents and as a consequence, says Boswell, ‘so far is he from distressing his people, that, in the present rage for emigration, not a man has left his estate.’
Up at the house waited Lady Raasay with her family — three sons and ten daughters.
Brandy was poured immediately, and ‘On a side-board was placed for us, who had come off the sea, a substantial dinner, and a variety of wines.’
Boswell does not record whether Johnson accepted a drink; nor has he recorded Johnson taking alcohol on the journey so far.
(Six years later, according to the Life, Johnson ‘harangued’ at Joshua Reynolds's house ‘upon the qualities of different liquors’, and coined the much-quoted ‘Claret is the liquor for boys; port, for men; but he who aspires to be a hero must drink brandy.’)
Johnson told Mrs Thrale, ‘We went up into a dining-room about as large as your blue room, where we had something given us to eat, and tea and coffee.’
Soon they rolled back the carpet and had a dance.
A slight divergence appears here in the separate chronologies; Boswell gives the impression they danced after supper; Johnson says, ‘When it was time to sup, the dance ceased, and thirty persons sat down to two tables in the same room.
After supper the ladies sung Erse songs, to which I listened as an English audience to an Italian opera, delighted with the sound of words which I did not understand.’
He had landed in the midst of the true hospitality and zest of the west of Scotland.
They came to Raasay House on the evening of Wednesday, 8 September, and stayed for four nights, a shorter stay than their first spell on Skye.
Yet, as if some kind of mathematical progression took hold of him, Johnson's accounts of the several places in which he found himself, get longer, with Raasay the longest so far.
He wrote a detailed set of observations — an entire territory, as it were, under his eye as a jewel to a watchmaker's glass.
The society of Raasay was so self-contained that he could hold it in his palm and turn it this way and that.
Thus, he acquainted himself with the meanings of the songs he heard them singing, songs of love and emigration; with inheritances and alliances between these  western chieftains; with the size and topography of Raasay and its suitability for animal husbandry.
He found trees on Raasay, and saw the trout from their streams but not the eels, which prompts him towards thoughts on national culinary abhorrences: ‘The Neapolitans lately refused to eat potatoes in a famine.
An Englishman is not easily persuaded to dine on snails with an Italian, on frogs with a Frenchman, or on horse-flesh with a Tartar,’ and then leads into a discussion which philosophically connects the natural foods of nations with the natural development of man's society.
pondering the absence on Raasay of deer, hares and rabbits, and expanding to discuss beasts of prey, he begins to give a picture of a small island community in the eighteenth century as comprehensively and economically as any reader could desire.
The compactness of the place, as Johnson found it, may still be touched.
He reckoned that the population of the day numbered somewhere between six and nine hundred people, but he based this on the fact that the laird pressed together an army of a hundred men for the ‘45, and according to Johnson ‘the sixth part of a people is supposed capable of bearing arms’.
Allowing for the fact that not every man would hear the call, and that the laird would wish to leave a number of men to guard the place, he then bumped up the arithmetic to suppose nine hundred inhabitants.
By the road from the ferry to Raasay House, small neat houses appear, bright colourful gardens, attentively tended, gleaming in the sunshine.
Sports reporters are reputed to gauge crowds well; who measures populations at a glance?
I cannot tell how many people live on Raasay today; nine hundred would seem a high estimate although in the interior of the island, houses appear unexpectedly like mushrooms in the grass.
A quiet life, but an exquisite one visually, on this long narrow island, on whose southern forested hills the poet Sorley Maclean found that ‘Time, the deer, is in the wood of Hallaig.’
Behind Raasay House there still stands ‘a chapel unroofed and ruinous’.
Is it the same as Johnson described?
This small graveyard contains the ‘repositories for the dead’ of the Macleod generations.
Once more appears the value of the difference between Johnson's discursiveness and Boswell's practical observations.
Johnson used  the little family cemetery to break into a contemplation of Martin Martin's journey and then lead to a consideration of roofless churches as an exemplar and a herald of the eventual decline of religion.
Boswell brings us to the very bones — literally — of their excursion to the churchyard behind the stable-block.
‘A little to the west of the house is an old, ruinous chapel, unroofed, which never has been very curious.
We here saw some human bones of an uncommon size.
There was a heel-bone, in particular, which Dr Macleod said was such, that if the foot was in proportion, it must have been twenty-seven inches long.
Dr Johnson would not look at the bones.
He started back from them with a striking appearance of horror…’
Excellent though Johnson has so far proven at the explorer's notes, Boswell threatens to outdo him regarding Raasay.
It is from Boswell that we learn of the height of nun Can, Raasay's peak on which he danced a Highland reel with old Malcolm Macleod who called him between five and six in the morning to go walking.
Boswell is the one who tells us the legend of the seahorse from the lakes who devoured a man's daughter, and was eventually trapped by the lure of a sow on a spit; from Boswell we learn that of the hundred-strong little army the Laird of Raasay mustered, eighty-six came back from Culloden; Boswell chronicles the ash and plane trees, the limestone rocks, the caves and their stalactites, the black cattle, the plover, the pigeons and blackcock, the rainfall, nine months in a year, the juniper, the peat, the belief in the existence of a gold mine, and the women wawking or waulking the tweed, a tedious operation where the tweed is rubbed over and through water in order to shrink and thicken it (in the outer Hebrides they add their own urine to the vat, although Bozzie missed that one), and the women sang a worksong to accompany the rhythmic labour, and did not succeed in drowning out Johnson's deep voice as he asked them questions.
From Boswell we learn that the Laird of Macleod was in debt to the tune of forty thousand pounds, and this Hebridean Micawber had an income of only thirteen hundred a year.
They danced every night.
Boswell reported: ‘The queen of our ball was the eldest Miss Macleod, of Rasay, an elegant, well-bred woman, and celebrated for her beauty all over these regions, by the name of Miss Flora Rasay.
There seemed to be no jealousy, no discontent among them; and the gaiety of the scene was such that I for a moment doubted whether unhappiness had any place in Rasay.’
Of the celebrated Miss Flora, Johnson wrote to Mrs Thrale that she ‘dresses her head very high, and has manners so ladylike, I wish her headdress was lower’.
When Boswell had completed his own adventuring on Raasay, he turned his attention, as usual, to making Dr Johnson sparkle: ‘Let me now gather some gold dust — some more fragments of Dr Johnson's conversation, without regard to order of time.’
Raasay had a smaller familiarity with the topics on which Dr Johnson was likely to speak.
Boswell tried all the same, but reported only one ‘typical’ conversation of any length.
It took place on Friday, 10 September, and only between Johnson and Boswell; Johnson talked of four people, Richard Bentley, David Mallet, the Duchess of Marlborough and Joseph Hooke.
It was an exchange of literary gossip, having to do with the finances of  writing, and the ‘ghosting’ of the Marlborough memoirs, and would have meant nothing to the dancing, chattering folk in Raasay House.
Apart from that, and a brief exchange with Boswell on one of the Macleod family, it was now clear that Johnson found little stimulation on Raasay: ‘There was not enough of intellectual entertainment for him, after he had satisfied his curiosity, which he did, by asking questions, till he had exhausted the island’: does Boswell mean the topic of Raasay or its people?
Johnson himself concluded that ‘Raasay has little that can detain a traveller, except the laird and his family’; and in their ‘feat of hospitality’ he found a ‘delightful contrariety of images.
Without is the rough ocean and the rocky land, the beating billows and the howling storm; within is plenty and elegance, beauty and gaiety, the song and the dance.’
On a sunny Sunday morning they left Raasay.
Despite their qualms of travelling on the Sabbath, they took the weather as it came to them and sailed back to Skye, landing in the harbour of Portree.
Beyond Raasay House today, the road winds inland, an excellent road for so small an island.
Then, like hope, energy or money, the road runs out just when you need it.
Small farms may be seen in the valleys, and, in patches at least, the crofters of Raasay would appear to have good, green land.
From the first heights heading north, the sails of the Adventure School's windsurfers may be seen like pictures in a child's storybook on the glimmering water.
This, rather than Inch Keith or Scalpay, would have been the island for Johnson.
Raasay has an atmosphere of independence: had the Macleods ever declared a Republic of Raasay, the place feels as if the idea might have taken hold.
Someone once felt it worth fortifying; beneath grey-white nun Can, a castle stands at the roadside, formidable and hostile even in bright warm sunshine.
Bees enquire within the heather overlooking the sea.
Boswell spent an energetic time on Raasay; he walked almost the entire island and had his dance on top of Dun Can.
For once, if briefly, the biographical positions are reversed, when Johnson writes to Mrs Thrale describing Boswell's doings. ‘on the third  day Boswel [sic]went out with old Malcolm to see a ruined castle, which he found less entire than was promised, but he saw the country.’
The building they stayed in and entered from the (largely unchanged) foreshore may now be found behind a later front; the walls of the Raasay House Johnson slept in are held prisoner within the nineteenth-century accreted façade; one or two corridors may be seen and touched.
After the Macleods' modest grandeur and great hospitality, Raasay House became a hotel, and now the bare boards of the Adventure School thud with young feet; they sleep in bunks and merry community where Johnson had a room to himself, which, as he told Mrs Thrale, ‘in eleven rooms to forty people was more than my share’.
He further speculated that with a room to Boswell, and one for the laird, ‘there remained eight rooms only for at least seven and thirty lodgers.
I suppose they put temporary beds in the diningroom…there was a room above stairs with six beds in which they put ten men.’
That night, I read again their separate accounts of Raasay, to see what I had missed: the streams of which Johnson wrote, ‘one of the brooks turns a cornmill, and at least one produces trouts’;, the garden, described by Boswell, ‘plentifully stocked with vegetables, and strawberries, raspberries, currants, etc.’; and a swift passing observation in one of Johnson's letters to Hester Thrale, a reference he does not include in his official text.
His politics, as exemplified by this omission, again prove intriguing and his almost furtive observation hands me on to my next destination.
Johnson had told Mrs Thrale a little of the four-hundred-year history of Raasay (or ‘Raarsa’ as he calls it)— and then he divulged that Bonnie Prince Charlie ‘was hidden in his distress two nights at Raarsa, and the king's troops burnt the whole country, and killed some of the Cattle’.
They made swift work of Portree where they landed on the Sunday afternoon.
Boswell, but not, oddly, Johnson, looked over an emigrant ship in the harbour.
After lunch they set off to Kingsburgh for one of their most memorable encounters.
It merits the longest entry devoted to any one person in Boswell's account, and no more than two sentences in Johnson's: the person they met  was Flora Macdonald, who had helped Bonnie Prince Charlie to escape after Culloden.
The harbour of Portree, the principal town on Skye, is, as Boswell observed, ‘a large and good one’, and from it the road climbs up into the town, now much built since 1773 — a square, several banks, a school, and many, many tourists.
In the hotels at night they provide ‘Highland Evenings’— kilts, pipers, stout balladeers, male and female, and little girls in tartan dresses and white socks dancing like precise, muscled wraiths between wooden swords to the music of accordion, fiddle and piano.
One shy-faced fawn performed ‘Flora Macdonald's Fancy’.
The naming of tunes in Gaelic dancing has as much to do with the whim of the moment as with anything portentous: ‘Upstairs in a Tent’, or ‘The Clock on the Dresser’, or ‘The Walls of Limerick, owe more to whimsy in the kitchen on the night than to any attempt by the musician to give his tune immortality.
Likewise, perhaps, ‘Flora Macdonald's Fancy’—‘A name,’ wrote Johnson in his Journey, ‘that will be mentioned in history, and if courage and fidelity be virtues mentioned with honour.
She is a woman of middle stature, soft features, gentle manners and elegant presence.’
She had borne seven children and was in her fifty-first year in 1773, when, on that September Sunday evening she entertained, and played hostess overnight, to her famous English visitor and his plump little annotator from Edinburgh, who wrote of Flora: ‘She is a little woman, of a genteel appearance, and uncommonly mild and well-bred.’
The A850, having come north from Broadford, leaves Portree for the north-west of Skye and after a few miles, just beyond the standing stones by Borve, splits into the A856.
After Kensaleyre, this beautiful road, a territory of hawks, runs by Loch Snizort Beag, and from the calm grassy uplands, well-to-do houses look down on the waters where the opportunities for boats seem infinite.
The scenery up here has been arresting so far; now it takes on an unexpectedly serene beauty.
Flora Macdonald lived in a small farm estate, off this road.
Nothing remains of the house where the Pretender hid and where Johnson and Boswell stayed: a few stones peeping forth from grassy old mounds, within new  unruly sycamores and sprouting ashes.
Trees guard the house from the east winds; meadows slope down to the water.
Nobody nearby knew the location of the well a little farther on, from which Bonnie Prince Charlie drank.
The outlines of the old house can just about be traced: lumps in the ground, grass-covered old rubble.
A reclusive woman lives on the site today, with a fierce and deterring desire to protect her privacy.
They stayed at Kingsburgh on Sunday night, having first been greeted by Flora's husband, another archetype of a fine Highland figure.
Says Boswell, ‘He had his Tartan plaid thrown about him, a large blue bonnet with a knot of black riband like a cockade, a brown short coat of a kind of duffil [thick-napped cloth], a Tartan waistcoat with gold buttons and gold button-holes, a bluish philibeg,[or filibeg, or kilt]and Tartan hose.
He had jet black hair tied behind, and was a large stately man, with a steady sensible countenance.’
Flora Macdonald's fancy, Allan, had married her in 1750 when she was twenty-eight.
Born in South Uist, she became and remains a most famous woman in Scottish history, epitomising forever the more acceptable of the romances associated with the Stuart cause.
On a June night in 1746, she disguised the haughty Prince as her Irish maid, ‘Betty Bourke’, and went with him/her in an open boat from Benbecula to the seat on Skye of Sir Alexander Macdonald.
Flora's coolness carried her through a dinner attended by the head of a platoon of soldiers on Skye to apprehend the Prince, who was then conducted to Raasay.
The Pretender nearly gave the game away by holding his skirts too high crossing a stream: ‘some women whom they met reported that they had seen a very big woman, who looked like a man in woman's clothes.’
The Flora Macdonald section of Boswell's Journal lasts for over three thousand words, and in the detail of any one single meeting or encounter enjoyed throughout their whole journey, nothing else compares with it.
It came about because, after an early night in the same bed as that slept in by the Prince, Dr Johnson, who had a cold and had been rendered a little deaf by it, ‘spoke of Prince Charles being here, and asked Mrs Macdonald, ‘Who was with him?
We were told, madam, in England, there was one Miss Flora Macdonald with him.’
She said, ‘They were very right.’’
She then launched into an account so detailed that Johnson said to Boswell, ‘All this should be written down,’ and Boswell did, in a faithful rendition that traces every move made by the prince and those who wished him to escape — every hardship, close call and incident, every hope, frustration and despair.
Beneath the oral history lies a sad text of spies, betrayers, official reprisal and oppression, and heartrending devotion: ‘Old Mrs Macdonald, after her guest had left the house, took the sheets in which he had lain, folded them carefully, and charged her daughter that they should be kept unwashed, and that, when she died, her body should be wrapped in them as a winding sheet.
Her will was religiously observed.’
Kingsburgh, Flora's father-in-law-to-be, gave the Prince a pair of new shoes and, when they were returned to him, kept them as treasured souvenirs.
‘After his death, a zealous Jacobite gentleman gave twenty guineas for them.’
Bonnie Prince Charlie had a price of thirty thousand pounds on his head when he was being ferried hither and yon across many isles and sea-lochs of the Hebrides, and yet, and yet — the people of the west, such as Flora Macdonald and Malcolm Macleod of Raasay, risked their lives for a man they must have known in their hearts was a lost cause.
Where Johnson exercised great prudence in his remarks, both in his own text and in his letters to Mrs Thrale, Boswell took a different line; having concluded his great notation of Flora Macdonald's exciting tale, Boswell summarised that for all the Highlanders’ dedication to the Stuart Cause, he ‘found every where among them a high opinion of the virtues of the King now upon the throne, and an honest disposition to be faithful subjects to his majesty…’
Were he not so useful and entertaining on his main subject, Boswell might easily call all his facts into question by such a blatant lie, so blatantly told to curry Establishment favour in London.
Did he sincerely hope to persuade his readers that the Gaels of the west of Scotland uncritically adored George III?
Moving down the open field at Kingsburgh, a view of the sea-loch comes into view, wide and bright, the view from her window every morning until Flora Macdonald and her husband left to try and increase their fortunes in America.
They emigrated  a year after they met Johnson.
In this they had no luck; the War of Independence broke out while they were in the Carolinas, and they came home no richer, if wiser.
On the Monday afternoon, Flora Macdonald's husband conducted the travellers to his boat, and took them across Loch Snizort Beag, out a little into Loch Snizort, around what is now called Lyndale Point and into Loch Grishinish, or Greshornish.
They might have fared more comfortably had they sailed a longer journey — from Kingsburgh up to Waternish point, a journey which would then have taken them directly down into Loch Dunvegan — although local people told me the weather here can come up very quickly, and perhaps Allan Macdonald's boat was not adequately large.
The Rev. Donald McQueen, ‘the most intelligent man in Skye’, was still with them, and while under sail he proceeded to give Johnson a pithy and useful outline of the landlord and tenant system as it operated, and as it proved unworkable.
The tacksmen, he told Johnson, were emigrating, unable to comply with the exorbitant rents demanded by the lairds and deluded by the dreams of wealth they had promised their own tenants.
(A tacksman, in Boswell's phrase, was ‘a large taker or leaseholder of land, of which he keeps part as a domain in his own hand, and lets part to under-tenants’:.
Flora Macdonald's father was a tacksman.)
Their lands were now being occupied by poorer people, their former servants, who had not the means, nor, to judge from McQueen's words, the energies or capacities to work the land properly; by such measures were they witnessing the reduction of the great Scottish holdings.
Boswell's observation that the King should intervene to stop people being forced from the land was augmented by Johnson's opinion that ‘were an oppressive chieftain a subject of the French king, he would probably be admonished…’
On the boat, Johnson asked about ‘the use of the dirk, with which he imagined the Highlanders cut their meat’, and was told they also had knives and forks, that the men tended to hand the knives and forks to the women after they had cut their own meat which they then ate from their hands, and that one old Macdonald retainer always ate fish with his fingers, claiming that ‘a knife and fork gave it a bad taste’.
At Greshornish, their horses, says Boswell, ‘had been sent around by road to meet us.
By this sail we saved eight miles of bad riding.’
Johnson disliked the riding he had experienced on Skye, complaining of its ‘unsocial’ nature, owing to the usual narrowness of the way which never permitted two abreast; and, he said, ‘you cannot indulge in meditation by yourself, because you must be always attending to the steps which your horse takes’.
Greshornish lies at the end of a long narrow road connecting with the A850; a calm and green place with blue, long waters, and a profusion of rabbits on the lawns of the hotel.
From there they rode to Dunvegan, either more or less as the crow flies by a drovers' trail, or coming down from Greshornish to join what is now the A850, at a point about half-way between Portree and their destination, Dunvegan Castle.
Johnson's cold, still in its first phase — three days coming, three days staying, three days going — was getting worse.
He did not have a good journey from Greshornish; the ground proved so soft that he frequently had to dismount and walk.
Nevertheless, his energy of observation remained constant and again inclined towards the economics of the area: he contemplated one piece of land, a ‘watery flat’, that seemed to have natural drainage possibilities —‘it had a visible declivity’; although he allowed that even if he felt it could be reclaimed without ‘difficulty or expense’, these were relative terms.
They made their way towards Dunvegan.
Dismounting on a narrow pathway with a drop of ground on one side, Johnson had a fall, and although ‘he got up immediately without having been hurt’ the journey was wild, hard and fatiguing.
Led the last stretches of the way by a guide using arcane local landmarks, they arrived at Dunvegan Castle in the later afternoon, and Johnson found himself much warmed by the reception.
He did not have to contend with hundreds of tourists.
Today the sounds from the packed car park and souvenir shop must surely drown the water-music of Rorie More's Cascade, the waterfall which the thirteenth Macleod chieftain liked to hear roaring beneath his window before he slept.
Dunvegan Castle stands on the edge of the sea, and looks up along the long narrow Loch Dunvegan to the north-west.
They say that on a clear day you  can see the Isle of Harris.
Lady Macleod received the travellers in ‘a stately dining-room’, fed them and led them into the drawing-room for tea to meet the family.
She made Johnson feel doubly at home, as she had ‘lived many years in England’, therefore he could expect English manners and sense of comfort.
He stayed at Dunvegan for eight nights, from Monday, 13 September, to the morning of Tuesday the 21st, and may even have outstayed his welcome; Johnson more or less refused to leave the comfort of the castle and  applauded the weather's inclemency which kept him and his companions pinned down.
Dunvegan was the headquarters of the clan Macleod; the old castle, a ruin in Johnson's time, dated back to a time of Viking rule.
A little earlier, the famous literary pair would have arrived by boat: the stairs of the land entrance only appeared during the reign of the previous chief.
pennant's Voyage to the Hebrides of 1772 carries an illustration by Moses Griffith which shows the castle almost separated from the land; since then, the approaches have been consolidated around to either side of the eastern, landward façade.
Dunvegan impresses, despite both its grey colour and the obvious architectural tinkerings of the Victorians.
The feudal independence of the clans fascinated Johnson, even leading him into anecdote, deriving from the vendettas of Skye between the Macleods and Macdonalds.
‘Before the reign of James the Fifth, a Highland Laird made a trial of his wife for a certain time, and if she did not please him, he was then at liberty to send her away’— which is exactly what took place when a Macdonald married a Macleod.
The Macleods repaid the slight in vicious irony; the wedding, they said, ‘had been solemnized without a bonfire, but that the separation should be better illuminated’.
Johnson reports this and other gory tales, tongue-in-cheek so firmly you can scarcely see his jaw bulge.
He seems to have spent his time at Dunvegan listening to the winds and the women, and compares the waves off Dunvegan, even in a tempest, unfavourably with those on the coast of Sussex, and again finds no trees.
Dunvegan had a well; the water, Johnson found upon enquiry, was not brackish but hard; Rorie More's drinking-horn held two quarts of liquor, ‘which the heir of Macleod was expected to  swallow at a draught…before he was permitted to bear arms, or could claim a seat among the men’.
When the laird returns after a long absence the shoals of herring fill the sea-loch outside the castle; if a woman departs for the islands opposite, the shoals will desert the Macleods.
Guests came, one pair occasioning a hilarity reported soberly by Johnson.
The laird and his wife from Muck, a small isle to the south, had a difficulty.
He, family name of Maclean, should have been addressed in common with all lairds by his title — thus, Macleod, Laird of Raasay was known as ‘Raasay’, to distinguish him from all other Macleods.
To come from an island called ‘Muck’ presented some problems, on account of the substance in which not to tread, and the animal with whose name in Gaelic it cross-fertilises — the pig.
Therefore, poor Mr Maclean could hardly call himself ‘Pig’ or ‘Ordure’; and he settled for ‘Isle of Muck’.
Johnson, in perhaps a fit of amending courtesy, reflects upon the excellence of ‘Isle of Muck’ as a landlord.
To the people of his little island, two miles long and three-quarters of a mile wide, ‘Isle of Muck’ fetched a tailor from the mainland twice a year and a blacksmith from the Isle of Eigg (Johnson has not so far reflected upon the name of the laird of Eigg).
And Isle of Muck had inoculated his tenants against the smallpox at a cost of two shillings and sixpence per head.
When their journey began, a crucial ingredient consisted in Boswell being able to show Johnson off to the people of Scotland who met him.
And all along the route, beginning at James's Court in Edinburgh, they gathered at Mr James Boswell's invitation to watch the pearls fall from the Great Bear's jaws.
Dunvegan became for Johnson his most successful visit of the Tour so far.
They gave him a good room, and ‘here therefore we settled,’ he said, ‘and did not spoil the present hour with thoughts of departure.’
In his last note on the place he says, ‘At Dunvegan I had tasted lotus and was in danger of forgetting that I was ever to depart.’
Boswell at Dunvegan vacillates between huge enjoyment of his friend's celebrity and performance, and acute discomfort at some of the conversational and social occurrences.
His rendition of the approach journey from Kingsburgh fills in more detail than  Johnson's, with the revealing observation — still visibly understandable — that their guide navigated across the moors much in the same manner as, I suppose, is pursued in the wilds of America, by observing certain marks known only to the inhabitants'.
Boswell should have written fiction.
Where Johnson utters statesmanly reflections, Boswell lets us see the small events —‘we dismounted’— and then captures the detail of their arrival, their welcome by Lady Macleod (the laird's mother, not his wife).
Her son had been detained on his way to Dunvegan, so they lunched in a stately dining-room, and then went to the drawing-room to meet the family.
He shows us Johnson in a delighted state, thrilled because the ‘entertainment here was in so elegant a style, and reminded my fellow-traveller so much of England’.
On the dining-room walls today hang generations of Macleods; Boswell and Johnson were entertained by the 23rd chief, Norman, who did not marry for a decade after the travellers stayed here.
He was nineteen in 1773, and had been tutored at Oxford by George Strahan, a friend of Johnson.
His father, also Norman, who died a year earlier, in 1772, is portrayed in Allan Ramsay's portrait as if he might have been Bonnie Prince Charlie — in wrap-around plaid, curly white wig, a gold-hilted claymore at his left hip, right hand outflung, and he stands in a landscape of rock, sky and water.
His wife, Ann, a Martin from Ross, was the Lady Dunvegan who hosted Dr Johnson.
Next morning, Tuesday, they slept late, and after breakfast they walked in the garden.
The local clergyman called, and two further Macleods, Claggan and Bay, ‘two substantial gentlemen of the clan’, stayed to lunch of venison and wine.
Boswell's father had rendered Lady Macleod of Dunvegan some legal service in a dispute with the laird of Brodie and James basked in the repayment of the compliment.
The host raised an interesting topic —‘the subject of making women do penance in the church for fornication’: Johnson, who does not mention this conversation, uses the word ‘infamy’ and relates sexual morality to laws of property.
‘Consider what importance to society the chastity of women is.
Upon that all the property in the world depends.
We hang a thief for stealing a sheep; but the unchastity of a woman transfers sheep, and farm and all, from the right owner.
I have much more reverence for a common prostitute than a woman who conceals her guilt.’
Neither man reveals whether Lady Macleod took part in this somewhat lubricious conversation.
When Boswell sought to establish a distinction between ‘the licentiousness of a single woman, and that of a married woman’, Johnson intensified his analogy, comparing the loose single woman to a thief, and the randy married woman to a thief who first murders the victim, and says that among women the infection of licentiousness spreads from the single to the married.
Boswell tried to rally by saying that in India there is a distinction, and Johnson put him down hard.
‘Nay, don't give us India.
That puts me in mind of Montesquieu’—; the French philosopher and belle-lettrist whose Persian Letters may have formed the inspiration for Goldsmith's Citizen of the World: both employed the satirical device of having their society scrutinised by visitors from a far-off land.
Johnson claimed that whenever Montesquieu ‘wants to support a strange opinion, he quotes you the practice of Japan or of some other distant country, of which he knows nothing’.
Dinner conversation that evening took in gout, on which a distinctive book had been published some years earlier.
Both Johnson and Lady Macleod found the book wanting, her objection being that the author did not practise what he preached.
This drew from Johnson the observation that what a man does has nothing to do with how he instructs.
‘No man practises so well as he writes.
I have, all my life long, been lying till noon; yet I tell all young men, and tell them with great sincerity, that nobody who does not rise early will ever do any good.’
He reinforces the point by asking Lady MacLeod to consider whether she needed to know the author of every book she read in order to agree with herself its value.
Typically, he summarises aphoristically the question of whether writers lose authority if they are found not to practise what they preach.
‘There is something noble in publishing truth though it condemns one's self.’
Boswell entered the argument.
The gout writer had recommended addressing the ailment with good humour, ‘as if ,’ says Boswell, ‘it were quite in our power to attain it.’
Johnson believed  good humour an acquired quality, one which came with the ageing process, and came of learning to please others rather than the child's instant gratification of pleasing itself.
As the evening progressed the clan gathered, and ‘listened with wonder and pleasure while Dr Johnson harangued’.
Boswell reveals another sliver of his biographical method by complaining of frustration that he cannot take it all down.
Next morning, through the sheets of rain, another glimpse of Scottish eighteenth-century life: the men of the Macleods left the castle early bound for the next large sea-loch south of Dunvegan, Loch Bracadale, to say goodbye to emigrants bound for America.
Johnson and Boswell sauntered through the castle, as they could today, where many of the artefacts are preserved in a museum; they looked at Rorie More's drinking-horn — Boswell's description is clearer than Johnson's —‘a rather large cow's horn, with the mouth of it ornamented with silver curiously carved’.
They saw his bow, and his claymore — which they both spell with a ‘g’, a mispronunciation if the word derives from cliamh mor, the ‘big sword’.
Boswell observes that when the clans were disarmed after Culloden, they used the old broadsword as covers for their buttermilk barrels: ‘a kind of change,’ he says, ‘like beating spears into pruning-hooks’; swords turned sadly into ploughshares.
The pair discussed a book found lying in the dining-room, the works of Sir George Mackenzie, a predecessor of Boswell both at the Scottish Bar and in literature.
Boswell, as he did frequently, used the works of one writer to provoke Johnson into an opinion of another, in this case Edmund Burke.
Burke, a Dublinman, was twenty years younger than Johnson and politically opposite to him, a member of the party Johnson called ‘vile Whigs’.
Yet, as Boswell records in the Life, ‘As Johnson always allowed the extraordinary talents of Mr Burke, so Mr Burke was fully sensible of the wonderful powers of Johnson.’
Repeatedly, their mutual admiration surfaces, and Johnson always found Burke a challenge, always felt it necessary to raise his game in Burke's presence.
Of Burke's politics Johnson believed, as he did of any political opponent, that honesty deserted him when embroiled politically, only to return when engaged conversationally or intellectually.
On this occasion in Dunvegan he repeated his earlier assertion that Burke never made a good joke.
The laird, Macleod, asked Johnson therefore to define ‘the particular excellence of Burke's eloquence’, and Johnson's reply summarises not only Burke, but all men of such gifts, and it hymns education and the acquisition of learning: ‘Copiousness, and fertility of allusion; a power of diversifying his matter, by placing it in various relations.
Burke has great information, and great command of language; though, in my opinion, it has not in every respect the highest elegance.’
On another occasion he described Burke as ‘an extraordinary man.
His stream of mind is perpetual.’
That evening, Johnson's cold was worse, and the Macleods of Dunvegan cosseted him.
He both wore and drank night-caps: the one made of flannel by one of the Macleod ladies, the other a little unaccustomed brandy, which occasioned him to reveal to his hostess why he never drank.
He said he had been unable to take it in moderation, and then, in a long illness, he was forbidden liquor, so when the habit had been broken he never returned to it.
Next morning, Johnson gave a fine performance of talking.
He held the company spellbound (or so Boswell says) with detailed accounts of how to mint coins and how to brew beer.
The impressed Reverend McQueen thought Johnson had somehow done both.
Since patronising behaviour always contains a curious element of innocence, Boswell was inflated with pride, ‘elated by the thought of having been able to entice such a man to this remote part of the world’, and his tongue, thus loosened, flicked out a memorable simile of himself.
‘A ludicrous, yet just image presented itself to my mind, which I expressed to the company.
I compared myself to a dog who has got hold of a large piece of meat, and runs away with it to a corner, where he may devour it  in peace, without any fear of others taking it from him.’
Before the day was over, Boswell would pay for his flush of righteous enthusiasm.
At table that evening, the current Macleod seemed depressed; he was having difficulty with relatives.
Boswell rattled on about the prospect of other travels with Johnson, perhaps to Sweden, where, hoped Boswell, they would see the King.
Johnson said he doubted if the King would speak to them and Colonel Macleod had a go at Jamie: ‘I am sure Mr Boswell would speak to him’— Boswell underlines the pronoun.
‘But seeing me a little disconcerted by his remark, he politely added, ‘and with great propriety’.’
Realising that Macleod had perceived him clearly, Boswell introduces a short apologia pro vita sua, ‘a short defence of that propensity in my disposition’, in which he justifies his pursuit of the great and famous as ‘nothing more than an eagerness to share the society of men distinguished either by their rank or talents’, and calls it a search for knowledge.
Whether Boswell means this sincerely, or as sleight-of-hand to deflect people from calling him a mere snob, must be measured against the remarkable and immortal results of his association with the one man who allowed him to share his company relentlessly.
Boswell walked into another wall that evening.
When the ladies had withdrawn from the dinner-table, a conversation began about the Highlanders and their linen.
Johnson, outlining a preference for vegetable derivatives rather than animal, said, ‘I have often thought, that, if I kept a seraglio, the ladies should all wear linen gowns, or cotton — I mean stuffs made of vegetable substances’ and declared a hatred for silk: ‘you cannot tell when it is clean.’
Boswell burst out laughing and could not stop — the very idea: that Johnson, ‘that majestic teacher of moral and religious wisdom’, should keep a harem, and had often thought of it.
Johnson tore him apart.
Boswell does not tell us what he said, other than that it included ‘a variety of degrading images’.
It must have been a savage attack; Boswell had offended Johnson's pride and held him up to ridicule; now Johnson retaliated with such force that Boswell says, ‘though I can bear such attacks as well as most men, I yet found myself so much the sport of all the  company, that I would gladly expunge from my mind every trace of this severe retort.’
Outside, the rain of Skye beat on.
Boswell's portrait of Johnson at Dunvegan shows an elderly man with the snuffles, easily tired, and happy to savour some of the comforts of home.
In the security of the castle, run under the English training of Lady Macleod, and as long as he could potter from room to room, with the occasional short foray out beneath the weather, Johnson relaxed, and flexed his muscles for his hosts and the other guests who called to see him.
At its best the structure of one of his perorations follows this pattern: he begins with a general statement and summarises it with an accessible example; then he moves to a narrower statement and concludes with a final example taken from everyday life.
On Friday, 17 September, he performed in a series of conversations in which the style of his thought clearly appears, the manner of his arguments, his journey from proposition to summary, thesis, antithesis and synthesis.
They began at lunch with a conversation on cunning.
Johnson related its effectiveness not to the trickery of the practitioner but to the credulity of the recipient: ‘It requires no extraordinary talents to lie and deceive.’
Developing the thought into consideration of wickedness, Johnson's one-two punch summarised the presence and shape of evil within the human spirit, and he returns, if obliquely, to his recurring theme of the difficulty in being good, rather than succumbing to the natural animus all humans share.
Once again he is worth quoting in full; the italics are Boswell's: Johnson's next disquisition arose from a subject brought back by Boswell after a short excursion.
He and the Reverend McQueen set out after breakfast to find the ruins of what McQueen believed had been an ancient pagan temple to the goddess Anaitis.
Boswell's description of the location corresponds with today's scenery: wild heathland has altered little on Skye: ‘The country around is a black dreary moor on all sides, except to the sea-coast, towards which there is a view through a valley…the place itself is green ground, being well drained, by means of a deep glen on each side, in both of which there runs a rivulet with a good quantity of water, forming several cascades which make a considerable appearance and sound.’
Forestry has now been applied to the upper slopes (Johnson would have been pleased), and in sunshine the views of the distant coast sparkle to the north-west.
The waters described by Boswell flow powerfully beneath deep banks reached after a walk of some hundreds of yards from the B886 north of Fairy Bridge.
From a height to the east the land's patterns show more clearly, and the remains of some ancient structure may be discerned in the heather.
When Boswell and McQueen walked out — the site is north-north-east from Dunvegan Castle over very rough, near-impassable ground — they were accompanied by McQueen's servant.
He must have been with them all the time from Corry, to Raasay, to Kingsburgh, to Dunvegan: ‘a fellow quite like a savage’— and they were followed, ‘as colts follow passengers upon a road’, by local lads, barefoot, ragged, lazy and not wholly unmenacing.
McQueen found the ruins, and then claimed to trace the road along which the goddess's statue would have been borne in procession from the temple to the river for the ceremonial washing attributed to worship of Anaitis.
Boswell puts into perspective the size of ancient sites of worship, by assessing the entire site at two acres and the ‘whole extent of the building’ as no larger than ‘an ordinary Highland house’.
After lunch, Boswell, knowing McQueen's passion for the place, introduced the subject of Anaitis.
Johnson questioned the clergyman closely — then, first disagreed with him and finally trumped him.
McQueen relied on the name of the locality, Ainnit, or Annait, to prove, using the traditional antiquarian reliance upon  linguistics, that it had truly been a temple of the goddess.
Johnson extracted from him the English meaning of the Gaelic place-name; it signified a place of, or near, water, conforming, claimed McQueen, to ‘all the descriptions of the temples of that goddess, which were situated near rivers that there might be water to wash the statue’.
Johnson, contradicting him, took him from the particular belief to the general likelihood: from the possibility of a singular holy place to the generic derivation from water: ‘Had it been an accidental name, the similarity between it and Anaitis might have had something in it; but it turns out to be a mere physiological name.’
It could have been, he argued onwards, a fort, or even an early Christian site, or even a pagan place of votive offering, ‘for there is such a  multitude of divinities, to whom it may have been dedicated, that the chance of its being a temple of Anaitis is hardly any thing.
It is like throwing a grain of sand upon the sea-shore to-day, and thinking you may find it to-morrow.’
Did Johnson know Anaitis, sometimes called Anahita, to be the name of a Persian and pan-European goddess associated with water, in the way that Sequanna gave her name to the river Seine?
His dismissal of McQueen's argument contrasts the man of the world with the islander, the widely-read man of learning and classical scholarship with the local pastor who had an amateur interest in the etymology of his own language.
Even when Mr McQueen said that since Asia Minor had been populated by Celts, could not the same religion have come with the Celts to Skye, Johnson defied him, and the point he made remains valid to this day.
He dismissed any such link for lack of proof; for him there was ‘no tracing the connection of ancient nations, but by language; and therefore I am always sorry when any language is lost, because languages are the pedigree of nations.
If you find the same language in distant countries, you may be sure that the inhabitants have been the same people, that is to say, if you find the languages a good deal the same; for a word here and there being the same will not do.’
Before that, Boswell reports two other Johnsonian performances, on portrait painting and the techniques of historians.
On the former Johnson wished for accuracy of representation, by which means the portrait painter also creates a piece of history; on the  latter he applauded developments in which historians had begun to consult and interpret factual record instead of merely culling from other histories.
In the evening Johnson, as he did when in defence of a figure he admired, delivered one of his acutest perceptions.
One of the dinner guests found Pennant, the travel writer, superficial.
Johnson counter-punched, landing three telling blows.
One — that ‘pennant has told us more than perhaps one in ten thousand could have done in the time that he took.’
Two — when the laird complained that Pennant described how rents drained the Highland economies without saying how they should be refurbished, Johnson said, in effect, that Pennant was obliged to report, not to cure; ‘If I tell that many of the Highlanders go bare-footed, I am not obliged to tell how they may get shoes.’
Three, and Johnson's knock-out punch — Pennant's descriptions went as far into detail as Pennant wanted them to, and therefore they should be seen for what they are, not what they might have been: ‘Here is a man six feet high and you are angry because he is not seven.’
Next morning, Saturday, Johnson walked early into Boswell's bedroom ‘to forbid me to mention that this was his birthday’.
He was 64 — and too late: Boswell had already told Lady Macleod, therefore Johnson could not avoid the embarrassment he obviously felt at the prospect of congratulations.
Boswell assumed that Johnson's displeasure at Lady Macleod knowing came ‘from wishing to have nothing particular done on his account’.
We do not know what, if anything, took place celebratorily: neither man mentions gifts, birthday toasts, felicitations, not even from the Macleod children.
As Saturday passed Boswell talked of leaving Dunvegan on the Monday; Johnson said he would not budge until the Wednesday.
Mr McQueen left, heading south in time to preach next morning at Bracadale, and saying he would wait for them at Ullinish.
He and Johnson parted with warm expressions of mutual regard.
In passing, Boswell asked McQueen whether he felt content as a clergyman on Skye, and the reverend man answered — or so Boswell interprets — that much of his satisfaction with his lot derived from his Skye ancestry.
In a rare occurrence, the accounts of Boswell and Johnson overlap on this Saturday, on the matter  of ‘Muck’, the laird thereof.
They share the information about the isle's dimensions, population, inoculation (against smallpox) and services.
Sunday morning at Dunvegan brought the worst weather so far — and the most valuable insight yet into Johnson's influence on Boswell's writing.
Before breakfast he went to Boswell's room ‘to read my Journal, which he has done all along.
He often before said, ‘I take great delight in reading it.’
Today he said, ‘You improve: it grows better and better.’’
Johnson dismissed a compliment-hunt by Boswell, who worried whether he had acquired slovenly habits.
To apply the principles of this meeting, and the crucial facts that its seemingly casual remarks convey —‘which he has done all along’ and ‘it grows better and better’— is to unveil a picture of Johnson, on the road, casting his eye repeatedly over Boswell's entries.
From the knowledge I have acquired so far of Johnson, I cannot imagine him forbearing to make comment, nor can I imagine Boswell not seeking advice and guidance.
Does not this short exchange at Dunvegan account fully for Boswell's never-ending flattery of Johnson?
He knew the Great Bear would see every word.
Yet, credit to Boswell, for all his lapses into near-hagiography, we get a sufficiently rounded picture of Johnson to survey him and to judge.
Sunday's conversation involved the manner in which men choose wives; strange associations with the island of St Kilda; the further travels of Johnson; and a dissertation upon prize-fighting, leading into observations upon combat and duelling.
Memorable among these exchanges: Johnson believed that men choose weak and ignorant women as their wives because they ‘know that women are an over-match for them’; he thought little of poetry he had heard from St Kilda: ‘it must be poor, because they have very few images.’
Boswell countered this critique, suggesting that genius may also reside in the inventive distribution of sparse material.
Johnson: ‘Sir, a man cannot make fire but in proportion as he has fuel.
He cannot coin guineas but in proportion as he has gold.’
On travel, Johnson hoped to go to Italy in 1775.
When the Laird said he preferred Paris, Johnson said there was ‘not a Frenchman of letters now alive he would cross a sea to visit’.
Johnson also read a little— in his room he had works by his erstwhile host Lord Monboddo, and Laurence Sterne's Sermons of Mr Yorick (interestingly, Boswell does not give the full title, merely calling it Sermons, a deference perhaps to the scandal the book had caused when it appeared in 1760).
Johnson even complained a little— or so Boswell suggests — that he was not seeing enough of Boswell: ‘He asked me today, how it happened we were so little together.’
Bozzie blamed the time-consuming Journal.
As happens many times throughout, and frequently in footnotes, one sentence of Boswell's from the after-dinner conversation contains the seeds of a novel — even, potentially, a saga:.
‘We talked of the extraordinary fact of Lady Grange's being sent to St Kilda, and confined there for several years, without any means of relief.’
Maddening, such a tantaliser.
Boswell's footnote, even if extensive by his standards, frustrates further.
Lady Grange was unharmoniously married to a Law Lord.
‘For some mysterious reasons, which have never been discovered, she was seized and carried off in the dark, she knew not by whom.’
She did, but Boswell for all the legal and social reasons in the world, could not say, nor could he expand beyond a sketchy account of her long, forlorn imprisonment.
Sir Walter Scott, however, had no such constraints upon him fifty years later, and he had the added advantage of seeing Lady Grange's journal.
Lady Grange's husband had been a Jacobite and during one of their marital battles she hinted that she would expose his seditious leanings — for which he could be hanged.
He, knowing of vindictive blood in her family, got her kidnapped and dumped on St Kilda, where she spent several years, with a waiting-maid for company.
Eventually she escaped, by means of a message for help hidden in a twist of tweed yarn, but she and the Catholic priest who agreed to assist her were both intercepted and imprisoned on another remote island where Lady Grange died.
It is part of the enjoyment of Boswell that again and again he sends his reader's imagination flying, like God, in all directions at once.
Monday, their last day in the Macleod castle, dawned with higher winds.
These abated a little around nine o'clock, and the sun came  out; then it rained again.
At breakfast Johnson reminisced about early days in London, and suddenly, with a surprising ungallantry, disparaged a previous hostess, Lady Macdonald, wife of Sir Alexander from Armadale.
Boswell is careful not to identify her; she is ‘a lady, whose name was mentioned’.
Johnson said she should be sent to St Kilda, that she ‘stood in the way of what was good’; he called her beauty ‘insipid’, and said that a skilful craftsman could cut a better face out of a cabbage.
When the young laird of Dunvegan, Norman Macleod, came down late for breakfast, Johnson ticked him off, saying laziness was worse than toothache: ‘I have been trying to cure my laziness all my life, and could not do it.’
Breakfast over, Johnson returned to one of his favourite themes on the trip — Scotland's economy.
Now that feudalism had collapsed, taking with it the traditional form of power, the great lairds had better make themselves rich, he believed, and land and its development offered the only way forward.
He dismissed commerce: ‘Depend upon it, this rage of trade will destroy itself.
You and I shall not see it; but the time will come when there will be an end of it.
Trade is like gaming.
If a whole company are gamesters, play must cease; for there is nothing to be won.’
If it feels like an extreme observation — and, in parts, not unprescient for the great financial débâcles of the nineteenth and late twentieth centuries — Johnson was also voicing an intellectual's fashionable enquiry into the lastingness of common interest.
He had chosen to see trade as linear rather than circular, upward rather than lateral, egotistical rather than mutual: ‘When all nations are traders, there is nothing to be gained by trade, and it will stop first where it is brought to the greatest perfection.’
Today, Dunvegan means to attract tourists, and the castle museum panders energetically with memorabilia of Bonnie Prince Charlie, including a blond, round lock of his hair, or possibly his wig.
The drinking-horn of Rorie More; his Cascade in the gardens; the means by which attention is drawn to cannon and architecture; the tight directions which the visitor must follow — this is no casual throwing-open for the curious and homageous, this is big business, as at Cawdor, although less kempt.
The literature of the  castle, published by the 29th Laird of Dunvegan, John Macleod of Macleod, makes the business plain: ‘Since the castle was first opened to the public more than forty years ago, the number of visitors has risen from a few hundred to tens of thousands’— many of them Macleod descendants from the New World.
Such developments keep Johnson and Boswell at a further remove, although on the wall of the castle hangs a framed letter in which Johnson, with his attractive spidery writing, gives thanks to his host: ‘The kind treatment which I have found wherever I go makes me leave with some heaviness of heart an island I am not likely to see again…
I hope you will believe me thankful and willing, at which ever distance we may be placed, to show my sense of your kindness by any offices of friendship that may fall within my power.
Lady Macleod and the young ladies have by their hospitality and politeness made an impression on my mind which will not easily be effaced.
Be pleased to tell them that I remember them with great kindness and great respect.
I am, Sir, your most obliged and humble servant.’
Lady Macleod (whose title was a courtesy one) kept serving Johnson tea.
She was wrong about Dunvegan being unsuitable for gardening — she wanted to move to a less rocky place: today it blooms and blows.
The rocks beneath the castle, on account of the form they seem to have in high seas and foam, are called Macleod's Maidens.
Johnson slept in the fairy tower where hangs the Zoffany copy of the Joshua Reynolds portrait in which poor Johnson looks so grumpy.
From his bedroom he could see Macleod's Tables, two flat-topped hills, Healaval Mhor and Healaval Bheag to the south-west.
One last memorable portrait to carry away from Dunvegan: Johnson wore his wig turned inside out as a night-cap, and Lady Macleod said, ‘I have often seen very plain people, but anything as ugly as Dr Johnson with his wig thus stuck on, I never have seen.’