

YOUR VIEWS…
STORIES…
SUGGESTIONS…
DEBATE
LETTERS
ACRYLICS NOT TACKY?
It was stated in the March Buyer's guide about acrylic colours that their residual tack causes dirt to accumulate progressively on finished paintings.
My own personal experience over the past ten years belies this.
Recently, in fact, with only bathroom tissue, hand soap and water, I cleaned up an acrylic painting that had been hanging in a office for 24 years.
I rinsed it off with wet tissue, dried it off with the same soft wipes, and it came up like new.
The only tackiness I've discovered was in the two paintings kept pressed together.
Also, I find the drying time of acrylics just perfect, and if I ever get a bit impatient I use an ever-handy hairdryer to speed things along.
That way, unless I've really laid it on thick, I can get along at a cracking pace.
IN FAVOUR OF THE CLUTCH PENCIL
Once again I write, in support of the highly efficient and ecologically friendly ‘clutch pencil’ or lead holder as an alternative to the ‘common’or ‘humble’but expensive —in terms of waste — woodcase pencil.
I'm pleased to see it gaining recognition, as Berol have recently produced the ‘prestigious’‘Art holder’ reviewed and advertised in the June issue.
Most other leading art & graphic material manufacturers produce holders, but the range of leads available is still very limited.
Perhaps through your letters page you will allow me this opportunity to urge all pencil manufacturers to consider making available their full range of leads (coloured as well as graphite) for holder use and saving annually a small forest of cedar wood and other trees used in producing the pleasing but expense and wasteful product.
MORE ON CONSTABLE
I read with great interest the article on Constable.
I am no art historian but I appreciate fine works of art, and would just like to make two points.
Constable was a commercial artist who needed to paint visually stunning works to make enough money to support his family.
Also, I was always under the impression that the likes of Constable, whilst in full knowledge that they were at the top of their profession, regarded themselves as craftsmen.
Why is it that critics nowadays have to bring in totally irrelevant arguments based on our own modern moral/ethical conscience?
Once that subject has been done to death I daresay they will bring up the subject of his large family.
Would his wife not have had a better quality of life with fewer children?
WATER COLOURS NEED WATER
Have you noticed how many things stop you from painting?
Recently on holiday in Southern Turkey I went off one sweltering afternoon to make a watercolour sketch of the harbour.
As usual, no sooner had I put brush to paper did the local and tourist onlookers arrive, along with a thirsty dog.
He promptly dipped his nose into my water pot and drank the lot.
So much for my afternoon's painting.
ARTIST'S RESPONSE
When a classical musician plays Mozart, does this mean that because the music is not his own it is not art?
The snobbish distinction between art and craft only began in the eighteenth century amongst collectors who felt it necessary to describe creativity according to their social or monetary values.
You are wrong about the accuracy of my copies.
The Degas, Turner and Monet shown are all in private collections and should not be confused with the better known versions of the same paintings in the major galleries.
If Monet always ‘made something new’, why did he repeat the same effects or subjects so many times?
Isn't that copying?
Creativity is relative.
I challenge you to name an artist who is completely original, and not in the slightest bit derivative.
We are always glad to hear your stories, complaints and, of course, your enthusiastic praise.
You haven't let us down yet, so keep those letters coming in!
The author of each issue's Letter of the Month will receive a free 12 month subscription to The Artist's and Illustrator's Magazine.
Don't worry if you are already a subscriber, you will be able to overlook your next year's renewal !
LETTER OF THE MONTH
Thanks to your article, ‘The Perfect Copy’, many readers will know what art is: it is everything that copying isn't.
The article is at its most eloquent in its illustrations of copies of work by Degas, Turner and Monet.
Even the earliest beginner, if he or she has seen the originals, will instantly recognise there is something missing.
It is the art that is missing: the work has no magic.
Art is about creativity, transmuting the humblest subjects into the sublime.
Copying just isn't artistic!
Assuming that Leo Stevenson is sincere (I suspect he's controversial for effect), his statement that Monet is overrated shows poor aesthetic judgement.
If I might paraphrase Picasso, ‘Copyists might make yellow look like the sun; artists can make the sun itself.’
NEWS…
REVIEWS…
COMPETITIONS…
EXHIBITIONS…
MATERIALS
MIXED MEDIA
FROM THE DANCE HALLS OF PARIS: TOULOUSE LAUTREC
The most important and comprehensive exhibition of Toulouse-Lautrec's work for nearly 30 years will be on show at the Hayward Gallery, London, this month.
Before coming to London, the exhibition will be shown at the Grand Palais in Paris.
It will consist of some 90 paintings, 60 drawings, prints and posters collected from all over Europe and the USA — hence this is one show this autumn not to be missed.
Toulouse-Lautrec is one of France's most popular and fascinating artists both for his work and for his lifestyle and acquaintances.
His work represents the Parisian street and night life during the last decade of the 19th century.
It features characters from the dance-halls, bars, brothels and circuses of Paris, some of whom he helped to promote through his posters.
The works chosen for this exhibition are the most important from each period of his career and include early portraits of his parents and of the exuberant performers such as Jane Avril and La Goulue.
A catalogue of colour illustrations of works on display together with essays by the selectors is being published.
Oct 10–Jan 1992.
COMPETITION UPDATE
Champagne Mumm has announced a competition!
The best contemporary marine painting depicting a major yachting event, will receive a grand prize of £1,000 and a weekend in the champagne region of France, as the guest of Champagne Mumm.
For further information contact: Oliver Swann Galleries, Tel 071 584 8684 or: Harvey and Ursula Bagnall, Tel 0590 679178.
The closing date for entries is Nov 1.
The Contemporary Art Society Market, sponsored by Sainsbury's, will be held from July 29 — Nov 2 at Smith's Galleries, Covent Garden.
The CAS ‘Market’ is a unique event with over 1,000 works by Britain's most talented living artists, on sale from £100 to £1,500.
This year, leading British artists will include Gillian Ayres, Prunella Clough, Dame Elizabeth Frink and Maggie Hambling.
A more and more popular way for undiscovered artists to exhibit their work is on the walls of London's restaurants and wine bars.
The Village Cafe in the Shepherd's Market, Mayfair, one of the oldest coffee bars in London, offers a special opportunity for such artists.
While most restaurants take commissions ranging from 15–30%, Rick Devlin and Dave Williams, who co-own the Cafe, are dedicating their wall space free of charge to help promote talented, but as yet undiscovered, young artists.
So far, bookings have been made for exhibitions well into 1992.
Drop in for some caffeine and culture!
A.I.M.
PRICE INCREASE
We have kept this year's price increase as low as possible despite the ever-increasing costs of print and production.
We will continue to bring you Britain's best and brightest periodical art magazine every month.
Toulouse-Lautrec, La Toilette, oil on board, 10×8″, 1896.
Courtesy Musee d'Orsay, Paris.
(ABOVE)
JAPAN FESTIVAL
The Japan Festival is the one of the greatest celebrations of another country's culture ever held in the United Kingdom, timed to coincide with the centenary of the Japan Society.
The festival, which began in August and will run until early 1992, will feature a vast range of events, including theatre, music, film, video and sport.
In London, the Barbican Centre will hold two shows.
A New Wave , devoted to contemporary oil painting, will be held in the Concourse Gallery.
60 large-scale works by artists from varied backgrounds and artistic affiliations are shown together.
Sept 17–Oct 8.
Japan and Britain: An Aesthetic Dialogue 1850–1930 will be held at the Barbican Art Gallery and surveys the art of Japan and Britain, showing the influences that the cultures had on one another.
It illustrates Victorian Britain's fascination with ‘Japonisme’ through the works of painters such as Whistler, Tissot, Rossetti and Beardsley, and looks at how British art movements inspired the Japanese Romantic and Symbolist movements in the 1900s.
It also includes photographs, drawings, prints, ceramics, textiles and furniture.
Oct 17–Jan 12.
One of the central events of the Japanese Festival is the Victoria and Albert Museum's Visions of Japan .
It presents visions of Japan's culture and lifestyle in the past, present and future with exhibits such as a full-size temple illustrating medieval ideas of heaven and hell, a recreation of the sights and sounds of a Japanese city, and an architect's vision of a future electronic paradise.
Sept 17–Jan 5.
In Liverpool, the Tate Gallery will have an exhibition of contemporary art by young Japanese artists entitled Your Bag of Thrills , Oct 15–Dec 1.
A stunning collection of Japanese calligraphy, including demonstrations, will be on show at the Octagon Gallery, University of Ulster, Coleraine, Oct 24–Nov 15.
Glasgow has an exhibition of contemporary art, musical instruments and fashion accessories at the Art for Industry exhibition at the Art Gallery and Museum, Kelvingrove.
The Fotogallery in Cardiff is showing RadicalChip , an exhibition of photography, video and mixed medial installations.
Sept 30–Oct 30.
Takeji Fujishima, Reminiscence of the Tempyo Era, oil on canvas, 1902.
Courtesy of Ishibashi: Museum of Art Kurume.
(ABOVE)
SOCIETY OF LANDSCAPE PAINTERS
Now in its third year, the Society of Landscape Painters will be holding its annual exhibition this month.
J M W Turner, one of England's most distinguished landscape painters, had always intended to set up such a society in his own lifetime, but it was never to materialise.
The society was formed in 1989 on April 23, Turner's birthday, and developed quickly in scope and quality.
The exhibition will show a wide range of landscapes by a varied group of artists including Norman Adams, Tom Coates and Sandra Pepys.
W H Patterson, Albermarle St, London, Sept 20–Oct 5.
Earlier in the year the awards were given to the winners of the Swan Stabilo/Arguati Disappearing Britain competition.
At least £1,000 was raised for the wildlife charity Zoo Check at an auction for the winning paints during the prize-giving ceremony.
1991 PRAEMIUM IMPERIALE PRIZE WINNERS
The Japan art Association has announced the winners of this year's Arts Prize.
Each of the following winners will receive US $110,000.
Painting: Baltus, Sculpture: Eduardo Chillida, Architecture: Gae Aulenti, Music: Gyorgy Ligeti, Theatre/Film: Ingmar Bergman.
The prizegiving ceremony will be held in Tokyo's Meiji Memorial Hall.
Chillida, from San Sebastian, Spain, is best know for his monumental works in natural materials, such as wood, iron and marble, but he also produces collages and engravings.
Eduardo Chillida, Gravitation, 1990, ink on paper, ‘Amate’, 23½x15½″.
Courtesy of Galerie Lelong.
(ABOVE)
FREE EDDING TECTIP
Your gift with this issue is Edding's new Tectip micro-roller pen.
Available in blue, black and red ink, it can be used in all writing situations, but is especially effective when carbon copies are required or when a very clear, precision line is needed.
We hope this makes your pen creativity flow!
ART DATES
ART CLUB AND SOCIETY PROFILE
When Miss Ada Wilkerson and eight others inaugurated the Sutton Coldfield Society of Artists in 1947, they were very much aware that Sutton Coldfield was a town in its own right.
The society provided a way for the town's art-lovers to assemble monthly for discussions, lectures, and demonstrations.
Today, Sutton Coldfield has been swallowed up, at least on paper, by the larger city of Birmingham.
Members of the society are no longer drawn solely from the town, and some also belong to art societies from the surrounding areas of Lichfield, Walsall and Birmingham.
Now, meetings involve creating as well as discussing works of art.
Meetings of the society are held throughout the year.
‘Working weekends’ held at a local school, begin on a Saturday afternoon and last through all day Sunday.
Members have the opportunity to paint or sketch from still-life arrangements or a model or to choose their own subject matter.
Members can also choose how long they wish to stay at the ‘weekend’, whether for just a morning or afternoon or for the whole day-and-a-half.
A well-known artist tutors at least two of these meetings each year, providing advice on techniques and interpretation.
These weekends are organised by the secretary and members of the society's general committee.
Families, too, are a great source of help and are roped in when the need arises.
During the summer, the society arranges field trips by coach for painting out of doors, visits to exhibitions and art galleries either for pure enjoyment or to broaden interests, lectures, demonstrations and criticism.
These activities are available when you join the society as an associate member.
Associates become full members by nomination and by presenting to the selection committee three original works for assessment after at least six months.
Full members are able to submit paintings for inclusion in the twice-yearly exhibition held for two weeks each Spring and Autumn.
Sculptures, ceramics, weaving, prints and collages are also submitted and included in the displays.
The Autumn Exhibition this year takes place November 4–16.
It will be opened by Jeff Rooker, MP for Perry Barr, Nov 2.
Details about the society can be obtained from the Secretary, Mrs Brenda Varty, 45 Tower Rd, Four Oaks, Sutton Coldfield, B75 5EA.
ONE OF BRITAIN'S BEST
Artist John Piper, born in 1903, has seen and participated in the major artistic movements and events of this century.
He was among the first generation of British artists to respond favourably, through their own art, to the ideas of Picasso, Braque, Miro and their circle.
Like the young men in Paris, he also designed for the opera and ballet, and then went on to design the famous stained glass windows of the new Coventry Cathedral.
His bleak and dramatic views of the bombed buildings in Bath and Coventry were the first of his paintings to become well-known, and were reproduced and exhibited through the war.
In recent years Piper has begun to paint flower and other verdure around his home in Oxfordshire.
The Tate Gallery, in London, will show a selection of Piper's best work from its own collection.
Oct 19–end Nov.
CRANE GALLERY SHOW
This month, the Crane Gallery, London, in association with Crane Kalman Gallery, will present an exhibition of recent work by Jenny Franklin.
Franklin draws much of her inspiration from early cultures and the symbolic and mythical imagery associated with them.
Sept 26–end of Oct.
Painting workshop given as part of Community Craftwork weekend held at Sutton Park Visitor Centre, weekend 14/15 July.
(ABOVE)
John Piper, Norfolk Church, etching and aquatint, 57x68″, 1989.
Courtesy of Marlborough Fine Art Ltd.
(LEFT)
Jenny Franklin, Petrified Strata, oil on canvas, 43x31″, 1990.
(ABOVE)
PAINT WITH CRAWSHAW
Alwyn Crawshaw, one of the UK's most distinguished watercolour painters, is now presenting a new 12 part TV series on Channel 4 called A Brush With Art .
The series is geared towards the needs of amateur painters starting out on the road to success.
Alwyn Crawshaw has also collaborated with the TV company to make 12 easy-to-follow programmes and, in each, he has put forward some useful tips that will become handy when painting.
Intelligently, Channel 4 has put the 12 part series into four videos that will serve as a substitute to anyone who missed the programmes.
In each of the four videos, Alwyn teaches about watercolour materials and different techniques.
All of his videos are filmed on location, where Alwyn chooses a subject and the viewer is taken through step-by-step demonstrations on how to produce a finished piece.
Alwyn has also managed to publish a book Watercolour Painting Course, a step-by-step guide to success , that has already sold thousands of copies in Britain.
A book is also published to coincide with the Channel 4 TV series and will be of great value to those who like reading and painting.
Remember to look out for Alwyn Crawshaw's TV series,A Brush With Art , starting on October 4th on Channel 4!
LANSO LINTON 
Anthony Caro, Xanadu-front view, steel, rusted and waxed.
94.5x245x64″, 1986–8.
Courtesy of Private Collection, USA, c/o Andrew Emmerich Gallery, New York.
(ABOVE)
SCULPITECTURE
Three new works by the distinguished British sculptor Anthony Caro are to be exhibited in London's Tate Gallery's three central sculpture halls.
The South Duveen gallery will hold a single sculpture,After Olympia , 1987, which was inspired by the Temple of Zeus at Olympia, and is truly huge and impressive.
The North Duveen Gallery will contain two works: Xanadu, 1986–88, and a sculpture in four separate parts, called Night Movements, 1987–90.
A completely new, and as yet untitled, work has been created specifically for the spacious Sackler Octagon.
Caro has coined the word ‘sculpitecture’ to describe his work, which uses the scale and language of architecture but retains the aura and function of art.
The exhibition takes place from Oct 16–Jan 5, 1992.
MIXED MEDIA PROFILE
Being an artist without a sense of identity in a city where identity effectively dictates how and where you live, creates an interesting phenomenon.
In Belfast, artist Jack Pakenham has always seen himself as fitting into a nebulous category of people in a no-mans-land, watching the activities of the city but unable to find a true affinity on either side of the often physically invisible diving line.
When asked what effect this has on his paintings, he replies, ‘I feel like an Irish outsider, which has given me a neutrality of vision.
It's me and I just feel it.
A lot of my concerns are aesthetic, the way places look’.
This neutrality is bred through a past where family has played no part.
Pakenham, born of a Catholic mother and Protestant father in Dublin, spent the first nine years of his life in a children's home, his mother dying shortly after his birth.
This has deeply affected the artist, and ironically makes him a kind of human ally of the city in which he lives.
Both lack a set identity, living without a certitude of their place in relation to their surrounding society.
Pakenham's work has a feeling of transience about it, things are not firmly rooted, the people and the places all tumble into one another like great conjuring act with too many balls.
In each painting a conjurer has overstepped his mark.
Theatre plays an essential part, and his paintings show a striking similarity to those of Chagall, with characters often flying in weightless space, but there is also a striking difference: where Chagall's view is romantic, Pakenham concentrates on the bare-bones of reality on his own world stage.
He concentrates on street scenes.
The streets are full of activity, but there is little joy to be found.
Four or five scenes may be enacted in one of his large recent works, whereas in earlier pieces, Pakenham would create a series of canvases each portraying a part of a greater whole.
He refers to his triptychs as being, ‘three chapters in one novel’, but in his recent works the stories are all thrown together, juxtaposing, he says, ‘as if they were stage sets’, liberating Pakenham's palette.
‘The funny thing was, I was actually ready for them.
The first one I did in just a week.
They're anthology pieces, piecing together things which have appeared in smaller works.’
In the paintings the players are like parts of a travelling band going nowhere, acting out their different scenes simultaneously.
Pakenham describes his method: ‘I would start off very lightly with a love poem and then there's a sudden edge to it, there's a twist or a change.
This is what living here's about.
People will tell you there's normality here and there is, but every now and then an abnormal thing happens which is quite horrific.
The city then becomes a collapsed face, the perspectives will change.
Ulster's Theatre , 1988, for example, really started off as a children's playground’.
Now it has become a scene of misery and discontent.
There are two symbols which appear in many of Pakenham's works.
They are very different in their purpose: the women and the ventriloquist's dummy.
The dummy appears, like a lost boy from another world, pushed from pillar to post, always wearing the same inscrutable smile, an innocent victim of other people's desires.
Pakenham relates personally to this curious theatrical prop.
‘He's only what people make him say.
He's also the innocent victim.
The doll smiles whatever happens to him.
Even when people are stamping on his head he still carries that inane smile.
He seems to me to be the symbol of innocence.
I taught for 29 years at a boy's school and I was very aware of young people who are now serving prison sentences for crimes relating to the troubles.
And I got really annoyed at the manipulation of the young, and the godfathers who are sitting free today.
They will never serve prison sentences’.
The dummy never changes, and its smiling face chills to the bone.
On the other hand, woman in Pakenham's work is a fickle thing.
‘She appears as a symbol for art’, he explains, ‘also she can be a feminist or a subordinate, then she can appear very positive and she'll have the power to move.
In her frequent role as the magician's assistant she embodies all of these things, she gets in the box, she's cut up and put back together.
Her sexuality is somewhere else’.
This type of ambiguity fascinates Pakenham, and it is all-pervasive in his art.
He is an eloquent man, and one who has a clear idea about his role as an artist, ‘I am aware of belonging to a tradition, I look to Picasso, Giotto, Goya, Beckmann, Chagall.
I would consider myself an old-fashioned painter.’
I asked him whether he felt that this work fed off the troubled times in Belfast, and if so whether it could also have a more universal appeal.
He was quick to answer, ‘These things are not overtly revolutionary.
Sometimes my city portraits could be anywhere, the comments are things which someone from Chile could understand.
I like the universality of all that’.
Jack Pakenham.
(ABOVE)
The Scape, 12x17′, acrylic on canvas.
Courtesy of the Orchard Gallery.
(ABOVE)
The Raft of the Medusa (Ulster Version), 4x4′, acrylic on canvas.
Courtesy of the Orchard Gallery.
(ABOVE)
Ulster Theatre, acrylic on canvas, 1989.
Courtesy of the Orchard Gallery.
(ABOVE)
IN CONVERSATION WITH THE ARTIST
I TRY TO WORK AGAINST THE WAY I WAS TAUGHT, WHICH WAS TO WORK ON THE PAINTING AS A WHOLE AND BRING THINGS UP TO A CERTAIN DEGREE OF FINISH
ALISON WATT
‘I'm never happy with the quality of the work, of its finish’.
ALISON WATT talks about the trials and tribulations of being an artist.
DO YOU WORK every day?
Just about, yes.
If I don't work during the week for a day, then I'll work at the weekend.
If I don't work during the week for a day, then I'll work at the weekend.
If I don't work to a routine then I feel everything is up in the air!
I'll only work in natural light, so in the summer, I'll be able to work till about eight, which is great.
Do you live here (second floor apartment in Glasgow) alone?
No, with my sister.
It's good because she's away quite a lot and we both work funny hours, so we don't see each other all the time!
I've been here just about a year.
My studio was the first room I did up, I just ripped up the carpet and painted the walls white!
It's nice and quiet.
I like to feel I have stability in my life.
It affects my work.
Would you like to move away from Glasgow?
No.
I still feel like a newcomer.
I wasn't born here.
I wouldn't like to say where I might end up but I'm happy at the moment.
I haven't got it out of my system yet.
Do you find painting a lonely occupation?
I like that.
I bought an answering machine — I leave it on all day when I'm working because it's quite a foil!
I think it's possible to learn from others without working with them.
Although I was at art school for four years, I was hardly ever there, I always worked at home.
I got a lot of stick for that at first but when my tutor realised I was actually producing work it was okay.
Does the contemporary art scene in Glasgow affect your painting?
Some people like to know what other people are doing.
I think the Glasgow business is all a bit of hype.
It's individuals, it's not anything to do with Glasgow.
I would say individual teachers have had an effect on people.
Stephen Conroy and I had the same tutor, Geoff Squires, and maybe he's a model for our life drawing.
I think you need to have the support and confidence of somebody.
And now?
The support I've got now is not really professional.
It's an emotional support from my boyfriend, sister, father.
My dad works every day himself.
He's a landscape painter, he's a good influence.
Does your father criticise your work?
He does!
I'm not very critical of his because I still feel, well, he's my dad, but he's critical of mine.
We have huge fights about it.
I remember we came to blows over the Queen Mother thing.
I wanted to do it one way, he thought I should be doing it another.
How many sittings did you have with the Queen Mother?
(National Portrait Gallery commission, 1987)
I was very lucky; Clarence House has a reputation for giving half an hour and then that's it.
I had five sittings, an hour at a time.
When she left I was free to stay and paint as I pleased.
I was physically ill the day before I met her because I was so nervous!
I had to go on my own and ring the doorbell with an easel and canvas under my arm and I didn't know what to wear.
I thought I might have to paint in a taffeta dress or something!
I wore my jeans but I felt a complete mess.
Did she enjoy it?
She actually moved about all the time which was quite frustrating.
I couldn't ask her to sit down as I can when I'm doing a portrait of someone I know.
I wanted to do her hatless because every portrait of her had been done with her hat on.
That's really what caused all the problems with the portrait.
I don't think she would have agreed to take off her hat and gloves if she didn't want to.
Why should she?
She's very tiny, even smaller than me!
Did you feel restricted?
I think I got away with quite a lot, considering.
When I went into the room there was this massive pedestal set up, smothered in red with a big throne and red velvet drapes.
The footman came and dismantled it for me and I brought a chair to the French windows, quite casually, and there was natural light coming in.
Maybe I should have been more tactful but it didn't seem to occur to me.
Did she like it?
Yes.
We spent a day together when it was finished because I knew there was going to be a fuss.
I needed to have her support, so when people said they didn't like it, I could say that she'd been happy.
She was fine and that gave me the courage to go on, then the unveiling was held up because the trustees thought it would be controversial and it was…
Have you been offered many portrait commissions?
I've been offered a lot of commissions but I haven't done any for two years.
I certainly wouldn't do a portrait unless it was someone I'd really like to do.
Can you think of anyone in particular?
John Byrne.
I think he's got a great face.
And he's quite rare because I think I could get away with imposing my ideas on him.
Whereas, with others, it can be more difficult.
I like to be quite quirky and his work is quite off-beat.
I think he'd be able to relate to that.
Many people can't accept anything in a portrait but flattery.
Do you like painting people you know?
Yes.
I paint my sister a lot.
She's got a much longer face than me, the ideal face.
I don't like my own because it's too round.
I associate her face with elegance and beauty.
She's quite androgynous.
She always ties her hair up and doesn't wear any make up and looks like a boy.
I love that.
Why?
Someone thought of my self-portraits was of a native boy.
I liked the idea of people not knowing whether it's a man or a woman who's done the painting.
I rarely paint hair.
I like to see the shape of the face and neck and straightforward lines on a portrait.
I don't like anything too fussy.
Hair against skin makes me think of glamour.
I don't like to think of a painting as pretty or feminine.
Women's work is always described in the same way; decorative, fragile.
Men in terms of power and patriarchy.
Critics treat male and female artists in a different way — as if women are emotional and highly strung and men are dour and tortured artists!
But it's never held me back in any way.
How do you go about painting a canvas?
I try to work against the way I was taught, which was to work on the paintings as a whole and bring things up to a certain degree of finish.
I work from the inside and come out and finish things as I go along.
I'd always start with the eyes and bring those to a finished state and work out.
Do you usually feel happy when you finish a work?
I hate it.
I rant and rave.
I never like things I've done.
I always turn them upside down or against the wall for a few months and then I might become curious and look again.
I never go back to things.
I'll have been feeling in a different way when I've painted something  three months ago, so it would be wrong to go back and work on it again.
It's part of the whole learning process.
When would you stop?
I have the impression of an ideal painting in my head, and I always think to myself that if I ever painted it then I would just stop.
It's not a tangible idea.
I'm never happy with the quality of the work, of its finish.
I have an idea that there's this wonderful, amazing painting and everyone'll love it and I did it, but it's down a long tunnel somewhere.
I don't feel I'm anywhere near reaching that ideal.
How long does it take to finish a canvas?
About a month.
I think that's slow.
Stephen Campbell can work on an eight foot by eight foot canvas a week, a phenomenal speed!
I only work on one at a time because I find it quite niggling if something isn't finished.
I was at the Stanley Spencer exhibition in London earlier in the year, and there was one canvas with just a tiny bit started, the whole thing pencilled in.
I nearly cried.
Are you influenced by Spencer?
Oh yes.
One of my all-time favourite paintings is his portrait of Patricia Preece in the  stripy shirt, leaning over the chair, absolutely brilliant!
It's not his compositions that interest me but more his attention to detail.
I like the self- portrait by him at 21, although I found it quite depressing, he was only 21 and it's absolutely fabulous!
I always do that — try and work out what age they were and think God, he did that when he was 21.
Do you always work in the same media?
I work in pastels quite a lot, but I tend to work in colour all the time rather than pencil or charcoal.
I've always worked like that.
I translate things better, express forms with colour.
Do you every roam into brighter territories?
Well, the paintings I'm working on just now are slightly more colourful.
I'm interested in the effect of light.
I like my sitters to wear white because anything else does  affect your skin tones.
I love painting nudes.
You're just looking, less mind power becomes involved.
To have the figure in front of you is really satisfying.
The female form is more beautiful.
I like classical poses.
I'm not saying they have to be any particular shape, not conventionally beautiful in any sense.
I have painted male models before but they tend to be a lot more angular.
All artists in history paint women so that's not anything new.
You tend to repeat some symbols in your work.
Yes, hands are a major part of my work.
I think hands are portraits in themselves.
I think they say such a lot.
The way I use them is slightly tongue-in-cheek.
I like to look at religious paintings, the madonna and child, the use of hands is always very stylised, rigid and forced.
The hands can lead you right through a painting.
It really upsets me when I see portraits where the hands have been neglected.
Certainly with the roses I use them as a love symbol, I used to always use dead and dried roses but now I've started to use live ones.
In Crown of Thorns , the ideas are coming from Italian paintings.
I'm working on 12 single figures all based on the apostles, the last series of paintings was very much more bathers.
With these the bathers meet Crivelli!
I've always been interested in the way Crivelli used garlands in his paintings.
Are you influenced by the religious content?
It's not a religious thing.
I don't always think about that when I'm looking at his work, I look at technique.
I was brought up a Catholic but I discarded it quite early on.
But it's so strict that it's impossible not to think about it sometimes.
I think it probably affects my work subconsciously.
I don't think, ‘I want this to be a religious painting’, but I do think they have a religious subtext.
Something just happens.
What do you think you'll be doing this time next year?
At the moment I never feel I'm working hard enough.
I feel guilty all the time!
I find it frustrating.
Everything you do counts.
The whole thing's very insecure.
Certainly the most important thing should be that I'm happy with my paintings, but I'd by lying if I said I didn't care what other people said.
I wouldn't say it affects the way I work, but certainly at the end of the day it does hurt when my work is dismissed.
It's like putting your diary on show.
I'm not involved with a gallery.
I put enough pressure on myself without having outside pressures as well.
I've had a very short term contract for each show.
I find it frightening that an artist can sign with a gallery for five years.
But you are in quite a good position now.
You've had a very successful show.
This time I want to have the work finished before I approach a gallery and then I can say, ‘Take it or leave it’!
Say I was involved with a gallery and they called me up tomorrow, and said, ‘Alison I want you to do this painting’, I could just comply.
I like the feeling that, when I wake up tomorrow, I paint because I want to do it.
It's up to me.
ABOUT THE ARTIST
ALISON WATT was born in 1965.
She attended the Glasgow School of Art from 1983–88, studying for a BA then Post Graduate degree in Fine Art.
Of the several awards she has won for her paintings, it is probably The National Portrait Award of 1987 for which she is best recognised.
As a prize Alison was commissioned to paint the Queen Mother.
She has been included in many mixed shows and in 1990 held her first sell-out one-woman exhibition at The Scottish Gallery, London.
This was followed by a second at the Glasgow Art Gallery and Museum, Kelvingrove.
Other commissions she has painted include those for EMI records, The Observer, Collins Publishers and News Scotland Ltd.
Alison Watt lives and works in Glasgow.
Queen Mother, 1987, oil on canvas, 40x36″ (ABOVE)
Rose Cutter, 1989, oil on canvas, 30x30″ (ABOVE)
Homage to a Flower Pot Loaf, 1989, oil on canvas, 40x22″ (LEFT)
Self Portrait, oil on canvas, 12x12″ (ABOVE)
Sleeping Nude, 1989, oil on canvas, 36x48″ Courtesy of National Westminster Bank (ABOVE)
Cupid After his Bath, oil on canvas, 60x36″ (ABOVE)
Life Before Me, 1989, oil on canvas, 22x40″ (ABOVE)
After the bath, 1989, oil on canvas, 48x54″ Courtesy of Robert and Susan Summer, New York.
(LEFT)
WORKING WITH COLOURED PENCILS
IT IS HERE THAT A CITY AND ITS PEOPLE POSSESSED A PART OF MY SPIRIT.
THEY WILL INFLUENCE ME FOR THE REST OF MY DAYS.
In her two and a half years in the Yemen, TRACY THOMPSON finds an almost unspoilt land to sketch, paint, and immortalise.
SHADES of the EAST
IN FEBRUARY 1985 I found myself on a flight scheduled for the Yemen Arab Republic, now called Yemen since its amalgamation with the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen in May 1990.
I had no idea what the country was like, I had purposefully not wanted any description of the landscape, city or culture.
All I knew was that North Yemen was on the south western coast of the Arabian peninsula, that the language was Arabic and that the country had been closed to the West until 1962 when a revolution overthrew the ruling Imamate.
I wanted to see, feel and experience the country with no influence from any other source, I wanted a first impression.
Looking our of the aircraft window, we were flying down the Red Seat coast, the water aquamarine, coral reefs pale and shimmering beneath the water surface.
We banked, flew over the Tihama coastal plain, up 40 miles inland and parallel to the coast.
Spreading below were the dramatic mountains of the Yemen, sharp, raw and young, bone with a little flesh, brown-grey with fiercely defined deep shadows.
These mountains fall to the east to the flat expanse of the plateau, where San'a, the ancient capital, rests: my home for the following two and a half years.
It is here that a city and its people possessed a part of my spirit.
They will influence me for the rest of my days.
LIVING IN SAN'A
Living in San'a, I was initially engrossed in the visual aspects of the architecture, but as I became involved with the Yemeni families, I started to record as accurately as possible all aspects of the traditional San'a culture that was rapidly being swallowed up by Western influence.
I initially divided my drawings and paintings into four basic sections.
The first was the architecture, looking at the materials used, building design, structure and pattern.
The second was the home life, an intimate, colourful contrast to the subtler hues of the buildings and surrounding countryside.
The third was the communal gardens, hidden behind the housing facades, green oases growing vegetables, fruit trees, herbs and flowers.
The final section was the market, the central energy point of trade, with the inevitable accompaniment of bustle and noise.
SPREADING BELOW WERE THE DRAMATIC MOUNTAINS OF THE YEMEN, SHARP, RAW AND YOUNG, BONE WITH LITTLE FLESH, BROWN-GREY WITH FIERCELY DEFINED DEEP SHADOWS.
WORKING OUT OF DOORS
One of the most interesting aspects of the drawing and painting there were the practicalities of working on location, especially as a western woman.
Each situation brought about problems for me to overcome.
The beauty of working on location is that so much is experienced, there is the constant interaction with the people and environment, and a constant stream of information filters into the subconscious and builds up an intuitive feeling and empathy for the country, culture and language, which ultimately influenced my drawings.
The practical problems for an artist working in the streets, markets or in the homes various enormously from day to day.
Primarily, I greatly respected the culture and customs of the people and, as a western woman, although free to dress in my own cultural fashion, I dressed respectfully for an Islamic country and covered my hair, arms and legs and wore loose fitting clothes, so I felt comfortable drawing and was protected from the heat of the sun.
I always asked people in the streets or markets if they minded my drawing from a certain position.
Once I had permission, the people knew I was working there and often took the responsibility of a guardian.
This was especially the case in the market.
If the crowd became too large or the children too cheeky, the stall owner who had granted me permission would disperse them.
I would look for strategically positioned places, such as a corner or perhaps set high off the street.
Here I would not have people standing around me, but sometimes if I wasn't high enough, the people below would obscure my view.
I found that if I immersed myself in what I was doing, the people respected my work and usually kept quiet, aware of my concentration.
If I talked too much at first or laughed at something, it broke the spell and everyone would start talking to me.
In the communal gardens I did not generally like drawing alone; children and young teenage boys away from adult supervision, like young people everywhere, would sometimes taunt me or become rude, whereas one time, I sat against a house wall and was looked after by a family.
From a window above me they let down tea in a flask and biscuits as I worked.
ROOF TOPS
One of my favourite places for working was on the roof tops, drawing city views, or by high open windows, looking out at architectural details.
Then I was usually left alone in a room used for special occasions.
However, in the winter months, on a roof top it was cold and I had to be wrapped in blankets, even though the sun beat down mid afternoon.
I loved meeting the people, and the times spent drawing amongst friends in their homes were the most memorable.
The endless patience and hospitality of the people was astounding.
They always helped me with whatever I was doing, giving me information and encouragement.
The women invited me into their homes, lent me jewellery, materials, head-dresses and all manner of objects to draw, explaining their uses in a mixture of English and Arabic.
However, any drawings of the women were forbidden, and so had to be constructed using many sources of information.
The problems encountered when constructing such drawings are given in the examples of the bridal head-dress painting, illustrated.
This was done in response to the invitation from Faber-Castell in conjunction with the Royal College of Art to do a painting of my choice using the Faber-Castell Albrecht Durer crayon watercolour range.
When I was awarded the crayons, it was the selection of colours that inspired me.
I felt that the drawing I wanted to tackle was the complicated head-dress worn by the bridge at the wedding celebrations, as it is colourful and unusual.
I had sorted out all the details I needed in the Yemen, such as colour sketches, colour matches and photographic records of dress materials and patterns, so consequently had an idea of what I was putting together.
FABER-CASTELL CHALLENGE
I had never done a drawing solely in watercolour crayons before, and so the whole piece of work was a challenge from beginning to end to end.
I wanted to use the crayons in an exploratory way but also keep control of the drawing as it was part of a set.
To start with I used them straight with no water and sharpened the leads to a fine point to draw the outline.
The piece of work was to have a semi-flat feel to it, and so the colours were blocked in later.
In some instances I used opposite light colours in outline to the main colours to be blocked in to give more contrast.
For instance, with the gold orange marigolds, I used purpose as an outline, for the pink rose petals I used green.
In places I put the colour on in a wash, either by crayoning onto the design and then adding water, or by taking the paint off the crayon direct with a brush.
Because I used Arches hot-pressed paper I could also lift the pigment off with a brush if the colour was too heavy.
Once I had the basic colours put in I would then sometimes, for added intensity, dip the point of a certain colour into the water and apply it direct for a small intense spot of pigment.
At times I would also use one colour on top of another, dry, to obtain the required shade.
The pencils I found varied, some would let go of the pigment more easily than others.
As the Arches paper is off white, in areas I needed to highlight, and so for an opaque light tone, I would sharpen the leads into a plate and add water until I had a thick consistency a little like gouache, and would apply that direct with a brush in flat colour.
The face I treated quite differently.
The eyebrows and eyelashes were drawn in an then very pale washes were put on, the paint smooth and even.
On top of this, I then crayoned very gently the colours required to build up the facial structure.
The facial features, as seen from the series of illustrations of the painting in progress, were put in last.
There were two reasons for this.
Firstly I wanted the intensity of the background to be worked in before the face, and secondly because the face is so delicate, to have it put on first would have risked smudging.
WORKING DIRECT
One of the biggest challenges was the fact that I had to work quite direct, once the colour was put on it was incredibly difficult to lift off completely and so I could afford to make very few mistakes.
Finally, the drawing is ongoing and never finished, which one could say reflects one of my philosophies of life.
Market sketched in watercolour, gouache and crayon, basically anything that will enable me to get down colours and information as quickly as possible.
(LEFT)
1/On the left is a working sketch sorting out the composition.
This was quite complicated due to the height of the head-dress and the fact that it is pointed.
Also, the height of the head-dress proportionately lowered the position of the face which could make the drawing  imbalanced and reduce the figure, thus losing the detail.
Consequently the eyes are based in the centre of the composition.
To the right is one of several photocopies of the bride, complete in outline, on which I worked to sort out the background composition in more detail, especially the position of the patterned arch on the carpet backdrop, which corresponds with the curve of the headcloth material embroidery at the bottom left.
This also breaks the very strong line of the conical head-dress.
(LEFT)
2/One of the sketch book studies of the head-dress recorded in the Yemen, details of the jewellery, materials and colour.
The whole painting had to be constructed using lots of different pieces of information from different sources which were all brought together to produce the finished piece of work.
(BELOW)
3/An unfinished sketch done solely with Faber-Castell crayons and worked on in conjunction with the final, more detailed painting.
This broad sketch helped me to explore the crayon's versatility without using the final painting as a trial piece, it also helped keep the whole composition in mind as I concentrated on a specific detail in the finished painting.
In this sketch, crayons were put on heavily, lightly sponged, washed, lifted out with water, scrubbed out, scraped off and also reapplied.
(ABOVE)
4/The outline of the head-dress started, drawn in lightly at first and then more positively.
Generally, the opposites are used throughout the drawing to highlight the main colours blocked in later.
(ABOVE)
5/Bridge complete; background lightly drawn in.
(ABOVE)
6/Colour applied flat, the whole idea was to keep the drawing as a flat pattern while at the same time giving a certain degree of depth.
(LEFT)
7/Details of methods used.
In places water was applied to thin out the crayon into a wash, or used thickly to highlight areas with bright specks of colour.
(ABOVE)
MEET THE ARTIST
TRACY THOMPSON is a graduate of the Royal College of Art who is now based at Queen's College, Oxford, where she is writing a dissertation on her experiences during two and a half years living in the Yemen.
In 1990 she  won a illustration award and commission from Faber-Castell, illustrated in this article.
8/Face sketched in lightly, eyes are lowered as is the custom in San'a to be as demure as possible if not a little apprehensive and afraid at the prospect of meeting your husband for the first time on your wedding night.
(LEFT)
9/Face completed; washes of paint from the crayon were put on after the eyebrows and eyelashes were drawn in.
After, crayon was applied to the face in small amounts to build up the structure, the whole was finished off with very fine lines of a highly sharpened grey crayon.
(ABOVE)
STARTING OUT WITH GOUACHE
If you have never had a go at gouache before, TOM ROBB'S advice should make it plain sailing!
SHIP AHOY!
IT IS MUCH BETTER TO ERR ON THE SIDE OF LIGHTNESS, ESPECIALLY AS GOUACHE PAINT IS MUCH DARKER WHEN IT IS DRIED
WATER-BASED PAINTING mediums have been used from the earliest times by artists.
The Egyptians used honey as a binding medium and sugar, gums and glycerin have been used, and are still used today, to hold together pigments with water.
The amount of pigment in paint effects the results on paper.
Fine, delicate washes of watercolour give quite different colours to highly pigmented gouache paints, even though the basic colour may be the same.
Thick gouache can give similar results to oil paint, except that the gouache often dries with a matt surface.
THESE QUALITIES CAN ALSO BE EXPLOITED BY ARTISTS AND IF YOU HAVE NOT YET USED GOUACHE, YOU MAY FIND THIS  OFT NEGLECTED MEDIUM SURPRISINGLY PLEASANT TO USE.
MAKING COMPARISONS
You can do simple experiments comparing transparent watercolour and gouache to see which type of paint is more suitable to your own technique.
Gouache can, of course, be used in thin washes to give watercolour effects, but you will not achieve the same degree of clarity that you would if you used pure watercolour.
However, gouache is not a substitute for watercolour, and is a water-based medium in its own right.
Often the differences between watercolour, gouache, poster and acrylic paints are not well-defined, some paintings described as watercolours are just water-based paintings.
1/Draw the main outlines of the picture lightly with a soft pencil.
This can be rubbed out later.
The drawing will be a guide to where paint will be placed on the picture and will not in itself be a pencil drawing of a scene, so all lines will represent changes in colour and outline areas which are to be painted later.
For example, it is not necessary to add any shading to the drawing, as any shadows can be painted in subsequently.
(ABOVE)
FLAT ON THE CANVAS
The advantage the pure watercolour has over all other media is that it depends greatly on the light passing through the colour being reflected back from the white paper.
This does not happen with a solid, heavily pigmented gouache.
It is often said that the pure watercolourist does not use any white pigment, relying entirely on the white of the paper.
This is largely true, though some artists do use ‘body colour’ occasionally, especially solid white to give that additional accent such as highlights and sparkles of light on water which sometimes give the same results as scratching out.
SAILING IN THE ALGARVE
2/Mix a sky colour from white to which a little ultramarine blue has been added.
Mix them with a small amount of water until the colour is even and the paint is of a smooth, creamy consistency.
With this, paint in the sky leaving the main masts and sails on clean white paper.
Don't be tempted to make this blue too dark.
It is much better to err on the side of lightness, especially as gouache paint is much darker when it has dried.
(LEFT)
WHEN PURE WATERCOLOUR PAINTING WAS DEVELOPED IN ENGLAND IN THE 19TH CENTURY, THE FRENCH WERE DEVELOPING GOUACHE PAINTING TECHNIQUES WHICH WERE JUST AS SUCCESSFUL AND APPEALING.
3/Paint in the blue/green colour of the water using a mixture of ultramarine blue, white and a small amount of yellow.
This colour is used to cover all the lower part of the picture, but leaving white the reflections of the masts, the roller-reefed jib sails and the yacht hulls.
Some areas of white are also left on the water at this stage, and will be painted with a different blue later.
Don't be timid, but apply the colour freely and quickly, and try to give some life to the reflections and water, a this lower half blue-green will be the dominant feature of the painting.
(LEFT).
A FRENCH INVENTION
When pure watercolour painting was developed in England in the 19th century, the French were developing gouache painting techniques which were just as successful and appealing.
With all its differences, gouache remains a water-based or watercolour medium.
It is often associated with designers who prefer obliterating qualities, and flat, even colour which it provides.
These qualities can be exploited by artists and if you have not yet used gouache, you may find this  oft neglected medium surprisingly pleasant to use.
The subject for this painting is the yacht marina at Vilamoura, in Portugal's Algarve.
4/The masts, hulls and other reflections can now be painted with a light grey or grey-green mix by mixing white with a little black and some small trace of viridian or yellow.
It is important to remember that reflections generally are lower in tone than the object which is being reflected, so all the colours have to be darker than those in the top half of the picture.
The boat hull and light aluminium masks and white roller jibs have to come down in tone to a light grey, and the varnished wood spars have to be darker ochre than those at the top.
So paint in both, and make sure that there is an appropriate tonal difference between the two.
Some detail can be added to the superstructure of the yachts, such as the coach roofs, doghouse and hatch covers.
The floating jetty can be painted in using two different strengths of green and blue-grey.
(LEFT)
THICK GOUACHE CAN GIVE SIMILAR RESULTS TO OIL PAINT.
5/First the areas of white in the water which wee left at stage two should be painted with a well watered-down pure blue which, in this case, is ultramarine.
The wash of pure colour which is semi-transparent will give a quite different quality of colour to the water, and give an illusion of movement and fluctuation.
The blue of the main sail covers on the booms should now be added using an ultramarine blue and white mixture.
Some variations to the reflections of spars and sails can be added at this stage to enliven the image.
(RIGHT)
6/All necessary details can be painted in.
A deeper mixture of ultramarine blue with a little white added is used to trace some lines of paint across the foreground of the water and add richness of colour and suggest distance between the near and far water areas.
Detail is added to the block of flats on the right hand side, and more yacht masts and rigging are indicated behind the boats in the middle distance.
Some indication of standing rigging is painted in.
There need not be too much detail here, as too much will be laboured and unnecessary.
It is sufficient to make one or two fine lines here and there, or the occasional mark which will give the impression of shrouds, chainplates, spreaders, navigation lights and mooring lines.
Lastly to make the picture more realistic, some crew are placed on board, and on the floating pontoons.
Don't overdo the detail, as what is to be achieved is an impression of the whole scene and any over-emphasis on detail can detract from the foreground colour variations and reflections which are the main feature of the picture.
(ABOVE)
COMING NEXT MONTH STARTING OUT WITH FABRIC PAINTS RING THE SUBSCRIBER HOTLINE 071 609 2177 TO ORDER YOUR COPY!
UNDERSTANDING OIL PASTELS
the SOFT TOUCH
WHAT I REALLY WANTED WAS SOMETHING DRY, YET LIGHT AND EXPRESSIVE
South Downs at Rodmell, sketch.
(LEFT)
For many artists like BARRY FREEMAN, it takes time before the versatile qualities of a medium make themselves apparent.
When he discovered oil pastels however, there was no turning back.
I DISCOVERED OIL pastels one Christmas when kindly relation bought me a large box after hearing that I painted in pastels; not realising that it was the soft chalk variety that I used.
Not wanting to offend, I gave them a try and ended up almost throwing the box away, but instead I put them aside in a small corner of my studio.
It was about five years later when I was going away for a weekend and knowing that space in the car would be limited, I spent a long time thinking what sketching materials to take which would not need much room.
As I always like to work in colour even when sketching, the usual options came up, watercolours, watercolour pencils and soft pastels.
I dismissed the watercolours and pencils, because of humping all the water bottles, brushes, and so on around.
Soft pastels meant taking sheets of tissue to protect each sketch.
What I really wanted was something dry, yet light and expressive.
I could never get on with ordinary coloured pencils.
It was then I remembered the oil pastels.
So, armed only with a piece of plywood, bulldog clips, 20 sheets of pastel paper and a box of oil pastels, I began a friendship with my perfect sketching medium.
A DIFFERENT APPROACH
As I explained earlier, I nearly threw my oil pastels away in frustration, but I thought I would give them another try with a different approach.
Instead of trying to produce a completed picture, the pastels would be used for colour notes, in a very loose, sketchy fashion.
What a difference!
Oil pastels act well on almost any paper with a slight tooth or grain.
Very heavy or rough grained papers are not particularly suitable.
Cannon M- Teintes, both sides, Fabriano Ingres and Tiziano also some cold-pressed watercolour papers can be used, as well as cheap cartridge paper.
I use both tinted and white papers and when sketching carry a mixture of both.
My personal favourite is Fabriano Tiziano, which has a lovely velvet surface, and which is readily available from R K Burt Paper Ltd in London.
It comes in a large range of tints, but I only use three: a warm grey, a blue grey and a sand colour.
AS I ALWAYS LOOK TO WORK IN COLOUR EVEN WHEN SKETCHING, THE USUAL OPTIONS CAME UP, WATERCOLOURS, WATERCOLOUR PENCILS AND SOFT PENCILS.
VIVID SKETCHES
Oil pastels can produce extremely vivid, vibrant and lively sketches which provide very useful reference material.
By cross- hatching or making rapid marks in different directions both vertically and diagonally, an almost endless variety of effects can be achieved.
When cross-hatching, remember to keep pressure constant.
I find oil pastels very useful when working in the studio on layouts or design roughs, for either oil or soft pastel paintings.
I buy some large sheets of oil sketching paper, secure them with four bulldog clips to a piece of plywood, then put this on the easel.
When working with oil pastels on layouts I employ all three methods described previously with the addition of white spirits.
Oil pastels can be thinned with white spirits using either brushes, rags or both.
This way the colours can be merged, spread and when dry, re-pastelled.
When sketching I usually carry a box of ‘wet-wipes’.
These are very useful for cleaning the hands periodically.
The one thing oil pastels teaches to be in your sketching is loose and uninhibited.
They frown upon the tight and restricted and will react if used in this way.
By their nature as a sticky substance they are not suitable to use in very hot weather.
THE SOFT TOUCH
Some pastels are softer than others.
The Caran D'Ache range Neopastel are very much softer than Conte pastels.
As far as I know, Caran D'Ache (50), Conte (40), Sennelier (24) and Talens Panda (45) are the only ones which sell pastels loose.
Other makes such as Filia, Craypas and Guitar produce boxed sets.
Of these, Guitar has the largest range with 60 pastels.
Oil pastels are fairly inexpensive, except for Sennelier and Caran D'Ache which retail at around 75p each.
In the end it is only trial and error that one settles on a suitable selection.
For those who have used soft chalk pastels and know their way around the tints I would advise loose pastels.
For the complete beginner you cannot go wrong with a boxed set of, say, 24 sticks.
By experimenting one will only discover the delights of this neglected, but most versatile medium.
By cross-hatching, an endless variety of marks can be achieved.
Remember to keep the pressure constant.
Notice in (b) pink was used first and then yellow and finally pale viridian.
In (c) French blue was put down first and again pale viridian on top.
Some of the blue will show through but this enhances the effect.
This combination is useful when suggesting distant hills.
The easiest way to cross-hatch is to hold the pastel as one would a pencil and make quick diagonal strokes from left to right and then use the other colour in the opposite direction from right to left.
It is important to always place your strongest colour first, otherwise the overlapping colour will obliterate the colour underneath.
For instance, if you put the pale viridian first and then blue on top, the end result would be that the blue would wipe out the pale viridian.
(ABOVE).
Another method which can be used to achieve good effects is dragging .
It is a method not unlike scumbling in oil painting.
The rule for dragging is the same as fro crosshatching: strong colours first.
With dragging, your first colour should be put down with quite firm pressure and the top colour is then very lightly dragged across, as in (f).
Her a very pale grey pastel was dragged over orange, giving a lovely luminous effect which could not be achieved if the two colours were blended together with the finger.
In (e), pale cadmium yellow has been dragged across pale viridian to give a cool grass colour.
One could experiment further by dragging a third colour, say a very pale grey or blue, across the two underlying colours.
The method for dragging is quite simple.
Break off a piece of pastel about half an inch long, holding the pastel between forefinger and thumb, and drag the side of the pastel across the paper, applying firm pressure as you do so.
The second colour is then dragged very lightly on top.
As oil pastels are a very sticky substance, they grip the paper well and the paper colour will show through the sketch giving it a unifying effect.
(ABOVE)
The last method of achieving an effect with pastels is by blending with the finger.
Blending is useful when trying to obtain a smooth finish.
For example, if you wanted the effect of wet sand when the tide is low.
In (h) you will see yellow has been blended into pale lilac and in (i) pale lilac has been rubbed into French blue.
This method can be combined with the previous method of dragging in as much as the blended colours can be a base to which other colours can be dragged across.
By combining all three methods, a sketch can be done in about 30 minutes.
Those who are familiar with them will have no trouble using oil pastels.
Even the beginner can quite easily adapt to this medium.
(ABOVE).
La Mothe Arthard, sketch.
(ABOVE)
River Hamble, Burlesdon, sketch.
(ABOVE)
Beach at St Restitude, Corsica, sketch.
(ABOVE).
BY CROSS-HATCHING, OR MAKING RAPID MARKS IN DIFFERENT DIRECTIONS BOTH VERTICALLY AND DIAGONALLY, AN ALMOST ENDLESS VARIETY OF EFFECTS CAN BE ACHIEVED.
Arlington Reservoir, sketch.
(BELOW)
OIL PASTELS CAN PRODUCE EXTREMELY VIVID, VIBRANT AND LIVELY SKETCHES WHICH PROVIDE VERY USEFUL REFERENCE MATERIAL.
MEET THE ARTIST
BARRY FREEMAN is a completely self-taught artist who paints mainly landscapes in pastel and oil.
Rarely completing a painting on the spot, preferring to take sketches back to ‘the studio ’ missing and ‘think’the picture through, often combining various elements from more than one sketch to form a completed picture.
He has exhibited in the Pastel Society at the Mall Galleries as well as in many London and provincial galleries.
Barry has had four successful solo exhibitions and his work is in private collections in the UK, France and USA.
He is a demonstrator for Daler-Rowney, lecturing and tutoring to art societies.
BARRY FREEMAN MAY BE CONTACTED ON TEL: 071 235 4363 (day) or TEL: 081 764 0983 (evening).
Seaton Hole, Devon, sketch.
(ABOVE)
Seaton Hole, Devon, completed picture.
(ABOVE)
OIL PASTELS CAN BE THINNED WITH WHITE SPIRITS USING EITHER BRUSHES, RAGS OR BOTH.
River Loire near Nantes, sketch.
(ABOVE).
INSIDE ILLUSTRATION
When DALE EVANS was commissioned to produce wall charts for the Natural History Museum, she couldn't believe her luck, it was a chance to combine her botany and zoology background with fine art illustration.
on the RIVER BANK
1/Pantone colour markets provide a quick and effective medium for producing overall impressions of a composition to see how its layout works in colour, and also to keep my supervisors in touch with my plans.
For these quite complex compositions I produced three layouts of each chart, each gradually increasing in detail until the approximate position of the elements has been decided.
I wanted the viewer to feel he was there, six inches high at the bottom of the pond or river, watching what was going on.
(LEFT)
WHEN CHRIS OWEN, Head of Natural History Publications at the Natural History Museum, published a painting of mosses that I had done for the National Museum of Wales, I had no idea that it would lead to a further and more exciting job offer, so a call out of the blue from Chris was a welcome surprise.
The Natural History Museum wanted me to complete some ecology wallcharts of ponds and streams, sponsored by British petroleum, who have a long standing relationship with the Museum, aimed at encouraging and supporting a better understanding of current environmental issues.
The ecology wall charts were to be the most recent in a series of a dozen or so published by the Natural History Museum with sponsorship from BP and featured in their educational catalogue.
GOING PUBLIC
This opportunity provided a welcome break from the purely botanical work to which I was accustomed, as well a s a chance to make the most of my botany/zoology background.
When applying for a place on MA courses five years previously, I'd suggested that, although there were many excellent publications for identifying birds, insects, plants and so forth, ecological concepts were ‘going public’.
There would be tremendous scope, therefore, for publications that tackled the more interesting, and perhaps relevant, topic of how plants and animals interrelate.
In 1980, I was accepted at Manchester Polytechnic and produced an illustrated study of the relationships between the plants of the buttercup family and their insect visitors.
The subject turned out to be vast and in one year I barely scratched the surface!
In 1982 I took the job of botanical illustrator at the National Museum of Wales.
Most of my illustrative work there involved straightforward plant portraiture, in both two and three dimensions.
Although I slipped in the odd prop or two, and tried to bend briefs towards my interests, on the whole I felt I watched from the sidelines as the plethora of ecology and natural history books of the 1980s appeared.
FAUNA AND FLORA
The wall charts were the type of project I felt I had trained to tackle, and this was my first major commission involving both botany and zoology.
The brief comprised a list of about 80 species for each chart, grouped according to pollution tolerance.
The task was to design wall charts using three species to illustrate the dramatic effect changes in water colour has on the fauna and flora of aquatic environments of ponds and lakes and a river system, to the extent that the presence or absence of particular plants or animals gives a good indication of pollution levels.
Quite a depressing topic, but the worst scenario, the almost lifeless state that arises with very heavy pollution, was omitted; not only would this have been pictorially boring but the charts had to sell.
THIS OPPORTUNITY PROVIDED ME WITH A WELCOME BREAK FROM THE PURELY BOTANICAL WORK TO WHICH I WAS ACCUSTOMED.
The species had been selected by staff in the botany and zoology departments with specialists representing each group of plants and animals on the list.
I was lucky to be given a great deal of freedom with the first draft.
PAINTING IN THE RIGHT DIMENSIONS
The designs needed to show a lake and a river system to put the species in context, but the range and size of the plants and animals made this tricky.
One solution could have been to put the smaller plants and animals in boxes or circles around a central illustration of a lake or pond with arrows indicating where they could be found.
I decided this would divorce the plants and animals from their niche in the system as well as from each other.
Also I'd had feedback from the moss chart that children enjoyed scouring the poster for tiny details, so I looked for a solution that would allow as many items as possible to be painted the same size.
I decided to put sections of the lake and river systems in the background, allowing an impression of the vegetation on the banks and in the distance to give a general idea of which part of a river or what type of lake was shown.
A cut-away view would show the relative size of the larger plants and indicate where they grew in relation to the banks.
The design left quite large areas for close-up compositions of bankside vegetation and underwater scenes to give a sense of being there.
Roughs, based on my general knowledge of the subject, were presented at my first meeting with the ‘team’ and accepted in principle.
LESS FAMILIAR SPECIES
The next stage entailed methodically working through the species lists to check out the unfamiliar plants and look up if (on distribution maps), where (specific localities and when (flowering seasons), they might be found.
Similarly I began to gather information about the invertebrates.
These were more difficult.
It meant delving into quite specialist areas as many species were unknown to me.
Knowing general family traits provided a good starting point and from assorted references I began to get an idea of the species I could hope to find myself and those for which I'd need help.
With this information, the second colour  mock-ups were produced, still lacking fine details but giving a good idea of the overall appearance of the final charts and the position of each species.
These, together with a list of queries and references needed, were circulated around the team for comments and suggestions.
FORM AND FUNCTION
In the meantime I continued to search out and scribble notes on background material.
This may seem a bit excessive, but I've always believed it as easy, if not easier, to work accurately.
Since form and function are related to living things, when the information in an illustration is incorrect it can take more work in the long run to get the thing to look right.
This project confirmed that belief.
The illustrations were to be typical representations of ecosystems that actually exist with inhabitants adapted to live there.
As the data was applied to the design of each section, the various elements began magically to fit together; most plants or animals would only fit a particular niche in the illustration.
I DECIDED TO PUT ALL SECTIONS OF THE LAKE AND RIVER SYSTEMS IN THE BACKGROUND
The third colour roughs, complete with borders, indications of text and so on, incorporated all corrections, species substitutions and the final positions and the size of each species was clearly indicated.
These were to be presentation roughs for the sponsors, BP, and so were sent with overlays annotated with my final queries.
This was the last opportunity for major inaccuracies to be corrected.
Go-ahead to start the final artwork came at the end of spring 1988 with an autumn deadline, providing the option to work from fresh material available throughout the summer.
SOME FIELD WORK
While searching for the plants, I found many of the invertebrates.
Finding one of the creatures or rarer plants is a bit of a thrill.
It gets obsessive, and throughout the summer, evening and weekend jaunts were re-routed via any stretch of water in the vicinity.
Fortunately Cardiff is within driving distance of various different habitats, ranging from the unpolluted mountain streams of the Brecon Beacons to the industrially polluted, but slowly recovering, River Taff.
Most sites bore fruit, even the latter where the black mud and mats of green algae teemed with worms, leeches and wandering snails!
2/With miscellaneous facts on over 140 species whizzing round my head, I decided a system was needed.
An index with cards for species brought order to impending chaos.
On these I noted taxonomic details, behaviour, eating habits and life cycles.
The relevant cards could then be kept at hand as each section was developed.
(ABOVE)
3/The roughs were sent with tracing paper overlays annotated with queries and a request for answers to be written alongside.
This allowed question and answer to be quite specific.
It felt quite good to get them returned covered with diagrams and comments, I know of no better sign that a project has the attention and support of the personnel involved.
Such backup gives me confidence with producing the final artwork that the factual content is sound.
(ABOVE)
IN THE MEANTIME I CONTINUED TO SEARCH OUT AND SCRIBBLE NOTES ON BACKGROUND MATERIAL.
4/I chose watercolour on a very smooth Fabriano paper for such detailed work.
I decided that the artwork would be painted in pieces; the backgrounds on a single sheet and the rest in sections the same size with the artwork for close up details painted twice up for reduction.
This would allow greater flexibility for chivvying around to fit, at that stage, an unknown quantity of text.
(ABOVE)
5/My painting technique is pretty straightforward.
Having worked out the general layout, the main outlines of the plants and substrates and so on were drawn in with the washes of the appropriate colours.
Careful watch was kept on the overall dimensions of each piece to ensure a fit when the charts were finally assembled.
The rough positions of the animals were pencilled onto this framework.
(ABOVE)
6/Highlights are masked out while areas are filled in with a thin wash.
Spaces had to be left for some animals to be added as and when I found them.
Details evolve as the tones are worked from light to dark in the visual watercolour fashion.
Fine details are virtually drawn in colour with a very fine paintbrush.
(LEFT)
FINDING ONE OF THE CREATURES OR RARER PLANTS IS A BIT OF A THRILL.
7/The backgrounds were imaginary and deliberately painted in loose wash and kept soft to allow text to be overlaid.
In the final prints they were pushed back even more, loosing out some of the green.
(RIGHT)
8/Finished wall charts published 1990.
Reproduced by courtesy of the Natural History Museum, London.
(LEFT)
9/Working on both posters, the artwork took four months on and off the paint.
I was told later that the designer at the Natural History Publications Section nearly broke down trying to put the pieces together, just as it was thought all the animals had been spotted and labelled, another would be discovered; I think this was an exaggeration but it was a very tricky task.
(LEFT)
10/The time and effort paid off.
BP ordered 5,000 extra copies for each translation and distribution abroad and the commission led to another: illustrating pond life on a tracing paper sample brochure.
(LEFT)
MEET THE ARTIST
DALE EVANS was born in 1956 and reared on a small Welsh farm in Cwmbran, Tredegar, South Wales, where her father breeds black Aberdeen cattle.
After a BSc Botany/Zoology degree at University College, Swansea, she took a part-time illustration course at Swansea Art College, went freelance and taught botanical illustration for a year or two, then did an MA in graphic design at Manchester Polytechnic.
From 1982–1990 she was Botanical Illustrator at the National Museum of Wales.
Dale now works freelance from home and plans to diversify to explore other subjects and techniques.
She works mainly in watercolour, gouache and acrylic and was recently awarded the Jill Smythies Linnena Society award for published botanical work.
THE ART MATERIALS DIRECTORY
COTTON PAPER IS SOMETIMES STILL CALLED OR DESCRIBED AS RAG PAPER.
Two Rivers handmade papers.
(LEFT)
PILES OF PAPER
When it comes to choosing paper, there are a hundred and one options.
EMMA PEARCE sets us straight on the properties of each type.
HAVING ALREADY REFERRED to types of watercoloured paper and their manufacturer in the August issue, I am this month going to refer back to and expand upon certain areas.
INGREDIENTS
In addition to cotton and chemical woodpulp, paper can also be made from mechanical woodpulp.
Mechanical woodpulp is acidic and is used for the cheapest types of paper like newsprint or certain types of cartridge paper.
You can ensure a cartridge paper or pad is acid free (pH7) by asking if it is wood-free.
RAG PAPER
Cotton paper used to be made with cotton rags but is now made from cotton linters, which refers to the second harvest from the cotton plant.
Cotton paper is sometimes still described as rag paper.
It should be noted, however, that a few papers do still contain real rag content, as is explained in the table.
MANUFACTURE
In addition to handmade and mould-made paper, paper can also be machine-made.
The machine is called a ‘Fourdrinier’ machine and mimics the hand process in a continuous conveyor belt fashion with wet pulp going on at one end and a dry roll of paper at the other.
The surface of machine made paper is rather mechanical compared to handmade paper or mould-made sheets.
It is the least dimensionally stable of the three types for two reasons.
i) It is directional, ie it tears easily in one direction, the direction in which the mould, the mesh upon which a sheet is formed, runs.
ii) The rapid and strong drainage of the pulp in the mould produces a different density of fibre on either side of the paper.
This makes the paper cockle more when water is applied to it.
Cartridge papers are machine made.
ON HANDMADE AND MOULD MADE SHEETS THE LOGO IS SEWN INTO THE MESH SO IT IS RAISED AND LESS PULP IS DEPOSITED ON IT.
FOUR AND TWO DECKLE EDGES
Handmade sheets have two deckle edges and two torn or cut edges.
Some companies, however, describe their mould-made sheets as four deckle edges.
It should therefore be noted that four deckle edges does not necessarily mean the paper is handmade.
WOVE AND LAID PAPERS
Wove paper refers to the woven mesh of the mould on which the sheet was formed.
There is no visible pattern in the paper.
Laid paper shows a pattern of lines within a sheet.
The pattern is produced in one of two ways depending whether the paper is hand or mould-made or machine made.
i) Laid paper made by hand or on a cylinder-mould is formed on a mesh of wires laid over each other at right angles.
More pulp is deposited on the underneath wires of the mound.
ii) Laid paper made by Fourdrinier machine is wove paper which has been embossed with a laid pattern whilst wet, this displaces the fibres and produces denser lines of pulp.
When either type of sheet is pressed and dry, a lined pattern results.
Sheets made on a laid mould have a more subtle pattern within the sheet whilst machine laid sheets often feel raised to the fingers.
WATERMARKS
The watermark is made in exactly the same way as the laid pattern.
On handmade and mould-made sheets the logo is sewn onto the mesh so it is raised and less pulp is deposited on it.
On machine-made paper the watermark is embossed into the sheet whilst it is still wet.
THE RIGHT SIDE OF THE PAPER
The ‘right’ side of a sheet of paper refers to the side on which  you can read the watermark.
More often than not, papers do appear different on either side and it would seem sensible not to be inhibited and to use the reverse if you actually prefer it!
PAPERS FOR ACRYLIC PAINTING
Acrylic painting does not require any particular types of paper other than those already discussed and recommended for watercolour.
A couple of points are worth mentioning however.
Because it tends to be used in thicker layers than watercolour, the surface character of the paper will have less effect on the painting.
If an opaque palette is used then the colour of the paper, white or otherwise, will have no effect on the brightness of the painting.
PAPERS FOR CHALK PASTELS
The nature of chalk pastels is their powdery and textural effects.
It is therefore in the artist's interest to avoid using fixative on a finished drawing where possible because it tends to flatten the surface of the pastels.
Fixative can also darken the colours in a picture.
There are three types of paper which can reduce the need for fixative or prevent the use of heavy layers.
i)
Any Rough or Not sheet of paper as opposed to an HP surface.
The undulations in Rough or Not paper allow the dusty pastel more surface area to grip to.
When using HP paper as much pastel falls away as sticks to the sheet.
ii)
Fine sandpaper gives the pastel a fine abrasive surface area to grip to.
The ‘four’ grade is sufficient as rougher grades would be too predominant through the drawing.
It comes in various sizes of large sheets as well as the small sizes available in hardware shops.
Its only disadvantage is the possible acidity of the backing paper.
Alternatively, you can stretch your own choice of paper and put an abrasive surface on it yourself.
iii)
Flocked paper has been coated with powdered cotton.
It can also be called velours paper or velvet paper.
It is sometimes available in bright or dark strong colours and, together with its dominant texture, these factors make it best suited to very heavily worked pastel drawings.
Similar to flour paper it has the disadvantage of possible acidity in the backing paper.
It comes in rolls or sheets.
ALTERNATIVELY YOU CAN STRETCH THE PAPER OF YOUR CHOICE AND COLOUR IT YOURSELF WITH A LIGHTFAST PAINT.
COLOURED PAPER FOR PASTELS
Chalk pastels are an opaque medium.
The colour of the paper therefore does not effect the brightness of the drawing and actually contributes something if it is not covered.
Those papers known commercially as pastel papers are so called because they are coloured and often           because they have a machine-made laid effect.
The disadvantages of these papers is the possible acidity of them and the possible lack of lightfastness of the colours used.
Some manufacturers may provide the necessary information on their papers and it is always worth asking for it.
Alternatively, you can stretch the paper and colour it yourself with a lightfast paint.
POCHETTES ARE GOOD WHEN YOU WANT TO TRY DIFFERING WEIGHTS OR COLOURS WITHOUT PAYING FOR FULL SHEETS.
PAPERS FOR OIL PASTELS
Gelatine surfaced-size papers offer maximum durability for oil pastels because the surface withstands vigorous work.
PRICES FOR PAPERS
Generally, papers become more expensive as you move from machine-made onto mould-made and handmade.
Similarly, as you move from mechanical woodpulp onto woodfree and cotton ingredients.
Lightweight papers are cheaper than heavier weight paper.
Measure for measure, rolls of paper are cheaper than their equivalent in sheet form and sheets or rolls are cheaper than their equivalent in pad or board form.
Some companies provide a selection of their papers in ‘pochettes’.
Measure for measure, the paper is more expensive than if you were to buy full sheets and cut up the paper yourself, but pochettes are good when you want to try different weights or colours without paying for full sheets.
Some pochettes simply contain five sheets of the same paper already cut for you.
Papers are not necessarily priced according to their surfaces, Rough, Not or HP and it is worth looking carefully at the various makes and their qualities, as two papers may have similar characteristics but be quite different in price.
Retailers who specialise in paper often sell ‘mill packs’(100 sheets) or reduce the price for 25 sheets bought.
Mill packs on average reduce the price per sheet by half.
If you are not fond enough of a paper to buy it in bulk, it would be worth it for a group of friends or a class to get together and buy a mill pack.
RECYCLED PAPERS
With the ‘green’ movement gathering pace, it is good to see recycled papers which are acid free becoming available to artists.
It should be remembered that we are only at the beginning and there are many varying factors yet to be confronted; how much energy is used when recycling paper compared to using new  stock?
What are the benefits of using managed forests?
The selection of paper and board manufacturers/retailers has been pre-selected by the magazine.
EMMA PEARCE IS METHODS AND MATERIALS LECTURER AT THE SLADE SCHOOL OF FINE ART, UCL, LONDON, AND THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD, AT THE RUSKIN SCHOOL OF DRAWING AND FINE ART.
COMING NEXT MONTH ALL ABOUT BRUSHES!
RING THE SUBSCRIBER HOTLINE 071 609 2177 TO ORDER YOUR COPY!
SPECIAL FEATURE
Nancy Kominsky at work.
(LEFT)
Anyone who wants to learn to paint with oils could do far worse than follow the advice of ‘the fastest knife in the West’, Nancy Kominsky, as MIRANDA FELLOWS found out
PAINTING with NANCY
I DON'T KNOW ABOUT NANCY BUT I FELT EXHAUSTED!
THIS IS NO COMPLAINT.
NANCY KOMINSKY IS AN ENTERTAINER AS WELL AS AN ARTIST.
IT ALWAYS COMES as a surprise to Nancy Kominsky that so many people still remember her for her television series in the late 1970s.
Her modesty in the face of such popularity is endearing, especially as it is for her self-confidence in front of canvas and tv camera for which she is probably best known!
Literally thousands of people have benefited form Nancy's instruction and she has perhaps been one of the greatest advocates of the Sunday Painter school , encouraging an increase in the popularity of painting as a pastime for people of all ages and from all walks of life.
‘I believe everyone has innate creativity’ she confided in me, ‘but with some it just takes a little bit of coaxing before it will surface’.
Nancy's method of coaxing is to tell the individual he can do it and, if he follows Nancy, he will do it, ‘I always succeed’ she assures me.
She makes painting an oil look so easy that the student will automatically start believing he will be capable of the same.
Nancy Kominsky was born and bred in Philadelphia, USA and became an art teacher on graduation.
The story goes that, in 1963, she opened her first Sunday Painters Art Studio in Burbank, California.
She devised a unique ‘anyone can paint’ system of teaching and became instantly successful.
At 70, Nancy is now less stable on her feet than in her younger days, and find standing at the canvas while demonstrating, quite a strain.
She still paints with equal vivacity, however, and enthuses that, ‘You can paint until you're ready to go!
Monet had the brush taped to his hand and he still carried on!’
Although she lives in Rome, Nancy makes regular trips to England.
Last time, she was here to help promote her new series of videos which, five years after their conception, she is delighted to see being made available to the public.
THE FASTEST KNIFE IN THE WEST
Although she is reputed for being, ‘the fastest knife in the West!’
Nancy appreciates that others might need more time than she takes, to absorb and follow her instructions.
‘Always start with the grid’, she admonishes with fervour, ‘and then you can't go wrong!’.
There are various essential tools which Nancy uses for the success of the finished work, ‘It's like baking a cake,’ she says, ‘you just follow the recipe!’
Why oils, I wondered — surely beginners feel more at home with watercolour or pencils?
Nancy disagrees.
‘People are afraid of oils because they are used by great masters’, she says, ‘but they are the easiest thing to start with.
As Nancy slid the first tape into her video machine I settled down to watch her at work, but, throughout, the advice offered me on the screen was interspersed with more from the sofa next to me, where she sat eagerly adding a tumult of tips to those already being relayed.
‘I never work from a script, I just adlib the whole programme…
So quick…
I think that's 26 minutes from start to finish from the bare canvas’, interjects Nancy.
For 26 minutes we watch, until the finishing touches, the birds and tree, have been added to Cypress Point and the painting is complete.
I don't know about Nancy but I felt exhausted!
This is no complaint.
Nancy Kominsky is an entertainer as well as an artist, and her enthusiasm is infectious.
I asked her if she always painted with such alacrity and her answer came as something of a relief, ‘I like to enjoy painting, so  ofttimes I paint much more slowly, it's like eating, you don't want to rush through a great meal’.
FURTHER INFORMATION
The Paint with Nancy videos are available from all good Daler-Rowney stockists, price £12.99, as are their Nancy Kominsky oil sets, retailing at £32.99.
From grid to finished picture.
(ABOVE LEFT & RIGHT)
The Nancy Kominsky videos and oil painting set.
(ABOVE)
SERIES
COLOUR MIXING
a practical guide
PART EIGHT
In the last of an eight-part series, MICHAEL WILCOX show us how our knowledge of colour and colour types can vastly expand the palette
MY APPROACH TO colour mixing is based firmly on the processes that take place within the paint film when colours are combined.
Control of colour mixing, which is vital for advanced work, can only come about when the actions of one colour on another are fully understood.
New colours, as such, are produced when paints are mixed.
The colour we end up with is the ‘debris’ after the main contributors have absorbed all or part of each other.
In order to exploit these processes, colours must be selected according to‘type’.
THE SIX COLOUR TYPES
As covered in previous articles, the six colour types which are the minimum required for a full repertoire are:
1.
An orange-red such as cadmium red light.
2.
A violet-red such as quinacridone red or alizarin crimson (bearing in mind the limitations of the latter).
3.
A violet-blue, ultramarine.
4.
A green-blue such as cerulean blue or phthalocyanine blue.
5.
A green-yellow, usually described as lemon yellow.
6.
An orange-yellow such as cadmium yellow.
These basic hues will give a range of mixes running into the millions.
Further specialised colours can be added to increase the series in specific areas.
TWO BRIGHT GREENS
A clear, bright hue, phthalocyanine green, has to be used with some caution due to its high tinting strength, although it has many mixing applications.
It is shown here combined with a green yellow.
As mentioned, most green-yellows are marketed as lemon yellow, the majority of which are rather weak colours.
In this particular example, only a very small amount of the green was needed to change the yellow in comparison with the large amount of yellow that was required to influence the green.
A very bright, transparent cool green, viridian has a place on many palettes.
It is similar in hue and transparency to phthalocyanine green, but perhaps slightly less brash.
Viridian and phthalocyanine green come into their own when a particularly transparent mid green is required.
Either is a useful addition to the six standard colours.
LESS IS MORE
Once you have selected your six colour types, two reds, two blues and two yellows, and added perhaps viridian and burnt sienna, you will be able to produce a vast range of mixes.
Few additional colours will be required.
CONTROL OF COLOUR MIXING, WHICH IS VITAL FOR ADVANCED WORK, CAN ONLY COME ABOUT WHEN THE ACTIONS OF ONE COLOUR ON ANOTHER ARE FULLY UNDERSTOOD.
The fewer colours the better as far as harmony and contrast are concerned.
Many very successful paintings have been produced using just two colours (Mixing complementaries).
Three colours on the palette will give an incredible range once mixing is under control.
Four colours on the palette at the same time will give several million mixes, more than enough for most work.
Five or six in use at one time is usually too many and can lead to distorted work.
This is in contrast to the practice of putting all the colours in the collection on the palette at once.
Control of colour mixing is vital.
Waste is avoided both in materials and time.
Frustration is avoided when required colours can be mixed with ease.
The most important aspect, to my mind, is that finished work is often vastly improved and colour harmony easily achieved.
BURNT SIENNA AND VIOLET
Often described simply as brown and used in a rather careless manner, burnt sienna should instead be regarded as a particularly transparent, slightly neutralised orange, and used accordingly.
When mixed with violet-blue (ultramarine), the two colours, both transparent, will darken each other very efficiently and produce some exceptionally dark greys.
Such greys are the ideal replacement for black.
A wide variety of violets are on the market.
Before purchasing, ask yourself if you really need the colour.
The palette will guide you towards a wide range of violets from the very dull to the bright.
If you do use the prepared violets they should be employed where their brightness and clarity are of the utmost importance.
To darken and dull either mixed or prepared violets, simply look to the other side of the palette for the mixing complementary.
DECIDING THE TYPE
Any colour can be introduced to the palette.
It is vital that the ‘type’ of colour be decided beforehand.
For instance, the original Naples yellow was a lead-based pigment.
Now the colour is invariably a mix of cadmium yellow (orange-yellow) and white.
As such it should be treated as a light orange-yellow.
In the same manner, Paynes Grey can be considered a dark violet-blue as it is primarily a mix of ultramarine blue and black.
Being a violet blue, it can be darkened further with a yellow-orange.
This article brings to an end the current series on colour mixing.
What I would suggest you always bear in mind is that nowadays we have at our disposal a far wider range of materials than any of the early masters.
We know a great deal more about colour than any of the Impressionists.
We also have, for the first time, the ability to control colour mixing through understanding.
The way is surely open for a new era in fine art.
MICHAEL WILCOX'S NEW BOOK: THE WILCOX GUIDE TO THE FINEST WATERCOLOUR PAINTS, IS NOW AVAILABLE THROUGH ALL GOOD BOOKSELLERS AND ART SHOPS.
THE BOOK RETAILS AT £14.95.
Add lemon yellow to pthalocyanine green, one of the colour types, and you will see how strong the pthalocyanine green is.
Only a small amount of the green was needed to change the yellow in contrast with the large amount of yellow needed to affect the green (LEFT)
Viridian has a place on many palettes; it is slightly less brash than phthalocyanine green, but has similar transparency and hue.
(ABOVE)
The range of colours available when burnt sienna is mixed with violet-blue.
(ABOVE)
FIVE OR SIX PIGMENTS IN USE AT ONE TIME IS USUALLY TOO MANY AND CAN LEAD TO DISTORTED WORK.
Blue violets are most efficiently neutralised with orange-yellow.
(ABOVE)
Red violets darken best with green-yellow.
(ABOVE)
There are a variety of violets on the market, from the very dull to the very bright.
Look to the other side of the palette to find their complementaries.
(ABOVE)
A whole range of colours can be mixed!
(LEFT)
THESE BASIC HUES WILL GIVE A RANGE OF MIXES RUNNING INTO MILLIONS.
SPECIAL FEATURE
MOORE'S VERBAL RECOLLECTIONS OF THE MINES ARE MUCH MORE EVOCATIVE THAN THE DRAWINGS THEMSELVES, IN WHICH THE MINERS APPEAR AS FROZEN STATUARY.
Josef Heman, Miner in a Landscape, 1952, mixed media.
Courtesy of the Boundary Gallery.
(LEFT)
Last month PHILIP VANN looked at artists who had come up from the mines to become artists; in this issue he concentrates on those artists who went down to the pit to paint
WORKING the SEAM
PART TWO
THE THREATENING POLITICAL atmosphere and depression of the 1930s Britain gave rise to an increasing left-wing bias of proletarian sympathies among many leading artists and writers.
In 1936, the poet W H Auden proudly and fashionably recalled that, during his childhood, ‘Those at the gasworks were my favourite men’; ‘And from my sixth until my 16th year/I thought myself a mining engineer.’
(Letters to Lord Byron 1936).
Bill Brandt's black and white photograph of a Coal-searcher going home to Jarrow (1937) in the North East, depicting an unemployed miner trudging along with a bicycle loaded with a scavenged coal, sums up, with dignity and subtlety, a black depression mood.
Depressed British industry, its mines, quarries and factories, was re-invigorated by the demands caused by the outbreak of the Second World War.
The War Artists Advisory Committee was set up, not only to stimulate and artistic record of war and related activities, but also to help ensure that at least some of the artists would be saved from First World War carnage.
Artists recruited under this scheme included Henry Moore, Graham Sutherland and Stanley Spencer.
In the same 1936 poem, Auden had written:
The mine I always pictured was for lead,
Though copper mines might, faux de mieux, be sound.
Today I like a weight upon my bed;
I always travel by the Underground.
SUBTERRANEAN ASSOCIATIONS
These nicely facetious lines ironically anticipate the grave subterranean associations between the London Underground and mines, later explored by Henry Moore in his role as war artist.
Moore's drawing of Londoners sheltering from the blitz in tube stations are now celebrated.
His father had worked as a coal miner in Castleford in Yorkshire and, after completing his shelter drawings, Moore revisited his home town to make sketches and drawings of mining as part of the war effort.
He later recalled, ‘crawling on sore hands and knees and reaching the actual coalface…
If one was asked to describe what Hell might be like, this would do.
A dense darkness you could touch, the whirring din of the coal-cutting machine, throwing into the air black dust so thick that the light beams from the miners’ lamps could only shine into it a few inches — the impression of numberless, short pit props placed only a foot or two apart, to support above them a mile's weight of rock and earth ceiling — all this in the stifling heat.
I have never had a tougher day in my life, of physical effort and exertion.’
THE MINES' HUMIDITY, THE SMELL AND LIGHT OF THE ACETYLENE LAMPS…
ARE ALL SUGGESTED IN HEIGHTENED AREAS OF PASTEL COLOUR WITHIN THE INKY BLACKNESS.
GRITTY, GRUBBY SMEARS
Whereas the shelter drawings had shown recumbent figures in still poses of monumental vulnerability, in the mines Moore faced new challenges: ‘There was first the difficulty of seeing forms emerging out of deep darkness, the problem of conveying the claustrophobic effects of countless pit-props…receding into blackness, and of expressing the gritty, grubby smears of black coal-dust on the miners’ bodies at the same time as the anatomy underneath’.
Moore's verbal recollections of the mines are much more evocative than the drawings themselves, in which the miners appear as a frozen statuary.
‘the dense darkness’, and ‘gritty, grubby smears’ have lost the earthy palpability in the immaculate portrayal.
APPROACHING THE VISIONARY
Graham Sutherland's wartime drawings and paintings, including views of bomb-damaged Swansea and London, and also of welsh tin mines, Derbyshire limestone quarries and devastated French caves, form a major contribution to modern British art.
Richly textured, with blazing reds, flaring oranges, smoky blues, succulent pinks against sombre backgrounds, these are visionary works in the tradition of William Blake.
Underground, Sutherland drew some ‘small and naturalistic’ heads of miners.
He felt that these men had, ‘an added stature which above ground they lacked’, and that, in spite of the work in this nether world, this place held for them, sub-consciously perhaps, an element of daily enthralment.
But these portraits were made, ‘mainly to distract the attention of the miners from what I was really drawing’.
In the ‘real drawings’, the vertiginous declivities and perspectives created a dramatic an surreal environment, literally subreal, in which the figures are viewed from every possible angle.
Sutherland's miner's appear gentle, malleable, pitiful, far from burly, social realist stereotypes.
The mines' humidity, the smell and light of the acetylene lamps, the precipitous danger, are all suggested in heightened areas of pastel colour within the inky blackness.
In autumn, 1942, Sutherland visited steelworks in Cardiff.
In the Teeming-Pit , brilliant yellow flames leap from a steel furnace.
The stress and crematorium-like unreality of the scene, the faceless steelworkers, the devouring industrial machinery in such pictures, are charged with  a visionary sense of the times.
It is not surprising to  learn that Sutherland felt so in sympathy with Picasso's Guernica and later regretted that, in 1945, he had not observed for himself the concentration camps.
INDUSTRIAL SCENES
Sutherland's fellow neo-romantic British artists, Keith Vaughan, John Minton and John Craxton, all depicted, in the 40s and 50s, industrial scenes, including mines.
There is a homoerotic affection and beauty in Vaughan's miner figures, qualities quite absent, for example, in Moore's rather remote drawings of the same subject.
A late pencil drawing by Vaughan, 1967, depicts naked male figures, crouching and climbing.
These could be interpreted as semi-abstract representations of figures in landscape with trees, or as miners with pit props.
The wartime years brought the Polish artist, Josef Herman, first to Scotland, then to Wales, where in 1944 he settled in the mining village of Ystradgynlais.
During the next 11 years, he created a remarkable body of work, paintings and drawings as well as Notes from a Welsh Diary , published in 1988, all depicting community life there, inseparable from his inner, mediative life.
In Ystradgynlais, he regained that ‘wonderful feeling’, lost in ‘years of perfecting the painter's craft’, of having, ‘felt that having a soul and a mind I needed little else’.
There the quotidian became immensely and  unembarrassedly real: ‘At the fish and chip shop a long  queue.
The brown bus with miners arrived.
A young man with a cage of restless pigeons.
Night approaching…
‘, ‘In the middle of the road the grand figure of the mother with child in her patterned Welsh shawl.
Grey light and gold on the roofs.
My eyes no longer embarrassed in their activities.’
Such an approach and preoccupations characterise his pictures too.
A DENSE DARKNESS YOU COULD TOUCH, THE WHIRRING DIN OF THE COAL-CUTTING MACHINE, THROWING INTO THE AIR BLACK DUST SO THICK THAT THE LIGHT BEAMS FROM THE MINERS’ LAMPS COULD ONLY SHINE INTO IT A FEW INCHES.
Henry Moore, A Miner at Work, 1942, ink and chalk.
Courtesy of the Imperial War Museum.
(LEFT)
Graham Sutherland, The Teeming Pit, 1942, gouache.
Courtesy of Imperial War Museum.
(ABOVE)
RELATED TWILIGHTS
Herman's heavily-layered paintings and his quick, succinct drawings are unmistakably of his place and time, so alert in the detail of both gesture and description.
Subjects include miners underground, in the brass band, pregnant women talking, figures on bridges, slag-heaps, empty village streets’.
‘Autumn is my season, twilight is my hour and all my life has been one chain of related twilights’, he has written.
A 1952 drawing is entitled Street bus nightfall and the Ystradgynlais pictures evoke the magic burden of that hour, piquant with expectancy.
Graham Sutherland, Slag-Ladies, 1942, gouache.
Courtesy of the Imperial War Museum.
(LEFT)
Keith Vaughan, Two Figures — studies, 1967, pencil.
Courtesy of the Redfern Gallery.
(ABOVE)
Graham Sutherland, Lime Quarry Trucks, 1943, gouache.
Courtesy of the Imperial War Museum.
(BELOW)
FOCUS ON DUBLIN
IRISH CONNECTIONS
DUBLIN: CULTURAL CAPITAL OF EUROPE
In the first of a two part series, MIRANDA FELLOWS takes a look at the art scene in Dublin, as it works its way through the year as European City of Culture.
DUBLIN IS THE sixth city to be named European City of Culture, a title which holds in its tread such cornerstones of the visual arts of Florence, Paris and Amsterdam.
Unlike these cities, Dublin is thought of first and foremost for its literary heritage, rather than for its art.
Glasgow, holding the title last year, was able to reinstate the importance of Scottish art, and celebrate its own special brand of design: Charles Rennie Mackintosh and the art of the Glasgow School at the turn of the century.
It even staged the most expensive gimmick of all, building the House for Lovers in a park in the city, a Mackintosh design never realised in his own lifetime.
Dublin has neither the artistic inheritance nor the financial resources to better such extravagances.
Nonetheless, it has its own special flavour which is of equal value.
After all, a trip to the city this autumn will enable visitors to watch all of Beckett's plays (Oct 1–20).
But, what is there for the art enthusiast in this cultural centre?
Art is an essential element in the founding of any culture.
Dublin is no exception and, as luck would have it, the most important event to be happening there this year is an artistic one: the opening of the Irish Museum of Modern Art (IMMA).
A NEW CENTRE FOR THE ARTS
Situated one mile from the city centre, on 48 acres of parkland, the IMMA is housed in the 17th century Royal Hospital, Kilmainham.
Its elegant architecture is based on Les Invalides in Paris — as befits the European tradition to which it belongs.
It has a formal, classical facade and a capacious central courtyard, its grand exterior is perhaps a paradoxical casing for the modern treasures bestowed within.
The building was restored five years ago by the Irish government, at the cost of £21 million.
Declan McGonagle has a background perfectly suited to his new post as director of the museum.
He directed the Orchard Gallery in Derry,(1978–84) for which he was nominated for the Turner prize.
His move to IMMA should breed a confidence amongst critics as to the innovative nature of work to be shown there.
Since it opened in May, however, criticism both of the space and its contents, have been rife.
Ireland doesn't own a large collection of modern masterpieces, and with a small budget cannot afford to expand its stocks of work.
As a result, the museum will be forced to rely heavily on loans from other museums and on contemporary art of less financial value.
It seems clear, however, that McGonagle's aim is not only to create a centre for the traditional masters of modernism, but to display contemporary art which encourages an interaction with the public, connecting the gallery with the community rather than separating art from it.
The first show to open there is called Inheritance and Transformation , reflecting the anomaly between exterior past and interior present at the site.
(closes Sept 29).
The show does include examples by classic modern masters, Miro, Braque, Dubuffet, Mondrian and Picasso, all on loan from Northern European cities.
Many other works in the gallery address the question of contemporary art and its role, with example by contemporary Irish artists Kathy Prendergast, John Kindness and Felim Egan.
The addition of this gallery to those already active in the city will help to redefine the role of another contemporary centre, the Douglas Hyde Gallery.
Since its opening in 1978 the gallery has been seen as the main centre for contemporary art in the city.
Now this has been forced to change.
I asked the new director there, John Hutchinson, whether this concerned him.
‘Not in the least’, he told me, ‘In fact, it lets us off the hook and will enable us to have more freedom perhaps than before’.
The gallery is based in Trinity College and shows work by  contemporary artists from both Ireland and abroad.
Hutchinson describes the gallery as, ‘a mini Hayward’, the architecture ‘late 60s brutalism’.
For the visitor to the city each will offer very different experiences and with two new directors adding their own personalities to the space, it should be an interesting time for both.
Main Entrance as seen from the courtyard, Irish Museum of Modern Art, Dublin.
(ABOVE)
LACK OF FUNDING
The lack of financial resources  affects the quantity of projects which can be undertaken in the city, and with about £2.5 million in their pockets (Glasgow spent around £40 million last year), I asked Lewis Clohossey, organiser at the Dublin European City of Culture office, whether this had been a hindrance.
He was quick to come to the city's defence, arguing that, what was lacking in financial support, was made up for in sheer determination, enthusiasm and innovation, ‘We have been keen to draw out the general cultural life of Dublin’, he explained, ‘much of our funding has been matched by donations from such organisations as the EEC’.
LOOKING TOWARDS EUROPE
One of the most successful shows to have been held in the city so far this year is,Berlin!at the Goethe Institute, which Clohossey described as ‘a resounding success’.
It encouraged viewers to take a panoramic look at 20th century German art including Dadaism and German Expressionism.
Attendances were over 100,000.
Its success, Clohossey speculates, was due to the resurgence of interest in Eastern Europe over the last couple of years.
The show was timely in another respect, for it added a definite European feel to the year's events.
The organisers of Dublin's year are keen not only to promote all things Irish but also make a European stand and put on exhibitions of interest to the whole community.
The next show to open at the IMMA follows this theme, with Gold of the Kremlin , looking at the art collected by the Tzars (Sept 15–Nov 15).
John Hutchinson lauds such programming, admitting that, ‘It helps define nationalist ideas, so we're not subsumed into the British Isles.
We're looking much more towards an international scene.
This is a very real and relevant issue’.
OTHER GALLERIES
Most of Dublin's galleries are based in two areas of the city.
The first is to the north of Trinity College, and consists of the national and established centres: Thomas Caldwell Gallery, the Rubicon Gallery and the renovated National Gallery, which houses a rich assortment of exhibits, including 17th century Dutch, French and Spanish masters, and French Impressionists.
As part of its programme this year, the National Gallery has organised Poetry and Painting .
The show marries poetry with art, encouraging viewers to take more time looking at each picture, as he compares the words with the image.
The other area is close to the Liffey quays and offers contemporary art and artists studios.
This area has seen much urban renewal over the past few years, with £6 million spent on rebuilding and refurbishment programmes.
The most important galleries situated here are the Royal Hibernian Gallagher Academy and the John Taylor Gallery.
At RHA this Autumn another show with a European flavour,The Hungarian Renaissance , acknowledges the rebirth of contemporary Eastern Europe, showing the work of many contemporary Hungarian artists as well as outstanding artefacts from the 15th century.
Being European City of Culture can mean many different things.
In Glasgow last year, it meant a huge financial interjection by the government, resulting in a splendid array of events and gaining a mixed response from the city's inhabitants.
Dublin seems to have a more philosophical approach to is turn, and, as John Hutchinson says, ‘Here we're a bit cynical, but its healthy cynicism, we don't need to prove ourselves’.
Money is tight in the city and there have been no huge investments into the staging of Dublin's year as City of Culture.
The result is that Dublin has to stand on its own constant, as well as temporary, merits.
This it does admirably.
SOME ART EVENTS IN DUBLIN DURING OCTOBER
J B Yeats, Clear Water, 1954, oil on canvas, 35x50cms.
Courtesy of Irish American Cultural Institute (long-term loan to IMMA)(ABOVE)
William Malereachly, The Sonnet, drawing.
Courtesy of the National Gallery of Ireland.
(ABOVE)
REVIEWS
BOOKS
WATERCOLOUR PAINTING COURSE By Alwyn Crawshaw
Alwyn is always a favourite with beginners.
In an easy flowing style, he shows just what can be achieved with a limited palette, two or three brushes and some watercolour paper.
Off you go to create your own masterpiece!
I have just started using the medium of watercolour, struggling along and producing paintings of a particular subject.
Although I am progressing all the time, like most people starting a new hobby for the first time, I need some help.
Alwyn has come up with a novel idea, producing a book which is directly associated with the painting holiday courses he runs.
So, reading through this book, you feel as thought Alwyn is looking over your shoulder, egging you on.
He starts by showing the reader the very minimum of materials required to get painting: six basic colours are suggested, from which different permutations are obtained using easily understood mixing techniques.
He then urges experimentation on a sheet of watercolour paper, teaching you just what can be achieved by moving the brushes over the paper.
Techniques such as wet-into-wet, dry-into-wet, washes and so on are discussed.
As well as explanation of painting techniques, Alwyn deals with drawing, perspective, painting from photographs and other relevant subjects.
Carrying on from this, there is a series of demonstrations, which have been planned out in easy stages and are therefore not too daunting.
In all, there are 32 lessons to get through and after each one I felt myself saying, ‘I can do that!’.
PAUL HARRIES
ARTHUR RACKHAM
A LIFE WITH ILLUSTRATION
by James Hamilton
Arthur Rackham,(1867–1939) was possibly the most famous of all children's book illustrators.
Through his work he was ‘to affect the imagination, literary and pictorial understanding of countless children and adults all round the world.’
A prolific worker, Rackham is credited as having illustrated over 150 books, amounting to some 3,300 illustrations.
With such a talent his fame was assured, and in America he received the accolade of knighthood.
Italy, France and Spain also honoured him with medals and ribbons, but in England, his native homeland, he never achieved quite the same degree of recognition.
Even up until now, comparatively few books have been written about him.
James Hamilton attempts to rectify this by placing Rackham in context, following the artist form his first paint box to his last commission.
The text is embroidered with extracts from Rackham's letters, contemporary reviews and even details of his financial accounts.
Few stones are left unturned as the life of the artist from his childhood to his marriage, to lifelong companion and fellow artist, Edyth Starkie, unfurls.
Virtually every page glows with colour prints of Rackham's illustrations, accompanied by black and white sketches and silhouettes.
So skilled an illustrator was Rackham, that the reader begins to believe that trees have faces, mermaids gather shells beneath the sea and fairies fly through Kensington Gardens.
Looking at his work, it is easy to believe that Rackham recorded, rather than imagined, these events.
Towards the end of his life, Rackham wrote, ‘As far as I can see, looking back into the past, it is not likely that the old Rackham book will ever come back’.
Thankfully he was wrong.
Arthur Rackham: A life with illustration , puts the spotlight right back where it should be.
His illustrations have stood the test of time and forever continue to fascinate and inspire the children, of all ages.
SHARON BASSIN
JOAN EARDLEY
By Cordelia Oliver
A giant, yellow-white wave roars towards land, its undertow pitch, menacing black.
This is The Wave , 1961, a large oil painting of great expressionist vigour, one of the late masterpieces of the Scottish painter Joan Eardley (1921–63), whose reputation is deservedly now in the ascendant as a major British Modern.
Cordelia Oliver, writer and critic, who knew the artist quite well, is perfectly placed to tell her story, which she does succinctly, affectionately and with a fine interweave of biographical detail and critical insight.
A black undertow dogged Eardley's life, perhaps partly attributed to her father's suicide when she was seven.
At Glasgow School of Art, she was lucky enough to have a teacher who understood that an artist has to ‘break down some kind of barrier within yourself’, transcending stifling Scottish morality.
This Eardley increasingly did.
The struggle to find herself was sometimes tortuous, yet often exhilarating.
She was drawn to ‘the slummy parts’ and shipyards of Glasgow.
Early drawings of Port Glasgow show a brilliantly tense use of line in depicting fence staves, boat scaffolding, industrial cranes.
A local family, the Samsons, provided models for what have become archetypal portraits of spirited Gorbals urchinhood.
Young Andrew's belly shows between upraised jumper and trousers.
As Eardley's power grew, so these portraits became less obviously charming and literal, rougher-hewn in abstracted and graffitied patternings.
Her powers of observations however, remained no less acute.
In 1954, she took an exposed, simple cottage in the north eastern fishing village of Catterline.
There are many quotations here from letters, evoking the primitive magic of that locale.
‘It's night, and the fire is giving a great, flickering light…
I'm sitting looking out at the darkness and the sea.
I think I shall paint here.
This is a strange place — it always excites me.’
The cliff, land and seascapes, the salmon nets, the flowers and grasses, the straggling village all provided a richness, a maelstrom almost, of subject matter.
She worked in all weathers, ‘pouring her paint on with tremendous freedom and power’.
Her final paintings, when she was dying of cancer, of storms and approaching storms, are most urgent, assured and disturbing, but not without a characteristic sweet humanity.
My only reservation about this book is that it is too reticent about her loneliness and attraction towards women in what were not the most sexually enlightened of times.
PHILIP VANN
BECKMANN
By Stephen Lackner
The extraordinary times in which the German artist Max Beckmann (1844–1950) lived and worked are reflected on his vibrant canvases to a degree arguably unequalled by his contemporaries.
Beckmann was a latecomer to modernism; it was not until after the First World War that he turned noticeably to the sharply outlined Expressionism that came to typify his work.
After having worked as a medic and observed first-hand the horrors of war, Beckmann began to produce ambitious paintings with religious themes and continued in this vein until the early 1920s.
His focus soon shifted to subjects he became famous for portraying: the nouveaux riches at play in 1920's Berlin.
1923's Dancing Bar in Baden-Baden has a definite ring of the social criticism apparent in the work of most of his fellow German Expressionists.
With the 1930's, however, Beckmann's works grew far more explicitly sinister, and in 1937, after it was declared ‘degenerate’ by the Nazis, he left Germany and settled permanently in the United States.
The new edition of Stephen Lackner's book Beckmann combines a perceptive, unpretentious text on the artist's work with many well-reproduced and well-integrated photographs of the paintings themselves, 40 of them in colour.
This book forms part of a Thames & Hudson series, Masters of Art.
All 33 books in the series are published in identical format, and include critiques of Klee, Vermeer and Modigliani.
LARISSA HARRIS         
GENERAL QUERIES…
TECHNICAL PROBLEMS…
QUESTIONS ANSWERED
QUESTION TIME
COTTON QUANDARY
I have been given a large quantity of fabric and I would like to know if it would be suitable for painting in oils or acrylic.
If it is, how do I bond it onto hardwood?
The sample of cloth you sent is fine cotton.
Cotton or fine linen can be used as a painting support either by itself stretched onto a wooden frame or stretcher, or it can be glued onto strong card or hardboard to give a good painting surface to oils or acrylics.
You should never use any cloth made from synthetic fibres unless you are sure that it will not react adversely, as oil paint can dissolve some man-made fibres.
Your sample is quite safe to use, being of pure cotton.
However, it is quite thin and would be unsatisfactory if used on a stretcher.
The best method would be to attach it to cardboard or hardboard.
Cardboard from old sketch pads could be used, or cutoffs of hardboard from DIY shops.
The cotton can be fixed by first coating the board with glue size or a coat of PVA glue.
The cloth is then carefully spread over the board and folded over the back, overlapping by about one inch.
When dry, it can be painted on directly, or, if a less absorbent surface is required, it can be coated with an oil or acrylic primer paint, or a coat of white emulsion paint.
CROOKED CANVAS
Recently I obtained a canvas.
I was excited to use it since I had only painted onto a stretched canvas once before, and I stretched it eagerly and tightly.
After my canvas was half painted, however, I realised that the canvas was at the wrong angle.
It wasn't very bad, but it was noticeable, which made me worried about exhibiting or framing it.
Is it possible to straighten a crooked canvas?
And am I correct in worrying that it may be difficult to frame?
I can't imagine that I am alone with this problem — stretching a canvas imperfectly seems like such an easy mistake to make.
Are there any well-known paintings on mis-stretched canvases?
Not even master painters could be completely infallible!
On a different note — I am very interested in the artist Peter Howson, who painted Psycho Squad .
I would appreciate any information you could give me about his works, books, or exhibitions.
Your problem is not unusual — a good many pictures are not square.
It wouldn't be too difficult to restretch your canvas if you removed the staples and tacks and just reset the stretched frame.
If restretching is too daunting, you could either use a frame with sufficient rebate to hide the discrepancy or have a frame made which fits the canvas.
Don't worry about it — many of my paintings are the same!
Your Peter Howson question was very well timed!
There will be an exhibition of his work from November 10–December 4 at Flowers East, London.
ALL ABOUT AIRBRUSHES
I am an artist on the verge of becoming professional and I am seriously considering investing in an airbrush kit.
I would be most grateful if you could recommend and advise me on the aforementioned, plus compressors.
I might need to be set up and ready to go, with up to £600 to spend.
There are many different types of airbrushes, and what you purchase really depends on what you want to produce.
For compressors, your best bet, if you are working in a studio environment, would be a silent compressor like the 20A, which retails at £269.50 + VAT from Morris and Ingram.
If you are working on an angled drawing board, the best kit we supply is a 150-4-PK dual action airbrush, which comes in a wooden box and has all three head and needle assemblies: fine, medium, and heavy-duty, to suit all the media you are likely to use.
This is available from Morris and Ingram for £128.70 + VAT.
If you are working on a flat surface, you could use any of the 100L airbrushes from Morris and Ingram, possibly the 100-4-SS airbrush set, which comes with a fine and medium assembly and needle and colour cups.
This kit will also work on an angled surface.
The type of paper you use also depends on what you are making.
There are many different types, all of which can be used with any paint of a creamy to milky consistency.
Some paint must be thinned down, some comes ready.
For more information on what airbrushes and compressors would fit your needs, your best bet would be to write to all the well- known airbrush manufacturers for their catalogues.
Then you can see what is available and what would work best for you.
Some good companies to write to are Badger, De Vilbis, Rotring, and Morris & Ingram.
YOU HAVE HELPED
I read with interest the question regarding paper sculpture and pop-up designs.
I have listed below some books on pop-up techniques, if it is of any help to G.D.
Bess (AIM, July 1991).
All are available from John Neal, Bookseller,(wonderfully informative catalogue) 18/33 Spring Garden Street, Greensboro, Newcastle 27403, but I'm sure that any good bookshop would be able to order them.
All books have patterns for many pop-up designs and No. 2 has pre-cut designs ready to use on card as well as patterns.
One book available from Kodansha, Biblios Publishers Star Red, Partridge Green, West Sussex, RH13 8LD.
Tel: 0403 710971, is White Christmas — Create Your Own Cards and Decorations.
Origami Architecture by Masahiro Chatani and Keiko Hakazawa. £9.95 + p&p.
I hope this may be of help.