

6 BOX
Spring is the time when everything starts growing again after the winter.
Try out a few of these growing ideas with your Six.
Crystals
Fill two jam jars with water and stir five tablespoons of Epsom Salts into each jar.
Wet a piece of thick string and put one end into each jar.
The centre of the string should hang over a clean saucer.
Watch the string over the next week to see what happens.
Leaf Shapes
Soon the leaves will appear on the trees.
Can you identify these leaves from their shapes?
Wild Flowers
You may recognise these common plants, especially if you have visited, or live, in the country.
If you're stuck you'll need to decode the names.
The key to the code is below.
Cuttings
Try growing a plant from a cutting.
Violets, ivy, coleus and geraniums are good ones to start with.
Cut off a piece of plant just below the place where the leaves join the stem.
Place the cutting in water until several roots have grown.
Put a layer of pebbles in a plant pot and then fill it up with healthy damp soil.
Then carefully plant your cutting in the soil.
Your cutting needs plenty of sun and some water.
But make sure you don't over-water it.
The answers are on page 28.
DISCOVERING…
PLANTS FROM PIPS
It is very easy to grow exotic plants from the pips and seeds in fruit.
Why not try to grown your own date palm from a date stone?
DATE PALM
Fill a small flower pot with potting compost and push two or three date stones into the top.
The spare stones are in case some don't grow.
Make sure that the stones are lying flat in the compost.
Water the pot until the compost is quite damp.
Cover the pot with a polythene bag and fix it on with an elastic band.
This will stop the compost drying out.
Leave the pot in a warm, dark place for a few weeks — the airing cupboard is best.
Keep checking every week or so.
When shoots appear from the soil, put the pot on a sunny window-sill and remove the polythene bag.
The shoots will turn green in the sunlight and grow into your very own date palm.
OTHER SEEDS
You could use the same method to grow oranges from their pips.
The little orange trees which grow are pretty but it will be many years before they are big enough to produce oranges.
You could also try growing a lemon tree, peach tree or melon plant.
CARROT TOPS
You can also get new plants without growing seeds.
Cut the top centimetre from a carrot and trim off the old leaves.
Place it in some water in a saucer and it will soon grow new feathery leaves.
Another way to grow a carrot top is in a hanging basket.
This time you need the top two centimetres from a thick carrot.
Ask a grown-up to help you hollow out the centre of the carrot.
Using a skewer, make two holes in the carrot by pushing it in one side and out through the other.
Thread a piece of string through each hole and knot it in place.
Hang the carrot top by the strings in a sunny window and keep the well in the centre filled with water.
When the feathery shoots appear, they will grow up around the carrot top to make a pretty hanging basket.
Easter Games
Games to play with your Six or Pack
EGG HUNT
This game can be played indoors or outside.
You'll need one egg for each Brownie.
You could either use chocolate eggs, or each Brownie could decorate a hard-boiled egg (see pages 30–31).
Ask your Brown Owl to hide the eggs in different places.
When they are all hidden, Brownies have to go looking for them.
You can play this game in different ways:
the winner of the hunt can be the Brownie who finds the most eggs
the winner can be the first Brownie to find an egg
every Brownie has to find the egg which has her name on it.
If a Brownie finds someone else's egg before her own, she must not tell anyone else where it is.
At the end of the game, each Brownie should be able to keep an egg.
So, if you play the first version, those Brownies with more than one egg should give their ‘spare’ ones to those who haven't got one.
EGG ROLLING
For this game, each Brownie needs a hard-boiled egg and a rolled-up newspaper.
Everyone stands at one end of the room with their eggs in front of them on the floor.
On the word ‘go’, everyone has to hit their egg and try to reach the other side of the room.
No one is allowed to pick up their eggs until they do this.
Anyone who hits the wrong egg must go back to the beginning.
To make the game easier, each egg could have the Brownie's name on it.
The winner of the game is the first Brownie to get to the other side with her own egg.
Or it could be the Brownie whose egg is in the best condition.
The game could also be played in teams with each Six having and egg with their name on it.
The winner will be the first Six in which all the members have had a go at egg rolling and have returned to their places.
EGG AND SPOON RACE
Brownies should get into teams or Sixes.
Each team stands at one end of the room, in a line, one behind the other, facing the opposite end.
The Brownie at the front of each team holds a spoon with a hard-boiled egg on it.
On the word ‘go’ they run to the other end of the room and back.
They then pass the egg and spoon to the next Brownie in the line who runs in the same way.
You could also play this with team members at both ends of the room so that Brownies only have to run one length and pass it on to the next Brownie and so on.
While running, Brownies must not drop the egg or hold it on the spoon with their fingers.
They must hold the spoon by the handle.
If the egg is dropped or held, the Brownie has to return to the beginning.
The winner is the team in which all the members have run with the spoon and are back to their places.
Moving On
When you are ten you'll be able to go up to Guides.
There are lots of things about being a Guide which are similar to being a Brownie — but there are also lots of new and exciting things for you to look forward to.
PATROLS
Guide units are called Companies.
Each Company is split into Patrols which are like Brownie Sixes.
There are usually between six and eight Guides in each Patrol.
Instead of Sixers, Patrols have Patrol Leaders.
Each Patrol Leader picks somebody to help her and be her Second.
Patrol Leaders have meetings called Patrol Leaders' Councils.
At these meetings they help decide what will happen in the unit — what the Company is going to do, where it is going to go and who is going to do what.
Patrols are usually named after flowers or birds.
Here are some popular Patrol names:
In some Companies, Guides make up their own names for Patrols and then embroider their own Patrol emblems.
A guide receiving an Interest Badge
GUIDE LAW
The Guide Promise is the same as the Brownie Promise, however their Motto and Law are different.
Here is the Guide Law.
It has ten parts:
1
A Guide is loyal and can be trusted.
2
A Guide is helpful.
3
A Guide is polite and considerate.
4
A Guide is friendly and a sister to all Guides.
5
A Guide is kind to animals and respects all living things.
6
A Guide is obedient.
7
A Guide has courage and is cheerful in all difficulties.
8
A Guide makes good use of her time.
9
A Guide takes care of her own possessions and those of other people.
10
A guide is self-controlled in all she thinks, says and does.
The Guide Motto is Be Prepared.
Toasting marshmallows the Girl Guide way
UNIFORMS
Just like you, Guides have a mix and match uniform.
They can wear a sweatshirt or blouse, with culottes or sweat pants.
And they have a trendy baseball cap.
Of course, where you have ‘Brownies’ written on your tops, the Guide tops read ‘Guides’.
But there is one big difference.
Brownies wear a yellow and brown uniform, but the Guide uniform is  light and dark blue.
And though all Brownies wear yellow neckerchiefs, each Guide Company has a different colour.
ACTIVITIES
Guides get up to all sorts of exciting things.
They do lots of fun outdoor activities like canoeing, hiking and camping.
Camping is probably the thing that Guides enjoy the most.
Going to camp is like going on Pack holiday but everyone sleeps outside in tents.
There's lots of fun to be had at camp — everything from cooking over an open fire to building gadgets out of sticks and string and singing round the camp fire.
BADGES
In the Guides you will work for Interest Badges just as you have done in Brownies.
But there are lots more to choose from.
Here are just a few of the exciting badges you can work to earn:
Aircraft
Farmer
Star Gazer
Radio Communication
Fire fighter
Angler
Outdoor Cook
Local History
Handywoman
Guides having fun out-of-doors
TREFOIL
Guides don't travel along a Footpath, Road and Highway.
Instead they work to earn Trefoils.
The first Trefoil is yellow, the next green, then red and finally blue.
The last Trefoil award is the special Baden-Powell Trefoil.
This is the highest badge a Guide can earn and it involves a lot of work.
BECOMING A GUIDE
Before you can make your Promise and become a Guide you have to do eight challenges, one from each of these sections: Enjoying the Out-of-Doors, Keeping Fit, Thinking for Yourself, Giving Service, Exploring the Arts, Becoming a Homemaker, Keeping the Guide Law and Getting to Know People.
You might be asked to learn a Guide song by heart, or learn to do something that will be useful at home.
THINGS TO DO
If you will be moving up to Guides soon, why not try and find out about the Company you will be joining?
What is the Company called?
What is the name of the Guider?
Where and when do the Guides meet?
What kind of things do the Guides get up to?
The best way to find all this out is to talk to a Guide from that unit.
See if you can get one to come along to a Brownie meeting and tell you more about what being a Guide is like.
Or try to get a copy of GUIDE PATROL .
This is the monthly magazine, for Guides, with lots of help and ideas for fun Patrol activities.
Magical Butterflies
Butterflies are probably the most beautiful insects but they have rather humble beginnings.
Just like the fairy tale about the ugly duckling turning into a lovely white swan, butterflies have a similar story.
Butterflies change three times to become adults.
They change from egg to caterpillar to chrysalis to adult.
This magical change is known as metamorphosis — pronounced met-a-mor-fohsis!
It is a Greek word that means changing shape.
EGG HATCHING
After mating, the female butterfly lays eggs — usually between 50 and 1,000.
The eggs, which are often stuck to a plant, eventually hatch into larvae.
You probably already know what a larva is because it is also known as a caterpillar.
Before it hatches, the developing larva inside can breathe through a ring of pores at the top of the egg, which allows air to reach it.
About a week after the egg has been laid, the cap at the top is broken or chewed off.
The larva comes out and into the world.
As soon as the young caterpillar is free from its egg, it turns round and eats the shell, which is thought to contain valuable nutrients.
CATERPILLARS
Caterpillars have eyes on the sides of their body but they can only tell dark from light.
They breathe through tiny little holes in their sides called spiracles.
Young caterpillars are very small and either graze along the surface of leaves or take tiny bites from the edges of young leaves.
As they get bigger, they tackle larger leaves and take bigger and bigger bites.
Next time you're outdoors and you spot a caterpillar, watch how it uses its legs and mouth to eat whole leaves systematically, strip by strip.
The caterpillar soon begins to put on weight.
It has to shed its skin four or five times to allow it to grow bigger.
Then it is time for it to find a suitable spot to turn into a chrysalis.
The word chrysalis is Greek for ‘gold’ and was given because many chrysalises have gold spots on them to disguise them.
eggs caterpillar chrysalis
THE CHRYSALIS
Before turning into a chrysalis, the caterpillar stops eating.
It then finds a hiding place and attaches itself to a branch with silk.
It does this by gripping the silk with its back legs and hanging from it.
The caterpillar is cleverly disguised to help it hide among the leaves.
The old caterpillar skin peels  back and falls away.
The chrysalis stays fixed to the resting place.
It does not move and it has no food.
The chrysalis is often called the ‘resting stage’.
But there will be no rest for all the cells in the body.
Within the chrysalis the insect undergoes complete metamorphosis.
All the muscles, nerves and other structures are dissolved.
New limbs with new muscles and nerves are formed.
Wings appear externally for the first time and the insect takes on the appearance of an adult.
After some weeks or even months, the skin splits.
Out comes a head and the top part of a new body.
Then come legs and two wet, crumpled wings.
Yes, you've guessed it — the new creature is a butterfly!
The butterfly's body is soft, wet and weak.
But soon it dries and hardens.
Then it spreads its wings and flies away, ready for its first meal of nectar!
FASCINATING FACTS
Sometimes it's difficult to tell the difference between a moth and a butterfly.
If you're unsure, look for its ‘feelers’ or antennae.
Most butterflies have little knobs on the end of their antennae — but moths never do.
Sometimes moths have thick antennae that look like feathers.
Have you ever noticed that a lot of butterflies have the colour black on their wings?
This is because the dark scales soak up the sunlight, to warm the butterfly.
Some of the most colourful butterflies never need to hide because they are poisonous.
If a bird tried to eat one it would get a nasty shock because it would taste foul.
The bird will remember to keep away from the bright coloured ones next time!
SPRING CUSTOMS
When spring comes the earth begins to warm up after winter's long, cold days.
All around the globe at this time of year people celebrate the coming of new life into the world.
Here are some of the customs which take place during the spring.
Patron Saints
Spring brings the special days of three of the patron saints of the British Isles.
March 1 is Saint David's Day.
Saint David is the patron (or special) saint of Wales and on that day a leek or a daffodil is worn by many Welsh people in his honour.
March 17 is remembered by Irish people as Saint Patrick's Day.
They wear the leaves of the shamrock in his honour.
April 23 is Saint George's Day.
He is the patron saint of England and is always shown as the dragon killer.
Watch out for his flag being flown from the church towers on this day.
Pancake Day
This year Shrove Tuesday fell on March 3.
This is the day before the special weeks of Lent before the days of Easter.
Once upon a time Shrove Tuesday was a holiday and there was feasting and fun in the streets before the quiet days of Lent.
Traditionally people made pancakes in order to use up their eggs and fat before the fasting of Lent.
Pancakes are simple to mix but quite tricky to make.
So, ask a grown-up to help you make some.
Serve your pancakes with slices of lemon and a sprinkling of sugar.
Daisy Day
‘Spring has come’, people say, ‘when you can put your foot on three daisies.’
Watch out for the day when the daisies in the grass show their flowers close enough together for you to feel that spring is really here.
But don't put your foot too firmly on them!
Easter Eggs
In many countries people give each other eggs as part of the celebration of spring.
Eggs are seen as the symbol of new life.
People may go from house to house with their gifts of eggs to greet each other again after the separation of winter.
Find out how to decorate your own Easter eggs on pages 30–31.
Who Is Persephone?
Have you ever read any of the tales people told in ancient Greece?
We call them Greek myths and they tell how the gods and their companions ruled and organised the world.
Ask at school or the library for a book of Greek myths and read the story of Persephone.
Find out what happened to her and why, according to the story, she comes back from the Underworld and brings spring to the earth.
Find Out
Which is the longest day of the year?
Which is the shortest day of the year?
On which day the spring Equinox falls?
On which day is the autumn Equinox?
BROWNIES ROUND THE WORLD
LUXEMBOURG
Luxembourg is a small country in western Europe.
But, even though it has about half the population of a city like Leeds, the people there speak a total of three languages!
FACT FILE
Luxembourg's capital city
History
Luxembourg has changed hands many times in the past.
In 1815, after 400 years of domination by many European powers, Luxembourg was made a Grand Duchy.
In 1867, Luxembourg gained complete independence from the Netherlands.
Many EEC (European Economic Community) institutions are based in his country, including the European Court of Justice.
Benelux
Luxembourg is a Benelux country.
Benelux is made up from Be lgium, the Ne therlands (Holland) and Lux embourg.
The underlined letters of each country make up the word.
These three countries agreed to cooperate soon after the Second World War.
They are all small and are the most crowded countries in mainland Europe.
Geography
Most of the land is low and flat — that's why Luxembourg is known as a Low Country, along with the other two Benelux countries.
But the north of the country has a range of pleasant, wooded  hills called the Ardennes.
Its highest point is 550m.
Industry
Iron and steel make up one quarter of Luxembourg's national income.
Food processing, chemicals, tyres and engineering are other important exports.
Most of its trade is with Germany, Belgium, France and other EEC countries.
Brownies
There are two Guide Associations in Luxembourg — the Association des Girl Guides Luxembourgeoises and the Letzeburger Guiden (Catholic Girl Guides).
In 1958 they signed an agreement to form the Bureau de  Liaison des Associations Guides du Luxembourg.
The Brownies of the Association des Girl Guides Luxembourgeoises get involved in many activities.
They have tree planting campaigns and regular fundraising for another building to be built on the grounds of the training centre.
Camping is a popular activity with the members of the Letzeburger Guiden.
Brownie camps are held annually and these are last for several days.
There is also an annual rally in May for Brownies, attended by members from all over the country.
Each rally has a different theme.
Uniform
The Association des Girl Guides Luxembourgeoises (1) Brownies wear brown trousers, a light brown shirt and dark brown tie.
A Letzeburger Guiden (2) Brownie wears a navy blue skirt and top with a royal blue tie.
Promise 1
I promise to do my best: To obey the Law of the Brownies and to do a good thing every day.
Law 1
A Brownie is friendly and happy at heart.
A Brownie is organised and cares for cleanliness.
A Brownie speaks the truth and listens to advice.
Promise 2
I promise to do my best to be obedient to God, to my parents and to the Brownie Law and to give happiness to somebody every day.
Law 2
A Brownie thinks first of other people.
A Brownie sees and hears everything.
A Brownie is always clean.
A Brownie always tells the truth.
A Brownie is always full of joy.
Recipe
Sour Cream Potatoes
Here's a dish from Luxembourg that is simple and quick to make.
The potatoes will have to be cooked for an hour at least, beforehand, depending on their size.
They will be reheated later.
If you are going to cook this dish during a Pack meeting, the person responsible for supplying the potatoes will have to do this.
The recipe serves four people.
You will need
2 large baked potatoes
75g (3oz) sour cream
2 medium eggs, hard-boiled
1 tbsp wine vinegar
½ tbsp caster sugar
½ tsp salt
black pepper
Method
Rub the hard-boiled eggs through sieve and add to the sour cream.
Slowly add the vinegar and stir in the sugar, salt and pepper.
Split the baked potatoes and pour the sauce over.
Or you can scoop out the flesh of the potatoes and mix it with the sauce.
Arrange the mixture back in the shells, place under a hot grill until lightly browned.
Signs of Spring
In spring, the weather becomes warmer and the days get lighter.
Young animals are born, flowers start to grow in a park or the country, keep your eyes open for these signs of spring.
Pretty primroses
FLOWER AND PLANTS
Primroses:These pretty pale yellow flowers grow in woods, hedges, fields and gardens.
Their lovely fresh smell reminds people of spring.
Daffodils:These are the most common and easily recognisable spring flowers.
Their golden colour brightens up many gardens and parks.
Bluebells:The name gives this flower's appearance away!
They're bright blue and bell-shaped.
They grow in clusters in woods and gardens and there are sometimes so many that they look like one huge blue carpet.
HAVE FUN OUT OF DOORS
Violets:Found in pastures woodland, heaths, and hedgerows, violets have five blue petals.
Although they look pretty, they have no scent.
Nettles:These plants grow on wasteland, beside tracks and roads in woods and hedges.
But don't go too near them — they are covered with stinging hairs.
Daisies:Daisies are very common.
They have a yellow centre and white petals which are often pink at the tips.
Daisies grow on garden lawns, roadsides, tracks and short grassland.
Have you ever made a daisy chain?
Lady's Smock:These flowers are made up of four pink or lilac veined petals and grow in small clusters.
You'll find them beside streams, in damp meadows and grassland..
A young rabbit
Remember — wild flowers are there for everyone to enjoy, so don't pick any
WILDLIFE
Lambs:Next time you're travelling on the motorway keep an eye out for young spring lambs in the surrounding fields.
Rabbits:Rabbits give birth to their young at this time of year.
You might see a group of these furry creatures in fields beside railway tracks.
Bees:Bumble bees are among the first insects to appear in the spring.
The ones you see may be queens searching for nest sites, such as old mouse holes in hedgebanks.
Hedgehogs:Hedgehogs hibernate during winter and wake up when the days start getting  warmer.
You might be lucky enough to see one in your garden, if you have one.
Butterflies:During winter, caterpillars form a chrysalis.
When spring comes they break through and emerge as butterflies (see pages 8–9).
The orange tip butterfly is a sure sign that spring has arrived.
Frogspawn:Take a look in ponds and streams during spring and you'll probably see what looks like a mass of clear jelly with little dots in it.
This is actually frogspawn and it will eventually grow into a tadpole and then a frog.
BIRDS
How many of these birds can you spot building nests this spring?
Blue Tits:Blue tits usually nest in garden nesting boxes.
They are yellow and blue in colour.
Robins:Robins build nests almost anywhere.
You'll find them in tree holes, tin cans or even on shelves in garages.
A robin feeding its young
Skylarks:The skylark builds its nest on the ground in fields and on moors, marshes and downs.
Pigeons:Railway stations, buildings and ledges are where you might find a pigeon's nest.
House Martins:Look under the eaves of your house for a cup-shaped nest.
It will probably belong to a housemartin.
Swallows:Swallows starting returning from Africa in April.
They like roosting on telegraph poles.
You should always watch nests from a distance.
Never disturb nests or baby birds and never take eggs from a nest — even if they seem abandoned.
THINGS TO DO
Go to your local library and try to find pictures of all the birds, animals and flowers we've mentioned.
Make a list of them and tick off the ones that you see during spring.
Can you find out about any others that can be seen at this time of year?
Keep a record of what you see in your own nature notebook.
Write down where and when you saw things and try to draw them too.
Make a spring collage with pictures from magazines of animals and flowers.
Count how many different types of butterfly you can find.
BE WIDE AWAKE
FLOWER ARRANGING
At this time of the year there are plenty of colourful flowers around.
Why not use some of them to make a lovely flower arrangement.
If you have a garden, ask your parents if you can pick some flowers for your arrangement.
Or you can buy some flowers from a shop or market stall.
Never pick wild flowers.
You will need
Scissors
A container to hold water, for watering flowers
A small misting spray to keep your arrangement in tip-top condition
Oasis.
This comes in many sizes and will hold your flowers at any angle you want.
You can buy it from florists.
Containers
Flowers can be arranged in almost any container.
You could put some small flowers, such as crocuses, in a pretty glass, or larger flowers in a copper kettle…as long as you've checked with your mum first!
If you want to be really adventurous, try making your own containers by using jam jars, washing-up liquid bottles, margarine tubs or yoghurt pots — once they're empty (and washed) of course!
Then you can paint or cover them to match the colour of the flowers you're going to put in them.
Your display will be top-heavy if the flowers you choose are too large for the container.
If you're using a tall container make sure you pick flowers with long stems — such as daffodils — to put into them.
A small container suits flowers with short stems, such as dandelions or primroses.
A wide container will need a block of oasis in the base.
This will stop your flowers flopping around and ruining your arrangement.
Just push the stems into the oasis and it will keep them in place.
You shouldn't need oasis in a narrow container as the flowers won't have room to move about.
Colour
There are two colour schemes that you could use for your arrangement.
You could use different shades of the same colour, rather than lots of different colours.
No two yellow flowers are exactly the same!
Or you could use different coloured flowers that match.
To make your arrangement more interesting, put some green foliage in between your flowers.
Any garden or  florist's should have plenty of different green leaves to choose from.
Arranging
Once you've chosen your flowers, cut the stems to size and trim any leaves that will get in the way.
Then think about where you're going to display them.
If your arrangement is going to be in a place where you will only see the front, make sure you put the shortest flowers in the front and the tallest at the back.
If your display will be in the centre of a table, your shortest flowers should be placed around the sides of the container, and the tallest in the middle.
Once you've arranged your flowers, make sure you keep your container topped up with water, and don't forget to refresh them with a quick spray.
HAVE YOU EVER…?
Ideas for you, your Six and your Pack to try
Decorated a hard-boiled egg for Easter?
Made and tossed a pancake?
Grown a plant from a cutting?
Seen a butterfly land on a flower?
Arranged some flowers in a vase for your mum on Mother's Day?
Celebrated a patron saint's day?
Helped at home with the spring cleaning?
Gone for a walk in a park or the country to see what wild flowers and plants you can find?
Grown your own vegetables?
Read about why eggs are important at Easter?
Seen frog spawn in a pond?
Held an egg-rolling competition, using hard-boiled eggs?
Jane's New Shoes
Jane was so excited, she looked at her watch every minute.
‘For goodness sake, Jane!’ said Mum.
‘The coach doesn't leave till nine!’
At last it was time.
As Mum was handing Jane her lunch, she looked down and paused.
‘Go upstairs and change into trainers’ she said.
‘Those shoes are quite unsuitable and you know it!’
‘Oh,Mum !’ argued Jane.
She did so want to wear her new shoes.
‘I'll take care of them, honest.
I promise I won't kick stones.’
‘Trainers!’ said Mum, firmly.
When Mum used that tone, there was no arguing.
Jane stamped sulkily upstairs for the trainers.
‘I wanted to show Laura,’ she thought, rebelliously.
A good idea popped into her head.
It was really a bad idea, but Jane liked it.
She emptied her bag and popped the new shoes inside, covered by her cagoule.
With the sitter and picnic box on top, no one could tell they were there.
‘I'll change on the coach,’ thought Jane, hurrying downstairs.
‘Good girl,’ said Mum.
‘You'll be much comfier in those and it doesn't matter how messy they get.’
The coach was just pulling in as they arrived.
‘Come on!’ called Laura.
‘Let's get the back seat!’
The journey to the Theme Park took ages but the Brownies didn't mind.
They sang all the way.
Suddenly Jane remembered her shoes and slipped them on.
‘Brill!’ admired Laura.
The shoes were made of shiny black leather with ankle straps and tiny heels.
They had neat black bows on the front.
‘My first pair of high heels,’ said Jane, proudly, because although they weren't very high, it sounded grown-up.
She kicked her trainers under the seat, in case Brown Owl had funny ideas like Mum.
The park was crowded.
‘Each adult is responsible for six Brownies,’ Brown Owl said.
‘So stay with our Leader.
Meet for lunch at 12 near the Log Flume entrance.’
Jane and Laura's group went with Snowy Owl.
‘The Dragon first!’ shouted Melanie, so they joined the long line snaking round the barriers.
It was a beautiful sunny day and Jane was nearly bursting with happiness.
‘I do like Brownies!’ she thought, ‘we do such lovely things.’
Some of the rides made Jane feel dizzy and there was one awful moment on the Pirate Ship when she thought she was going to be sick!
But most of the time she had tremendous fun.
Just one little thing bothered her, though she tried not to think about it.
Her heels felt  sore, and because there was so much walking, they seemed to be getting worse as the morning went on.
At noon, the exhausted Pack gathered together and Brown Owl led them to a shady area.
Everyone flopped on the grass, glad to be out in the sun, and began lunch.
‘Enjoying yourself?’ asked Brown Owl, sitting down nearby.
Laura nodded, her mouth full of egg sandwich.
‘It's brill!’ she said.
‘Especially The Beast!’
It was pitch dark and it went really fast but I wasn't scared!’
Brown Owl shuddered.
‘You wouldn't catch me in there! she declared, and the girls giggled.
Suddenly Brown Owl bent down and looked at Jane's foot.
‘You're bleeding, Jane!’ she frowned.
‘Did you have a fall?’
Jane shook her head.
‘Take your shoes off’, said Brown Owl, so Jane did.
Brown Owl made a sympathetic noise when she saw the two huge blisters.
Jane realised just how much they hurt and tears sprang into her eyes.
‘Not the best shoes for a day out,’ remarked Brown Owl as she opened her first aid kit.
‘You wear trainers at Brownies, why didn't you come in those?’
Jane went red.
‘I did,’ she said.
‘They're on the coach.’
It didn't take long for Brown Owl to find out the whole story.
‘Hmmm,’ she said.
‘I'll just pop and see if the coach is open.
You can't walk around in those flimsy things all afternoon, they'll rub your blisters, even with plasters on.’
Brown Owl came back empty-handed.
The coach had gone on another job.
At home-time, a different driver was waiting with another coach, so there were no trainers under the back seat.
It was the last straw.
Jane had spent the afternoon sitting by the paddling pool, with her feet in the water to ease the pain.
She'd missed all the fun because she couldn't face any more walking.
Worse still, Snowy had missed out too, because a grown-up had to stay with Jane.
Snowy said she didn't mind, but Jane still felt upset.
Jane worried all the way home about telling Mum, but she didn't have to say anything.
As soon as she climbed off the coach, she burst into tears, and Mum took in the situation at a glance.
‘I'm sorry,’ sobbed Jane, hobbling painfully home.
‘I promise I'll never disobey again.
Will you take my new shoes away from me to teach me a lesson?’
Her Mum smiled at the woebegone face.
‘I think you've already learned it, don't you?’ she said, gently, and Jane nodded.
PINBOARD
DISCOVERER BADGE
We have just done the Discoverer badge.
It is quite a new badge and involves learning about seven animals and seven plants.
It was good because every week a Brownie brought in a pet.
We had ducks, a hamster, stick insects, a guinea pig, a budgie, a dog, a cat and even some baby rabbits.
I liked learning about the plants.
We also had to do trails which were lots of fun.
I'd recommend this badge to other Brownies but it's better to do in a group.
ANIMAL MAGIC
Do you know that elephants ‘purr’?
Or that a rhino's nose system is larger than its brain?
If you do you've probably been watching OWL TV after school.
Presented by Michaela Strachan, the programme has been  homing in on different varieties of animals and conservation projects in countries all around the world.
If you want to find out more amazing animal facts, you need to get hold of the book which goes with the series.
The Owl TV Book of Animals costs £3.99 and you can get it from most bookshops.
It's full of great colour photographs and is all about endangered animals.
At the back is a list of names and addresses of conservation organisations you can either join or write to for more information.
Members of the 69th Doncaster Pack relax after holding their first Coffee Evening.
They raised £100 in the process, which they used to order their flag.
PRAYER
Dear God ,
Thank you for our homes, our mums, dads, brothers and sisters and our families.
Thank you for our pets and all the flowers and trees.
Thank you God for everything.
POETRY
MY LATEST FAD
When I was a little girl
I had a secret dream.
It was to join the Brownies
And be part of the Brownie scene.
I wasn't sure how Mum would feel
About my latest fad,
But I really needn't have worried —
She seemed to be quite glad.
So off I went to Brownies,
So smart when I left home.
I went as a shy seven-year-old,
But I came back as a Gnome.
The writer of this month's Star Letter has won a storybook.
If you could like the chance to win a prize, get writing now.
Letters
PERFECT HOSTESSES
We've adopted the local elderly people's home.
We make cakes and serve tea for our Hostess badges.
Last Christmas we all went to sing carols and we had a party there.
The people are very interesting.
Annie is 100 years old.
She has telegrams from the Queen and the Houses of Parliament.
SPONSORED ANIMALS
My pack has sponsored some animals — a natterjack toad and a sand lizard.
We have sponsored the toad for two years and the lizard for one.
This is now we raised the money — we had a sponsored silent sweet suck.
Before that, though, we went round asking people to sponsor us.
On the evening of the silent sweet suck we had saucers of about five sweets.
We had to keep quiet all through the evening.
We managed to do it and after that we had to get the money from people who sponsored us.
I raised £3.50.
A DOG'S LIFE
I went with my Pack to the Guide Dog Centre at Wokingham.
We were shown all the guide dogs — yellow labradors, black labradors and German shepherd dogs.
We saw the obstacle course where the dogs learn to imagine they are six feet tall so that they can keep their blind owners safe from hurting themselves on low objects.
We also saw a film about how the dogs are trained.
They live with a puppy walker for the first two years.
During this time they learn to live with a family and to behave well.
Then they go to the centre for special training and wait until a blind person needs them.
One important thing the dogs learn is not to chase cats, so a big cat lives at the centre with them.
We visited the guide dog shop and my favourite souvenirs were the two posters of Ziggy, a German shepherd puppy, and Hamish, a yellow labrador puppy.
When Katharine McGettigan sent in a letter to BROWNIE it won her the Star letter prize in the November issue.
Here she is with Eagle Owl, Jane Munt, and the three books she received.
When Little Owl Barbara McGlone married Andrew Hirst, the 23rd Wakefield Ossett Methodist Pack turned up with a flower each and presented the couple with a horseshoe.
BUTTERFLY BALL
There's a brilliant new musical called The Butterfly Children touring all over England.
It's ideal for children aged over five and adults who are young at heart.
This exciting pop musical takes you on an adventure deep into the woods.
Once there you'll meet the naughty Moth Gang, join in the singing and watch some great dance routines.
And there are lots of Butterfly Children souvenirs available, such as T-shirts and cassette tapes which include all the songs from the show.
The Butterfly Children 1992 UK tour has already started but it's still got lots of places to visit.
For details of when The Butterfly Children will be dropping into your area ring Del on 0329 238449/233088.
NATIONAL SPRING CLEAN
From April 3–12, the Tidy Britain Group are inviting people all over the country to take part in the National Spring Clean 1992.
It's your chance to do something fro the environment and show that you really care about the damage litter causes.
If you'd like to take part in the campaign to spring clean the UK, information, ideas, promotional kits and posters can be obtained by writing to:.
Or ring the hotline number on .
Narcissus
Do you know anyone who thinks they're really beautiful?
This Greek myth tells us the story of Narcissus who thought he was the most beautiful young man in all of Ancient Greece.
Every morning, the first thing Narcissus did when he woke up was to look at himself in the mirror.
He'd admire his long, blond hair, his bright blue eyes and his perfect white teeth.
Narcissus's parents just did not know what to do with him!
For although he was only 16 years old, he was in truth, really good-looking.
Many girls fell in love with him but could only admire him from afar.
It wasn't only humans who were bowled over by Narcissus.
Greece was also filled with charming spirits called nymphs who lived by the rivers and springs and guarded the trees in the forests.
One of these nymphs was called Echo.
Echo once angered Hera, queen of the gods, by playing a trick.
Hera punished Echo by making her unable to speak, except to always repeat the last words anybody said to her.
So when Echo tried to tell Narcissus how she felt about him, she was only able to use his words.
When she met him one day in the forest, Narcissus said to her: ‘I suppose you are yet another of these women who find me so very attractive.’
‘So very attractive,’ Echo replied.
‘I thought so,’ Narcissus said.
‘Well you're wasting your time, I'm afraid.’
‘I'm afraid,’ Echo said.
‘And so you ought to be,’ Narcissus continued.
‘To be absolutely honest, even if you were Aphrodite herself, I wouldn't let you come near me.’
‘Come near me!’
Echo cried.
‘Are you deaf or something?
I juts told you I wouldn't.
Now go away!’
‘Away!’
Echo moaned.
Realizing that her plight was hopeless, Echo fled from the wood, tears pouring down her cheeks.
By chance, Aphrodite, the goddess of love, saw what happened.
Narcissus had, by his words and deeds, made himself love's enemy.
Once Narcissus had fallen under the spell of Aphrodite he was lost.
On his way home, Narcissus discovered a pool of crystal water in a clearing in the forest.
It was a hot, sunny day and he knelt down to take a drink.
That was when he saw what was — in his eyes — the most beautiful boy in the world.
His mouth fell open.
So did the boy's.
His eyes blinked with astonishment.
So did the boy's.
He smiled.
The boy smiled back.
Narcissus had fallen in love with his own reflection.
He reached out and touched the surface of the water but the reflection shimmered and disappeared.
He leaned over to look into the pool and, losing his balance, fell into the deep water.
Narcissus was never seen again.
Aphrodite took pity on Narcissus and turned his body into a flower to remind everyone what had happened.
And to this day, narcissus flowers can be found growing wild in the woods and sprouting around the banks of a silent pool.
Freda & Friends
A breezy, sunny springtime day
Says Susie: ‘Let's go out to play.
‘It's far too nice to stay inside
‘We'll take my bike out for a ride.’
So Susie cycles up and down
Along a road well out of town.
While Freda watches from the path
And waves each time she pedals past.
A friend of Mum's, nice Carol Tring
— With toddler Mike and much shopping —
Draws near and flops down on the seat.
She gasps: ‘These shoes do hurt my feet’.
‘What's more, I really feel quite ill
‘I think I must have caught a chill;
‘My head aches and my throat is sore
‘I cannot go on any more.’
Quick!
Susie works out what to do:
‘Don't worry, we'll take care of you.’
She puts the bags on to her bike.
Freda looks after little Mike.
Then Susie wheels the bike along.
Beside her, Carol's hanging on.
Soon Carol's home comes into view
They're home!
She says a big thank you.
indoor gardens
Just because you haven't got a garden, it doesn't mean that you have to miss out on growing your own plants.
Try some of our ideas and soon you'll have your own indoor garden.
To start with, you'll need a cutting from a healthy, fully grown plant.
You could either ask a gardening friend if they could give you one or you could try and take one yourself.
Cut just under the leaf, where it joins the stem.
Place the cutting in water, keeping it topped up.
Soon you'll see roots growing.
When there are plenty of roots, transfer the cutting to a small pot of compost.
Your parents may be able to give you some home-prepared compost.
If not, you'll need to buy some.
The pot must have holes in the base for good drainage.
Stand the cutting in strong light, keeping it damp without drowning it!
When it has grown strong and healthy, you can display it in various ways.
HANGING GARDEN
You can make a lovely garden from an old bird cage or small animal cage.
Ask a grown-up to attach a hooked chain to the centre top bar.
Suspend a cage from a strong hook in the ceiling and fill it with potted plants, preferably the trailing kind.
As the leaves grow, train them through the bars for a lovely effect.
TRAY GARDEN
Ask a grown-up for a shallow plastic container — a seedling tray from a garden centre or a pasting tray from a decorator's shop would be ideal.
It must have holes.
Stand it on two blocks of wood, fill it with compost, then transfer some of your cuttings to their new home.
BOTTLE GARDEN
Any large lidded glass container makes a good bottle garden.
Scrub the container inside and out with warm, soapy water and dry it thoroughly.
Remove any lining from inside its lid.
Using a cardboard tube and funnel, put in a layer of washed gravel as drainage, then one layer of charcoal lumps and another of moist peat or compost.
The tube will prevent the glass becoming soiled.
Choose small, healthy, slow-growing plants.
Avoid flowering ones.
Insert your plants gently with a hooked wire tool.
Moisten the compost with water and replace the lid.
Stand the bottle in a shady, warm place.
If condensation hasn't formed at the top of the bottle in a few days, add a little more water.
If you can't see through the glass because of condensation, remove the lid for a few days.
After this, you need only water the garden sparingly every few months.
But you must remove rotting matter regularly to prevent infection.
EDIBLE GARDENS
Herb Garden:Using a skewer, poke holes in the base of some washed plastic tubs.
You may need a grown-up's help.
Fill the tub with compost, leaving 1cm clear at the top.
Sprinkle on mint, parsley, sage, basil and thyme seeds.
Cover them with more compost and water lightly.
Put them on a window-sill and water them every two or three days.
The compost mustn't dry out, but shouldn't be soggy.
Cotton Wool garden:Mustard and cress seeds grow readily on damp cotton wool.
You can either grown them in a pot, or sprinkle them on the cotton wool in the shape of your name or a pattern.
decorating eggs
At Easter time it is a tradition to give eggs as presents.
These gifts represent the coming of new life into the world after the winter.
Chocolate eggs are good to eat and you can decorate boiled eggs too.
Or you can try making decorated eggs that will last much longer.
COLOURFUL BREAKFAST EGGS
The simplest decoration is to put a few drops of vegetable dye into the water when you boil and egg.
It's best to use white eggs for this.
Experiment with different dye-stuffs.
Wrap an egg in an onion skin for a yellowy-browny colour.
Try boiling eggs with beetroot to make them pink.
Coffee grains will dye eggshells brown.
Draw features and patterns on the eggs with a pencil before you boil and dye them.
EGG PEOPLE
Hard boil your eggs with a few drops of pink dye or coffee grains to make them skin-coloured.
When the eggs are cool, paint faces on them with felt-tip pens.
Put a little glue on the top and sides and stick on cotton wool hair.
Stand your eggheads in egg-cups or make circles of paper collars to stand them on.
BLOWING EGGS
If you want to decorate an egg to keep, you must first take out its inside or it will go bad.
Here's how to do it.
1
Make a small hole at one end with a pin.
2
Make a larger hole at the other end by working outward around the pin hole.
Make sure the pin pierces the inner skin of the egg.
3
Have a saucer ready to catch the yolk and white of the egg.
Blow through the small hole so the contents come out of the larger hole on to the saucer.
You could use the contents later to make scrambled egg for yourself.
4
Run clean tap water through the egg to rinse it.
Stand it in an egg-cup to drain.
5
Place the blown egg upright on a piece of dough or clay while you decorate it.
DECORATING BLOWN EGGS
Paint patterns on your eggshell with felt-tip pens.
When the paint has dried, varnish it over with clear nail varnish to keep the colours bright and shiny.
WAX-PATTERNED EGGS
Draw patterns on the eggshells with a wax crayon or the pointed end of a candle.
Leave the eggs in cold water overnight.
When you boil the eggs for breakfast, the wax will melt, leaving a lighter pattern on the coloured shell
JEWELLED EGGS
In Russia there was once a very famous jeweller called Faberge.
Each Easter he made wonderful bejewelled eggs for the tsars or kings of Russia.
One year he placed a tiny train inside an egg to celebrate the opening of the famous Trans-Siberian railway.
If you ever go to Moscow you can see these amazing jewelled eggs.
Try making your own jewelled eggs.
Collect together sequins, tiny glass beads, tiny shells, bits of lace and braid and ribbon.
Get some tinsel and some glitter dust if you can.
You will need a good, reasonably quick-drying glue as well.
Paint a blown egg all over in one colour and varnish it.
When it is quite dry, use a thin stick or toothpick to draw your pattern on the egg in glue.
Put little dots and lines where you want the ‘jewels’ to go.
Stick the ‘jewels’ on to the glue.
You may need to use tweezers to pick up the pieces and position them on your egg.
PATCHWORK EGGS
This way of decorating blown eggs started in Germany and went from there to America.
You need some tiny scraps of cotton cloth, some clean, firm glue and a small damp cloth.
Make the patchwork on the shells by spreading the glue over a small area, laying on scraps of cloth and pressing them down with the damp cloth.
Glue the next area and repeat the process until the whole egg is covered.
Let the egg dry and then cover it with a layer of varnish to make sure all the edges stay firmly stuck down.
DISPLAYING YOUR EGGS
To display the jewelled egg, knot a thread at one end, run it through a pretty bead, up through the egg, through another bead or two and then make a loop with the top to hang the egg.
You can hang two or more eggs together on one thread with divider beads between them (painted macaroni makes a good divider).
Or you could hang your eggs on a white-painted twig ‘tree’ standing in earth in a flower pot.
FUN FOOD
This year, instead of buying eggs for your family and friends, have a go at making your own.
Or if you want to do something really different, try making our chocolate fish.
EASTER EGGS
Ingredients (makes ten eggs)
175g (6oz) ground almonds
100g (4oz) honey
225g (8oz) icing sugar
1 egg white
yellow food colouring
chocolate vermicelli
Put the almonds into a bowl and add the honey.
Mix them together so that you have a sticky paste.
Divide it into ten pieces.
Leave them to one side.
Put the icing sugar into another bowl.
Beat the egg white so it begins to get frothy.
Add it to the icing sugar, together with a few drops of yellow food colouring.
Mix well and divide it into ten pieces.
Take a piece of the almond paste and flatten it in the palm of your hand.
Put some of the icing sugar mixture on top and carefully mould the paste round it so that it covers the icing sugar.
Make the paste into an egg shape and roll it in the chocolate vermicelli.
When all the eggs are done wrap them separately in clingfilm.
CHOCOLATE FISH
In France it is traditional to exchange chocolate fish instead of eggs.
Before making these fish you must make a mould.
Mould
You will need a strip of stiff drawing paper, about 2cm x 30cm.
Fold the paper in half and then make two more folds in the doubled ends.
Holding the strip in the middle, run the two halves in turn between a pencil and your thumb, so that each half of paper is curved.
Fasten the two ends with sticky tape and push against the fold lines to make a fish shape.
FISH
Ingredients
A small bar of chocolate, about 50g (2oz), per fish
Vegetable oil or butter
Brush the inside of the fish mould with vegetable oil or butter so that the chocolate doesn't stick to it.
Heat a saucepan of water.
When it is hot, put an ovenproof plate on top of the saucepan.
Put a piece of kitchen foil on the plate and then the mould on top of that.
Break the chocolate into pieces and put them inside the mould.
The chocolate will melt and start to spread.
Make sure the whole base of the mould is covered.
Remove the plate from the saucepan and let the chocolate cool.
Take away the mould and your fish is complete.
Rainbow GUIDE EXTRA
Volume 1 Number 2
MARCH 1992
Here is Rainbow Rabbit.
She is visiting a wood.
There are 5 things wrong in the wood.
Help Rainbow to find them.
The answers are on page 7.
Virginia Creeper
When God made the plants that are on this Earth, first He made their stalks and leaves.
Then He made the blossoms.
He painted the petals of the flowers in the loveliest colours.
As God passed by, the flowers stretched out their stalks so that He would notice those which He hadn't painted.
One little plant grew at the foot of an old, bare rock.
She was so shy that she couldn't look up when God passed over her, so God missed her and did not paint her blossom.
The rock, at whose feet the plant grew, complained about the heat of the sun.
So the kindly plant grew to cover the rock with her green leaves.
She crept up all over it.
The rock thanked her for helping it.
In the autumn, God sent down an angel to see all the beautiful flowers He had made.
When the angel came to the rock he saw that it was covered by a lovely green creeping plant.
‘How beautiful!’ he exclaimed.
The little creeper heard him and blushed.
She blushed a most beautiful crimson — more beautiful than all the flowers.
And every year the little creeper remembers the words of the angel and blushes again as she thinks of them.
And that is why the virginia creeper plant turns a lovely red colour in the autumn.
Action Rhymes
Here are some rhymes to move to.
Make up your own movements.
Shadow
Shadow, shadow curled up small,
I can make you grow up tall.
Now I'm jumping
stretched and wide,
Shadow, shadow at my side.
Tiptoe slowly, shadow go!
I can't lose my shadow though.
(Act this rhyme with a partner.)
Stretching
Up we stretch on tiptoe
Then down to touch the floor.
Stretch our arms up high again,
Then do it all once more.
(Repeat the actions.
Get faster each time.)
A Secret
There's something about me
That I'm knowing.
There's something about me
That isn't showing.
I'm growing!
Plant the Seed (sing to the tune of Mulberry bush 
We are going to plant a seed
Plant a seed, plant a seed.
We are going to plant a seed
In our little garden green.
First we plant it with our finger
With our finger, without finger
First we plant it with our finger
In our little garden green.
Then the summer sun will shine.
Then the little flower will grow.
Then the winter winds will blow.
Then the little flower will die.
Wild Flowers
Here are some pictures of wild flowers.
You might see some of them growing near your home.
Tick the right box when you see one of these flowers.
Never pick any wild flowers.
Leave them for other people to enjoy.
daisy
dandelion
buttercup
cow parsley
forget-me-not
violet
bluebell
harebell
thistle
foxglove
primrose
red clover
daffodil
Grow a bean
Watching plants grow is fun.
Here's how to grow a broad bean.
You will need
a jam jar
blotting paper
a broad bean seed
water
1
Roll up the blotting paper.
Put it in the jar.
Pour a little bit of water in the jar.
2
Put a bean in between the paper and the jar.
3
Put the jar in a dark cupboard.
Look at it every day.
Keep the blotting paper damp.
4
Put the bean on a window-sill when it has started to grow.
How high does your bean grow?
BITS AND PIECES
ANSWERS TO IN THE WOOD
1
Flowers are growing upside down.
2
There is a hedgehog in a tree.
Hedgehogs don't climb trees.
3
The clouds are pink
4
The squirrel is eating an ice cream.
5
Penguins don't live in woods.
They live at the South Pole.
A Rainbow from Maidenhead makes masks at Berkshire's Fun Day.
When Rachel, Little Owl of the 1st Spalding Brownies got married, the Rainbows and Brownies went along to give her and her husband their best wishes.
Rainbow Rabbit would love to read your letters and poems and see your photographs.
So if you've got any, send them to us and we'll try to publish them.
FIREMAN SAM
Rainbows will love a new stage show which has already started a national tour.
Fireman Sam Ready for Action is great fun.
You can meet all Sam's friends from the popular TV programme.
And you'll see some new friends too — Penny Morris, the new female firefighter and Bentley the Robot.
The star of the show is Jupiter 999 , Sam's fire engine.
It has a real siren and flashing lights.
And, as well as having fun, you'll be learning about fire safety too.
Would your unit like to go along and see the show?
If the answer is yes, ask your Guider to write off for more information.
The address is: Layston Productions, The Spendlove Centre, Charlbury, Oxford, OX7 3PQ.
All Change
When things grow they change.
They might become bigger.
They might change colour.
Or they might change into something else.
Some things change colour as they grow.
Colour these pictures to show how these things change.
Some things change their size and shape as they grow.
Tadpoles turn into frogs.
Caterpillars turn into butterflies.
Little seeds turn into huge flowers.
When Rebecca was a baby she looked like this.
Now Rebecca is five and she looks like this.
How has Rebecca changed?
What did you look like when you were a baby?
Fill in the spaces to show how you have grown.
Ask your Rainbow friends to find photos of themselves as babies.
Look at the pictures and try to guess who is who.