

Front cover forms figure 3 in our focus on US credit marketing practice.
See page 26
CHAIRMAN
Earlier this year I reported in this column the Institute's decision to terminate its contract with the Institute of Purchasing and Supply and to form its own Secretariat.
I can now confirm that the termination date of the contract has been agreed as 30 September 1992.
In addition, I am delighted to announce that our Director General will be Peter Rowe, who has been the Institute's Head of External Affairs since 1986.
Through his work with the Technical Advisory Committee Peter has done much to raise our standing with Government and the media, a task that he will continue to fulfil in his new role.
I am sure you will join me in wishing him every success through this period of transition and the challenges that lie ahead.
These challenges are by no means just domestic.
As this is the first journal of this most heralded of years — 1992 — it would seem appropriate to mention our links with Europe.
I write this having just returned from a meeting in Frankfurt of the Council of the Federation of European Credit Management Associations (FECMA).
Eight European countries were represented at the meeting, and apart from the official business conducted there, it was extremely useful to chat informally about matters of common interest.
With the development of the internal market, it becomes increasingly important for us to make contact with credit professionals in other European countries and, where possible, to join forces with them.
This happened most recently when all the constituent FECMA associations agreed that the Institute's views on an EC proposal for a Directive on the Processing of Personal Data be submitted to the European Commission as the official FECMA view.
To express the view of a professional institute is one thing, but how much more effective it is to respond with a collective European voice.
I am convinced that FECMA has enormous potential and my personal hope that eventually it will spread its net far beyond its current European boundaries.
As 1991 fades from view, the timing of this issue gives me an excellent opportunity to wish all of you a Merry Christmas and a Happy, Healthy and Prosperous New Year.
But before you pack your briefcase, heave a sight of relief, turn out the lights and close your office door behind you, remember to complete the enclosed booking form for our National Conference on 4 March.
We have, as always, an excellent programme which no credit professional should miss.
Peter Allen
When the Institute sets up its own Secretariat on 1 October 1992, its new Director General will be Peter Rowe.
Peter had been Head of External Affairs at Easton House since 1986, and through his work with the Institute's Technical Advisory Committee has done much to raise our standing with the Government and the media.
Earlier this year he led the ICM's campaign for a change in the VAT bad debt relief rules.
More recently he has played a major role in persuading the Department of Employment to publish, in co-operation with the Institute, the information pack ‘Making the cash flow’.
Peter, 45, is a graduate in Chemistry of Queen Mary College, London.
Prior to joining the Institute, he spent much of his career with the Greater London Council and Inner London Education Authority, including spells as Head of the Private Office of the Leader of ILEA and in the management of the Authority's colleges and polytechnics.
Peter is married and has two teenaged daughters.
Peter Rowe
ICM COUNCIL MEMBERS
LETTERS
One in, all in
My pleasure at seeing my name appear in the November journal as a new member by examination was tempered by the long list of those gaining membership by direct entry — indeed, a list of comparable length with those graduate members.
On further inspection of the employers of those direct-entry members you will not that many work for banks, building societies and other large firms.
I suspect that none of those companies would employ someone in a role of an accountant without proper examinations, or at least a part-qualified accountant with intentions to complete, yet they seem to be happy to promote staff to achieve ‘recognition’ by our Institute with formal testing of aptitudes, skills and abilities.
The conclusion is surely that they do not place great store by our profession or its body.
I am aware that the Institute is making efforts to bring about change, but I cannot but help feel that my and my fellow graduates' achievement is somewhat devalued by the continued willingness of the Institute to adopt almost as many new members as it can.
T J Davies Leicester
No endorsement of agents
I write to make some corrections to the article ‘Adjustment claim services and ECGD’ which was published in your November issue.
ECGD would like to point  out that it actually has no ‘official inspectors’, as quoted in the article, who arrange the recovery of goods in cases of buyer default.
When appropriate ECGD engages agents to effect examination and resale of unpaid goods.
ECGD instructs such agents on a purely commercial and non-exclusive basis.
ECGD does not require these agents to have any special qualifications as claimed by the Director of Adjustment Claims Services Ltd.
The fact that ECGD may have instructed them should not be taken as an endorsement of their expertise, official or otherwise.
Anthony Hasluck ECGD Press Office
Miscellaneous matters
How refreshing to see pages of letters last month; plenty of scope for further correspondence, to which I wish to contribute as follows.
Sorry M J Finch, but I feel your views a little narrow; of course trade references are limited to the questions asked, so ask the right ones!
Also, accounts are all very well, but even 1990 figures are going to be 12 months out of date and there is still a recession.
Finally could I suggest that if the ‘wolf pack’ had your credit policy and implications explained to them, then credit refusals might go down a little easier or not even occur.
As usual Derek Scott makes some good points.
I would only add that although the behaviour of some of our major construction companies is a little short of criminal in some cases, no amount of legislation will change things unless subcontractors are prepared to band together and take a much firmer stance against some of their tactics (they could start by employing members of the Institute perhaps).
I share Ken Cook's desperation at the state of the court system.
It needs a huge injection of cash to equip it with a fully computerised national IT system, more and better trained staff and commercially experienced management.
Meanwhile, if you must use it, follow it to the letter (and grit teeth, cross fingers etc ).
J S French Jay Fasteners Limited
‘Excellent’
I have now been a member of the Institute since my election in April 1991 and feel I must compliment you on Credit Management .
I not only feel it to be the most relevant magazine to the industry I work in — the consumer finance sector — but have also found the appointments section excellent, especially as I secured new employment through it after being made redundant.
This contrasts greatly with another professional publication that I receive which is stodgy and insists on corresponding via an employer's address.
This means that when I was out of work for six weeks and most needed the publication, I could not receive it.
M McRedmond Hoghton, Preston
A matter of balance
I appreciate your comments on certain issues that you extracted from my letter headed ‘advertising mania’ in the December edition of Credit Management .
It appears that you have taken the real content of my personal views out of their true context and treated them with an interpretation that I least expected.
I accept your reasons for the visit and interview you afforded Lewis Group, but one must admit that the end result has been an indirect advertisement for the Lewis Group of companies which does not necessarily imply a ‘consideration’ for services rendered or anything similar.
I certainly had no sinister thinking on the subject.
I do accept the need for advertising, but as I said, there was a need for ‘a sense of balance’ not, as you have construed, having a journal completely free of advertising.
As regards utilising the services of third parties for debt collection, you have once again assumed the worse scenario as if I meant their complete extinction, which I quite clearly stated ‘less dependent’.
Yes, advertisers do keep coming back, precisely because they are currently finding it extremely difficult to secure worthwhile business as more and more companies are cost saving and doing all their collections and even legal work in house.
I trust I have been able to dilute any misgivings that my letter may have stirred.
I am still 100 per cent behind Credit Management and all that it stands for.
Malcolm Coelho London
The Editor writes: Well, that's a relief, Malcolm — we would hate to have lost you.
Seriously, though, it is important that the matter of advertising is raised every so often, for a number of reasons.
One is that Credit Management functions to some extent as a trade paper as well as in its primary role as an Institute Journal.
This I think is greatly to the credit of ICM, provided, as you say, that we can retain the appropriate balance.
It is only fair to our advertisers to put on record that, pretty well without exception, they have a lively appreciation of and respect for the constraints under which an Institute journal necessarily operates.
Emphasis on training
I find Mr P Winger's letter in the December issue indicative of the naive attitude some outsiders might still hold of credit management.
I am saddened to find that such thinking still exists within the profession.
The object of any examination is to produce members of proven ability.
No company would permit an unqualified accountant to audit its books, no matter how well he presents himself, and no patient would allow a doctor without qualifications to operate on him just because he has plenty of ‘implied’ ability.
Cash flow is the lifeblood of any company.
Recession makes it even more essential to have properly trained staff and leaders who portray credit management as a necessary tool — and whilst on the subject of dictionary definitions, my dictionary defines ‘profession’ as an occupation requiring special training, whilst ‘professional’is a person who engages in some activity also pursued by amateurs.
Rowena U Davis Horton Village Berkshire
Let's get the story right
Lest the wrong impression be given by Mr P Winger's letter (December CM ), I would like to respond, particularly with regard to his comments concerning the thesis application he made.
Clearly, timescale problems will always arise when requirements for any form of examination are changed.
However, having studied the file, the facts of the matter are that Mr Wingert proceeded with is written work without seeing the required approval of subject and content from the Membership Committee.
During the time which elapsed after his initial registration (and the then delayed approval of his proposals), in line with Council's determination to raise entry standards and tighten up membership requirements overall, the thesis content expected was increased to 10,000 words.
In these circumstances the Committee felt justified in insisting that the new requirement be met.
Finally, on the general and perhaps more important point of his letter, the Committee's firmly held view is that the Institute's future lies in attracting an increasing number of members qualified via the examination route.
In parallel, and in the shorter-term, acceptance will still be possible for those over 30 years of age with appropriate and verified management experience over a period of at least five years.
B Freedman Chairman, ICM Membership and Recruitment Committee
The right image
Thank you for my copy of the December issue, which as always has a lively and readable quality, with a prestigious appearance that I think well-serves the image our Institute would wish to present to the world.
I remember when ‘our magazine’ was a wordy quarto-size publication inside grey covers.
You must of course deal with the odd letters of criticism, but I trust that these can be viewed in proportion to those (probably thousands) of satisfied members, who are nevertheless unlikely to write in every month to say so.
T Eaton Christchurch
Equal treatment of creditors
In reply to BS Berlyn's letter in the December issue of Credit Management where he complain about a creditor's inability to enforce judgment against its debtor when a winding-up petition has been presented against that debtor, I can only say that he is ignoring one of the fundamental concepts of English insolvency law, that all creditors should be treated equally when their debtor becomes insolvent.
There are of course classes of preferential and pre-preferential creditors, but I do not propose to expand on that here.
It has long been the case that where a company is would up by the court, the liquidation is deemed to commence at the date of presentation of the petition.
Furthermore the creditors receive an element of protection in the hiatus period between presentation of the petition and the making of the winding-up order insofar as any transactions which take place in that period are void against the liquidator.
There is a substantial body of legal precedent in support of this doctrine, the most well known of which is probably the Gray's Inn Construction case.
It is well settled law that the exercise by the Court of its discretionary power to validate a post-petition payment does not turn on whether the company was or was not damaged by the payment.
The payment will only be permitted if it can be seen that its purpose is to benefit the company.
That is, it must be paid out properly   and responsibly with a bona fide view to the assistance of the company (re Webb Electrical Limited ).
The court will not validate a transaction where there are serious doubts as to the company's solvency, such that continued trading could reduce the value of the assets to the prejudice of the company's creditors or shareholders, such as by continuing to incur trading losses.
In the Gray's Inn case, the bank involved had to repay the liquidator a sum equal to the estimated trading loss in the post-petition period, because it had continued to allow the company to operate its accounts.
This principle stems from the desire to preserve the value of the company's assets for the benefit of all creditors once it becomes insolvent.
Further protection is given to other creditors (as Mr Berlyn mentions in his letter) in that once a winding-up petition has been presented, the court may order that any other pending action or proceeding against the company should be restrained.
Clearly the presentation of the winding-up petition is a prima facie indication of a company's insolvency and it would therefore be wholly inequitable for one creditor to be entitled to enforce his debt to the detriment of the other creditors.
It is symptomatic that the directors of insolvent companies ignore demands for payment, and frequently judgments are obtained where the proceedings have not been quite wrong for such judgment creditors to obtain any preferential treatment.
In addition, from a purely practical point of view it would not make sense for judgment creditors to be afforded preferential treatment in insolvencies.
Imagine the deluge of writs and summonses which would cascade upon the courts from creditors jostling to get to the front of the queue.
The courts have enough to do already, as I am sure Mr Berlyn would agree.
Alan R Price Wellingborough
Need for direct entry
I have always been a little concerned that one day direct entry will cease entirely.
We are getting closer and closer to entry by examination only.
Not for a moment do I want our standards to drop and I entirely advocate the stringent standards of the Recruitment Committee.
It is a fact of life, however, that membership by graduation is not mandatory before being able to work in the credit management profession, unlike accountants and others.
It is something we must not lose sight of.
Many of our most active and fervently loyal members and supporters are members through direct entry.
We must not lose the ability to bestow membership on those very able people in the allied professionals of accountancy, banking and insurance for example.
It is a sad fact that most of the active and supportive Branch members are not the graduates of this world.
Don't let us jeopardise our being able to add flair and lustre by a cross pollination of intellects; we don't want to be an insular introspective band.
We need to be innovative and extrovert, looking to the future and the continued enhancement of the Institute and I think we will always be enriched by the direct entrants so long as these continue to be strictly monitored.
Over the coming years obviously the addition will be diluted as the graduates become the majority of our membership.
I am a direct entrant and think I have given a little to the Institute in return for the privilege of being granted Membership.
Don't consign us lesser mortals to outer darkness.
Eve Meredith Council Member Branch Chairman Chairman Seminar Management Committee Member Management Committee
Sir Kenneth Cork
An account of Sir Kenneth Cork's contribution to the accountancy and charitable bodies reads flatly without some attempt to record, among other things, his involvement in the International Year for the Disabled and his encouragement to me when I instituted fro Accountancy the (now) annual award for the Best Report for the Accounts of a Charity (writes Colin Cassie, former associate editor of Accountancy.)
As a financial journalist for over 30 years, I together with many other financial journalists, regarded him as one of the accountancy profession's most unassuming men who accepted a host of roles which enhanced the Cork Gully dynasty, the profession's stature, and many charities.
The profession's fifth Lord Mayor of London in 1978 and the 651st holder of that ancient office, ‘KRC’, as he as known to closer journalists and business acquaintances, used that office to help the plight of the disabled and small to medium sized businesses.
Of the former he said: ‘Disabled people should have or be able to lease their own car, with all the new horizons such freedom of movement will open up for them.’
On business, he declared: ‘It must be run for the community.
Investors have their capital tied up and at risk; senior managers have their livings and ulcers tied up in it; but we must not forget the men on the shop floor who have their lives and self-respect tied up in it too.’
Under the 26 years of his ICM Presidency, KRC exercised a benign and constructive influence, which ensured that the ICM became recognised by all the professional bodies.
He really said it all to me in a comment some years ago: ‘The ICM must become the accepted mirror of the credit scene, and we must be wary of some things which can break the reflection.’
NEWS
Company insolvencies (seasonally adjusted)
In the third quarter of 1991 there were 5717 company insolvencies in England and Wales.
For the year to September 1991 the number of company insolvencies was 2.2% of the average number of active companies on the register, or 1.9% of the total number on the register 
Individual insolvencies (seasonally adjusted)
There were 6705 individual insolvencies in England and Wales in the third quarter of 1991 
Scotland
In Scotland in the third quarter there were 1908 sequestrations of individuals, and 149 company liquidations
Fall of eagles
The DTI statistics on insolvencies in the third quarter of 1991 are shown opposite.
Commenting on these figures, Maurice Withall, partner at Grant Thornton and a member of the Institute's Technical Advisory Committee (TAC), said: ‘These figures come as no surprise.
The sharp increase in insolvencies during the last year has made the banks less willing to lend money to anyone, including prospective purchasers of failed businesses.
This has naturally led to a drop in the price receivers are able to get for a failed business, and thus a drop in the surpluses the receiver hands to the liquidator.
Trade suppliers of a failed company therefore receive less of a dividend, which may have a critical effect on their own cash flow.
There is therefore a ‘knock-on’ effect for every business that cannot withstand the pressure of bad debts.’
This point was echoed by another member of the TAC, Bernard Chambers of Booth White, who said: ‘Insolvencies often arise from cash-flow problems caused by late-paying customers.
Businessmen should not set up in a market where they will be powerless to enforce their credit terms.
Neither should they sell on credit without employing the techniques of professional credit control.’
Maurice Withall went on to say that the situation is exacerbated by the government's new rules on VAT bad debt relief.
‘The requirement of a creditor to wait 12 months before claiming relief instead of being able to claim at the end of the first quarter after an insolvency (as was possible previously) has an adverse effect on his own business's cash flow.
It could therefore be argued that government policy has helped to push more businesses under.’
KPMG Peat Marwick point out that ‘for the first time in a year, the number of companies failing has deceased.
The number of compulsory and creditors’ voluntary liquidations fell below 5000 in the third quarter of 1991.
There were 4670 liquidations in that quarter, a 17 per cent fall on the total of 5634 in the second quarter of 1991.
However, KPMG Head of Corporate Recovery Tim Hayward cautioned: ‘Too much should not be read into one quarter's figures, particularly given the distortion that holidays can make to the third quarter.
However, if we can sustain the current climate of optimism and continue the progressive lowering of interest rates, consumer spending should begin to pick up.
That in turn will be reflected by the rate at which companies are going into liquidation continuing to fall.’
A comparison between the third quarter of 1991 and the same period a year earlier, an increase of 44 per cent, shows signs of a slackening in recessionary pressures: between the third quarters of 1989 and 1990, there was a 64 per cent increase.
‘For the first time since the start of the recession,’ said Mr Hayward we may be seeing some glimmer of light, particularly as the figures tie in with the slight decrease in receiverships this quarter and with recent reports of an increase in business optimism.
The trend in liquidations is a good indication of how smaller businesses are faring.
They have been particularly badly hit in the current recession, not having the cash reserves and greater bargaining power with the banks that larger companies have been able to draw on, to ensure survival.
It seems that the outlook for smaller businesses may not now be as bleak as it has been so recently.’
In a separate study of business failures, Trade Indemnity, the UK's largest private sector credit insurer, found the peak in insolvencies has not yet been reached.
TI's statistics on bad debts and business failures, compiled since 1966, are based on irrecoverable bad debts and business failures in which the company's policy-holders become involved.
TI said that business failures notified to it rose by 6.7 per cent between the second and third quarters of 1991, and were 78 per cent higher than in the corresponding period in 1990.
This follows a 6 per cent increase between the first and second quarters of 1991.
The levelling off in business failures, has not yet been completed.
TI's figures cover a broad spectrum of insolvency, in terms of types of failure, industry sector and geographical region.
TI says that is figures tend to reflect the trend in failures of more established companies, with historical evidence suggesting that the series often leads other available insolvency indicators by up to six months.
In all seven broad industry categories monitored by TI, the level of failures was higher than a year previously.
Three of the broad industry sectors showed a decrease in business failures between the second and third quarters of 1991.
The chemical industry saw a fall in the level of failures of 23 per cent; textiles and clothing by 21 per cent ; and services by 9 per cent .
In the food and agriculture, and engineering and metals sectors, however, business failures were up by 30 per cent and 26 per cent, respectively, over the second quarter levels.
The level of failures in the construction industry, which accounted for 30 per cent of all failures, compared with 20 per cent in 1983, was three times higher than in the third quarter of 1988.
TI says that there are no indications that there will be any upturn before the first quarter of 1992.
‘Moreover’, it says, ‘in the last recessionary cycle the    peak in business failures did not occur until some 18 months after the recession ended and even then the level of insolvencies did not reduce significantly for a further years.’
TI remained cautions about the financial position of the corporate sector, given the levels of gearing and the expected modest speed of economic recovery.
It anticipated that business failures of established companies will continue to rise into the first quarter of 192 and did not expect to see a significant fall in the level of failures for up to 18 months.
Advice to bank on
In response to the recent rows over banks' charges to small firms, a new company staffed by former bank managers has been established to give advice to small firms on how to deal with their banks.
For a fee of £500 per day, the new firm, The Banking Liaison Group Ltd, will show its clients how to get the best out of the banks.
According to a company spokesman, ‘the aim is to maximise banking arrangements for clients, assist clients in presentations to bank managers and help to build trust.’
The Group, which intends to operate nationally, does not set an upper limit on the size of customer, but expects 80 per cent of its work to come from companies with a turnover of between £0.5M to £5M.
The Group was formed on the initiative of Financial Public Relations Ltd and is chaired by ex-MP Sir Robin Chichester-Clark of head-hunters The Welbeck Group.
According to Financial PR, the clearing banks have been approached and ‘the reaction was positive’.
Its major business area will be reviewing the ‘appropriateness’ of bank charges with a view to having them reduced.
The Group concedes that many client will be afraid of upsetting their relationship with their bank.
The Chief Executive, John Sillett, former Trade Finance Director and Corporate Banking Area Manager for the Midland Bank, said that the Group would encroach on accountants' territory up to a point but claimed to have an ‘inside track’.
He said: ‘We are quite probably cheaper and better qualified to help smaller companies.
‘From our own research and from extensive press coverage, it seems that there is a very substantial gulf between banks and their business customers.
I am sure it is not all the fault of the banks.
Many businesses could do more to help themselves.
‘The first rule of banking is that bankers lend to those they trust.
The more they trust you, the more they lend you: the less they trust you, the more they charge you.
Our job is to help build up trust between the smaller companies and their banks.’
Small firms law outdated
Pressure group The Forum of Private Businesses has called for a radical change in the legal structure of small firms.
Its report,Business Legal Structures , says that the small business sector has undergone a transformation but the legal formats available, proprietorship, partnership, or limited liability company, are outdated and more appropriate for big business.
The report was prepared by Birmingham University and Manchester Business School.
It proposes a new legal format, the Incorporated Business Firm (IBF), which wold require a simpler presentation of accounts, simpler constitutional documents, a clearer definition of directors' duties, and a choice between partnership or limited liability tax regimes.
FPB Chief Executive Stan Mendham said: ‘The private business community has never had a legal format tailored to its needs.
With the 21st century on the horizon it is wrong that small firms remain locked into legislation drafted as long ago as 1844.
‘The government should now draft and enact legislation for the IBF as soon as possible, so that small firms, 32 per cent of whom are growing, can progress into the next century unhindered by anachronistic rules and regulations.’
Nat West to study Euro payment legislation
The National Westminster Bank is commissioning a comparison of payment legislation across Europe to tackle the growing problem of late payment of trade debts.
Nat West Chairman Lord Alexander said: ‘The late payment of trade debts is becoming a considerable problem for many businesses.
It is clearly linked to the recession and in some cases reflects difficulties the debtors, in their turn, have in making payments.
But it is making life even more difficult for those seeking to weather the already troubled economic conditions.’
He said that promoting debate would discover the best way of protecting businesses harmed by late payment.
‘In many others European countries there are measures in force, such as a statutory right to interest, which can discourage late payment,’ he said.
Lord Alexander said that problems in Britain could be tackled by using ‘best practice’ but, he said, ‘this may need reinforcement, either through a widely accepted code of practice which is effective in securing payment or, in the last resort, through legislation.’
In a survey of small businesses, Nat West said that late payment of trade debts has become a major problem over the past year.
Half of those giving a trade credit report said that payment was not received on time and two-thirds said that the situation was worse than 12 months previously.
Nat West says that late payment has recently been a significant factor in the demand for bank finance.
It argues that voluntary measures such as the Department of Employment's Making the Cash Flow initiative ‘may require further legislation reinforcement’.
The survey showed that almost two-thirds of small firms were selling on credit and 40 per cent were giving more credit than a year previously.
Of those extending additional credit, 55 per cent attributed it to the failure of their customers to pay on time.
Nat West is to spend £1.5M on training branch managers and Small business Advisers with the aim of helping them understand small firms' needs more clearly.
In addition it will distribute 500,000 copies of its Start-up Guide for people starting their own business.
Nat West Chief Executive Tom Frost said: ‘We are prepared to make a public commitment to supporting small businesses.
We have stood by our customers through the recession and we will continue to do so.
A measure of our commitment is that in the year to June, we increased our lending to small firms by 13.5 per cent to nearly £10bn.’
Worst ever bad debts
The third quarter 1991 bad debts are likely to be the worst ever, according to Europe's largest trade credit insurance broker, The Credit Insurance Association Ltd.
The CIA claims to effect about one third of all UK domestic and export credit insurance.
In a survey carried out at the end of October of a sample of 100 of The Times top 1000 companies, it found that 61 per cent of companies were experiencing worse bad debt problems.
A second, informal survey of major underwriters of credit insurance risk supported recent Trade Indemnity figures and indicated that third quarter 1991 bad debts were likely to be the worst ever.
Of the 100 companies surveyed 10 per cent had a turnover of £50M to £99M; 51 per cent, £100M to £249M; and 27 per cent had a turnover of £250M plus.
The survey examined bad debt experience, credit periods and credit management compared with three years earlier.
Eighty-two per cent of companies were ‘much more worried’(50 per cent) or ‘more worried’(32 per cent ) over bad debts, compared with only 6 per cent who were less worried.
Only 49 per cent of companies surveyed were paid by 75 per cent or more of their customers within the agreed credit period and 20 per cent said that half their customer were failing to pay on time.
The survey bore out recent observations that smaller companies were bearing the brunt of bad debts and late payment.
However, 78 per cent of companies with turnovers of more than £500M are paid by 75 per cent or more of their customers within the agreed credit period.
For protection against bad debts, less than half the firms in the survey operated the sales ledger on secured terms and nearly two-thirds did not use credit insurance.
Fifty-six per cent did not operate the sales ledger on secured terms; 27 per cent did; and 16 per cent sometimes operated on secured terms, using bank guarantees, export credit guarantee, or cash up front.
Only 35 per cent of the companies in the survey used credit insurance to secure themselves against bad debts.
CIA Marketing Director Bryan Squibb said: ‘More than half the companies surveyed have left themselves unprotected against bad debt and reported that they were merely making bad debt provisions, taking legal action, vetting customers or using debt collection agencies.
‘There has, however, been a boom in the use of credit insurance to insure all or part of turnover almost directly as a result of the recession.
‘Of the 65 per cent of companies not using credit insurance, half had no idea what it would cost as a percentage of total sales value, indicating that the industry has a real job to do explaining how little properly structured credit insurance can cost: often 0.5 per cent of turnover or less.’
Slow return to retail confidence
Figures from Infolink show credit demand in the retail sector (as indicated by volume of credit searches requested) continuing to recover slowly, standing in October 11.1% above October 1990 (compared with 7.3% September on September, and 6.1% August on August).
However, other sectors show continuing decline, especially loans from finance houses (down 8.7% on the previous year), and for new cars, which were 20.8% down, October on October.
This is mirrored by HPI figures showing a year on year drop of 19.3% in new car sales on credit for the period January to October.
CREDIT & SALES
Credit and sales figures for October
Credit
In October 1991 there was a decrease of £0.08bn in the amount outstanding on credit agreements with consumers, compared with a decrease of £0.11bn in September.
In the three months August to October, there was a decrease in the amounts outstanding on credit agreements with consumers of £0.21bn compared with an increase of £0.17bn in the previous three months.
The amount of new credit advanced to consumers in October was £4.00bn, compared with £3.90bn in September.
In the three months August to October, the amount of new credit advanced to consumers totalled £11.77bn, compared with £11.99bn in the previous three months.
Sales
Final estimate of retail sales volume (seasonally adjusted) in October is 118.9 (1985=100).
This is a little below the level in September but little changed from the figure for August.
The provisional estimate for October was 119.0.
In August to October sales were 0.25 per cent lower than in the previous three months (after seasonal adjustment) and 0.25 per cent lower than in the same period a year earlier.
Also in August to October sales by food retailers rose by 1 per cent compared with the previous three months; those by mixed businesses were 1.5 per cent lower; and those by specialist non-food retailers were 1 per cent lower.
Based on non-seasonally adjusted data, retail sales value in current prices in October was 6 per cent higher than in October 1990.
So far this year the value of sales has been 5 per cent higher than in the first ten months of 1990.
EXPORT
The makers of Europe
Charlemagne , a little book which has been written for 12 to 16 year olds (but suitable for all ages) would make an ideal present.
Your correspondent thoroughly enjoyed reading this 32 page history book which was written by Douglas Pickett and beautifully illustrated by Harry Tucker.
The book, price £1.99, can be purchased from New European Publications Limited, 14–16, Carroun Road, London SW8 1JT, or WH Smith branches.
More on BCCI
Surprisingly, the Counsel for the Bank of England did not support or oppose the adjournment of the petition to wind up this ailing bank — it said nothing!
The Vice Chancellor, Sir Donald Nicholls, in granting an adjournment, confirmed that the liquidators have had an exceedingly difficult task.
He did, however, underline the fact that it was important that arrangements be made for creditors to have information to enable them to consider reconstruction proposals that have been put forward.
In the Court, Touche Ross was criticised for not allowing third parties to see their 120 page report dated 29 November 1991.
Only Counsel was privy to the report until leave was given by the Vice Chancellor for the report to be circulated at 10.40 am on Monday 2 December.
Creditors has travelled thousands of miles to attend this hearing.
Dr Adil Elias, the Chairman of the BCCI Depositors' Protection Association, mentioned to your correspondent that his committee represents creditors who are owed anything from $500,000 to tens of millions of dollars.
Dr Elias referred to page 81 of the Touche Ross report where the liquidation and overhead expenses had already reached $439 millions!
In anger he stated that no-one ever suggested that a billion dollar a year business should operate without a proper board of management.
However, a liquidation of this importance should operate with a creditors' committee to represent them.
Readers who wish to read the amazing background to the BCCI story should purchase Nick Kochan's paperback Bankrupt, The BCCI Fraud .
This book has had to be reprinted as the original which was published at the end of November 1991 was withdrawn owing to an injunction issued by Sheik Zayed bin Sultan at Nahayan the Ruler of Abu Dhabi.
Gollancz confirms that they are reprinting 20,000 copies with the deletions.
These should be available in booksellers by 12 December, priced £4.99.
Incidentally, the bank in its present state does not appear to be insolvent as assets are estimated at $1.1bn and liabilities a mere $10bn.
The Chinese ducks project
A £1.9M grant to supply three duck processing plants to China — believed to be the first supplied by a British company — has been awarded by the Overseas Development Administration.
The total contract value is worth over £5.5M.
The plants will be built by APV Baker of Peterborough.
Two will be at Huaibin and Huangchuan in Henan Province, and one in Qing Zian, close to Peking.
The plants will process 1M ducks a year.
The ducks will be hatched at the plant but the ducklings will be raised by local farmers who will send them back for packaging and freezing when they are around 10 weeks old.
The key element of the project will be the relationship between each processing plant and the local farmers responsible for raising the ducks.
There are plans to establish a Duck Raising Association so that local farmers can participate in the running of the plants.
It is hoped that the project will help supplement rural incomes and also utilise land currently derelict and unsuitable for paddy cultivation.
Birmingham Chamber of Commerce
Birmingham's Small Business Club, launched earlier this year to give smaller companies a meeting place and platform to air their views, has launched a full programme of events.
The club, which already boats more than 200 members, has also elected its first committee with businessman Peter Saywell taking the chair.
Mr Saywell is Managing Director of Trewhella Bros (UK) Ltd of Bordesley, Birmingham, a company employing 12 people and manufacturing land clearing winches for overseas agricultural projects and jacks for the mining industry.
He said: ‘One of the things most appreciated by those running smaller businesses is the chance to meet people in the same boat and discuss matters of joint interest and concern.’
The President of Birmingham Chambers of Industry & Commerce, Gary Allen, is leading a new initiative to ensure that the voice of business and industry is heard clearly by Government.
‘In recent weeks, businesses large and small have told us of their fundamental worries both about their immediate problems of the cost of finance and their treatment by the banks.
Longer term issues such as tax policy and the ability to compete on equal terms in the Single European Market are also of Concern.
‘We have now reshaped our lobbying and policy operation to ensure the needs of our 5500 member businesses are effectively researched and highlighted.’
Martin Posner 081 688 7978
This sporting life
Peter ‘Jorrocks’ Banyard looks at repossession in a new light
Far too many people become confused between sport and games.
All that football, hockey and even rugby followers are watching is mere games.
The Olympic athletes, the cricketers and the tennis seeds are just playing games, although one can hope that they do it in a sporting fashion.
The only popular spectator sport, as opposed to game, is professional boxing although for reasons I shall come to later, the only sportsmen involved are those backing the contenders and not the participants themselves.
Sport is a hash realm with definite boundaries.
For those still in ignorance, I can reveal what every true-blooded Briton should have dinned into him from birth.
Sport encompasses things like hunting, all sorts of hunting: fox, hare otter, camel or whatever, just so long as it is conducted with hounds.
Shooting is sporting too: grouse, partridge, pheasant, tiger or anything else, except foxes which have to be left for hunting men.
Fishing is also a sport, although the chaps who do it for a livelihood in trawlers are not included in the sporting fraternity.
The quick-witted will have gone instantly to the heart of the problem: what mysterious attribute distinguishes sport from games?
At first glance it would seem that sport must involve a victim, which rather explains why boxing is considered sporting.
On the other hand, it does not quite cover all sporting interests because horse racing (or indeed camel racing) is also in there as a sport.
So there is another element, one of breeding.
If you have to look to the breed of your foxhounds, lurchers, whippets, steeplechasers, ratting terriers  or whatever, you are certainly involved in sport.
Which does not quite explain the fishermen.
So, a rough judgement would be that the best sports need a victim and a touch of breeding.
With that in mind, I am offering readers the thought that we should do well to upgrade the status of repossession from ungentlemanly pastime to true sport.
There are plenty of victims involved: thousands of brutes get routed out every week.
These victims are also quite evidently vermin too, like the foxes, hares, rats, badgers and defeated boxers that are given such a hard time in the established sports of Old England.
Having a go at the piker, the bilker and the debtor as he tries to shield his recession-affected business or his mortgaged home from just retribution must surely count as sport.
Set on the bailiffs, I say.
Given that we have victims, we come to the delicate matter of breeding.
I have seen letters in the Financial Times complaining about the dearth of bailiffs: in the repossessionary times there are not enough of them to go round.
One of my fiercer relatives, bilked of five hundred quid when a client was bankrupted, also claims that the bailiffs we have are useless.
Obviously a major programme of breeding from the finest stock is necessary: huge and sturdy bull bailiffs, cunning and persistent bitch bailiffs.
With the right sort of bailiff pack, our new sport is bound to find acceptance; particularly so since traditional sports are threatened.
Under Kinnock's Red Terror, hunting with dogs (the canaille does not understand the word hounds) is to be banned.
Lots of chaps with pink coats will have nothing to do on winter mornings unless we let 'em come repossessin' with us.
Of course, I cannot pretend that repossessin' is ‘the image of war with  honly five and  twinty per cent of the danger and none of the guilt’ like huntin' foxes.
Not much danger of course, but there must be a shade of guilt attached to the best repossessin' season.
After all, you are meant to give the quarry a sporting chance.
I reckon that high interest rates, falling stock and asset values together with mounting unemployment makes the kill all but a certainty.
Perhaps we had better stick to shooting fish in a barrel; the odds are a shade more even.
So far, readers may have gathered that I am disenchanted with the credit scene in the UK.
Of course, it is hardly the fault of the credit industry that government macro-economic policy encouraged a consumer boom followed by a deep recession.
But you can be a bit sickened by the effect as you pass the new crop of boarded-up shops and closing down sales.
For those who went to see the Christmas lights in London's Regent Street this year, it must have been a sombre experience; out of 102 shops, 19 are empty and 38 had desperate pre-Christmas sales.
If that can happen to one of the most prestigious shopping streets in the world, we can be sure that dispossessin' is in for a good run.
Back in Japan
I have not been very kind to UK banks or bankers recently, so they may be pleased to find their incompetence echoed, or even exceeded, abroad.
Most of us must reluctantly concede and admiration for the way the Japanese do things, but even they make some remarkable cock-ups, which can serve to cheer and instruct us when we consider our own inadequacies.
In 1987, I founded by prestigious First Turkey of the Christmas Season award and gave it to the British banker who had lent (and lost) £500,000 to a penniless student for him to play stock market futures.
It is a pleasure for me to announce the inaugural International First Turkey, and to award it to Mr Kaneo Nakamura, recent chairman of the Industrial Bank of Japan (IBJ).
Of course, Mr Nakamura could not have done it without a lot of help from his staff: two of them resigned with him and all other executives are taking a six month pay cut of between 20 per cent and 50 per cent .
However, I feel sure he will be generous enough to regard the award as a general honour for them all.
What they did was to lend Y20 billion, £1.08 billion (yes, billion not million) to a Ms Onoue, who used seances for investment advice.
Now, I cannot say whether advice from the spirit world would prove superior to advice from investment analysts still living in this value of tears.
Probably a close run thing.
Yet, my feeling is that the spirits could bear my reproaches for bad advice a good deal more easily than men of flesh and blood to whom contusions and abrasions, the common result of argument, are very real sources of anguish.
The lads at IBJ should also have remembered that the spirits are hard to sue for financial redress.
Actually, Ms Onoue also seems likely to stack up for quite a bit short of a billion when it comes to payback time.
She was by no means a billionairess when she and IBJ began their relationship, but she did own a couple of restaurants in Osaka; and IBJ was desperate to expand operations in that area.
How her borrowings became so vast is a bit of a mystery, but she does not seem to have ploughed the straightest furrow in Osaka.
At one stage she was issued with forged certificates of deposit for  
Y342 billion by the Toyo Shinkin Bank, and used them as loan collateral.
It really seems as though the methods of Toyo Shinkin, IBJ and Ms Onoue herself did not amount to best practice.
I am very aware that things are not always as they seem in Japan.
The involvement of one of Japan's terrifying gangland mobs would change the whole nature of the fiasco, and there were rumours that Ms Onoue was well connected, whatever that may mean.
but things can be just as well explained by the usual list of human follies that bankers are prone to.
IBJ was heavily capitalised and needed to lend more.
It was especially looking for new business in Osaka.
When the loans began, the Japanese stock market was on a spectacular bull run in which almost any investment paid off handsomely.
That seems to be a fair round-up of the recipe that had bankers lending to property developers in this country.
In both cases, the inevitable bear market has revealed the ugly truth.
Wear the turkey with pride, Mr Nakamura, wear it with pride.
There can hardly have been any business sector with so many strong contenders for it as the banking sector.
Competition from the UK
It was sometimes rather hard to think of the late Robert Maxwell as British.
He seemed a more exotic figure that we are used to, even among our tycoons.
Yet British he was, which enables us to claim his exciting career as part of Our Island Story, part of the rich pageant of British mercantile life and of incautious lending.
Whether MCC, his financial empire, really is going to cost bankers a lot of money is not yet certain, but it will surely given them some sleepless nights.
The remarkable thing about it all is that he had already caused significant bad debts when his Pergamon Press failed in the seventies.
Bankers do not usually forget that sort of thing.
On the other hand, the long communal memory of the banking fraternity seems to be a thing of the past.
There seems to be a particular blind spot concerning Czechoslovakia and, come to think of it, Captain Maxwell was a Czech before he was British.
Whether there is anything in that I cannot say, but one of the golden rules of banking, ‘once bitten, twice shy’, seems to be waived for Czechoslovaks.
It all revolves around some new Czech bond issues.
In times past, default was treated with gravity.
The US state of Louisiana defaulted on a nineteenth century loan and was still unwelcome to bond markets a century later.
Admittedly Czech history has been more turbulent than that of Louisiana, but we have to realise that there is a principle at stake.
There is a default on the 8 per cent Czechoslovak Republic dollar bonds of 1922, and also on the Cities of Greater Prague and Carlsbad bonds issued in 1924.
If it wants to borrow, the present Czech government should negotiate repayment terms with existing bondholders first.
New investors should take the past record into account.
One could say the same sort of thing about Captain Maxwell and the 26 banks that lent money to his enterprises.
There was a Department of Trade inquiry into the Pergamon affair and its inspectors concluded that the Captain was not a fit person to run a public company.
Well, time moves on and Maxwell rose from the ashes of this setback, but it is remarkable that the telling verdict of the DTI inquiry should have been so utterly dismissed by the risk-assessors of so many banks.
Vexations in the High Court
Some creditors will try and confuse the issue by issuing writs.
Peter Walker points to a recent case, and advises credit managers to keep their heads
‘A banker without money is like a doctor without pills’, commented American banker George Wood some 25 years ago, but a recent question for some banks recently was whether or not a judge in Chancery would dispense a ruling in their favour.
In this context the legal points in Tudor Grange Holdings Limited v Citibank NA (1991) 3 WLR 750 were as diverse as the ingredients of a hospital dispensary, in that they were a mixture of insolvency, company law, and the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977.
The outward symptoms arose out of Tudor Grange's ambitious expansion programme, which could only be fuelled by borrowings.
Two banks were persuaded to put up a lot of money, so that by the time Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson V-C came to consider the action, the loans including interest totalled around £40M.
The borrowers were companies involved in scrap metal and disposal, and property.
They and their main shareholder contended that, in reliance on the facility offered by the banks, that had entered into certain commitments.
Towards the end of 1988, however, the borrowers failed to pay the interest due, and it was essential to arrange refinancing.
They proposed to sell half of a property in Kent for around $55M, to which the banks would agree subject to cross-collaterisation.
The companies would grant security on their debts against all their assets.
There was a complication in that the companies and shareholders had previously made various unspecified claims against one of the banks.
As part of the new financing arrangements, the first plaintiffs and some of the shareholders signed a document releasing all claims.
Tudor Grange agreed to indemnify the bank should any of the other plaintiffs try and bring an action.
No company doctor at the bank
The indemnity was dated 20 April 1989, yet within six months the bank felt obliged to call in administrative receivers.
A liquidator was appointed for one of the companies, and actions were commenced against the guarantors.
One of the banks succeeded in obtaining judgment under Order 14 of the rules of the Supreme Court.
This allows a court to grant summary judgement at an interlocutory stage, where a defendant is shown to have no hope of success.
It will also be granted if any defence raised is shown merely to be a delaying tactic.
Because it is an interlocutory judgement it is usually heard before a master of the High Court, and a defendant only has to show a good arguable case for the plaintiff's application to fail.
If it is successful, there is a right of appeal to a High Court    judge, and the guarantors in the Tudor Grange case duly appealed.
Before he could be consulted, writs were issued against the banks by the companies and the shareholders in accordance with resolutions purporting to have been passed by each board of directors consisting of members of the Crawley family, but the receivers of each of the companies did not give their consent.
Mr Crawley, one of the plaintiffs and ‘moving spirit behind both groups of companies’, agreed to settle the bills either personally or with some associates.
The liquidator of the sole company in liquidation indeed assigned the cause of action to him.
Plenty of action
According to Mr Crawley and the plaintiffs there was plenty of action, because they had claims against both banks.
For example, it was alleged that one of the banks ‘would not knowingly or recklessly take steps such as to prejudice the business plan’.
Counsel for the plaintiffs wanted to amend the pleadings still further to the effect that the deed of release and the cross-collaterisation agreement ‘were induced by misrepresentation’.
The other bank was also attacked, because it was argued that there was a syndicated loan.
It was suggested that as principal it had knowledge of whatever the first bank did as its agent.
Other allegations against the latter suggested a breach of a contractual duty of care, false representations and undue influence.
High Court judge, Sir Nicholas Browne-Wilkinson V- C, was not concerned about ‘a detailed analysis of much conflicting evidence or documentation’, because at this stage there was only a preliminary question of whether or not the plaintiffs' statement of claim should be struck out.
Locus standi
In that respect the banks argued that Mr Crawley had no locus standi , and the judge agreed that a shareholder could not recover damages for any reduction in value of his shareholding.
Although he did not say so, the logic is that only the company itself would have a cause of action.
The relationship between the shareholder and the person allegedly causing the loss would in law be normally too remote.
An example of similar questions of remoteness is found in Caparo Industries plc v Dickman (1990) 2 AC 605 (as noted in Credit Management May 1990).
That left the companies; yet the first of them was in the hands of the receiver, who could bring an action by virtue of the Insolvency Act 1986 (section 42 and also para 5 of Schedule 1).
The directors themselves, however, had stepped in under the authority of a decision in Newhart Developments Ltd v Cooperative Commercial Bank Ltd (1978) QB 814 .
In that case a debenture holder had appointed a receiver, and the directors were allowed to bring a case against him.
It was obviously impossible for the receiver to sue the person who had appointed him, and in any event the company had received indemnities for all costs, including those of the other side if necessary.
The action could not prejudice the specific property for which the receiver was responsible, so Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson V-C was willing to wait and see if Tudor Grange could come up with suitable indemnities.
The only company in the case, Lionhope, was in liquidation, and the liquidator had assigned the cause of action to Mr Crawley.
The lawyers turned to their law books to find a precedent, but there was not much to help them except perhaps Ramsey v Hartley (1977) 2 All ER 673 , described in The Journal of Business Law as ‘an odd case’(January 1978 at page 77).
It arose out of an action for professional negligence against a firm of accountants, but the person bringing the action went bankrupt.
The trustee in bankruptcy in whom the cause of action was vested, assigned it to the bankrupt, who covenanted to pay over 35 per cent of the net proceeds of any successful result.
It was held that section 55(i) of the Bankruptcy Act 1914 permitted the trustee to sell any part of the property of the bankrupt to any person, which included the bankrupt himself.
In the Tudor Grange case Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson noted that ‘it has never been decided and was left open in that case whether a trustee in bankruptcy or a liquidator could assign otherwise than for value received by the estate of which he is the trustee.’
In the event the judge merely shared the surprise of one of the counsel for the defence, and left the matter to be resolved by an application by the defendant banks to the Companies Court under section 168(5) of the Insolvency Act 1986.
This permits any person ‘aggrieved by an act or decision of the liquidator’ to take such a step.
Unfair
The case itself was taken a step further to consider the effect of the various documents in the light of section 10 of the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977, which prohibits exclusion clauses in one contract, which purport to affect another agreement.
It has to be read in the light of the underlying principle in section 2(2) of the Act.
This states that in respect of loss or damage other than arising from death or personal injury ‘a person cannot so exclude or restrict liability for negligence except in so far as the term or notice satisfies the requirement of reasonableness’.
The banks normally could not restrict or avoid their liability for breach of their duty of care towards their customers, the plaintiffs in the case, but their lawyers suggested that the deed of release did just that.
If the analysis was correct, the second document unfairly excluded the banks' liability towards the plaintiffs in the main contract.
This is an ingenious argument which made everyone think of what the real and guiding principle underlying the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977.
In Smith v Eric S Bush (199)) 1 AC 831 Lord Griffiths devised a ‘but for’ test in relation to a notice excluding liability.
He considered ‘that the existence of the common law duty to take reasonable care, referred to in section 1(1) (b), is to be judged whether it would exist ‘but for’ the notice excluding liability’.
The judges of the Court of Appeal decided otherwise.
Section 2(1) of the Act was concerned with protecting the victim of negligence, and not with arrangements between the wrongdoer and other parties as to sharing the burden of compensating the victim.
Although that decision was not mentioned in the Tudor Grange case, by analogy the Unfair Contract Terms Act did not apply to secondary contracts which were retrospective waivers of existing claims.
The deed of release furthermore had not been induced by any misrepresentation, so it was a complete bar to any claims by the companies concerning anything that had happened before that agreement took effect.
Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson therefore decided that it would be vexatious ‘to pursue this one matter on its own in these proceedings’.
He struck out all the claims against the banks.
In addition to the points of law the case also shows that directors of companies in receivership may raise all sorts of legal questions to try and protect their interests.
That is not surprising if they stand to lose large amounts of money through personal guarantees they may have given.
Effective credit marketing: recovering from the recession
Susan Squires looks at the prospects of the consumer credit industry
1991 has seen much gloomy news for the UK economy.
Whilst the latest CBI survey reports a turn for the better in future business confidence amongst UK industry and commerce, this merely indicates that the rate at which businesses are failing has slowed.
The fall of 17 per cent in company liquidations for the third quarter of 1991 brings us down to a figure which is still 44 per cent higher than the same period; it does not yet represent a net recovery.
In consumer terms, business failure rates have had a particularly adverse effect on unemployment levels and, unlike previous recessions, the south east of the country, traditionally the strongest regional market for the credit market, has suffered severely.
Equally, stagnation in the housing market has been most severely felt in the south east.
Rising unemployment has taken its inevitable toll on the consumer lending market.
Other factors, such as the continuing trend for company relocation away from the south east, have also contributed to the changing geography of consumer lending.
It is important to recognise that whilst the UK business economy may see a recovery in 1992, the adverse effects of the current recession on the consumer market will continue to be felt long after the economy has begun to recover.
Aside from the many companies which have gone into liquidation, those which survive have taken the opportunity to improve their operating efficiency, often achieving this by reduction in staffing levels.
This then is an overview of the consumer lending market which the credit marketer faces, a market which has deteriorated overall and, moreover, which is undergoing speedy and dynamic flux at the finer level.
Traditional wisdom dictates that companies which, during a recession, continue to market actively and consistently, are best placed to reap the rewards in the post-recessionary period.
With the advent of new target marketing techniques which allow the credit marketer greater scope to define   and target appropriate potential customers, credit marketing can employ this traditional wisdom to best effect.
As in any business, the successful direct marketing service provider is constantly looking for ways to improve the systems employed, and thus improve the volume of high quality response which the marketer can achieve from his/her campaigns.
In the 1980s geodemographic systems were hailed as the powerful new direct marketing technique.
The late 1980s and early 1990s have seen lifestyle techniques emerge as the most talked about development in the industry.
A combination of these techniques can benefit from their individual strengths, whilst at the same time compensating for their individual weaknesses.
In combination, the two data sources and techniques probably provide the latest sate-of-the-art in direct marketing.
Geodemographic targeting systems are build on a system of likelihoods.
Data from the Census of Population is published at the small area level (circa 200 households).
This information is then used to profile each area and identify the principal characteristics of the neighbourhood.
Financial behaviour data, such as that from Infolink's consumer credit databases, may then be set alongside the geodemographic data to identify household financial profiles.
The combination of Census geodemographic and financial profile of each name on the Electoral Roll.
Whilst such systems are powerful tools for marketing analysis and direct marketing campaigns (indeed, such profile codings have been shown to be highly predictive when incorporated into credit scorecards), the credit marketer should never lose sight of the fact that these are likely profiles and there will inevitably be a small proportion of targeted customers whose actual profiles display a disparity from the system profile.
This highlights the importance of individual credit screening of those applying for credit following a marketing campaign.
Lifestyle target marketing systems, in contrast, capture data on named individuals regarding their professed interests and needs, but such systems offer this data on a limited volume of individuals from whom such data has been solicited.
For the credit marketer who is looking either to reach higher volumes of target customers throughout the country, or who needs higher volumes of names for a rolled-out marketing campaign, this restriction forms and important limitation.
The answer is to combine the two techniques.
The very recent emergence of such dual technique products is providing the credit marketer with a system which combines the strengths of lifestyle and geodemographic/financial direct marketing methods, whilst avoiding the potential pitfalls.
This procedure, known as Data Fusion, is set to provide the direct marketer with the tools to achieve maximum result for his/her direct marketing spend.
That is why the ‘Lifestyle Network’ has been created, employing both the geodemographic and financial targeting capability of Infolink's DEFINE and the lifestyle targeting power of NDL's ‘Lifestyle Selector’.
Applying these information sources to the Electoral Roll for name and address selection allows the marketer to access and target the maximum mailable universe.
The timing of such developments as the Lifestyle Network (which is already proving its power amongst users with excellent response rates) was not, of course, primarily determined by the recession.
What is true, however, is that credit marketers have a sharpened awareness of the need to maximise value for money.
In this recession, few can afford not to look for ways to improve return on investment — in all areas of business.
In this context, the Lifestyle Network is a timely addition to the tools of Direct Marketing.
The Lifestyle Network allows the direct marketer to use customer profile analysis (incorporating a combination of DEFINE household information from the annually updated Electoral Roll and from the Lifestyle Selector) to score individuals according to their similarity to that marketer's existing best customers.
Lookalikes are then selected from Infolink's Electoral Roll for use in direct marketing campaigns.
The following examples illustrate the advantages of the combined power of both systems over either technique in isolation.
If we take the example of marketing support for an environmental ‘affinity’ credit card, the marketer seeks to target those with a professed interest in the environment.
Lifestyle database techniques give the marketer the ability to select a limited number of such individuals.
However, these names are often not available in the volumes required for high volume target mailings or for an extended, rolled out campaign.
Secondly, the marketers of such a financial product often need more than the lifestyle information can provide on its own.
Lifestyle data can identify those interested in a particular product or service but cannot answer the sort of financial questions which will help the credit marketer achieve success even through a recession.
The marketers of, say, electronics products or costly household equipment (items often bought on credit) need to be aware of financial indicators as the marketers of a credit card.
Is the recipient likely to be able to purchase the goods?
If they buy on credit are they likely to encounter difficulties in repaying the loan?
Answers to these questions are crucial to the success of direct marketing campaigns for such products, and it is direct marketing systems based on real consumer financial information, such as Infolink's DEFINE, which provide those essential targeting criteria.
Data fusion techniques are allowing the credit marketer to harness the strengths of both lifestyle and geodemographic/financial direct marketing systems.
The limitations of each individual technique, as discussed above, can be greatly improved.
The potential offered by data fusion techniques provide the opportunity to capitalise upon the sophistication and accuracy of lifestyle information combined with the volume access to target markets which geodemographics and the Electoral Register can afford.
The Lifestyle Network provides a value for money platform from which to launch direct advertising campaigns, and provides the basis for sound investment in marketing as a means of overcoming the economic recession.
Susan Squires is Head of Direct Marketing at Infolink, tel 
Susan Squires
Marketing with hindsight
Carl Fischer describes transatlantic trends
In drawing comparisons between the state of credit marketing in the US and her, I am mindful that I have been in the UK for a long time and of that famous Bacon quote, ‘Time is the greatest innovator’.
There are many lessons that UK marketers can learn from experience in the USA in credit marketing.
The major question is when those lessons can be applied.
Three things struck me most in comparing the UK market with my experiences before I arrived here from the Equifax Inc in Atlanta.
None has led me to that dangerous conclusion that we were doing it better over there than here.
So, I am not about to preach, but I feel that you would welcome a glimpse of the future before it arrives.
The most notable difference between the two countries is a result of legislation.
There is no unique identifier that allows you to accumulate and match data.
In the US, Social Security numbers are available and are used to build up a unique individual record, so all historical credit and demographic data can be allocated to an individual record with complete confidence.
Almost as important is the difference in culture.
Credit granters in the US are willing (in common with nearly all direct marketers) to share information.
As a result, credit referencing agencies can rely on receiving full account details on a regular basis.
This normally encompasses balances, status, arrears, movers and a full payment history which involves complete confidence in sharing information.
Over here, some lenders are giving data to preferred suppliers; others seem unwilling to participate.
This can only lead to a partial picture where lenders try to succeed within their own parameters, without all the facts on the likely borrower.
As you'll soon see, the availability of total pooled data is a major factor in the US market becoming more efficient and more responsible.
The last difference is really a function of the first two — credit marketing services in the US is a mature and substantial market.
It represents no less than a $250M business sector and is still growing healthily.
The marketing cycle
Leading companies in the US take the whole process from beginning to end, from assistance in credit marketing, through processing applications to opening accounts and managing them, all based on a complete picture of each individual and their circumstances.
Credit marketing revolves around pre-screening to enable the lender to make a pre-approved credit offer, eg mailing the offer of a $5000 Visa card limit to vetted names.
(No problems with credit tokens there!)
At its simplest, list pre-screening yields names of those who pass the set criteria, those who fail and ‘no-finds’(those with no credit history).
The more sophisticated the pooled data, the more sophisticated the selections.
Application processing is a simple check that the data received from the response matches exactly the data that was used to construct the original offer.
With access to over 300M records nationwide, this is a most reliable service.
The only snag is the ‘Fair Credit Reporting Act’, insisting that any rejection at this stage is based on precisely the same criteria on which the original offer was made.
Creditor management is based upon criteria supplied by the lender and looks at the credit behaviour of the individual, not just a single account.
It alerts the lender on any negative information and allows them to freeze the account, close it, adjust the limit or even to counsel the borrower.
It need not be entirely negative; opportunities to upgrade or cross-sell are also highlighted.
The advantage to lenders is that they reduce the risk of delinquent accounts by having access to data from a variety of sources.
Where required, system are available to prompt and manage Collections, a fast growing area which reflects the increasing sophistication of the industry.
Credit marketing
Credit pre-screening takes place in a number of ways now.
In its basic form, lenders provide a list for screening and mail the names which ‘passed’ the criteria that the lenders chose.
Any criteria can be used in this situation, provided, of course, that the data on which decision are made have been captured or can be sourced.
Much of the growth, however, is now in systems that incorporate pre-packaged criteria.
These have the advantage of being tried and tested and involve lower cost.
They also offer a much faster turn-around.
Two key elements that have been incorporated into the pre-packaged systems are a scorecard and market segmentation.
Segmentation
Developments have taken place in improved testing and segmentation, some of which will be familiar as they have already appeared here, specifically geo-demographic profiling.
The scale and extent of segmentation ‘over there’ is fast developing to an extent whereby the behaviour of each individual potential borrower is driving the system.
Equifax in Atlanta has a system called EQUIS which classifies every individual in the US according to their ‘credit-activeness’.
This system will analyse credit usage, leverage (percentage of credit limit used), location, age and other variables to place the individual into one of 64 segments that define their credit behaviour.
The systems are sufficiently accurate to distinguish between a husband and wife at the same address and ascribe different codes (see figure 1).
Behind this geo-demographics are being used to their full extent to match profiles to identify the most likely prospects for a particular offer.
If you bear in mind the fact that the wealth of data available makes even tighter analysis and cross-analysis solely a function of the limits of the computer, you may begin to appreciate what is not only possible, but is happening right now.
Information is power
When you link the information on the individual with the under-lying demographics, the ability to target becomes even more predictive.
At Equifax, we are using specific credit behaviour overlaid with demographic characteristics to provide ‘Power Data’ list overlays.
The intention is quite simple: to identify and match likely responders and users to the credit offering.
When, however, you take into account the fact that certain US states release motor vehicle records which yield data of birth, you'll appreciate that the job of the US credit marketers is that much easier.
A phrase which has cropped up  (and is being used to death is the ‘Buyability Index’.
It is the key to what has happened recently with US credit marketing.
Every active credit user can be assessed on their behaviour and rated against their potential — how close they are to their overall credit limits.
With pool data, their total indebtedness account by account can be measured and compared with the ‘product’ they prefer to use, measured by their total activity.
How the systems work
If we take an example, using our products EQUIS and Delinquency Alert System (DAS), is not too difficult to see how it is possible for a credit marketer to plan effectively.
You have to take into account first that there, as well as here, the better the score, the less the requirement for credit and, hence, the lower the response.
Similarly, vice versa: the less likely the prospect is a ‘good’ borrower, the more likely they are to need credit and apply.
The example in Figure 2 shows how this problem is overcome.
A company wishes to mail 500,000 names sourced from the Equifax database of 20M individual records.
With a combination of EQUIS and DAS the upper and lower extremes of the database are excluded and a sample of 4M potential names in the relevant ETS and DAS codes are identified.
The system is already helping to meet the other tow goals; it is balancing the response rate with the risk in order to predict profitability.
The last chart, Figure 3 (see front cover), shows how the 4M possible names are segmented.
The model has predicted a response rate for each EQUIS code and plotted the response against the risk.
Only those shown in the upper left segment are viable, and easily yield the required 500,000 mailing file.
The future
In the US, the latest development is the concept of ‘onestop’ shopping for pre-screening.
The lender provides a profile of responders, or a response model, together with an acceptable level of credit risk.
In return, he receives a mailing list of ‘pass’ names that has been screened against a scorecard, pre-programmed criteria, geo-demographic profiles, credit behaviour and segmented.
All referencing agencies have a product of this kind.
In Equifax, we have called ours DE2000 (for Direct Extraction from the national database).
This has yielded substantial modelling possibilities which is now approaching the stage where virtually all of the guesswork has been taken out of credit marketing.
Such sophistication is unlikely to cross the Atlantic just yet, which is a shame, because the credit granting industry in the US is now enjoying a vastly improved image.
Thanks to pooled data, lenders have become much more effective by aiming their products at those who are most likely to respond, more likely to use the credit offered and be more willing and able to pay.
Being perceived as such responsible lenders is just one of the benefits available to UK credit granters, but this situation is being hampered by the reluctance to share data.
An integrated pool of shared first party information would overcome the data protection problems and eliminated reliance on what might be spurious data from third parties.
The legislation you face will obviously prevent credit marketing here becoming as mature as its US relation.
That doesn't mean we need stand still and watch when there is so much to be learned and copied.
Carl Fischer is Director, New Product and Market Development, Equifax Europe Marketing Services, tel 
Figure 1
Figure 2
Credit marketing at the crossroads
Richard Webber looks at how increased sophistication will improve credit marketing while reducing badly targeted junk mail
From time to time one feels that an industry is approaching a critical point, one at which the pursuit of future success requires quite a significant reorganisation of existing thought patterns.
For the smarter operators the conventional recommendations of consultants, echoed across interminable seminars, lose their sense of urgency.
They seem to be address objectives that have been overtaken by irreversible changes both in technology and consumer expectations.
Such a crisis, in my judgment, is now approaching those parts of the financial services industry that market credit.
What then is the issue?
A concise way of illustrating it is to consider two questions.
Firstly, what would happen to the profitability of Britain's most successful consumer credit organisation if it mailed debt collection notices to its customers on (typically) just two dates each year, just as it currently mails its personal loan promotions?
Secondly, what would happen to the profitability of Britain's least successful credit operators if it reacted to the credit demand signals of customers as rapidly as it responds to their credit risk signals?
With the introduction of behavioural (or performance) scoring systems, credit grantors can quickly identify unacceptable levels of risk for any individual account within their portfolios.
Where a consumer has multiple relationships with a credit grantor (eg a mortgage, personal loan, cheque account and/or investment account) this risk can become significantly more accurately assessed if the status of different accounts can be consolidated on a single data record at consumer or address level and the customer evaluated from the entirety of his relationships.
The benefit of such consolidations — or perhaps more accurately the disadvantage of not treating a customer in his entirety — is nicely illustrated by my own personal experience with a highly respected financial services provider.
I have had a cheque account with this organisation for over 20 years and a mortgage for seven; the latter now for a comparatively small proportion of my house value.
On one occasion, with no advance notice, my salary was paid into my account seven days late.
As a consequence, a large cheque which was presented against my account was returned unpaid.
This resulted in bank charges which, in turn, led to the account itself becoming overdrawn.
I then incurred further charges through failing to remain in credit for a full quarter.
As a not untypical consumer of financial services, I was annoyed in two ways.
First of all I had been subjected to two substantial costs consequent upon some unexplained administrative delay.
More significantly, perhaps, I was annoyed because I expect this financial services organisation to recognise the totality of its relationship to me when making decisions in respect of specific transactions; in this case to realise that its interest in my house should be adequate collateral for a small and presumably temporary overdraft.
Not long afterwards, I shut down my account and transferred the business to another hitherto dormant account.
Examples such as this are legion.
Clearly it has relevance to the design of effective risk management and collections systems and to the issue of customer service in its widest sense.
But it also has relevance to the pro-active marketing of credit and, to my mind, nicely illustrates the crossroads the industry has reached and the opportunities that lie beyond it.
This is because the development of a customer level database, updated constantly from transaction and account status records, allows the marketers to move from a ‘wave’ orientated promotional mentality to one which is ‘event’driven.
The wave orientation (ie one which involves the cross selling of a product by mail on two or three dates only each year) is based around defining which are the customers who best fit the profile of the target user (ie the person who typically opens the credit account).
The event orientation is built around the accurate identification of signals indicating when the  customer needs a new line of credit,what the line might be and why it may be needed.
Taking my situation instanced earlier, the event (of a cheque which would have caused a negative balance) and its context (a good credit history over 20 years, small mortgage in relation to the property value and an otherwise steady income) could have been exploited as clear marketing opportunities.
With intelligent programming, the computer should have been able to recognise either that this particular customer needed an overdraft or that he has probably just become redundant and that mortgage repayment might soon present a problem.
A telephone call to establish whether I had been made redundant or, if not, to inform me of the administrative delay, would have been far more appropriate, and possibly cheaper, than a typed letter announcing the uncleared cheque and the administrative charge.
Many may argue that such a precise level of customer communication is not commercially viable or technically feasible.
With respect to its commercial viability, it is relevant to note the findings of research undertaken by one of CCN Marketing's largest customers in the financial services industry.
This showed that the biggest source of customer dissatisfaction with the promotion of financial services via direct marketing was the failure on the part of banks to make their mailings relevant by taking into account existing known information about the customer.
Direct communications which were relevant to the customer's situation were highly welcome.
It was not the medium itself, but the poor timing and targeting, that rendered mail junk.
A point overlooked by many marketers is that their customers are at the same time also customers of their competitors.
They may hold a current account with you.
They may equally, as I did, hold a second current account with a competitor.
A building society savings account may be held with a second competitor and an insurance policy with a third.
Each of these three relationships is likely to generate competitive mailings for credit products.
In this situation, which is the one which will generate response?
It is my feeling that competitive advantage will not necessarily lie with the company whose television advertising builds the best brand image, or whose direct marketing agency hires the best creative brains.
If it is a customer service that gives advantage, then for the majority of consumers who have minimal communication with branch personnel, it is the personalised quality of the computerised communication systems that constitutes the service quality level.
In such an environment, competitive advantage lies with the organisation that has the richest variety and frequency of interaction with the customer, not because this builds brands awareness, but because it offers the greatest opportunities to identify and to react the events that signal credit demand.
These can be varied.
For example, a young professional receives a significant increase in his annual salary in October.
Such an increase gives him a feeling of career security; his employer is pleased with his performance, he is unlikely to be made redundant, he decides there is no further need to monitor advertisements for opportunities for career advancement with rival firms and he feels he can now afford to enter the housing market and buy a flat.
Maybe he feels he merits and can now afford a more expensive car.
The information necessary to spot such an event as this is not difficult for a well organised customer level database to recognise.
In another example, two customers with a joint account notify their bank of change of address.
They have been building up balances in their current account for some four months.
The number of their monthly transactions and the average value of these transactions has also been growing as they transfer monies from their savings accounts to pay for surveys, place a deposit with estate agents and so forth.
Soon they will be needing a personal loan, perhaps for the first time ever, to pay for the carpets, the curtains and the new kitchen.
It is too ambitious for a financial organisation to hope to recognise such situations and respond accordingly?
To marketing departments the technological challenge associated with such an approach may appear at first quite daunting.
Yet with the development of improved risk management techniques, they find that much of the technological infrastructure is already in place.
For instance, the development of a customer level database may be justifiable solely by reductions in debt made possible by customer level performance scoring systems.
The need on the part of performance scoring models for ready access to detailed transaction and account balance trend data required for such a marketing strategy are already stored on the database, even if off-line, and in a form that makes them sufficiently easy to retrieve.
Likewise, the analytical techniques and human skills needed both to build and to apply risk management scorecards can be adapted quite easily to build marketing scorecards,ie models which measure the likelihood of each customer, at any time, being in need of any credit facility.
Using a mixture of regression, clustering and genetic algorithms, it becomes possible to ‘train’ the computer to recognise the signals that indicate a given event, and to decide the most appropriate action, if any, that such an event should trigger.
Using specially designed pc based software for tracking the impact of different communications strategies, it becomes possible to progressively fine tune these strategies.
Seen from this perspective, a customer base can be viewed as a population most of whose members are in a stable state of financial service equilibrium, with a set of financial accounts adequately matching their needs.
Computer systems should be able to recognise these people and to restrict communication with them to the minimum.
This is consistent with efficient service and basic courtesy.
From time to time various members of this population will move from a stable state to having a special status.
This status may be correlated with day-to-day events such as a promotion at wok, moving home, marriage, redundancy, parenthood, the receipt of an inherited legacy or the final payment of a mortgage.
As the customer moves into any one or more of these states, it is as though his record on the customer database is marked with special flags.
An appropriate set of product communications needs to be sent out at the very earliest opportunity and more expensive, albeit more responsive media, such as a telephone, should be brought into effect.
For the duration of a fixed period after the setting of the flags, communication becomes more frequent and more customised.
According to the event, the duration of this state may last from just a few months to many years.
Indeed, counter staff could also be trained to react to selective product selling opportunities as branches gain easier access to the contents of their customer database.
In summary, the crossroads we are reaching is one where the established targeting criteria (such as demographics, application form characteristics and average balance) which pointed to whom to mail, will in future be overlaid by more complex segmentation systems based on trends and changes in the way customers use the totality of accounts.
Communications will be fewer in number, but will be much more accurately timed and will often employ more expensive and responsive media than statement inserts or direct mail.
Richard Webber is Managing Director of CCN Marketing
Farm debt latest
There are around 100,000 ‘forgotten farmers’ in the UK, who work no more than 27 acres of land, earn profits of no more than £200 a year and are overlooked in almost every set of official agricultural statistics (writes Peter Robson ).
Now a new report, prepared by the University of Reading's Department of Agricultural economics and Management, reveals that those small farms make up more than 40 per cent of the UK's farming industry, but are of ‘negligible agricultural significance’, being responsible for only 2 er cent of all the UK's agricultural production.
Professor Tony Giles, one of the report's three authors, comments that out of the UK's 240,000 agricultural holdings, at least 100,000 average no more than 27 acres and can fall into the ‘very small farm’ category: ‘in England in 1988 the average net farm income of these holdings was a mere £300, falling to £200 in 1989’.
The report also adds that in those cases, ‘off-farm income averaged £12,500 in 1988, rising to £13,500 in 1989’.
Yet under the European Community's proposals to reform the Common agricultural Policy (CAP), such small UK farmers could reap substantial windfalls (see Credit Management , November 1991).
Sean Rickard, Chief Economist with the National Farmers' Union (NFU), admits that such a financial harvest is possible; during the past ten years, ‘very small farms have increased in number, but decreased in acreage, because generally middle-sized farms are being split up with part of the land sold being taken over by larger farms and part becoming smallholdings.
‘But I deplore the thought that very large chunks of public expenditure could be devoted to people who are no more dependent on farming for their livings than you or me.’
Certainly, because those very small farms contribute so little to agricultural productivity — just 29,000 farmers out of about 120,000 commercial holdings are responsible for almost 60 per cent of farming output — many people within the industry query whether or not the very small farm should be legitimately classed as a farm.
The report explains that because these farms are ‘deemed too small to appear in the National Farm Business survey’, the government funded research into a sample of 500 holding sin 1986 and 1987 and into a sample of 1000 others between 1988    and 1989.
Southern England — counties like Surrey, Sussex  and Kent — was rather unique in several ways.
With high land values and the lowest UK unemployment, almost 50 per cent of the very small holdings were what the survey classed as ‘amenity farming’, in which land and buildings are acquired with ‘a desirable residence and the agricultural activities carried out largely for pleasure’.
High profit ventures like garden centres and nurseries had an important place there, and many small holding were owned by retired people.
By contrast, some 6 per cent of small farmholders in Wales are more than 50 years old, 33 per cent are more than 65 years old and many are in poor health.
Almost 25 per cent of all the farms in Wales were reported as having low standards of living ‘with an element of struggle in making ends meet financially’.
Most of the farmers interviewed in the south-west of England were more than 50 year old, and the very small farms represented 30 per cent of all agricultural holdings in that region.
Farm incomes averaged as little as £442 per annum, but were regarded as providing ‘a useful — even essential — supplement to other non-farming sources of income’.
The average non-farming income for the south-west of England ‘from non-farming sources’ in 1989 was £9,356, and about 66 per cent came from waged employment.
Very small farms in the east of England also suffered from low income during the same period.
The region included some of the UK's largest and most profitable farms, but average annual income for the small farmers was £300, with non-farming income averaging just over £9000 a year.
The University of Reading's survey comments that most small farmers ‘could not even subsist on these farms if they did not have outside sources of income.
Even this, at between £7000 and £15,000 a year including earned income, was small by national household income levels.’
The report shows that these small farmers and their spouses spend almost as much time working on the farms as they do at their other jobs, yet farm profits are almost non-existent.
The study identifies few holdings where the occupiers could claim ‘primary dependence on farming as a livelihood’, and that there was no valid reason for those farmers to expect any benefit from the CAP.
One persistent question that intrigued those working on this study during the past four years was, ‘Why do small farmers continue in agriculture when they achieve such small financial rewards for considerable expenditure of effort?’
In Very small farms — a distinctive role ? some attempt is made to reply to that question.
It explains that ‘the picture that emerges is of a group of people who were keen to engage in farming on their own account and who established themselves on a smallholding, often many years ago, but who have failed to progress beyond this first step in the farming ladder.
‘They still mainly regard their farming as a commercial activity pursued for profit.
Residential considerations were paramount for about one-third of the sample.
Most respondents did not foresee any major changes in their way of life in the years ahead and saw no particular difficulties in continuing their present activities…
’Details : Very small farms — a distinctive role?is available from the University of Reading, Department of Agricultural Economics and Management, tel 0734 875123, ext 7118, price £6 
Overworked? underpaid? stressed?
Philip Underwood and Glenys Sowonola look at causes and solutions
Stress is a factor recognised by most Credit Managers and their staff as being an integral part of the job.
We are all familiar with quantative overload (too much to do in too little time), but for those involved in credit there is also the stress caused by having to cope with an environment where, very often, the credit function is not understood and usually underfunded.
Where the Sales Department insists on selling to people we wouldn't want to touch with a barge pole!
On top of this, dealing with recalcitrant debtors can be very frustrating, but where do you vent your feelings?
How many times during a day do we actually get through to the person we need to speak to?
And then, look at the different types we have to deal with — and be polite to, no matter what we may be feeling inside!
No wonder Credit staff are known for downing the odd pint or two — talk about stress!
Unfortunately, stress has an adverse effect on all individuals who become its victims, that is to say, for example , sickness, loss of income, unhappiness, poor relationships, negative attitudes, loss of motivation.
These in turn having damaging effects on the companies and organisations that those individuals work for.
Recent research has shown that one in three managers and supervisors suffer from stress related symptoms and 75 per cent of loss working hours are due to illnesses resulting from stress.
It is recognised by many leading physicians that the existence of unresolved emotional conflict leads to periods of mounting stress which in turn produces alterations in normal bodily functioning, often resulting in disease.
Research shows that many debilitating diseases are often precipitated by stress, and it is well recognised that conditions like heart disease, gastric ulcers, mental illness, colitis, hypertension, skin disorders and several others have their origin in stressful situations.
Organisations can also suffer the effects of stress — excessive absenteeism, loss of output, increased administration, high staff turnover, low staff morale and loss of profits.
These can create even more stress on the individuals left with the burden, especially in the credit control department, where targets have to be met and cash pulled in by certain deadlines.
Events like redundancy, divorce, bereavement, family and work problems, debts, separation, illness, may be stressful for most of us, but why is it that some people can go through crisis after crisis and never suffer the effects of stress?
What abilities do they have compared with others who suffer when faced with similar situations?
The difficult situations that life presents to us are not the cause of stress.
The stress comes from our inability to handle the situations in an effective manner.
After talking to an unco-operative debtor on the phone, or having yet another confrontation with the Sales Department, do you feel calm and relaxed?
Or tense and frustrated?
What is stress?
Simple definitions are: ‘changes in the environment that demand adjustment in our behaviour’ or ‘imbalances between our personal resources and the demands being made upon us’.
Stress comes from three primary sources:
The environment — smells, glare, noise, food contaminants, chemical, radiation etc.
Our occupations — unsociable hours, quantative overload, difficult debtors etc.
Our attitudes.
Psycho-social stress tends to occur in the form of debilitating negative emotions — anger, guilt, jealousy, fear, worry and resentment.
Legacies of past hurts, neglected childhood needs, parental over indulgence and over-concern often set the stage for later stress because the individual is not prepared realistically for handling the events of life.
So what is the answer?
Treatment of the effect or symptoms of the disorder without attention to the cause itself can have the same effect as ignoring the oil warning light on a car; eventual major breakdown.
Pills and potions are only going to remove the symptoms.
No doubt we will feel better without the pain and discomfort and often a spell away from the stressful situation will alleviate some of the effects.
However, the cause is still there and has to be removed by the sufferers themselves.
That means responding to the inevitable events of life in an effective way.
Sadly, few people have an effective strategy for handling stress.
They need to learn new ways of thinking and handling their emotions, because it is the wrong handling of emotion that causes the bulk of so-called stress in today's society.
Stress can be managed effectively through learning to control and change the emotional response we have to the situations we come across in our jobs and personal lives.
Unfortunately we are not taught these things at school, and there are very few organisations offering practical, effective methods that really work.
However, they are available and if individuals are to improve their lives, and companies and organisations are to improve the attendance and  commitment of their staff, they must learn and apply the skills of emotional management.
Progressive organisations are taking stress management education available to all their staff.
This non only improves the attendance, health and morale of their workforce, but also enhances working relationships and the reputation and status of the employer, as they are seen to place more value on their employees.
Take responsibility for your life, and happiness, health and well-being will be yours.
Stressful situations can be managed effectively, thus making you a master of life's events rather than a victim.
A well-balanced, unstressed credit person will be able to reach correct decisions and deal with those difficult debtors (and the sales force) in a more effective way once the techniques for handling emotions — and thereby stress — have been learned.
Philip J Underwood is a Stress Management Consultant and a Director of Tracey College Eastern Ltd.
He is also the founder of The Personal Energy Foundation.
These organisations have been set up to educate and inspire people to greater levels of achievement in both their personal and business lives.
Glenys Sowonola is the Managing Director of Glennick Ledger Controls Ltd and a Fellow of the Institute.
Details can be obtained form the Personal Energy Foundation by phoning 
Patterns of default in the non-financial private sectors
The current recession has been accompanied by an unprecedented rise in the incidence of default on loans by both households and companies
Company liquidations and personal sector mortgage defaults have both risen sharply over the last year and currently stand at record levels.
In the first half of 1991, company insolvencies reached 10,833 (4.0 per cent of the total number of companies registered at Companies House) compared with 6,549 (2.7 per cent) in the equivalent period a year earlier.
Of the former figure, 4149 were compulsory while 6684 companies were would up without a court order.
In the same period, figures produced by the Council for Mortgage Lenders show that 221,900 mortgages (2.3 per cent of the outstanding stock) were more than six months in arrears, compared with 109,370 (1.2 per cent of the outstanding stock) a year earlier, and that 36,610 dwellings were repossessed (0.4 per cent of the outstanding stock of mortgages), more than double the number recorded a year earlier.
Personal bankruptcies and consumer credit defaults are also at record levels.
Although the combination of recession and high interest rates is likely to have been the main cause of this rise in defaults, the much more moderate increase in company failures and mortgage arrears which accompanied the more severe downturn and higher interest rates of 1980–81 period suggests that other factors may also have been important.
Common factors
Similar factors may affect both corporate and personal default.
One important common determinant is the level of gearing, both capital gearing (debt as a proportion of assets) and income gearing (interest payments as a proportion of income), with higher levels of indebtedness associated with a greater likelihood that fixed contractual obligations to creditors (principally interest payments) cannot be met.
Borrowers who have taken out loans ion illiquid assets or assets whose value subsequently falls are particularly vulnerable.
There may also be a relationship between the default rate and inflation.
When there are limits on borrowing, a company or household in financial distress has to survive on cash flow.
With non-indexed and variable-rate debt, a rise in inflation and the nominal interest rate reduces cash flow (implicitly, in this situation, interest payments include some capital repayment).
However, although this factor is important, it is unlikely to explain why default rates have risen so rapidly during 1990–91 compared with the early 1980s, given the much lower levels of inflation during the recent downturn.
In general, company liquidation rates (insolvencies as a proportion of the total number of companies) are higher than personal sector repossessions in relation to the number of mortgages outstanding.
Part of the explanation lies in the greater liquidity of the second-hand market for residential dwellings; corporate assets are more difficult to resell because of difficulties in ascertaining quality.
Another factor explaining higher corporate default rates is the greater volatility of company incomes.
Personal sector incomes are generally more stable, a characteristic underpinned by social security payments of individuals' mortgage interest in the event of unemployment.
Company liquidations have increased more sharply recently than at the same stage of the last recession, when defaults significantly lagged the deterioration in companies' financial position, but corporate indebtedness has been much higher both at the outset of the recession and subsequently.
ICCs' capital gearing (net debt at book value as a percentage of replacement cost capital stock) was 19 per cent in 1990 compared with 9 per cent in 1980.
Their net income gearing (net interest payments as a percentage of post-tax income) was also a little higher, 28 per cent as opposed to 26 per cent on the same comparison.
Gross income gearing (gross interest payments as a percentage of post-tax income) rose from 34 per cent to 37 per cent.
Although much of this increase would seem to have been voluntary, as debt became more attractive relative to equity, the fall in aggregate demand left companies in an exposed position.
A number of factors besides increased gearing may also have contributed to higher corporate default rates.
The sharp fall in share prices in 1990 and the more protracted decline in commercial property prices could have exerted an influence, since such movements reduce the value of corporate collateral, possibly making distress borrowing more difficult.
In addition, the increased proportion of small or newly established companies may have boosted the number of liquidations, since both tend to rely heavily on bank finance.
Moreover, given the length of the post-1980 upswing, an unusually large proportion of companies had no previous experience of dealing with recession.
The recent rise in company liquidations may additionally, and to a much greater extent than in 1980, have been induced by the downturn in the housing market.
It is not possible to obtain data at a sufficiently disaggregated level to confirm this argument, but it is consistent with the data that are available.
Thus, the annual percentage increase in construction sector liquidations in 1990 (up 49.3 per cent) was much higher than in 1980 (up 20.3 per cent ).
The same is also true of the non-food retail sector (which includes, for example, furniture and DIY sales), where the corresponding figures are 52.7 per cent and 33.8 per cent .
By contrast, the manufacturing sector, which is affected less by housing market developments, has experienced a much more limited rise in liquidations, with an annual increase of 26.1 per cent in 1990, compared with 101.6 per cent in 1980.
Personal sector mortgage default
The differences in recent trends in  personal sector mortgage default from the 1980–81 period may also be partly attributable to the rise in gearing, which has increased the likelihood of households encountering debt problems.
Household income gearing (gross interest payments as a proportion of disposable income) stood at 13 per cent in 1990 compared with 5 per cent in 1980, while housing-related capital gearing (mortgage debt as a percentage of the value of the owner-occupied housing stock) increased from 15 per cent in 1980 to 25 per cent in 1990.
This rise partly reflects the longer-term trend towards owner-occupation (encouraged over the last decade by the sale of council houses) and the effects of financial liberalisation.
The latter has allowed borrowers to take our mortgages that are larger both as a multiple of income and as a proportion of property valuation.
For example, between 1980 and 1990 the average advance to income ratio for first-time buyers rose from 1.67 to 2.19, while the average percentage advance to first-time buyers rose from 73.8 to 82.5 over the same period.
The rapid acceleration of house prices during the late 1980s (which received added impetus from the rush by house buyers to beat the ending of multiple mortgage tax relief in August 1988) meant that highly geared first-time buyers were especially vulnerable when interest rates began rising during 1988, and their exposure increased when house prices began falling at the end of 1989.
At the same time as debt service ratios stood at record levels, higher levels of capital gearing, aggravated in some circumstances by house prices falling below the level of outstanding debt, may have made lenders less tolerant of arrears and less willing to help borrowers through remortgaging.
Subdued housing market turnover since the end of 1988 has also made it difficult for borrowers to clear arrears by trading down, and some may have thought it in their best interests to default once their mortgages exceeded the value of their homes — although the borrower in this situation still remains legally liable for any outstanding debt after the property has been sold.
Figures produced by the Council for Mortgage Lenders suggest that of the 36,610 properties repossessed in the first half of this year 45 per cent were voluntary, in the sense that they did not involve a court order.
Another factor which may be relevant to explaining the difference between the early 1980s and the early 1990s is the different regional and social impact of recent rises in unemployment.
In comparison with the last recession, recent rises in unemployment have had a greater relative impact on the South East of England.
Whereas during the 1980–81 period the unemployment rate in the South East was on average three and a half percentage points lower than the national average, it currently stands close to one percentage point lower, while the unemployment rate in Greater London is equal to the national average of 8.7 per cent.
It follows that recent rises in unemployment may have had a relatively greater impact on property-owning white-collar workers than was the case in the early 1980s; moreover, the latter will also be more highly geared than average.
Implications for the financial sector
Defaults in non-financial sector mean that financial institutions have to provision against loan losses.
So far, however, these provisions appear to have been relatively minor, with the exception of some composite insurance companies offering mortgage indemnity guarantees.
For the big four clearing banks, the stock of domestic provisions in relation to domestic lending (1.65 per cent in 1990) remains some way below the levels of the early 1980s and, while building societies' mortgage losses and provision were at a record level in relation to mean assets last year (0.23 per cent), the ratio remained small in absolute terms.
More generally, the balance sheets of both UK banks and building societies appear reasonably healthy, both having capital ratios comfortably in excess of the Basle requirements.
Short-term prospects
Pressures on household and corporate borrowers have been eased significantly since last October by a series of interest rate reductions, which have reduced base rates by a cumulative four and a half percentage points to date.
This has already contributed to a fall in households' income gearing, which stood at 11.4 per cent in the second quarter compared with a peak of 12.9 per cent in the second quarter of last year.
The rise in companies' income gearing has also stabilised.
Economic recovery, coupled with the current low-inflation environment in borrowers' financial positions.
However, these developments are likely to take time to feed through into lower corporate liquidations and personal sector mortgage defaults.
In the case of mortgage default, for example, there are now nearly 60,000 mortgages more than 12 months in arrears, and some part of these arrears will inevitably translate into additional repossessions.
The question of the relationship between current arrears and future repossession has aroused much interest because of the potential impact of the latter on house prices.
The relationship between the two is unlikely to be one-for-one, not least because lenders themselves will be wary of the impact on house prices from further sales of repossessed dwellings; lower house prices not only increase the potential losses to lenders of selling repossessed dwellings but also increase the likelihood of further mortgage default.
Furthermore, when conditions in the housing market pick up, some series arrears could be prevented from becoming repossessions, through households trading down on remortgaging.
As regards future prospects, both mortgage defaults and corporate liquidations should, in due course, decline; at the same time, pressures on financial intermediaries to make further provisions against loan losses should also moderate.
Reproduced by permission of the Bank of England from Quarterly Bulletin November 1991.
Credit control the hard way
Part Two of Gordon Archer's everyday story of credit folk
Jolly Roger (JR) is the newly-appointed financial director of a medium sized engineering company which is having trouble with its credit control, or more precisely its lack of it, and JR is attempting to introduce new controls.
The usual opposition has been put up by the sales contingent in the form of Jim Cavalier, the sales director.
However, at a board meeting the Chairman has supported JR's suggestion that, as a preliminary measure, the accounts department should in future have some control over the acceptance of sales orders.
JR has two weeks to prepare a discussion document outlining his proposals for the company's credit control policy and procedures.
He has already reached the conclusion that slow payment and bad debts are caused by accepting orders to supply on credit terms to uncreditworthy customers.
An obvious statement and an over-simplification perhaps, but one which would require some far-reaching and fundamental changes in the way in which business was being accepted if the problem was to be dealt with.
First steps
JR now had the initiative, and it was vital not to lose momentum.
Through his institutional library he obtained a standard work of reference on the subject of trade credit management and quickly formed the opinion that he would need the co-operation of several more departments before he could hope to implement a full credit policy.
In fact he would have a selling job to do, but could hardly ask Jim Cavalier for a few hints.
JR finally decided to base his report on the following outline.
Terms and conditions
These should be the basis on which a supplier hoped to control the sale before, during and after the movement of the goods.
From past experience he knew that this subject was usually given a low priority, on the basis that by far the majority of business is transacted without ever having to refer to the small print.
Even so, it was equally true that huge sums had been lost in the courts and he called to mind a case from the text books, when a million dollar had been forfeited because of the misplaced comma.
What was intended by the supplier had not in fact materialised, because the case had been tried on correspondence rather than a correctly drawn up agreement.
There is a difference between plain English and legal English which is plain.
Obviously, a line-by-line comparison was not needed at this point, but it was probable that their conditions would be at variance with others in the same industry.
JR had a feeling that theirs would be a hotch potch of additions and amendments over many years, and written in semi-archaic English, with scant regard for cohesion and the most recent legislation.
The trend these days was towards plain English.
Debtors Ledger
He needed to compare his ledger's statistics with the industry averages/norm, and he had hoped for a concentrated sample from their trade association, but no such luck.
In the end, he had to settle for a survey which had been carried out on a national scale by a well-known agency.
Days outstanding (DSO)
This calculation, together with aged debt analysis, seemed to be the most commonly used yardstick.
However, JR, being an experienced figures man, new that statistics could be made to prove almost anything.
For the moment anyway, he would accept that his DSO of 80 was not acceptable when compared with an industry average of 63.
Bad debts
Bad debts as a percentage of turnover was difficult.
There were no averages available and non-one seemed willing to discuss the subject in detail.
Not so surprising, really; it's a sensitive subject and JR remembered the heated boardroom inquests from his previous appointment which usually followed a ‘big one’.
The accountants' view tended towards an acceptance of them as an inevitable consequence of credit trading and their remedy was to increase the bad debt provisions.
The salesmen were willing to follow the same line as it entailed no extra effort on their part and was not likely to interfere with their way of doing things.
The bad debt problem had its roots in a complicity of fatalistic acceptance and in viewing the debtors' ledger as a single balance sheet entity which needed to be financed, rather than a composite of unsecured risks of many colours.
And then the term ‘bad debts’ needed to be defined.
For the sake of this exercise, he would confine his research to sums which were lost due to insolvencies.
This was the area where the most capital was likely to be made.
However, there were other reasons such as‘lost documentation’ and small balances written off, all of which comprised the annual figure, the disclosure of which might result in too much attention being given to his department.
Bad debts of 2 per cent of turnover seemed high, and JR decided to adopt the view that the acid test for a credit controller would be the cost of employing him when compared with the reduction of bad debts and overdraft charges, which should follow the appointment of a competent credit manager.
In these circumstances a high starting figure should help.
This dealt with the overview, but to persuade the board, JR would need to put up the cost justification and that would entail more work than time permitted.
So, he was now in the area of guestimates.
Bad debts at 2% of turnover = £100,000
Average debtors outstanding = £1,095,890, or the equivalent of 80 days sales
Current overdraft stood at £750,000, and was often at ceiling level: at base rate plus 2% it was costing £105,000pa
Now for the theory
Reduce bad debts to 1% of turnover = £50,000 gained
Reduce debtors to 63 days sales (£1,095,890 divided by 80 x 63) = £863,013, a reduction of £232,877; at 14.5%; this would be worth £33,767 £50k plus £33k = £83k or, if they chose to, they could have £232k cash to put to better use
Against this they would have to offset the cost of credit control which, in the light of these figures, would still be profitable.
JR was suspicious by nature, and even more so when figures came together as easily as this.
Nothing was that simple.
He put the project to one side and worked on something else.
From long experience he knew that one of the roads to problem solving was to allow time for the sub-conscious mind to operate.
Slowly and methodically, he worked for about an hour on his correspondence, which included a letter from one of their major customers.
It was a routine matter concerning a query on an invoice, something to do with prices.
He re-directed it to the sales department and made a mental note to have a word with the post room; it was about time that they got their act together.
He put the letter in his Out tray and moved on to another piece of paper, and then he stopped and went back to the first letter.
It's strange the way that chains of thought and ideas are triggered; there is often a delay.
Major customers, distribution of wealth, Pareto analysis, the 80/20 rule.
The sub-conscious mind, it seems, also relied on time and chance.
All this theory of reducing the collection period by 17 days would be brought to no effect if the payments habits of major accounts could not be influenced.
Also, this was where the most opposition was likely to come from, from Jim Cavalier.
JR sent for the latest aged debt report, quickly extracted from it the top 20 customers and found what he now expected to find — that more than 80%; of the total debts were due form these, although by number they amounted to considerably  less than 20%; of the total customer file.
Several of the major accounts appeared to be excessively overdue when compared with the total ledger aged debt statistics.
All the way from America
Because our members have similar interests and concerns, I wanted to discuss an idea with you.
We've made a concerted effort in recent years to make the articles in our association magazine,Business Credit , relevant to the day-to-day problems credit and financial managers face, and to present the latest techniques and applications.
The ideas, practical applications and topics presented in our magazine may appeal to your members.
Subscription rates are $42 (US funds) for one year or $78 for two years.
Obtainable from:Business Credit , National Association of Credit Management, 8815 Centre Park Drive, Suite 200, Columbia MD 21045 USA.
Cindy Tursman Editor,Business Credit 
Making the pace in Chester
Frank Card went to the 1991 Conference of the Consumer Credit Association of the UK in October
The north of England and Scotland have traditionally been the areas of greatest activity in collected credit.
This is largely made up of cheque and voucher trading but also includes personal loans, credit sales, hire-purchase, running account and hire and rental.
The identifying element is that instalments are collected on the doorstep, and the agreements themselves are, in instalment credit terms, for relatively small amounts (typically £150) repaid over relatively short period (typically 26 weeks).
Because of the northern connection, it is entirely appropriate that the annual conference of the Consumer Credit Association of the UK — the largest trade association in this field — should be held in Chester.
The first day consisted of workshops, for members only, on pledge taking and voucher selling, with a free discussion at the end.
Running alongside was a trade fair.
The second day saw the conference proper.
Among those present were Richard Berthoud of the Policy Studies Institute, Rod Blair of the Office of Fair Trading, Geraint Howells of the Unit for Commercial Law Studies, University of Sheffield, Bob Imrie, a leading Trading Standards Officer, and Gerald Howarth MP, the Association's new Parliamentary Consultant.
David Rees is Chairman of the Law Committee, and he introduced the first morning session, which dealt with the new rules for Administration Orders in personal insolvency.
On the platform with him were Ken Wilslow, the conference manager, Gerald Howarth, Gemmell Good, a past Chairman, Tony Dickinson and Mr Blair.
Michael Liley, the Association Director, has pointed out that important changes were in the offing, and it was important to know what was to happen as the change were likely to be found unpleasant in the trade.
It was, said Mr Liley, a form of insolvency, and we would see, over the years, an increase in Administration Orders.
Administration Orders
To illustrate the possible pattern in England and Wales, Mr Rees gave some figures, taken from the Scottish Law Commission report, of sequestrations in Scotland since recent changes in the law there.
From nil in 1989, there had now been a total of 8368 up to mid-July 1991.
The peak had been May 1991, with 728.
The effect of this was to relieve the debtor of all liability for their debts.
However, the individual concerned would find it difficult to obtain credit in the future — a point often overlooked by those who advocated the system.
There were, suggested David Rees, three reasons for the growth in numbers:
insurance practitioners make a lot of money out of the system and therefore actively promote it
pressure of work on credit advises can tempt them to see this as a way of reducing the workload
there is an element of abuse on the part of some debtors — it can be simply one way of not paying the debt
As a matter of interest, Mr Rees took a head count, asking how many members in the hall were aware of the impending changes; apparently only about 30 per cent of the audience knew of the proposed amendments.
The Administration Order, which has existed for about 100 years with hardly anyone noticing, was limited to cases at present below the £5000 threshold.
The proposed changes had one key aim — to increase usage — so, for example, that threshold was to go.
When the new rules come in, any debtors will be able to apply for one whether or not there is a judgement debt against their names.
And there was a sting in the tail, he warned finally.
First, the existing power to make a composition order was emphasised.
Second, it seemed that at the end of three years the debtor's debts would be written off, although the Act's drafting was not clear on this point.
Financial Statement
In my report on the Money Advice Liaison Group conference (‘Life beyond debt — a common goal’,Credit Management , May 1991) I described in detail the standard Financial Statement launched at that conference by Anthony Sharp of the CCTA.
Mr Rees confirmed to the CCAUK conference that this form had been approved by trade associations representing various types of consumer creditor.
‘But’, he added, ‘we have a problem.’
As report in May, the CCAUK feels that the present distribution arrangements can impinge unfairly on its members.
The present system is that income is distributed pro rata to the total debt owed.
The Association feels, and has always felt, that the distribution should be pro rata to the amount of the contracted repayments.
Mr Rees elaborated: ‘We are being expected to agree to an omnibus distribution method under which the monthly creditor might be repaid more quickly than the contract provides, whilst the weekly creditor is repaid by instalments only a fraction of those shown in the contract.
On any view, this seems unfair.
Our alternative is straightforward, and meets this objection, and we are not only asking that it be used in all cases, only those where the result would otherwise  be patently unjust.
This one, I believe, will run and run’.
Nevertheless, Mr Rees believes the Financial Statement to be a helpful tool which saves creditors, advisers and debtors much time, and helps the debtors to sort themselves out.
‘Debt advisers spend on average 17.5 hours on each case.
Much of that time is taken up negotiating with creditors.
The Financial Statement's key aim is to save much of that time by use of an agreed system in which creditors have trust and confidence.
That can only be good for the efficiency of the debt advice industry and thus for debtors as a whole.’
Mr Rees felt that the current impasse on distribution methods stemmed from a degree of confusion between voluntary systems and Administration Orders.
The Administration Order was a bankruptcy procedure administered by the Court.
The Financial Statement was a voluntary arrangement, which aimed to avoid court action.
Yet those who objected to ‘pro rata to contracted payments’ pointed in support to the distribution method commonly used by the Courts in Administration Orders.
Such reasoning had two flaws.
Firstly, why should a voluntary arrangement have to mimic an Administration Order?
They were quite different things.
Secondly, although the Courts had historically tended to distribute pro rata to the total debt owed, there was no requirement to do so.
The Courts had unfettered discretion.
This was not widely realised.
This technical analysis had been confirmed in a recent County Court appeal against the exercise of a Registrar's discretion.
However, given the notorious difficulties under English law of appealing against an exercise of discretion, that particular case had not been taken further.
Before leaving Mr Rees's favourite subject, it is worth recalling what took place at the MALG Conference earlier this year.
Two workshops there considered the CCAUK's case for ‘pro rata to instalments’, and the point was well taken, especially where debtors had a mixture of short and long-term debt and/or weekly and monthly instalments.
Indeed, one representative of a finance house pointed out that there was a benefit in allowing the short-term debts to be cleared first; it gave the debtor a light at the end of the tunnel, an achievable goal to aim at.
There was not serious opposition reported, in either workshop, to the CCAUK's case.
Extortionate bargains
The next item on the morning's agenda concerned the proposed new rules on extortionate credit bargains.
The Office of Fair Trading's report on the subject came out only a few days before, and Mr Blair introduced it.
Other members of the Panel included Mr Liley, Mr Rees, Mr Howarth and Frank Card.
The OFT, having taken opinions from various sectors, considered that these particular sections of the Consumer Credit Act had not really been effective.
Relatively few cases had come to court, and those that had, the court had tended to take a restrictive interpretation of the crucial words.
The threshold, perhaps, was set too high; the courts, remembering the Moneylenders Act, tended to equate ‘extortionate’ with ‘harsh and unconscionable’.
The main recommendations, as far as the CCAUK's members are concerned, are:
extortionate credit bargains in ss. 137–140 should be known as ‘unjust credit transactions’
‘excessive’, rather than grossly exorbitant, payments should be a factor in identifying an unjust transaction
there should be a test — based on the statutory wording related to licences—as to whether a credit transaction involved activity which was oppressive or unfair or improper, which should be a further factor
another factor would be the creditor's creditworthiness checks
the court should be empowered to re-open a credit transaction of its own volition, both in defended and undefended cases
the court to notify the Director General of all unjust transactions
the Director General and the local trading standards departments should be empowered to initiate ‘unjust credit transaction’ proceedings, but only in the public interest
Another recommendation was that unlicensed activity should be subject to tougher penalties, and this met with the Conference's general approval.
The Office of Fair Trading had considered an alternative approach: either ceilings (a maximum permissible rate of interest) or thresholds (a rate beyond which the creditor had to bear the burden of proof in showing that the transaction was not oppressive, as in the old Moneylenders Act).
These existed in other countries, including EC countries.
They were rejected here for various reasons.
Mr Rees reminded Conference that the Association had been asked why members did not charge a lower rate of interest, and then charge interest on default.
In fact, said Mr Liley, some companies in the field had tried this, but the customers had let it be known that this was not what was wanted.
The buyers in this particular market were very clear that what they wanted was a small loan, for a fixed amount, over a short period, paid weekly to a collector.
One of the main planks of the CCAUK's argument is that the Annual Percentage rate is not so high as it looks, since though most transactions are contracted for (say) 26 weeks, in fact they end up being repaid — with no series problem — in about 30 or 33 weeks, with no penalty.
Banks and the APR
As was discussed during the morning, it is in fact a source of grievance to the Association and its members that banks are not obliged to — indeed are barred from — using the Annual Percentage Rate formula in the context of overdrafts.
They could quote a percentage rate and charge costs of various sorts on top; other creditors had to include all additional costs — which for CCAUK members included doorstep collection costs — in the APR figure.
However, the Association recognises that the APR concept, with its faults, is probably here to stay.
The general feeling was that the report was fair and balanced, and that members could live with the ‘unjust credit transactions’ idea when the time came.
Clearly, however, the Association has a problem.
One passage in the OFT report says:
The cost of credit…is more than the borrower can afford.
Even where the credit market is fully competitive and suffers no distortions, it may be judged that the price of credit so resulting is excessive and socially unacceptable.
This aspect therefore involved a judgement that low-income families…do not have access to credit at an acceptable price.
The problem is more of income distribution than of a failing in the technical working of the credit market itself.
The paragraph goes on to hint that the report is in sympathy with calls for development in ‘social lending’ rather than commercial lending at this level.
However, we had seen lively debates on aspects of a part of consumer credit with which many are not too familiar, debates which had illustrated well that there was more to the ‘credit bargain’ than the headline APR figure, and which had dispelled some long-held prejudices.
Other, briefer sessions in the morning included the Chairman's and Director's reports.
Then in the afternoon were scheduled debates on The European Scene (led by Caroline Snewin) and Canvassing.
As I left in early afternoon to catch the London train, I reflected that here was as large number of small businessmen who were likely to see some radical changes in the way they operated.
They could, perhaps, take comfort from the poster on the hotel's swing doors announcing the following Saturday's cabaret.
It was Gerry and the Pacemakers.
At least some things never change.
After the downwave
Frank Card reports from the recent ICM/Justitia CAS conference
Did Bob Beckman identify the Downwave?
Or did he, as some are inclined to think, actually invent it?
The concept is so closely linked with his names that it is difficult, sometimes, to separate the two.
In the objectives of the ICM/Justitia CAS conference (Stratford-upon-Avon, 20 November 1991) some questions were posed:
The CBI now confirms that the UK should pull out of the present recession at the beginning of 1992; in fact, will it?
Are we actually going to learn anything from this recent disastrous period?
A recession causes many reliable creditworthy consumers to go under; how safe will new and existing scoring systems now be?
Is professional money advice still a subject creditors can afford to ignore, or should we not be moving towards full recognition and co-operation and all its implications?
Anthony Sharp, the Chairman, pointed out that the DTI had recently said that the recession would be over in January 1992.
That was six weeks hence.
(By the time this goes to press, readers will probably have the benefit of hindsight.)
The end of sight?
That possibility was handled by Bob Beckman, an American economist-writer who has settled in this country and has built a reputation for the uncanny accuracy of his predictions, though it is fair to say that not everyone agrees with his views of his predictions.
He started by asking those present how many believed that the end was, indeed, very close (nil).
He pointed out, however, that on one definition it had in fact arrived; but the figures concerned were distorted by developments in North Sea oil.
He went on to demonstrate that no only was the recession not yet over but its end was not even on the horizon.
In the forthright style that has helped to earn him his reputation, he said that politicians are sick people, that they have a profound characters fault, and that their main objective is to keep their jobs (does the later at least not also apply to economists, one might wonder?).
As a result of that, he said, you should never believe anything from the political source except denial — and then you should believe what is denied.
Having got his attention-grabbers out of the way, Mr Beckman went on to the more serious stuff.
Preaching to the converted, he said that credit was the best indicator of forthcoming recession, or the end thereof.
Putting in a plug for his new book,Crashers , he described how it covers the major financial crashes in the world, starting with the 17th century tulip crash in the Netherlands, through to 30s banking crisis and the Deutschmark crash of the same period, to the stock market ‘silver bubble’.
The common denominator was credit, since credit adds volatility to the economy.
During recession, unemployment is high, bankruptcies rise, financial assets fail, so the only factor to fuel revival is credit.
Ignore, he said, unrealistic prattling from political sources; when recovery comes it must be based on fact, not prattling.
He saw no evidence of recovery under present conditions.
All depended on the velocity of the circulation of money.
Money is available, but there was a fall in its velocity, since people were not prepared to borrow.
When that velocity starts to rise, that will be an encouraging sign.
He declined to speculate on dates, except to say that he saw no sign of it happening next year (1992); there was too much backlog to be mopped up.
There was a serious situation, Mr Beckman continued, in the building society world.
Stronger societies were taking over smaller and weaker ones, which resulted in a downgrading of the credit rating of the predator.
The bailing out of weaker building societies must come to an end.
It was an illusion that a building society has never gone bankrupt; there  was two that had done so, where investors had lost money.
Another potential disaster area was housing.
He was critical of Clive Thornton for having once claimed that a house was the best investment, since prices rise and never fall; they may reach a plateau, but will then rise again.
Not true, said Mr Beckman.
He was critical, too, of government sources for changing the position of the goalposts when defining economic recovery.
The 1930s recession took about 10 years to work through; but have we now even recovered the position we wee in during 1979?
Beckman — guru or fakir?
In answer to a question, he said that a change in the political hue of the government would not, in the long term, make any difference.
Such differences as there were would be short-term ones, such as problems for sterling or changes in interest rates.
He had not been able to identify any change over the past 50 years which could be linked with the economic policy of any party.
In the long term, he said, the government would not take us out of the recession; the recession would work out naturally.
He believed that the government had lost credibility, first by denying that any recession ever existed, then by claiming it was only minor, then by claiming that though perhaps it was severe the recovery was just around the corner.
The outcome of this was that if finally recovery did actually start, no-one would believe them.
But recovery was not about to start.
He believes that 1992 will be the worst yet.
Asked about the role of Japan, he replied that Japan's economy was lagging behind; only now was Japan going into recession.
The mention of 1992 prompted question on the effect of the forthcoming single European market
‘For 20 years’, said Mr Beckman, ‘the European Community has been trying to agree on air fares.
If they can't even agree on that, how can they possibly agree on other, more important, things?’
What have we learnt?
Roger Hymas is a lecturer and writer and a Director of Cadogan Management Ltd, a business development adviser to corporations and institutions.
His experience includes AA, AmEx and the Burton Group.
Mr Hymas started by giving a personal view of the differences in character between the 80s and the 90s.
Where 80s people were grabbing, 90s people would be caring.
Where the 80s economy was one of bust-boom-bust, the 90s economy would be one of stability.
In the 80s, the banks, with poor management, had conspired with government to get us into this situation.
In the 80s, the tendency had been towards deregulation; that would reverse in the 90s to re-regulation.
Marketing then was  indisciplined , but now would be more targeted.
And so on.
We are, he thinks, entering a period of new morality, when people would be looking for lack of stress, believing that the quality of life would transcend monetary reward.
The consumer, now, had a new confidence and demanded respect.
The National Health Service was a genuine concern to many people, and for this and similar reasons, he believed, Margaret Thatcher could not possibly have won the next election for the Tories.
Tentatively, he put the recovery at about 18 months ahead, but queried if it could be a non-inflationary one.
The consumer was helping to delay recovery; the consumer was scared, afraid that they were going to be squeezed further.
The riskier loan was disappearing from the market.
This time round, he believed, the housing market was unlikely to be the driving force.
How long would our present problems last?
Only till the consumer confidence was restored, which could be a very slow process.
He advised us to treat any claims of recovery with caution, and he forecast sluggish demand over the next 18 months.
Growth would only come with money supply.
If the economy does start to recover, speculated Mr Hymas, banks will be hitting their ratio ceilings, and there are moves, led by Barclays, to relax these rules.
The Bank of England is cautious.
Moving on to the lending market, he pointed out that this is consolidating, since some lenders were perceived as duplicating the efforts of the parents.
On the other hand, there were new entrants such as GE Capital Corporation, and more DIY operations by such as motor manufacturers.
He believed, however, that the overdraft would dominate the lending market, as it does in France and Germany.
Access would be by debit card, and the use of credit cards would diminish.
Store cards, particularly, were very vulnerable.
Consumer privacy and data processing were high on the horizon, said Mr Hymas, and Brussels was suspicious of all direct marketing activity, to the extent that list-swapping will be hampered.
Those in the business therefore should create strong interest groups to form a powerful lobby.
Credit agencies in the  United States had taken a hammering, and people on the lists were now entitled to a report annually or on demand.
Businessmen must ensure that they meet the terms of business ethics imposed by the media.
He cited the apparently uncaring attitude of some bank managers, and said that this was the customer's best opportunity to get this rectified, ‘a golden chance to insist on service from the bank’.
We were already seeing the effects of this in the softening of attitudes in bank advertisements.
A role for the future?
John Langhorn is a chartered accountant, and joined Justitia CAS in 1985.
He became Managing Director in April 1991.
If present forecasts were correct, he stated, the implications for debt collection agencies were enormous.
These could be defined as:
changes in personal behaviour
restrictions in the availability of credit
developments in credit scoring
court and bailiff reforms
legislation on such matters as harassment
The agencies had published a Code of Practice which had the approval of the Office of Fair Trading.
Mr Langhorn  compared the relative values of in-house collections and agency collections, stating first that the agencies must develop a rapport with the clients.
In his view, it was true that the in-house collection manager was generally dedicated, well-trained, well-paid, well-motivated.
But debts were becoming increasingly difficult to bring home.
He felt that attitudes as a bad debt problem made itself felt, got out of control and was brought down again, could be typically summarised like this:
He made the point that, whilst the mail order companies had lived with bad debt for years, for such as the building societies it was a new phenomenon.
Now is the time for agencies to prove their claims.
They had the edge over the inhouse operations.
Why was this?
He cited several reasons, not all of which perhaps would be accepted by your average credit manager.
more specialisation
more innovation
better knowledge (because of the database — 18 per cent of new debts were linked in some way to debts already known)
better information technology
doorstep collections
(As to the last, it should perhaps be remembered that both the collected credit operators and some of the finance houses have this facility too, although Mr Langhorn said only the agencies do it.)
There had, he said, been a recent independent survey which had shown that the clients put ethical standards of the agencies right at the top, above rates, above speed, above feedback.
The Credit Services Association had a Code of Practice which was strictly enforced, and all creditors were advised to stick to CSA agencies.
Finally, he forecast a reduction both of length of credit and of balances, a rationalisation of in-house departments, and an increase of solus agreements.
How safe is scoring?
Dr John Coffman, as President of the MDS Group, heads a company which has expanded from its original credit scoring base into three closely related businesses: credit and market analysis, credit management software, and credit consulting and training.
Credit scoring, he said, is just another means of controlling the credit risk.
As with any credit decision, there was always a lag between decision and outcome.
In evaluating credit scoring at the present time, we had to consider three aspects:
coping with the recession   
managing after the recession
preparing for the next recession.
During a recession, the prudent customer doesn't ‘revolve’; but unfortunately the imprudent one ‘revolves’ even more.
One thing he had learnt in the US was that, regardless of when credit was approved — before the recession or during it — it suddenly started going bad.
Three questions had to be considered:
Do we modify our credit acquisition policies?
What can we do to minimise the amount of loss?
Should we lower cut-off points?
He pointed out that modifying the credit acquisition policies might have only a minimal effect, since most of the losses were from cases accepted some time ago.
In the long term, however, it would have some effect.
An early identification of problems was important, followed by prioritisation of resources.
We must, said Dr Coffman, be:
proactive
selective
not over-reactive
Whilst coping with immediate problems, it was important to take the long-term view.
Computer scoring provides management with much control, in the forms of various types of scoring and degrees of calibration.
After the recession, the question arises: Do I loosen up?
There were also modelling issues.
In devising scores you were working on a mixture of recession and non-recession models.
The data from the recession may not be useful in managing in normal times but on the other hand may help in managing the next recession.
At the start of the recession, we had to be prepared to have regard to its length, its depth, its breadth and to adapt policies and to be flexible.
Whither money advice?
Stuart Errington was perhaps better known as Chief Executive and Chairman of Mercantile Credit (and at different periods Chairman of the Finance Houses Association and the Equipment Leasing Association), but is now Chairman of the National Association of Citizens Advice Bureaux.
His involvement with the CABx started when Mercantile funded the South East money Advice Support Unit.
Poacher turned gamekeeper, perhaps?
Every banker, he started by saying, has a vested interest in bad debt: bad debt is part of the job.
The UK has, in European terms, the largest difference between unemployment rates and wages.
CAB clients felt disenfranchised — upturns pass them by.
So what was the approach of the CABx to the downwave?
He believed that Money Advice was  here to stay, whatever happened to the economy.
If an upwave was due, it was inevitable that thee would be bad debts, and Money Advice would be needed to help.
Every year, half a million problems were tackled by Money Advice agreements.
He gave pictures of typical CAB enquirers:
low income
recent change in circumstances — divorce, redundancy — resulting in lower standard of living
self-employed sole trader, receiving little help or advice, living on credit which should be financing the business
overcommitted homeowner, who only comes in when things get desperate
The CABx spend 70 per cent of their time on debt enquiries, although debts were a much smaller proportion of the portfolio in number terms.
One of the chief causes at the present time was the increase in interest rates, especially for the self-employed.
When approached by a client, the bureau would, with client, allocate priorities to each of the debts, putting fuel and housing high on the list and unsecured credit lower down.
The majority of clients would need to have their debts rescheduled, and it was important that the companies should receive the full picture.
The bureau must be available in case the scheme broke down.
The Citizens' Advice Bureaux, said Mr Errington, were advisers and advocates, not debt collectors; they had to be careful not to step over that line.
They had to respond to changes in volume, changes in client, changes in climate.
It was important for the lenders to give normal and practical support.
The incidence of bad debt, he concluded, was socially unacceptable and financially disastrous.
Write off or write back?
Curt Fredrikson founded the Swedish Debt Surveillance operation, and has been Managing Director of the Swedish wing of Justitia since 1985.
He introduced a concept, pioneered in Sweden, under which instead of writing off a bad debt, the creditor would arrange to have the debtor's situation monitored, and then, when time was ripe, would ask for payment again.
From the Swedish beginnings, the company is expanding into Switzerland, Norway, Finland, Denmark and — soon — the United Kingdom.
 It was intended to set up all over Europe; can it, Mr Fredrikson asked rhetorically, repeat the Swedish experience?
The potential in the UK was enormous.
Instead of writing off, there was a better option: a chance of recovery, which if it fails, costs the creditor nothing.
He made the point that most debtors will have to pay, and will respond positively when things improve.
Furthermore, the percentage of success would be higher following a long recession.
There are three phases to debt surveillance:
 ensure that the debt is not invalid (statute which varies country to country)
monitor the debtor's personal situation
collect
The tax system in Sweden was very helpful to creditors in this respect, but in the UK, unfortunately, one needed collectors.
He believed that the company would soon have a network of debt surveillance collectors throughout Europe.
The benefit for the creditor was clear: no result, no fee.
Mr Sharp, in introducing the questions at the end of this session, wondered if eventually the EC would standardise the statute of limitations.
Three points then arose in questions:
No, the debt surveillance company would not accept ‘gone away’
Yes, interest in added to the debt where local laws allow
In answer to a query from Rod Blair of the OFT, Mr Fredrikson would not discuss the techniques which might be used to keep track where the debtor was not on the electoral role.
Light on the subject
The delegates had a stimulating day, with a wide variety of speakers, none of whom was afraid to be controversial.
It is a pity, therefore, that the Beckman sceptics — and they do exist, as was obvious during casual conversations in the breaks — did not indulge in a little more aggressive questioning.
On a more practical level, two points should be made.
No matter how interesting the speakers, neither a full morning without a break, nor subdued lighting in an overheated room, are conducive to alertness and sparkling debate.
Having said that, congratulations are due to the Institute for a starry conference, and to Anthony Sharp for firm and smooth chairing.
Frank Card is an ICM member, and author and a training consultant 
INSTITUTE NEWS
Successful education conference
The Institute's fifth Education Conference was held in Birmingham on Tuesday 19 November, and was attended by a record number of representatives from branches and colleges.
In total, 40 people were present, and a thorough review was undertaken of all major topics relating to the educational development of the Institute.
An excellent atmosphere prevailed, and a ‘bullish’ note was struck from the beginning with the announcement of the plans for the establishment of a Chair in Credit Management at the University of Bradford.
Delegates were informed that an encouraging number of responses had already been received to the search for sponsoring organisations, and there was every prospect that the chair would be established in 1992.
It was one thing to make the necessary financial decisions, and another to obtain the right candidate for the post.
Delegates were invited to start preparing their applications.
The post at Bradford was only the tip of the iceberg (although a very big tip) and much of the discussion throughout the rest of the day concentrated on the ways in which the Institute's professional examination scheme could be offered in the most effective way in colleges, and to ensure that colleges, branches and Institute Headquarters were working together.
At the present time, 27 colleges are providing courses, with a record enrolment of 690 students.
Urgent efforts are being made to revive courses in Liverpool and Brighton, where educational PR events have been planned for Wednesday 4 and Thursday 5 December respectively.
In addition, a branch sponsored class has been established in Newcastle, with a good prospect of this being converted into a college course in September 1992.
Among other topics discussed at the Education Conference were the Preliminary Certificate in Credit Management, for which the Watford College (now known as the West Herts College) has been established as a pilot centre.
Approximately 12 students are pursuing this valuable course of study, which will give them a real insight into credit management, with a special emphasis on the development of competence in the job.
As usual, much discussion took place on syllabuses and examinations and on the arrangement of courses in colleges.
The day concluded with an exchange of ideas on the ways in which branches and colleges could achieve better publicity, and thus increase the number of students even further in the coming years.
Proceedings throughout the day were chaired by John Brown, the Chairman of the Education Committee, and a strong measure of support from Committee members was obtained for this most encouraging event.
New tuition centre in Newcastle
With the active cooperation of members of the Northumberland and Durham Branch, and Colin Jenks from the College of Arts and Technology in Newcastle, and Branch-sponsored tuition scheme has been established in Newcastle, meeting at the headquarters of the Logic Group plc.
There is an extremely good chance of this class becoming an official class of the Newcastle College of Arts and Technology in September 1992 if sufficient students come forward.
Come on you Geordies, get studying !
Edinburgh publicity event
Wednesday 8 January 1992
An education PR event will be held at the Telford College, Edinburgh at 6pm for 6.30pm on Wednesday 8 January 1992, and all supporters of the Institute in the eastern part of Scotland are urged to attend, in order to re-establish the classes to be held at the college.
The presence of managers as well as potential students is strongly encouraged, so that the full range of facilities and student requirements can be discussed and properly sorted.
Excellent refreshments will be provided, and those who wish to attend are asked to contact Catherine Sharpe at Institute headquarters as soon as possible, so that proper arrangements can be made for this important reception.
Annual Lectures
Details will be found opposite of the 1992 Annual Lectures, which will start on Monday 20 January 1992, with Terry Robinson, Vice-President of the Institute, launching the series under the title Improving Cash-Flow by Collecting to Terms .
The 1992 series will be held at a new venue, Abbey Community Association, 34 Great Smith Street, London SW1 3BU.
Stop Press:
Liverpool is back in business.
Intermediate Stage classes start in Liverpool in January.
Details later.
Contact either Suzanne Roberts at Legal & Trade Credit Management on 081 302 2522 or at home on 0744 52336 urgently, or Ian Johnson at the Liverpool Community College on 051 259 1124.
Postscript
There is now a course at Brighton starting in January 1992 for the Intermediate Stage.
For details contact Jonathan Pugh at Brighton College of Technology on 0273 667788 or Sharon Finch on 0293 560777.
Shipshape and Bristol Fashion
Despite the recession, credit managers are bearing up well.
it is hoped that the interesting programme of events has contributed to their wellbeing.
The committee is very pleased with attendances ‘this term’, which seems to indicate that we got it right…at least some of the time.
‘The term’ commenced in September with a talk by Guy Stobart of Burges Salmon on ‘Pitfalls of taking security’which took place aboard the MSV Lochiel moored in Bristol harbour.
It was a lunchtime event which proved most enjoyable, and people left realising that it's not only the banks that can do something to cover themselves.
October saw the ‘classroom’ move along the road (or the M4) to Swindon for John Lye and Richard Long of Nationwide Anglia to educate us on the mysteries of behavioural scoring on current accounts.
The audience was predominantly trade-orientated, but found the opportunity to see how the consumer side of credit operates.
‘The staff’ were delighted with the turnout, and in particular the number of new faces that attended.
Will there be a Swindon Branch some day?
Only time will tell, but it will require a number of dedicated members to get it off the ground.
Members were really tested in November when, at the Almondsbury Interchange Hotel, Barr Thornton of Dale Carnegie    delivered an exhilarating talk on time pressure management.
Top of the class came Andrew MacDonald and Stuart Richardson, who were able to remember 20 objects in under three minutes using word association.
Shades of Leslie Welch the Memory Man (this gives the writer's age away!)
Certainly a different style of presentation, which provoked food for thought.
Perhaps later feedback will show whether members are able to operate the ‘less stress desk system’ advocated, where the waste bin plays a major role.
Again, an excellent turnout on a dreadful evening.
The final examination of the year was early in December at the elegant Victoria Rooms in Clifton, Bristol, when a Promotion Evening was held to publicise the Institute not only to our own profession but to the business community in Bristol.
How did we go about it?
With the help of Easton Houst we mailed 3700 major businesses in the area and followed this up with press advertising in addition to seeking help from our existing members.
How did we do?
Not bad.
Over 50 attended the function, but what was so encouraging was the quality of the prospective members that attended.
Applications for new membership have already been received and our profile in the Bristol area has been increased.
We were pleased to welcome Peter Rowe, our Director General Designate, along with Kate Beddington-Brown.
The committee did sterling work on the hospitality front, and one more so than Gill Weymouth and the Social Committee who organised a credit trivia quiz.
Master of Ceremonies was Branch Chairman Malcolm Cork, Booth White, who has decided to stand down from the position.
His place will be taken by our Vice Chairman, Peter Coupe, GE Capital, and Basil Billinger, Touche Ross, takes over as Vice chairman in addition to PRO.
The New Year brings new challenges, none more than providing tuition facilities for students taking their finals, and thanks to BT this has been overcome and Student Liaison Officer Geoff Forster is running his down courses.
Well done.
A warm welcome is extended to all members (and prospective members of course) at our meetings in 1992.
A wide variety of events are planned including the ‘ICM Thespians’ in a playlet, talks on the changing role of the County Court, why so few directors' disqualifications, and legal updates, in addition to social events and, of course, the AGM.
The committee looks forward to seeing you in the coming year.
Elections to Membership