

Front cover by Starburst Images
CHAIRMAN
Driving through fog on the M25, listening to yet another radio programme about the recession, it is difficult to imagine that there might be light at the end of the tunnel; but spring is on its way, and I hope it will bring with it some sign of the long-promised upturn in the economy.
For the Institute, with the spring comes our National Conference, which will be held this year on Wednesday 4 March at the London Hilton Hotel, Park Lane.
Full details of the Conference speakers are given on page 48.
The Conference is traditionally accompanied by an Exhibition, and this year is no exception.
The exhibitors are all market leaders in their respective fields and are of special interest and value to all engaged in the credit profession.
A ‘final reminder’ Conference leaflet and booking form are enclosed with this issue.
If you have not already reserved a place, please do so soon.
Also enclosed you will find a programme and booking form for this year's FECMA Conference.
The Conference, entitled ‘European credit’, will be held in Cologne on 4 and 5 June.
It will be truly European, with speakers from most member states, and with simultaneous translation of the sessions into German.
it is my personal hope that the Conference will help to encourage the formation of a credit association in Germany, where none exists at present.
The Conference has already engaged the interest of the German equivalent of the CBI, which has offered to assist us with marketing the event.
I am, however, particularly keen that we make every effort to achieve a maximum attendance, so if any members would like a supply of booking forms — in English or in German — to send to potential delegates at home or abroad, Lucy Burgin at Easton House will be pleased to hear from you.
Finally, this is also the season when our branches hold their Annual General Meetings.
At these meetings, new people may be recruited to serve on branch  committees , and existing committee members elected to office.
Our network of branch chairmen, branch secretaries and their committees deserve our heartfelt thanks for the hard work that they do.
The health of the Institute depends on the commitment and support of its branches, and each branch depends on its individual members, so please make sure that you attend your AGM and, if possible, become involved in branch management.
ICM COUNCIL MEMBERS
LETTERS
A clear note
I am writing this letter in a personal capacity, but as Chairman of the Education Committee and a member of the Membership & Recruitment Committee, perhaps I am well placed to comment on the debate on entry requirements.
Goodness knows I do not wish to prolong the agony, but I feel some clarity is needed.
On the one hand, the Institute wishes to be seen as a professional body, and this is possible only where entry is restricted by academic qualification.
On the other hand, it requires a membership large enough to enable it to represent a significant number of credit managers.
In addressing these conflicting aims, the Institute's Council, in 1987 determined that from 1997 entry would be by examination only.
This would demonstrate its commitment to achieving professional status whilst allowing enough time for membership to grow.
Although wishing to increase membership, Council was anxious that direct entry was not seen as an easy option and instructed the M&R Committee to apply rigorously the requirement that the candidates demonstrate at least five years' experience at senior level in credit management and to raise to 30 years the minimum age.
At the same time, the minimum length of thesis was changed to 10,000 words for those few candidates seeking entry by this route.
By these measures it sought to ensure that direct entry and thesis-entry members were at least of an equivalent calibre to student graduates.
I think this accurately summarises the position and it will be of comfort to prospective direct entrants that there are no proposals to raise further, in terms of age and experience, direct entry requirements.
On the other hand, students may be reassured that those requirements are rigorously applied.
Corrections
Credit Management apologises to Infocheck and Infolink for transposing their names on page 8 of last month's issue.
The new item headed Going Global should have stated that an Infocheck (not an Infolink) subsidiary Global Scan had announced a number of major product enhancements.
For further information on the availability of Global Scan and other Infocheck services through Telecom Gold, please see page 39.
On page 27 of the last issue of Credit Management , the footnote should have said that individual voluntary arrangements account for 13 per cent(not 1 per cent as was printed) of personal failures.
We regret any inconvenience caused to readers and to Cork Gully, whose Senior Insolvency Manager wrote the article.
Subscribing to a view
I read in the December issue of Credit Management that council, at its October meeting, decided the 1992 subscription rates and also to penalise those who did not choose to pay by direct debit.
Many members enjoy the advantage of having their subscriptions paid by their employers and the new rates mean that these members' employers will be penalised by the direct debit fee.
I presume the reason for the change is to ensure prompt receipt of the subscriptions — I only wish we could do the same with our customers!
Would not a more reasonable decision have been to fix the subscription at the direct debit level but offer a discount of £5.00 for payment say within 14 days of the due date?
This topic like others could be introduced into the Annual Conference agenda which would then allow the membership a chance to debate general issues.
Does the membership as a whole ever get the chance to raise questions with Council?
Have we, the membership, had any details of the new independent Secretariat due from 1 October?
What do other members think of these issues?
COLIN HINGSTON, HONORARY TREASURER, REPLIES:
It is not the intention of the Institute to penalise those who do not pay by direct debit, but rather to reward those who elect to pay by this means.
The reason for this is not primarily to speed payments.
You may be surprised to learn that the vast majority of our members paying by cheque do so reasonably promptly, like yourself.
It is, however, easier (and therefore cheaper) for our administration to receive payments by direct debit.
So why should we not pass the benefits of these savings back to the members?
I accept that we perhaps should have made this point clear in the December magazine.
Of course, members are free to raise these issues, though the appropriate forum is the Annual General Meeting rather than the Annual Conference.
Possibly the best way of talking through such matters is at local branch meetings.
Each branch chairman is automatically a member of council.
In your case, at Thames Valley, I am sure Iain McLennan would be delighted to have a chat.
Finally, you probably realise by now, in light of the January magazine, that we are keeping the membership as up to date as possible with developments as we plan our own Secretariat.
NEWS
Attempt to control bailiffs fails
Attempts to introduce stricter controls on the activities of the increasing number of private bailiffs through an amendment to the Local Government Finance bill failed in the House of Lords in January.
For the Government, Lord Henley said that there was no need for amendments because of the activities of ‘a few bad apples’.
The amendments, introduced at the Committee state on the instigation of the National Consumer Council, were aimed at preventing unsuitable people from acting as bailiffs, laying down rules under which private bailiffs operate, and setting limits on what bailiffs may charge debtors.
Except in the case of rent arrears, almost anyone can act as a private bailiff.
The NCC also believes that when bailiffs seize goods from people who are in arrears with the Council Tax which will replace the Community Charge, they should be obliged to leave behind essential items such as clothing, bedding, furniture and cookers.
The NCC cited a number of examples of bailiffs ‘abusing their powers shamefully’.
A car valued at £700 was sold by bailiffs at auction, without a reserve, for only £20.
After bailiff's expenses were charged to the debtor, the debtor found that only £7.35 was credit towards his debt, which a fair price for the car would have more than covered.
A debtor whose goods were seized to pay a debt was also charged £70 for the bailiff's van which collected the goods even though the van was already in the neighbourhood.
One person's arrears of £40 became a debt of £118 when the bailiff's charges were added.
The mother of an incontinent daughter, who had been lent money out of the DSS Social Fund to buy a washing machine, had the machine removed by a bailiff.
She still had to repay the Social Fund loan.
‘We are also concerned by reports from advice workers that some reasonable offers of repayment by debtors are being refused by bailiffs’, the NCC said.
The NCC cited an allegation by Suffolk Citizen's Advice Bureau of a woman on income support who telephoned the bailiff's office to try to arrange payment in instalments of her Community Charge arrears.
According to the NCC, the offer was refused and she claimed that the bailiffs told  her that they would kick her door down.
In Sussex, bailiffs were alleged to have refused an offer by a couple with two children on family support to pay £5 per week, refusing to accept anything less than £20 per week.
Rent arrears rise
Council house rent arrears totalled £430M at the end of March 1991, Housing Minister Sir George Young has said.
He claimed that ‘poor management’ was frequently the cause of arrears and that tenants who paid their rent suffered poor service and higher rents as a result.
Total arrears rose by 18 per cent, £70M, over the previous year.
London authorities accounted for nearly half the English rent arrears and had eight of the ten worst collection records.
Sir George said that arrears represented 8.5 per cent of the total rent collectable in the 1990/91 financial year.
The 20 authorities with the worse collection records accounted for 50 per cent of the total arrears.
Repossession hope
Home repossession orders through the County Courts rose by 35 per cent in 1991 to a total of 74,000, the Lord Chancellor's Department said.
However, repossessions fell in the fourth quarter to 18,000 from 20,000 in the third quarter.
These County Court statistics cover only England and Wales and do not take into account voluntary repossessions where the borrower surrenders the keys to the mortgage lender.
On the other hand, in many instances the repossession order is not carried out and it is estimated that only 60 per cent of orders eventually result in repossession.
Commenting on the Lord Chancellor's figures, a CML spokesman told Credit Management : ‘These are some of the more pleasant statistics, with a sharp reduction in the fourth quarter.
The level is still clearly far too high but many of them don't actually result in possession.’
Single voice
Credit reference agencies from Scandinavia, Austria and the EC have formed an association to represent their views in the single market.
Called the Association of Consumer Credit Information Suppliers (ACCIS), the 19-strong body will provide a voice on legislative matters such as the Draft Data Protection Directive and the council of Europe recommendation on the bulk supply of public data to third parties.
OFT criticises the credit doctors
Sir Gordon Borrie, Director General of Fair Trading, has advised consumers to beware of advertisements by ‘certain so- called credit repair companies which have recently appeared in some newspapers’.
The Office of Fair Trading says that these advertisements purport to offer help in removing adverse credit history information from credit reference agency files, and to give guidance on how to make a successful credit application.
Often they give a ‘premium rate’ telephone number to call for further information.
Sir Gordon said: ‘It is not easy to beat the system as these advertisements suggest.
Consumers could be committing fraud if they provide false information on a credit application form.
It is in nobody's interest for consumers to supply false information when seeking credit, or to try to take on more credit than they can manage.’
According to the OFT, some ‘credit repair’ companies provide booklets containing advice on how to make successful applications for credit.
‘Some of these booklets contain information which is misleading,’ the OFT claims, ‘and some contain information which is plainly incorrect.’
Lateness fines
Firms are to be fined up to £5000 if they are late filing their accounts with Companies House.
This measure will take effect from 1 July and the severity of the penalty will depend on the lateness of the filing.
Private companies have 10 months after their end to file accounts and public companies have seven months which, says Companies House, is ‘more than enough’.
Details : Companies House 0222 380152, or for Scotland 031 225 5779 
Sir Bryan Carsberg (left), 53, will succeed Sir Gordon Borrie as Director General of Fair Trading for five years from June.
Sir Bryan, an accountant, has headed Oftel, the telecommunications regulator, since 1984.
The Director General is responsible for reviewing commercial activities in the UK and identifying trading practices which are against the interests of consumers.
His remit includes administering the consumer credit licensing system.
Sir Gordon, 61 this month, has held the post for 16 years, since its inception.
After three five-year terms, he was persuaded to stay while a successor was found.
Auditing watchdog barks
The Financial Reporting Review Panel, which oversees financial reporting and ensures accountancy standards are adhered to, has accused two publicly quoted companies of failing to comply with Statements of Standard Accounting Practice (SSAP) and the 1985 Companies Act, but in both cases the Panel has decided not to use its powers under the Companies Act to apply for a court order revising the defective accounts.
The Panel said that industrial group Williams Holdings plc and Ultramar, the oil company since acquired by Lasmo, had both boosted earnings per share figures for the year ended 31 December 1990.
On Williams Holdings the Panel said: ‘The Panel's attention was drawn to Note 1 to the Accounts which indicates that exceptional items are reported net of tax and that earnings per share are shown before exceptional items on the consolidated profit and loss account.
The Consolidated Profit and Loss Account thus does not comply with the requirements of the Companies Act 1985 and statement of earnings per share is not in accordance with SSAP3.’
The directors of the company have given the Panel a written assurance that the company's 1991 accounts will meet the requirements in full and the Panel has decided to take no further action.
In the second case, the Panel found that Ultramar's treatment of the unrelieved portion of advance corporation tax in the consolidated profit and loss account, including it as part of the cost of dividends, is contrary to SSAP8, and as a result of this departure, breaches paragraph 3(7) of Schedule 4 to the Companies Act 1985.
Although Ultramar is no longer a separate entity and will not be circulating audited accounts for 1991, the Panel has publicised its view ‘for the information and guidance of others’.
Finance review announced for small firms
The Confederation of British Industry is to review the provision of finance to small firms by examining the difficulties they face in borrowing.
Tom O'Connor, Chairman of the CBI's Smaller Firms Council, said: ‘In manufacturing alone, smaller firms account for one in three jobs and a quarter of the total output.
Without their support some of the giants of British business would quickly grind to a halt.
‘Finance needs to be appropriate to the needs of a business.
Too often in the past there has been an over-reliance on the traditional overdraft facilities in preference to term loans and equity finance, even though the latter may be more appropriate.
The CBI is also calling on the Government to establish a network of local investment companies designed to encourage equity investment in smaller firms.
Investors could be either individual or corporate concerns and should qualify for tax relief on their investment.’
Other proposals in the CBI's programme include launching a code of prompt payment and examining court procedures relating to debt collection and increasing the influence of small firms in the work of the European Commission.
Debts boom
Japan's business failures rose by 66 per cent in 1991 and bad debts rose by more than 300 per cent, Tokyo Commerce and Industry Research reported.
More than 10,000 companies failed with debts of more than Yen 10M, nearly twice the level in the previous worst year, 1985.
Commerce and Industry Research attributed the high level of failure and bad debts to stock market and property speculation.
Alan Sarling and Brenda Whitear who will head a broking unit to provide the timber, paper and pulp industry with a credit risk management service.
The unit, which will be based in London, has been set up by Jardine Credit Insurance, part of the Jardine Matheson Group.
Optimism fades in financial services
Despite an improvement in overseas business activity in the financial services sector in the UK it is likely to be flat over the next quarter, according to the latest CBI/Coopers Deloitte quarterly survey of financial services.
The volume of business with overseas customers improved in the fourth quarter of 1991 and the recovery is expected to continue into the first quarter of this year.
However, this improvement has been insufficient to offset the decline in other areas.
Improved business optimism, reported in the previous survey, has not been sustained and expectations of rising business volumes were not fulfilled.
Building societies reported the sharpest decline in business confidence, following by banks and fund managers.
Business with industrial and commercial companies and financial institutions is expected to remain flat in the next quarter but business with individuals is likely to fall further.
General and life insurers and securities traders were reported as more optimistic.
Profitability declined slightly but more slowly than in the previous 18 months.
A slight decline is expected in the next quarter.
Building societies experienced the sharpest fall in profitability but a significant increase was achieved by general insurers and fund managers.
Financial service companies operating costs fell sharply in the final quarter of 1991 and a more modest decline is expected over the next quarter.
Boardroom caution
Dun & Bradstreet claims that business confidence has declined at the start of 1992, according to other results of its latest survey.
Sixty per cent of 1800 managing directors interviewed did not expect any improvement either in sales or new orders and 80 per cent said that they would either not be recruiting new staff or shedding staff.
D&B's Marketing Manager, Philip Mellor, said: ‘Extreme caution in British boardrooms is reflected in a reluctance by firms either to tie up vital funds in increased stocks or take on new staff.’
New car hire purchase sales down nearly 20pc
New car sales on credit finance slumped by nearly 20 per cent in 1991 compared with 1990, according to HPI, the vehicle information agency.
However, used car sales on credit, registered with HPI, totalled 917,116, a slight 1.4 per cent increase in 1991 over the previous year.
While new car sales in the UK showed a drop of 20.7 per cent in 1991 according to the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders, sales on credit finance fell by 19.1%.
During December, however, HPI figures show that new car sales on credit finance fell further than the cash market.
HPI reported a drop of 15.8 per cent compared with December 1990, while the SMMT reported a fall of only 7.3 per cent.
HPI is a member of the Infolink Group which supplies on-line information relating to high value mobile assets, particularly motor vehicles.
Its information enables subscribers to minimise the risk of loss from fraud and malpractice.
Data suppliers and customers include motor dealers and auctioneers, the finance industry, insurers, the police, the DVLA and local government bodies.
In 1991, 56.1 per cent of new cars were bought on credit, compared with 55 per cent in 1990, and 50 per cent in 1989.
A total 893,309 finance agreements on new cars were registered with HPI in 1991, compared with 1,105,099 in 1990, and 1,151,411 in 1989.
HPI Chairman Dr Brian Bailey said: ‘New car sales on finance slumped by 21.1 per cent in the first quarter of 1991, against the same three months in 1990.
This represented the biggest quarterly drop since HPI began compiling statistics.’
As a further indication of the industry's plight, he said: ‘Nineteen ninety-one was the first year in which more used cars than new cars were bought on credit finance.’
HPI has also warned of a dramatic increase in the number of stolen vehicles being offered for sale to the used car trade.
It says that in the fourth quarter of 1991, there was a threefold increase in the number of stolen cars in the second hand market compared with a year earlier.
On the move
Ken Waters has left his post as Managing Director of Legal and Trade Collections to join the board of the Lewis Group, the credit services and debt collection company.
Lenders lukewarm on money advice levy
According to the National Consumer council, funding for money advice centres is inadequate and support from the credit industry is insufficient.
But trade associations representing credit grantors have reacted unfavourably to proposals that a statutory levy should be imposed on lenders to finance the centres, writes Richard Smith.
In a discussion paper, the NCC has proposed a compulsory levy on all who offer credit, including public utilities as well as banks and building societies, to help finance the growing cost of money advice.
The NCC said that at best one in seven problem debtors can expect help from money advice centres.
‘The centres are so overstretched and under-funded that some can only help one in 10 debtors, or less’, it said.
According to NCC Chairman Lady Wilcox, most funding for money advice comes from local councils which, in 1989, contributed 50 per cent.
‘In contrast, only 16 per cent came from the finance industry.
Yet on average 73 per cent of UK adults now use some form of credit, compared with 22 per cent in 1969, and 33 per cent have three or more loans, compared with three per cent in 1969.’
Lady Wilcox claimed that there was widespread agreement that lenders had a responsibility to assist the minority of people who became ‘debt casualties’, by helping to fund money advice.
She said that both Consumer Affairs Minister Edward Leigh and Bank of England Governor Robin Leigh-Pemberton had called for voluntary funding.
‘It is in lenders’ own interests to fund specialist advice for debtors’, she said.
‘All the evidence points to the fact that if people get the right advice at the right time, creditors are more likely to get what is owed to them, even though it may take longer than it would originally have done.
But the Money advice Trust, set up in 1990 with the aim of raising £9M in three years towards money advice services, has so far received only £275,000 in cash, although another £349,000 has been pledged and staff have been seconded to the value of £450,000.
Building societies in particular have been reluctant to contribute, though I was delighted to see that the Nationwide Building Society recently announced that it would be donating £345,000 to the London Money Support Unit.’
She said that mortgage lenders and advice centres were reporting record levels of problem debts.
‘If the lenders won't contribute voluntarily to money advice funding, it may be that a compulsory levy on lenders, to augment funding by central and local government and others, is now the answer.
This is advocated by the National Association of Citizens’ Advice bureaux, the Money Advice Association and the Consumer Congress.’
The NCC Paper sets out six methods of funding money advice and the NCC has invited comment from interested parties by 15 April.
Lady Wilcox said: ‘We want to get informed comment before we draw up firm recommendations, but, at present, it seems to us that the best solution is likely to be a mixture of funding from different quarters.’
The NCC concedes that ‘although a statutory levy would bring extra resources for money advice, it would not be without its costs.
A measure of autonomy may well be lost and the needs for accountability for the funds could place constraints on how they are used.
Money advice services need to decide if these costs are worth paying.’
The NCC options for imposing a compulsory levy on the credit industry are:
an extra charge on the consumer credit licence, which the OFT would be responsible for collecting
a direct levy on lenders, not linked to the credit licence fee
a charge on creditors, related to debt recovery.
Creditors would pay a share of the money recovered through money advice services to those services.
Such a system funds 60–70 debt counselling services in the US
a bonding scheme which lenders would have to join.
A lump sum would be paid to a trade association or similar body.
The money would be paid out as clients made use of the services.
a levy set and collected by a trade association
a levy on borrowers either on each credit transaction or on each account.
This could either be flat rate or one taking into account the risk associated with different types of lending.
‘This levy could be seen a s a form of compulsory insurance against the need to use money advice services,’ the NCC said.
The NCC stressed that funds contributed by the finance industry should be in addition to the money currently contributed through central and local government, not as a substitute for it.
It set out these criteria for private sector funding:
it should apply to all those providing credit
it should be equitable between creditors
it must not jeopardise money advisers' independence
it should be cheap and easy to collect
it must be politically acceptable, with strong support both from lenders and money advisers and with a good chance of being implemented by government.
The Consumer Credit Trade Association is considering the NCC proposals, but Director John Patrick FICM said that his initial thoughts were that the CCTA would not want to be involved in collecting a levy.
‘With a very great number of credit grantors not being members of any trade association and others being members of more than one, such a system could not give rise to a fair method of raising a levy.
A levy through a trade association would also discourage credit grantors from membership.’
A spokeswoman for the Council of Mortgage Lenders said that building societies and other mortgage lenders had supported money advice centres either directly or through the Money Advice Trust.
‘We don't support the idea of a statuary levy on principle.’
A spokesman for the British Bankers' Association said: ‘It is a little premature for us to take a view on it.
Individual banks have put in funds for money advice in the past.
NatWest put in £250,000 but not through the Money Advice Trust.’
Neil Grant, Director of the Finance and Leasing Association, told Credit Management : ‘Nice idea but won't work.
Obviously we'll look at the paper in detail but our overall view is that the levy will not work because all the methods they consider have some severe limitations.’
He said that the American system, where the debtor pays the advice agency which then deducts a levy before paying the creditor, was the most practical.
He said that a levy assessed on arrears could not work because of the problem of defining arrears and basing the levy on the amount outstanding was unfair because of the different types of debt such as an £80,000 mortgage or £100 weekly collection.
Mr Grant said that his association and its members had contributed quite a lot of money for advice over a number of years.
EXPORT
Turkish Trade Mission 1–5 June
There can never be a time when there was a greater need for UK companies to find new markets.
The following notes have been reproduced in full by courtesy of the London Chamber of Commerce which are organising this mission.
Their export adviser confirmed that there are now indications of growth in the Turkish economy, with a balance of payments in surplus for the firs time in several years.
This is largely due to a drop in foreign trade deficit and a rise in net income on services and grants.
Industrial production and import investments have grown by 2.1 per cent and 2.7 per cent respectively.
The elections of last October resulted in a coalition government of the Truth Path Party (DYP) and the Socialist Democratic Populist Party (SHP).
these parties were committed to the continuance of a free market economy by concentrating on combating inflation and a spiralling deficit, speeding up the privatisation of state enterprises, thereby reducing state bureaucracy, and the steady reduction of the trade barriers and import tariffs.
Although Turkey's economy has some downside aspects, which the new government intends to rectify, it is a market with strong potential for UK exporters as the country strengthens its links with the European Community and East Europe.
Total UK exports to Turkey equalled £347M in 1990, an increase of 58 per cent on 1989.
Prospects for British exports in the private sector remain good and there are still worthwhile contracts to be won in the public sector financed by the World Bank and other external fund agencies.
Areas of interest for exporters
These sectors have been noted as offering substantial potential for the UK exporter: airport equipment; automotive spares and equipment; building materials; textile machinery; computer hard/software; consultancies; defence equipment; education equipment; financial services; food processing and packing equipment; mining equipment, power generation/transmission/distribution; railway equipment, and solid waste processing and disposal.
The following sectors have also been identified by the British Embassy's Commercial Sections in Ankara and Istanbul as holding the greatest potential for UK exporters: hospital and medical equipment and  pharmaceuticals ; tourism/hotel equipment and leisure; shipbuilding and marine equipment; telecommunications; natural gas distribution equipment; water and sewerage treatment, and pollution control equipment.
Further information from   
New terms at overseas fairs
Tim Sainsbury, Minister for Trade, announced on 28 January that new terms of support for British companies at overseas trade fairs will be offered from 1 April 1992.
The new terms will give sponsoring trade associations and chambers of commerce greater freedom of choice in how DTI trade fair support is spent, and so better match the needs of exhibitors.
Support in future will broadly maintain the present 50 per cent level of subsidy and will be mainly of fixed grants for exhibitors towards their space and stand construction costs.
Administration grants will also be introduced towards the costs incurred by sponsoring organisations in making arrangements for exhibitors.
Streamlined administrative arrangements in DTI's Fairs and Promotions branch will save costs and allow a greater number of fairs to be supported.
The level of travel grant support will be increased for eligible exhibitors at events outside Western Europe.
It should be noted that the DTI provides support for about 7000 British participants attending over 300 overseas trade fairs.
The net cost to the DTI of this support will be £13M for 1991/92.
The Maastricht battle
‘The UK may have won a battle at the Maastricht summit, but not the ‘war’, says David Lomax, Group Economic Adviser at National Westminster Bank, in his January economic review.
Whether Britain had made it harder to win the war — of influencing Europe's future — was an open question, he added.
If the UK decided not to join in stage three of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) under the ‘opt-out’ protocol negotiated, then in effect the UK would be outside the European Central Bank (ECB).
‘History shows that it is important to be on the inside of institution building in the EC.
If you are not on the inside track, then decision are taken over which you have no influence.
Joining at a later stage means that you have to accept what has been agreed by others.’
Dr Lomax considered that the published convergence criteria for countries to enter stage three of EMU will be difficult for all countries to meet.
Some countries may therefore be allowed into the single currency without satisfying the criteria which could lead to serious financial problems in later years.
‘This could prove to be one of the key issues as Europe attempts to move into stages two and three of EMU’, he said.
Medical assistance to the former Soviet Union
Britain is to provide £2M for urgently required medical supplies for the former Soviet Union.
This follows the visit to St Petersburg in early January of Lynda Chalker, Minister for Overseas Development, when it was made clear to hear that as well as food shortages there were also shortages of medicines and associated equipment for use in hospitals and clinics.
ODA will fund packages of essential drugs and equipment which will be procured and dispatched by Crown Agents and distributed by Red Cross to hospitals and health centres at various locations within the former Soviet Union.
Distribution of targeted aid within the republics will be handled carefully.
Officials of the ODA will work with local health personnel and through groups like the Red Cross to identify hospitals and clinics which will made good use of the aid and ensure that it gets to those who truly need it.
Change of Ambassador at Moscow
The Queen has been pleased to approve the appointment of Sir Brian Fall KCMG to be HM Ambassador to the Russian Federation in succession to Sir Roderic Braithwaite KCMG, who will be retiring from the Diplomatic Service.
CREDIT AND SALES
Credit and sales figures for December
Credit
In the fourth quarter of 1991 the total amount outstanding on credit agreements with consumers (broader coverage which includes loans on bank personal accounts, by insurers and by retailers figures for which are only available quarterly) fell by £0.24bn, compared with an increase of £0.13bn in the previous quarter.
Other main features of the broader coverage figures are as follows.
In the fourth quarter of 1991 the amount outstanding to non-bank credit companies fell by £0.28bn compared with a fall of £0.14bn in the previous quarter.
The amount outstanding on bank credit cards increased by £0.13bn in the fourth quarter of 1991 following an increase of £0.21bn in the previous quarter.
In 1991 the total amount of consumer credit outstanding increased by £0.22bn compared with an increase of £4.08bn in 1990.
The narrower coverage figures show that the amounts outstanding on consumer credit agreements fell by £0.20bn in December following a small fall of £0.03bn in November.
In the fourth quarter of 1991 the amount of new consumer credit advanced was £11.82bn compared with £12.07bn in the third quarter — a fall of 2 peer cent.
Sales
Final estimate of retail sales volume (seasonally adjusted) in December is 119.3 (1985=100).
This is below the level in November but little changed from the figure from October.
Based on non-seasonally adjusted data, retail sales value in current prices in December was 1 per cent higher than in December 1990.
The value of sales in 1991 was 5 per cent higher than in 1990.
Some winter's tales
In the battle against the banks and building societies, not even the Institute's Treasurer is safe, writes Peter Banyard
From time to time the sense reel, the mind boggles and all cerebral control is lost.
This usually happens after a fairly senior personal effort to cheer the Distillers Company on to greater profitability, but not always.
There are occasions when something occurs that is so much outside the laws of nature and likelihood that all previous points of mental reference have to be abandoned.
In this case the unnatural occurrence is that my black-hearted old dad has just been striped by the Lloyds Bank Access card mafia, and is taking it quietly.
A man once famed for his intolerance, xenophobia and irrational rages has become a husk of his former self.
Unless of course the chaps in the secure wing of Rampton Psychiatric Hospital have at least decided that the old boy is an outstanding danger to modern life and pumped him full of Largactil.
Certainly, he seemed strangely quiet and bemused as he recounted the extraordinary tale.
Feeling somewhat naked in the bitter winter's chill, he had decided to pitch up to his shirt maker in Jermyn Street, his hatter in St James's and his tailor in Savile Row to deck himself out in a manner which Solomon in all his glory would have found intimidating.
None of the old toadies who run these places will accept credit cards, so it's hard to know how he ran up an Access account of approximately £1200.
I date say a cheap day return from British Rail might account for a lot of it, but the rest is speculation.
When the Access people billed him, he bunged them a wedge for £1000.
Why he did not pay the full amount must remain a mystery.
People of his generation do tend to regard £1000 as being rather a lot of money, although the rest of us realise that it will hardly keep your motor car in petrol for long.
With £200 outstanding, he fully expected to pay some interest over the month, but was alarmed when it came to £29.
Now the old chap is no fool.
He realises that Access make money through usury, yet he felt that 25 per cent a month was going the pace a bit.
As a preliminary, he shot off to the telephone and dialled the Southend Lubianka where the Access bills are processed.
His telephone manner, I should say, is not exactly all silken menace.
More the howling fury type.
Anyway, the young woman on the other end of the machine survived with daunting ease and told him that it was customary to charge interest on the whole month's credit, unless it had been paid off in full.
When he gave her his opinion of this, she merely replied that she was sorry he felt like that, and ended the conversation.
My mother, a witness to many   acts of motiveless violence over the years, was already holding the door open.
She probably expected him to nip off to his gunsmith, buy an AK-47 assault rifle, and bomb down to Southend to take reprisals.
Instead, he sagged back in his chair and took no further action.
I dare say he felt that all this modern stuff was a bit beyond him, and I must admit that it is getting beyond me.
I cannot believe that Access genuinely charge interest on repaid money, which means that his bill was a cock-up and the brass-faced hussy at Southend was a liar.
I should be interested to hear readers' verdicts on the matter.
A different story
From a previous column, readers may remember Peter Olive: poet, scholar, wit, general builder and sworn enemy of Lloyds Bank.
He is another who has failed to maintain a grip on the advancing technology of credit and payment.
On a recent occasion, he was forced to shop in the local supermarket unaccompanied by his lovely wife Mary, who was keeping their children quiet by the exciting new pindown method.
Heedless of their cries and struggles, perhaps even whistling a merry tune, Peter strolled among the shelves filling a capacious shopping trolley.
He approached the cash till with the supreme confidence of a man who has paid a cheque into his account more than the requisite three working days in advance.
Armed with his Royal Bank of Scotland swipe card, he passed £150 of groceries through the bar code scanner with insouciance.
As it was only a few minutes before the shop closed, he forbore to detail the checkout girl with his usual badinage about the finer points of philosophy or astrophysics.
Instead he drummed his fingers with increasing irritation as repeated passes with the swipe card appeared to reveal that he was borassic: absolutely stony.
Eventually the goods had to be returned to their shelves and Pete departed empty-handed, with a muttered quotation from Ezra Pound, or some other poetic shyster who used four letter words.
However, like General MacArthur he made the promise ‘I will return’ and so he did, the next night.
Furthermore, following MacArthur's precedent, he returned with heavier armament: Mary and the children poured in his wake like a Mongol horde.
Once again he led the storming party to the checkout flourishing the swipe card.
Once again the lying plastic claimed that he was skint.
Well, the answer turns out to be simple enough.
Most of us have rather too much faith in the high tech ability of these smart cards, and imagine them to be capable of more than they are.
Peter fondly imagined that the swipe machine was ‘on line’ to his bank, constantly updated on the state of his account.
In fact, information is fed to these machines in something less than ‘real time’, which is a high tech way of saying instantly.
Indeed, they are updated in ‘unreal time’, which is a luddite's way of saying three working days.
Something of a warning to the rest of us.
Sheared by the Woolwich
Many readers will have a deep and troubled awareness that Mr Colin Hingston is the Honorary Treasurer of our respected Institute.
Although he has undoubtedly filled the post with such distinction that the staff lout low and doff their caps whenever he appears, he is not perfect.
While his gimlet eye has been fixed upon the Institute's accounts, it has not been free to rove over his own financial affairs and he has, accordingly, been marked up by the Woolwich Building Society with distressing ease.
He rather wished to pass on his experience to the rest of you, but felt that my column was a more appropriate medium for that purpose.
Before we allow him to intrude on to my turf too far, I should set the whole business in its correct credit context.
As we all know our lending institutions, from banks to building societies, have long ago given up caring a tinker's about customer service or quaint notions of that sort.
Indeed, even honesty is a mere legal concept now, rather than a moral one, as they undertake to hide important information from us in order to borrow as cheaply as possible, while they lend at the highest practicable rate.
At the beginning of his tale, Mr Hingston points out that negligence over personal finance does not mean that he is unfitted to be Institute Treasurer.
I can confirm that he is supported by a competent staff, and has never actually been convicted of being foreign or of committing serial buttock fondling in his office or elsewhere.
That should be enough in these dangerous times.
He starts:
‘I suppose that, unlike the PJBs of this world, I have never had too much opportunity to become experienced in handling enormous amounts of personal wealth.
As a family, therefore, we have perfectly happily left what little savings we could scrape together over the last 20 years or so with the Woolwich Building Society, whose efficiency and ethics we have never had any reason to doubt.
The fact that the vast majority of these funds are in the names either of my wife or daughter casts a further question over my personal financial awareness, but that is not the point.
When we entered the local office to add yet more to my daughter's investments, the helpful cashier advised us to switch from her existing account, requiring 90 days’ notice of withdrawals to an instant access ‘Prime Gold’account which had been available for some time, and in fact paid higher interest.
I was aware that building societies are in the habit of launching new products from time to time, primarily to attract new investors.
What I did not realise before was that whilst new accounts are given much publicity and the rates of interest are proudly displayed, the accounts of existing investors no longer available to fresh punters are discreetly removed from such lists.
So the old faithful customers do not have the chance to compare the new rates with those currently being paid to them’.
Perhaps I can intrude into my own column again at this point to reinforce the message.
Not only do some building societies produce greatly more advantageous accounts from time to time and neglect to alert their existing deposit holders, but they actively conceal the new arrangements.
When I last looked, Stephen Edell was the Building Society Ombudsman and it may not cheer the Woolwich to know that he will be getting a copy of this.
It is some five years since I worked with Mr Edell in his previous incarnation as a lawyer, but he struck me as a man who would do the necessary.
Anyway, if I may return to our Treasurer's anguished tale, matters became ever worse.
He was unable to transfer the swag from his daughter's account straight into a ‘Prime Gold’ account, because the former added the injury of a 90-day notice of withdrawal to the insult of a lower rate.
Seething at the thought that acne-ridden new savers were getting a better deal than a man of his maturity and substance, he retired like a wounded beast to its lair to ponder the problem.
His disposition became no calmer when, in reply to his request to withdraw the money, the Woolwich suggested he put it in their ‘Prime Gold’ account.
He continues:
‘If we had to wait three months for this money, then fill in a new form to open a different account, just like a    new investor in fact, it would not be a bad idea to see if any other society was offering a better rate than the 8.85 per cent offered by ‘Prime Gold’.
Even better I thought to find a society that automatically lets its existing investors know when a better deal becomes available.
Sadly, in this second objective, I have to confess total failure.
The more I looked at different societies, the more I saw the little traps lurking in the small print…
My little local survey drove me to the conclusion that the Woolwich, in fact, offers some of the lowest rates on the market.
Eventually I was drawn to a sign in the Norwich and Peterborough Building Society advertising 11.3 per cent.’
In fact Mr Hingston found a slightly unusual account in that it had instant access so long as withdrawals were made by post.
Call it five-day access if you wish.
Anyway, appropriate forms and pre-paid envelopes were provided for withdrawals and the interest rate was guaranteed until the beginning of May.
If it slips then, as it probably will, the Hingston fortune will wing its way elsewhere.
I have no wish to change my nature over this matter and become a crusading journalist.
Indeed, I shall try to maintain the dry and dusty nature of this column so that we return to more arcane matters of corporate credit in the next issue.
However, it has, in the past, been made a legal offence to rely on customer inertia; notably in unsolicited postal selling.
The idea of providing a decent service to a customer is probably dead, so we might all try to look for the protection of the might, majesty, dominion and power of the English Common Law.
Scotsmen can take their own measures and, my friends there assure me, need few lessons from us.
WALKER'S LAW
No fishing from the liquidator
Peter Walker advises on the latest court ruling on how much information the liquidators can give the police
‘There are no secrets except the secrets that keep themselves’ was George Bernard Shaw's picturesque way of stating the obvious, but in a messy company liquidation the police may be very interested in the information that is being extracted by the liquidators from sometimes unwilling directors and others.
These people may of course want to keep their knowledge secret so as to avoid any involvement in criminal proceedings, which is not helpful to creditors and to credit managers wanting to know what is to be salvaged from the wreck.
The issue played an important part in the recent and well publicised Barlow Clowes affair, and resulted in the case.
In re Barlow Clowes Gilt Managers Ltd (1992) 2 WLR 56 , an application was made by the liquidators under section 168(3) of the Insolvency Act 1986.
This provision, applicable in England and Wales only, allows them to request directions ‘in relation to any particular matter arising in the winding up’.
The liquidators had interviewed many people to find out whether or not civil claims could be brought on behalf of investors against two of the Barlow Clowes companies, in particular Barlow Clowes International Ltd based in Gibraltar and Barlow Clowes Gilt Managers Ltd.
The 16 people interviewed were helpful and attended voluntarily, although some of them preferred to be accompanied by legal advisers.
Millett J in the Chancery Division Companies Court thought they were encouraged by the threat of a more formal examination before the court.
The liquidators, however, had assured the witnesses that the information would only be used for ‘proper purposes of the liquidation’.
The police became involved
While all this was going on, the police had made several arrests, and the Department of Trade and Industry decided to interview the 16 witnesses all over again.
The transcripts were handed over to the Serious Fraud Office, and duly and properly given to the defendants in the criminal proceedings.
The Serious Fraud Office, however, wanted more, and requested copies of all the liquidators' transcripts of the earlier interviews with the 16.
The documents were handed over on the grounds that this could be compelled under section 2(2) of the Criminal Justice Act 1987.
Some of the transcripts would be released to the defendants in the trial anyway, because some of the 16 interviewees would be called as witnesses in the criminal trial.
The defendants as well as the Serious Fraud Office wanted to see more of the documents, but the liquidators objected on the ground that the transcripts were not material evidence within the definition of section 2(2) of the Criminal Procedure (Attendance of Witnesses) Act 1965.
The statements had furthermore been made in confidence and the liquidators claimed public interest immunity.
Gone fishing
There was no guarantee that the transcripts would contain any information useful for the defence.
Millett J commented: ‘It would not, I think, be unfair to say that the defendants wish to embark on a fishing expedition, and that what they hope to catch is not primary evidence, but material for cross-examination’.
Similar questions arose in Marcel v Commissioner of Police (1991) 2 WLR 1118 , where the police had seized documents from people connected with a company.
Some of them were shown to the solicitors of a Mr Jaggard, who was defending civil actions in the Chancery Division brought by the same company.
It wanted the return of those papers and an injunction restraining the use of the information obtained from them.
Sir Nicolas Browne Wilkinson V-C commented that ‘there manifestly must be some limitation on the purposes for which seized documents can be used.
Search and seizure under statutory powers constitute fundamental infringements of the individual's immunity from interference by the state with his property and privacy — fundamental human rights.’
He concluded: ‘But in my judgment the powers to seize and retain are conferred for the better  performances of public functions by public bodies and cannot be used to make information available to private individuals for their private purposes.’
It was therefore not lawful for the police to make the documents seized available to the solicitors of the defendant in the civil action for his private purposes.
On top of that there was ‘a public interest in upholding confidentiality as such even as between private individuals’.
Public interest
This could be overridden by a countervailing public interest, and this issue was raised in A-G v Guardian Newspapers (No 2)(1988) AC 109.
It arose out of the publication in the USA of Spycatcher , in which the author, Peter Wright, claimed that MI5 had sometimes acted unlawfully.
The House of Lords accepted that there was a legally enforceable obligation of confidence in certain relationships.
Many of the cases, such as Seager v Copydex (1967) 1 WLR 923 , concerned actual or threatened breaches by ex-employees in relation to information given to them by their former employers, and where they wanted to exploit it to their own benefit.
An injunction was once granted in Duchess of Argyll v Duke of Argyll (1967) CH 302 to prevent the revelation of marital confidences.
The government has sometimes tried to prevent the publication of material.
In A-G v Jonathan Cape Ltd (1976) QB 752 Lord Widgery ruled: ‘The Attorney-General must show (a) that such publication would be a breach of confidence;(b) that the public interest requires that the publication must be restrained; and (c) that there are no other facts of the public interest contradictory of land more compelling than that relied upon.’
The Richard Crossman Diaries recorded the opinion of various cabinet ministers some ten years earlier and, according to Lord Widgery, did no harm to the public interest.
On the other hand, in the Spycatcher case Lord Goff decided that Peter Wright had a lifelong duty not to disclose confidential information that had come into his possession as an officer of the Secret Service.
Can the liquidators keep it quiet?
The real answer to the Barlow Clowes question was found not so much in duty of confidentiality, but in the position of the 16 witnesses who were not involved in the criminal proceedings against Mr Clowes and others.
Third parties were under no obligation to provide voluntary assistance, and section 2 of the Criminal Justice Act 1965 only required material evidence to be handed over.
Although the liquidators did not have to release the transcripts, this could result in an injustice to the defendants in the criminal proceedings.
Millett J added that the question of whether or not the transcripts were in fact material evidence had more properly to be decided by the Crown Court.
Its powers to use a witness summons are restricted in that, for example, it cannot compel the production of documents merely required for the purposes of cross-examination.
Fishing expeditions for transcripts which may or may not be relevant are also not allowed, so Millett J directed that the liquidators could press for Mr Clowes' witness summons to be discharged.
BCCI
He went further to deal with the question as to whether or not the liquidators had public interest immunity in case the issue should become relevant later.
A clue to the answer is to be found in section 236(2) of the Insolvency Act 1986, which allows the court to summon various people, such as the company office holders, people known or suspected of having the company's property, or any person capable of giving information ‘concerning the promotion, formation, business, dealings, affairs or property of the company’.
The point was raised in Cloverbay Ltd v BCCI Ltd (1991) Ch 90 , where joint administrators wanted to question two officers of that bank, now itself the subject of a major liquidation.
There were supposed irregularities in the cheques, some of which had been endorsed over to third parties allegedly in breach of authority, so the administrators issued but did not serve a protective writ.
BCCI produced large numbers of documents, which prompted counsel to advise further investigation.
The administrators wanted to question both the manager and assistant manager of BCCI's Brompton Road branch, so made an application to the court under section 236(2).
Because this provision could be an instrument of oppression against individuals, Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson wanted to resist its application.
An important factor was the need of the administrators to ascertain the state of knowledge of the employees of BCCI in order to show whether or not the Bank had knowingly participated in the fraud.
Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson V-C said that this could only be achieved by an oral examination of the witnesses.
If the company had been solvent and considering a civil action against the Bank, it would not be allowed to take pretrial depositions from those who may have participated in the fraud.
In the civil courts the plaintiff would be required to provide his or her case against the defendants, so to allow the application under section 232(2) would be oppressive.
Sir Nicolas Brown-Wilkinson V-C added that the section is really concerned with helping a liquidator fill in the gaps of any missing information in the company's records, so that the or she would then have the knowledge that the company should have.
No fishing
In the Barlow Clowes case Millett J agreed, and added ‘that the proper and efficient functioning of the process of compulsory liquidation would be jeopardised if transcripts of the formal interviews of witnesses carried out by liquidators were to be made generally available to defendants to criminal proceedings’.
Such fishing expeditions were not allowed, and he ordered that the liquidators could claim the public interest immunity.
His decision and that in the BCCI case show that the powers of liquidators and administrators to obtain information in messy situations are limited.
In the ordinary course of a liquidation, for example, people can only be forced to attend the court where their evidence is needed to fill gaps in the company's records.
Where officers of insolvent companies are being prosecuted in relation to their activities, voluntary disclosure of the transcripts of interviews with witnesses in relation to the liquidation can only be ordered by the Crown Court.
Fishing expeditions should be limited to the sort of angling, which for sportswriter Jimmy Cannon ‘has always been an excuse to drink in the daytime’.
The Z-score approach to credit risk management
Can we be more scientific in our risk assessment judgements? asks Professor Richard Taffler
Traditional financial analysis involves the calculation of a number of accounting ratios, which it is hoped represent key measures of a company's performance.
These are then interpreted one at a time, on a rule of thumb basis.
However, there are serious drawbacks to this approach which relies very much on the analyst's interpretational skills and subjective judgement.
The Z-Score approach overcomes such problems.
It considers a number of appropriately chosen financial ratios, simultaneously weights these and adds, as a results in a single index of corporate financial health, the Z-Score.
If the derived Z-Score is positive, above the ‘solvency threshold’ on the ‘solvency thermometer’of Figure 1, the company is solvent and there is negligible risk of failure.
However, if its Z-Score is negative, it is ‘at risk’ of financial distress.
This may take the form of administration (Maxwell Communication Corporation), receivership (Turiff Corporation), capital reconstruction (Strong & Fisher), rescue rights issue (Budgens), acquisition (Beazer) or major disposals to repay creditors (Ferranti).
Building a Z-Score model
The Z-Score techniques originated in the US more than 20 years ago with a US professor, Ed Altman, at New York University, and has been continuously refined since then.
The general approach to developing a Z-Score model consists of taking samples of failed and solvent companies, computing a large number of financial ratios from their accounts, more than 80 in the case of the models discussed here, and then applying a statistical technique, such as stepwise linear discriminant analysis.
This distils the ratios to that sub-set which, when taken together and appropriately weighted, best distinguish the characteristics of the failed and silent sets of firms.
A typical model for the analysis of UK quoted industrial companies is provided in Figure 2 for illustrative purposes.
Different combinations of ratios and coefficients are required to analyse companies with different activities, although the underlying principles are the same.
Other models developed for the analysis of unlisted industrial companies, quoted distribution and unquoted distribution enterprises have respectively the following component ratios: profit before interest and tax/sales, debt/net worth, current liabilities/total assets, days creditors; cash flow/total liabilities, debt/quick assets, current liabilities/total assets, no credit interval; operating cash flow/total assets, debtors/creditors, current liabilities/total assets, no credit interval.
The two unlisted models apply to companies with around 50 employees or more, below that size accounting information is not always reliable.
The underlying principle of such models is that companies that have a financial profile similar to previous failures are themselves at risk.
Compared with traditional approaches the technique has the advantage that it is both strictly objective, being based on rigorous statistical analysis, and has a readily interpretable measurement scale.
By considering different facets of a company simultaneously the model is able to synthesise these to give a clear message, even if the individual ratios are giving contradictory signals.
In addition, because of the way it is developed, the Z-Score approach can often see through window dressing, which may defeat normal one at a time radio analysis focusing on conventional ratios.
Figure 1 The insolvency thermometer
Figure 2 Model for analysing quoted industrial companies
Figure 2 shows the contribution of the different ratios to the power of the model and what they are measuring.
Approximately 50 per cent is    accounted for by the profit and loss account and the other 50 per cent by the three balance sheet measures.
Table 1 lists the 31 fully listed industrial and distribution companies which failed in 1990 and 1991, one in 25 of all such firms.
The only company which did not show a negative Z-Score in advance of failure was Polly Peck, which serves to demonstrate that even such advanced techniques of analysis are dependent on the quality of the underlying data.
However, such receiverships and administrations are only the tip of the iceberg, with many firms reaching arrangements with their bankers and trade creditors and others being acquired or subject to capital reconstruction as the price of survival.
The position for private companies is even worse.
Table 1 Recent receiverships and administrations etc
Currently, there are no fewer than 25 per cent of quoted industrial companies and 16 per cent of quoted distribution companies at risk of failure (Z<O).
Figure 3 plots the percentage of listed industrial companies with potentially failing profiles over time from 1978 to date.
It shows how the present position compares with the depths of the last recession in 1982 when 23 per cent of such companies were at risk.
The peak of the economic cycle was in 1988 with only 11 per cent of companies with such profiles.
How is the Z-Score used in practice?
The track record of the Z-Score models described here is quote remarkable, with 99 per cent of listed company failures correctly identified as ‘at risk’, often with three to four years’ advance warning, and not very different results for unlisted concerns.
However, the Z-Score essentially is limited in nature, being restricted to two values, + and -.
For it to be used as a practical business tool it has to be taken further, both in terms of enhancing its measurement potential and embedding it in appropriate computer software so it can be readily used.
Two major improvements of the technique are the ‘risk rating’ and  PAS- (Performance Analysis) score.
The risk rating is a statistical measure of the probability of failure for companies with negative Z-Score.
It is developed from research into the characteristics of companies at risk that best differentiated those which ultimately failed from those which were able to recover.
Three determining factors were identified how bad the Z-Score, how steep the fall and how many years at risk.
Combining these statistically leads to a five-point scale, which 1 indicating a negative Z-Score company with low probability of immediate distress, and 5 (as in the case of MCC) a company usually beyond saving in its present form.
The risk ratings of recent failures are also provided in Table 1.
By virtue of its nature and scale, the Z-Score is unsuitable for monitoring trends in a company's solvency over time and averaging to provide an industry picture.
An important development that overcomes such problems is the PAS-score, which is the firm's Z-Score in a particular year, ranked against the population and expressed in percentile terms.
The percentage of companies with lower Z-Scores,ie at higher risk, represents the company's PAS-score in that year.
In this way, a simple and readily interpretable relative performance measure on a scale 0–100 is derived.
The process is repeated separately for each year to give the company's PAS-score trajectory, cancelling out the effect of fluctuations in the economy.
Using this approach, it is possible to pick up incipient warning signs as the company starts to decline well in advance of it crossing the solvency threshold, allowing much more time for action to be taken.
A further development that users of the Z-Score technique find helpful in its use as a diagnostic tool is a breakdown of the component ratios of the model in an appropriate manner to highlight which aspects of the firm's financial profile are strong and those that require attention.
Such Z-Score analysis is best conducted using purpose-built micro-computer software which computes the company's Z-Score, risk rating, PAS-score trajectory, financial profile and standardised accounts automatically from accounting data input by the analyst.
An alternative is to take a data feed electronically from an established computerised accounting database, such as Extel Financial's MicroEXSTAT, allowing full company analysis within seconds and tables of main customers to be drawn up and monitored automatically.
Maxwell Communication Corporation
Figure 4 shows the PAS analysis for MCC and consists of three lines: the PAS-score for the company itself, the solvency threshold where Z=0 (the percentage of companies with negative Z-Scores) and the publishing industry average.
As can be seen, MCC was already at risk on the basis of its March 2989 accounts after its £2bn of US acquisitions and by March 1990 was in the weakest 5 per cent of UK companies (PAS-score = 5), in fact with a risk rating of 4.
By the time its March 1991 accounts were published, showing a risk rating of 5, the writing was well and truly on the wall.
Nonetheless, the company was still valued at more than £1bn on Stock Market as late as last September.
It is, of course, now worthless.
Although Maxwell's reputation and personality  may have led those involved with the company to believe it was financially sound, the PAS-score analysis of the accounts highlighted the degree of risk quite clearly.
It is interesting to note how Trade Indemnity, which has been an active user of this Z-Score approach for many years, used the technique as part of its overall risk assessment procedures to provide advance warning, allowing it to reduce exposure to MCC to a nominal sum by the time it failed.
Conversely, Trade Indemnity maintained support for the Mirror Group, whose PAS-score trajectory shows it to be financially sound.
Lowndes Queensway
Figure 5 is the PAS-score trajectory for Lowndes Queensway, the second largest furniture and carpet retailer in the UK, which went into administrative receivership in August 1990, exactly two years after it was formed from a £450M leverage buy-out.
Lowndes Queensway failed with debts of £200M, despite two refinancings and substantial asset sales.
The impact of the buy-out on the financial structure of the business is highlighted by its PAS- score collapse from 37, pre buy-out, to 1, on the basis of its January 1989 accounts.
Such analysis suggests the company was never viable from the start and the buy-out should not have taken place.
Amstrad Plc
The PAS-score approach however, can readily be used to identify companies which are financially sound and thus good credit risks, but where conventional analysis may have misread the situation.
A good example is Amstrad plc, where its share price fell by more than 80 per cent between 1988 and 1989 following quality problems with new computer ranges and alarmist rumours about the viability of the company.
At the same time, as Figure 6 shows, its PAS-score only fell from 98 to a still very healthy 80, and well above the industry average.
Despite reduced profits and an almost trebling of inventory in the year to the end of June 1989, the Z-Score model was able to demonstrate the underlying financial strength of Amstrad.
Since that time, despite a further decline in profit margins, Amstrad's PAS-score has risen again following attention to its balance sheet.
Currently it is among the 10 per cent most solvent UK corporations in PAS-score terms.
Credit management applications
Syspas Ltd provides computerised systems, built around the models described here, to a large number of clients.
These include the major clearing banks, industrial companies for credit management purposes, leading credit insurers including Trade Indemnity and local authorities and government departments for evaluating supplier risk, among others.
Whereas the Z-Score approach provides an important input to the credit manager's judgement, it should not be used simply as a tool for avoiding risky customers, but more creatively.
Firstly, the approach can be used to direct his or her attention to those customers or prospective customers requiring further investigation regarding their ability to pay, and importantly can alert him to the need to alter the terms of trade or pricing to manage the level of risk and set appropriate credit limits.
Also by virtue of its ability to predict whether a company will survive for a given period of time, it can give the credit manager more confidence to enter into long term relationships with customers.
Moreover, by updating customer information using annual, interim or management accounts, such a system allows the ready evaluation of a customer's solvency on an on-going basis.
The overall risk profile of the debtors' ledger can also be assessed and continuously monitored.
This approach to risk measurement, in addition, is particularly important if the credit manager is taking a strategic approach to risk management which requires as its initial stage a formal system for risk categorisation of customers.
Finally, by linking the system to an outside database of corporate accounting information, it can become a powerful aid for marketing, for example to help direct marketing energies most effectively.
Conclusion
In this paper I have outlined the Z-Score approach to financial analysis and some of its applications for the credit manager.
Its increasingly widespread use and track record over many years emphasise its benefits compared with more traditional procedures.
However, care needs to be taken in its use.
The Z-Score is not a black box, nor a substitute for the credit manager's judgement, but a diagnostic tool and decision aid.
By knowing whether a company is at risk or not and the degree of risk, the credit manager is in a better position to use his professional judgement and experience creatively to manage the risk, not just avoid it.
Used appropriately, the Z-Score model can be a very powerful tool indeed.
FOOTNOTES
1
Further details of the approach are given in R J Taffler, ‘The Assessment of Company Solvency and Performance Using a Statistical Model’, Accounting and Business Research, Autumn 1983, pages 296–307
2
More detail on the different probabilities of failure associated with different risk rating values is given in R J Taffler, ‘Empirical Models for the Monitoring of UK Corporations’, Journal of Banking and Finance, volume 8, number 2, June 1984, pages 199–227, together with details of the other models not described here
3
See for example D G S Williams ‘Credit Limits and Risk Categories’, Chapter 6, Credit Management Handbook, third edition, edited by Burt Edwards, Gower Publishing, 1990, pages 105–113
Richard Taffler is Professor of Accounting and Finance and Head of Accounting at City University Business School, London 
Reviewing risk?
CreditScan can!
Graydon has been working with several large UK organisations on a remedial approach to corporate risk assessment
Now on the market is CreditScan , a commercial risk scoring service that focuses on identifying the real credit risk within a sales ledger.
David Pearce, Director of Graydon's Creditscoring Division, explained why a new approach was needed.
‘In late 1990, we became increasingly concerned that credit managers’ skills and expertise were being tested to the limits.
Credit information was widely available across a range of delivery options.
However, product formats and delivery systems were geared to the vetting of new business.
‘From the credit managers’ point of view the main concern was the degree of risk contained on the existing sales ledger.
Gaining an overview of that risk was very costly and could only be achieved by ordering credit reports, of whatever format, on a case-by-case basis.
‘We spoke to a number of credit managers who confirmed that reviews of existing accounts were conducted at quarterly, bi-annual or annual frequencies, but  were not able to produce an analysis of the results of the reviews.’
Graydon's work with many of Europe's credit insurers had resulted in their credit rating system being exhaustively tested for accuracy and predictiveness.
It was with one of those credit insurers that Graydon met in January 1991 to take a fresh look at how corporate risk could be effectively measured and summarised .
Using the whole range of known characteristics involved in calculating the Graydon credit rating, a scoring system was developed that could accurately determine total sales ledger risk.
Graydon tested out this system by producing a list of some hundreds of UK buyers for the credit insurer with each buyer measured with a risk score ranging from low risk to high risk.
The testing confirmed that the scoring system was accurate and predictive, and to a great extent it mirrored the underwriters' own subjective analysis calculated on a case-by-case basis.
During further testing, value was added to the analysis by including registration numbers, key financial indicators, SIC codes, dates of latest filed accounts, identification of parent companies and the Graydon credit rating for each company analysed.
The analysis was completed by a tabulation of results which consolidated the risk scores and financial strength ratings.
As David Pearce said: ‘Now we had an analysis tool which enabled credit managers and financial directors to see, at a glance, the degree of      risk within a sales ledger.’
Armed with this format, Graydon approached one of their UK customers, Honeywell, with the concept.
Dianne Gregory, UK credit manager, takes up the story: ‘When we met with Graydon we were facing a challenge common to most credit managers — how to analyse the risk on our sales ledgers and enable our credit controllers to focus their efforts most effectively.
‘Apart from providing us with key data about the tangible net worth, pre-tax profitability and borrowings of each account, we have shared the CreditScan information with our sales and marketing colleagues.
They now know which customers we want to increase the business with because the credit risk is low and we are ‘under exposed’, and which market sectors we wish to restrict our exposure in.’
At Oracle Corporation, Phil Grannell, credit manager, has also been working with Graydon by using CreditScan .
‘We wanted to see how we could analyse our existing customer base.
The CreditScan analysis was back with us within two weeks; the detailed listing of accounts enabled our credit control team to review the credit limits of particular customer sin line with the stated risk.
The consolidation of results gave me, on one page, an overview of the ledger by risk category and was very effective in resource planning.
‘Once we had identified the high risk element on our customer base, we placed certain customers onto a monitoring service for daily surveillance of change information.
‘All in all we feel we now have better control over our customer file and can be pro-active more than reactive.
During 1992, we feel that's going to be the essential ingredient in managing risk.’
Call themselves managers?
Peter Robson reviews a recent report
Bank managers are not exactly well-versed in pragmatism when it comes to making judgments on business proposals from small companies.
They are seen as paying too much attention to narrow financial criteria, but insufficient attention to other important and vital factors like management skills and technical knowledge.
These points are among the conclusions reached by David Deakins and Ghulum Hussain in their report Risk Assessment by Bank Managers for the Department of Financial Services, Birmingham Polytechnic Business School.
Messrs Deakins and Hussain adopted the role of small business proprietors to investigate the importance of the different criteria used in making lending decision by bank managers to small businesses, and they recorded the opinions of 30  bank managers in the West Midlands on a real business plan for a new start-up company, which would provide information technology (IT) services to quantity surveyors.
The result of the survey was ‘a remarkably even split between managers who were prepared to help and lend to the proprietors and those who were not prepared to do so’.
In fact, 50 per cent of those 30 managers would have lent money to the business on the proposals which were presented, but the other 50 per cent of bank managers were not prepared to do so.
The report argues that the bank managers displayed a bias in approach by focusing attention on financial information like businessmen's ability to provide security for a loan when assessing risk.
At the outset of their research, messrs Deakins and Hussain believed: ‘there is a paucity of qualitative research that attempts to look at the relationship between the bank manager and the small business owner and the importance of different reasons for accepting and rejecting propositions that come before the banks.
To enable us to get at the real reasons for lending decisions and influences upon those decisions, we decided to adopt a different approach from any previous research…‘
The report points out that the importance of developing good relationships with the small business customer cannot be overstated for the banks.
Lending to small business owners has become an important profit centre for banks and the importance of establishing an efficient means of raising finance is also vital to the economy, because ‘recent evidence shows that small firms have been the major creator of new jobs in the 1980s’.
During the research, a real business plan for a company that is now trading was involved.
It was a new start-up company with proprietors who were highly-qualified quantity surveyors and had well-paid previous posts — one a managing director, another a senior partner — in one of the UK's major quantity surveying practices.
The business proposition ‘involved using specialised IT applications to develop a bespoke service to the design, construction and maintenance of buildings, with an integrated costing service that enabled design, build and cost to be integrated’.
The research project took into account factors like a business being launched during an economic recession and a particularly severe recession in the construction industry.
the business plan included items like the CVs of the clients, business strategy and cash-flow projections.
Over the first four years, the company projected an income growth from some £60,000 in the first year of operation to £555,000 by the fourth year.
In all cases, the bank managers received the business plan well before the interview took place, in most cases two weeks in advance.
Messrs Deakins and Hussain make the comment that ‘some managers took the opportunity to be well prepared for the interview and read the business plan in detail beforehand.
However, a few managers, probably because of the pressure of work, had only looked at the business plan the night before.’
The response from the latter group of managers to the business plan would no doubt have made even more compelling reading.
The employees interviewed in the 30 banks all have the responsibility for making lending decisions to small business customers, but in only a few cases were those branch managers as such, because generally the role of dealing with the small business customer is delegated to executives such as the specialised Enterprise Manager, or the Small Business Manager, all of whom had several years' experience.
Most interviews lasted 60–90 minutes, and all the interviews were recorded for analysis and categorisation, with the exception of four bank staff who would not agree to having their discussions placed on tape.
Messrs Deakins and Hussain have certainly provided an unusual and, in many ways, provocative survey on the attitudes taken by banks towards small business customers, and in drawing their main conclusions, concentrate on the most important factors relating to risk analysis.
It undoubtedly appears from this report that, among other factors, decision making in risk management is not consistent across different banks or even within banks; bank managers give a disproportionate attention to the small business's founders' ability to provide security for a loan when assessing risk; and, although the business plan to recruit a director to handle IT issues was crucial to the company's success, most of the bank managers interviewed paid scant attention to that factor.
Surprisingly, the report also mentions that ‘other criteria — which in other circumstances would be equally important to the success of the business — are given less importance…(by banks) these include business acumen of the proprietor, management skills and business training, efficient use of resources and technical knowledge.’
Yet at the time the report was released, the actual company that was used as the basis for the research had been trading for five months and is coping well with a difficult launch period and providing to be highly successful in meeting its targets.
A one-day seminar is to be held at the Department of Financial Services Birmingham Polytechnic Business School, on 7 April, to utilise the findings of the report.
Further details about the seminar and copies of Risk Management by Bank Managers are available from The Department of Financial Services,.
Please mention Credit Management 
Investment project appraisal
Bill Neale investigates the role of the credit manager
Credit managers have traditionally been regarded in many companies as little more than debt collectors, albeit often highly effective ones.
Yet in the course of the relatively unglamorous tasks of monitoring debtors and persuading recalcitrant payers to settle their obligations without endangering subsequent orders, a vast bank of data has been (or should have been!) assembled by many companies.
If this data is constructively used, it can provide significant pay-offs in other important areas of financial management and thereby enhance the role of credit managers in corporate decision making in these areas.
One such area is the field of investment project appraisal, or capital budgeting.
This has traditionally been regarded as the province of the management accountant, responsible for collecting data on cost and revenue forecasts and assessing the likely net pay-offs before submitting qualifying proposals to the appropriate decision-making body.
Only within the past decade or so have accountants themselves fully appreciated the wider ramifications of capital expenditure and the need to consult ant utilise the skills of other ‘experts’ such as marketing managers.
Indeed, in many organisations, the tasks of project appraisal have been taken over by corporate planners, whose primary concern is to ensure that projects, however viable, possess ‘strategic fit’,ie they conform with the long-term aims of the organisation.
The investment expenditure process
An example, albeit simplified, of a typical integrated capital budgeting system is shown in Exhibit 1.
This contains four key elements:
1
The search process .
New ideas for evaluation may be generated by in-house Research and Development or by sponsored research.
There may exist either a formal, highly structured process of search or a loosely structured ‘think-tank’ approach.
Organisation theorists suggest that the latter type of arrangement is more conducive to the emergence of original ideas.
2
Evaluation .
After initial proposals have been researched and screened using broad ‘acceptability’ criteria predetermined by higher management, those which satisfy the screening tests are subjected to more detailed scrutiny as more information regarding their prospects is generated and a rigorous risk analysis may then be conducted.
3
Implementation .
Once a project receives the go-ahead, a project manager may be appointed to lead the process of implementation — that is, overseeing the conversion of an approved proposal into a facility generating added value for the firm.
There is evidence to suggest that the most successful projects are pioneered by ‘champions’, who not only sponsor the project proposal in the first place but manage the implementation phase and often the early stages of fully-fledged operation.
 4 
Control .
Projects rarely develop in a totally predictable fashion and thus require close and detailed control both during the implementation phase and after they are fully operational.
Progress during implementation should be monitored on both a time and a cost basis against a critical path-based plan, and regular reports should be fed back to more senior management.
Such reports should not only discuss what problems might have emerged, and their time and cost implications, but also attempt to anticipate any subsequent difficulties to offer advance warning of any requests for supplementary expenditure.
Exhibit 1
The second aspect of project control is the regular monitoring of project performance in its early stages and the taking of corrective action to overcome and any identified difficulties, such as failure to meet learning curve targets.
This should be coupled with the less frequent process of post-auditing, which involves reviewing in detail the extent to which the project outcome has corresponded to expectations.
What then is the role of the credit manager in this process?
Credit manager can make an important contribution in two key areas — evaluation and post-auditing.
Evaluation
Central to the appraisal of new capital expenditure proposals is the estimation of the size and timing of the cash outflows required to purchase labour and materials and of the cash inflows from invoiced sales of goods.
Assumptions about the rate of payment by debtors may have a significant bearing on the expected profitability of the project.
For example, consider the simple investment proposal shown in Panel A of Exhibit 2, which applies to the launch and operation of a new product development venture.
Now let us assume that standard credit terms for goods received and despatched in this particular industry involve payment after 30 days with neither discounts for early payment nor penalties for late payment.
If the demand for the product materialises as expected, annual cash inflows will be (10,000 x £120) = £1.2M, equivalent to £0.1M per month.
Annual cash outflows will be (10,000 x £60) = £0.6M, equivalent to £0.5M per month.
Applying the techniques of Discounted Cash Flow and treating the project as a 30-month annuity at a 2% per month discount rate, we can calculate the profitability of the project as indicated by its Net Present Value (NPV).
The computation is shown in Panel B of Exhibit 2.
On the assumption of ‘normal’ credit terms being offered and adhered to, the NPV is a reasonably healthy £0.1198M, and the project is acceptable.
However, if we begin to examine the realism of the underlying assumptions, and engage in a fairly simple sensitivity analysis, the project may start to look less attractive.
For example, in the case of developing and marketing a new product, however well the market has been researched and however convincing the volume figures may appear, some inducements inevitably have to be offered to customers in order to encourage them to switch their expenditure from other products.
One such inducement might be an extension of the usual credit period  from one month to, say, two months.
Experienced credit managers will be well aware that once a pattern of payment is established, it is difficult to coax customers out of that pattern.
In other words, the initial credit inducement may become accepted as the norm, thus shunting all cash inflows forwards.
The effect is unlikely to be compensated by a corresponding delay in cash outlays, and of course applies to total sales revenue rather than to simply the net cash flow, the difference between inflows and outflows.
This, naturally, magnifies the impact on one-month delay in settling invoices is to lower the NPV from £0.1198 to £0.0759, a reduction of 37%, while a prolonged two- month delay further lowers the NPV to £0.0328, barely a quarter of the initial estimate.
Clearly, any further delay in collection would seriously jeopardise the project.
Of course, these results are based upon several simplifying assumptions.
The initial inducement may not be taken by customers to imply the normal credit terms, or if it is, the firm's credit managers may eventually be able to rein back the actual credit period taken to the planned one month.
Moreover, the effect is likely to be spread across different customers in an uneven fashion; not all of them are likely to attempt to prolong the credit period permanently in this way.
Consideration of these qualifications to the analysis highlights the role of the credit manager.
His data bank should be invaluable in attempting to assess the following factors in relation to new product development activity.
How long a period of extended credit should be allowed?
How can reluctant payers be encouraged to adopt ‘normal’ credit periods with  jeopardising sales?
What is the likelihood of new customers refusing to budge from initial terms?
Should further credit be refused? or should we acquiesce in this involuntary trade credit to retain business?
What is the impact on profitability of different assumptions about speed of payment?
If the customer base is broadly the same as for existing products, then the credit manager should be able to arrive at a reasonable assessment of these factors.
If not, past experience will still reveal important insights into the plausibility of different assumptions about collection periods.
Either way, the credit manager and his data bank are resources which are too important to ignore in effective and realistic project appraisal.
Post-Auditing
The second area where the credit manager has the potential for making a major contribution is in that of post-auditing.
It will be useful, firstly, to consider the essential simple rationale for post-auditing a project.
The aims of a post-audit are:
(i)
Once a project has settled down into reasonably routine operation, it is useful to examine the pattern of achieved costs and benefits in the light of what was initial predictions.
In this way, the audit staff can assess whether the initial appraisal was suitable thorough.
Post-audits are thus a means of evaluating management expertise.
(ii)
More importantly, the lessons learned from a post-audit may be applied in subsequent appraisals.
In this respect, a post-audit may provide an important learning feedback leading to a sharpening-up of future evaluations, both in terms of the range of issues examined and of the degree of depth in which they are investigated.
A major benefit of post-audit should therefore be an improvement in future decision-making and planning procedures including the investment expenditure evaluation system itself.
(iii)
The knowledge that a project is likely to be post-audited is useful for keeping management on its toes, not only in their evaluation of investment proposals but also in the implementation and operation of an investment programme.
One of the major difficulties faced by many firms which post- audited their investment projects lies in separating out the cash inflows and outflows directly attributable to the project from those of existing activities.
In addition, many executives comment that one of the main reasons for actual project cash flows not corresponding to forecast cash flows is due to the impact of working capital movements.
With new product development, as we have noted, this is especially likely to be a problem.
More than usually generous credit terms may have to be offered, and although we did not allow for introductory discounts in our example, these may have to be offered to induce custom, with the degree of generosity perhaps varying by assessment of likelihood of payment and repeat orders.
If the size of cash flows, net of discounts, and their timing, is not carefully recorded and attributed to particular activities, it makes the process of comparing actual with forecast cash flows (as opposed to profits) very difficult and perhaps pointless.
For example, if customers purchase both existing and new products and no distinction is made as and when bills are settled, the post-auditor has now way of determining the size and rate of cash flow for the new project.
Even when such records are kept, it is common for post-audit staff not to consult the credit management function.
This tends to happen when a project is post-audited on the basis of its profit contribution rather than its cash flow performance.
In companies where the post-audit process works most effectively, a post-audit is planned in advance.
Project sponsors are instructed to indicate what information would be required to conduct a thorough post-audit, whether the existing information systems provide this data, and if not, what steps should be taken to ensure that the required information is collected and available when required.
It can again be seen that the credit manager can play a significant part in advising on the construction and overhaul of information systems to ensure that the essential feedback on project performance is forthcoming.
Conclusion
In this article, we have discussed the ways in which credit managers can, by providing key information, contribute to more effective decision-making and control in an area of critical importance to many firms.
If this information is sought and applied carefully, the credit management function can an even more significant role in enhancing corporate performance and profitability.
Bill Neale is Lecturer in Finance and Accountancy at the University of Bradford Management Centre 
Recovering your debts with the help of technology
Alayne Swanson shows that the Scots are no slouches when it comes to IT
In the present economic climate, credit control and debt recovery have become even more important.
In Scotland, the methods available to recover debts differ from those in England and Wales.
Alayne Swanson explains the methods available and outlines the ways in which technology developed within her firm helps in the recovery of clients' debts.
In Scotland, actions for payment of money are divided into three categories:
Actions for less than £750 are small claims
Actions between £750 and £1500 are summary causes
Actions in excess of £1500 are ordinary actions.
The procedure for small claims and summary causes is similar.
A claim document called a Summons is lodged with the court and two dates are provided.
The first is the return date by which the claimant must return the completed Summons to court following service and by which the debtor requires to advise the court whether he wishes to defend the action or offer to make payment by instalments.
If he does not declare an intention to defend the action or make an offer, the second date, known as the calling date, is the date on which the claimant can ask for a Decree from the court declaring that the debtor owes him the sum sued for.
(In Scotland, plaintiff and defendant are known as claimant and debtor, respectively.)
The procedure in relation to ordinary actions is different.
A warrant is granted by the court and the payment action must be served within one year of the date of warrant.
The period within which the debtor must notify the court of his intentions runs from the date of service and is a period of 21 days.
At the end of that period, if the debtor has made no offer or declared an intention to defend, the claimant can obtain decree.
Producing documents
When we receive instructions from our clients, the information is input to our computer system, differentiating between the types of action as appropriate.
The computer then produces the court documents with the relevant information at the correct time.
When the small claims and summary cause summons are returned from court, the two dates given are input to the system and various reminder memos are then issued in connection with those dates.
In relation to the ordinary action, the service date is input and a reminder is issued 21 days later.
Court procedure
When the court receives the papers, it issues a warrant entitling the claimant to execute diligence on the dependence.
This is entirely different from the situation in England and Wales and often causes confusion.
Diligence on the dependence takes two forms.
The first of these is arrestment on the dependence which is an attachment of funds in the hands of a third party pending resolution of the matter in dispute.
The money is frozen in the hands of a third party and not paid out to either side.
This form of diligence can be used as soon as the warrant has been obtained from the court and before the debtor has received notification of the action against him by service of the court papers.
The second form of diligence on the dependence is an inhibition .
this is a restriction on the debtor personally preventing him from disposing of or dealing in any property owned by him.
This diligence can only be exercised once the curt papers have been served on the debtor.
Our computer system is designed to produce the necessary documents for these two types of diligence on the dependence when the appropriate input is made.
These forms of Diligence are particularly useful procedures for creditors seeking to recover debts under a Scottish payment action.
What they can provide, if they successfully attach to money or property which is about to be disposed of, is security for the sum sued for together with interest and expenses.
Once the court papers have been served on the debtor and an enquiry has been made at court regarding the debtor's intentions, the result of those enquiries is input to the computer and the appropriate papers for obtaining Decree are produced.
Alayne Swanson is Head of Debt Recovery Unit, Bird Semple Fyfe Ireland WS of Edinburgh
Enforcement
Once Degree has been obtained there are various methods of enforcement of that Decree available.
Arrestment and inhibition can be carried out following Decree, and at that time they are described as diligence in execution .
Arrestments can be lodged after Decree with employers and these are known as earnings arrestments .
The additional methods available once Decree has been obtained and a final demand for payment issued, which is known as a Charge, are a petition for sequestration or liquidation of the debtor .
These are also processes which can be easily incorporated into the computer system.
In addition, poinding of assets can take place and a warrant sale can be carried out to realise those effects at a later date.
The necessary papers and instructions required for these various forms of diligence are produced by our computer system when the appropriate input is made.
Processing information
Debt recovery is particularly suited to a computerised system because much of the work is similar apart from the particular details of each case.
What the computer system enables us to do is input the various pieces of information for each case which are particular  to that case but to run these pieces of information through a set framework of events which produce the appropriate documentation, thus achieving a cost effective and efficient system.
This is particularly true in the case of recovery of monies under the Consumer Credit Act where a large volume of recovery can be handled once the necessary styles and parameters have been determined.
Our system is much more than a word processor.
It is able to move on to the next stage of the action if the various relevant conditions have been satisfied and to produce documentation for court or reminders for the debt recovery unit personnel to enable them to progress matters beyond the next stage.
The reporting facilities which are available by using a computer system are extremely important.
Bird Semple Fyfe Ireland has commissioned a piece of 4GL software which will be unique to the firm in the Scottish legal world and which allows it to produce any report required either for management purposes or for clients.
The major concern for clients in debt recovery work is reporting each stage of each case, and this report facility, linked with the information already held on computer, will provide an opportunity for reports to be prepared to clients' specifications on any given timescale.
Cost effective
The major benefit to clients of the use of a computer system is the cost saving involved.
The use of a comprehensive computer database allows a small number of staff to handle a large volume of cases with the confidence which arises from the correct use of documentation and the reminders which are produced by the computer.
Because time costs money, any time saving device like a computer system obviously cuts costs.
Management of a large number of cases successfully is easily achieved.
Compatible language
The systems for recovering monies due are broadly similar in England and Wales and in Scotland.
Obviously, the computer system which we run is designed to take account of the Scottish jargon and the Scottish elements of procedure which are particular to payment actions.
Because our computer programme has been specially designed for us by our Information Technology Manager, we have never experienced any problems in converting our English clients' instructions to Scots!
Bird Semple Fyfe Ireland have offices in Edinburgh , Glasgow  and London   
150 up for UAPT-Infolink
UAPT-Infolink plc celebrates its 150th anniversary in 1992.
In the first of two articles, we look at the development of the UK's longest-established provider of credit information.
The origins of UAPT-Infolink plc can be traced back to a group of traders meeting in coffee houses to exchange their personal experience of bad debtors.
These meetings proved to successful that, in 1842, the traders founded the London Association for the Protection of Trade to facilitate the exchange of credit information.
Today UAPT-Infolink plc has grown into the UK's leading independent credit information organisation.
Other trade protection associations have foundered in the face of the challenges presented by the 20th century.
To what does Brian Bailey, Managing Director of the UAPT-Infolink Group, attribute the long-lived success of the organisation?
‘UAPT-Infolink plc occupies a unique position in the UK credit industry.
We have always remained faithful to our roots in the trade protection movement and we take pride in the fact that we have maintained our independence for one hundred and fifty years.
Meeting customer needs
‘Unlike many of our competitors, the provision of credit information has always been our core business.
Another major strength has been our ability to meet the needs of a wide range of customers, from the small business offering trade credit to the UK's leading financial institutions.
This has allowed us to develop a number of pioneering information-sharing systems to the benefit of all our subscribers’, concluded Dr Bailey.
Infolink's ability to respond quickly to the needs of a particular industry sector is demonstrated by a number of recent initiatives.
Last year, together with the Association of Mortgage Lenders, Infolink introduced the UK's first national register of mortgage defaulters, to tackle the growing problems of mortgage repossessions.
Soon after its launch, the Mortgage Repossessions Register was adopted by the Council of Mortgage Lenders.
In 1991, Infolink also introduced an initiative to tackle the growing problem of vehicle transfer agencies.
Dr Bailey explains: ‘These people were cashing in on consumers with repayment problems by offering to take over their debt and their motor vehicle.
However, in the vast majority of cases, the repayments have not been maintained, leaving the consumer with no vehicle as well as outstanding debt.’
The Finance House estimate that this debt is worth more than £4.4M.
Infolink responded with a central register of vehicle transfer agencies, to help lenders keep track of the nationwide extent of the problem and limit the extent of fraudulent activity in the future.
Dr Bailey believes that Infolink's willingness to respond to the changing requirements of its customer base has helped the company to maintain a leading position in the credit industry.
‘We have obviously seen enormous change in the last one hundred and fifty years.
Our strength lies in our ability to keep pace with this change.
We were one of the first credit information providers to computerise our data resource and our understanding of technology has brought many benefits to our customer.
Finally, our success has always been based upon a sound strategic platform.’
New corporate structure
It is therefore highly appropriate that UAPT's-Infolink plc has introduced a new corporate structure in its 150th anniversary year to provide the framework for the continued success of the organisation.
‘In the last ten years or so we have developed a number of ancillary services, which have grown out of our core business.
We can now offer automated risk assessment systems combining statistical scoring techniques and the advancing technology of expert systems in support of more profitable lending decisions.
Our direct marketing services, established in 1988, have also grown considerably.
Finally the acquisition of HP Information plc in 1990 has also increased the range of services offered with the group,’ explained Dr Bailey.
A strategy for the future
Three separate companies will now operate within the UAPT- Infolink Group.
Infolink Ltd encompasses consumer and business information services; Infolink Decision Services Ltd will provide support for risk assessment and profitable decision-making, and will include direct marketing services; finally HP Information plc will continue to offer a range of on-line services relating to high-value mobile assets.
Dr Bailey believes that the new structure will bring important strategic benefits in the decade ahead.
‘We want to give each company the opportunity to develop strategies for new product development to ensure that we remain ahead of the competition in each area of business.
The new structure will bring obvious advantages to our customers who will continue to benefit from the cross-marketing policies of the three companies.
Infolink Ltd
Nevia McKiernan, the new Managing Director of Infolink Ltd, believes that the new structures will provide even greater scope for innovation in the provision of consumer and commercial information services.
‘Our strategy is simple.
We want to maintain our leading position as one of the UK's foremost providers of commercial and consumer credit information.
We will continue to introduce new products specifically tailored to the needs of our customers, whatever the size of their company.
Above all, we are committed to providing the best service in the business.’
Mr McKiernan believes that the  economic climate of the early 1990s has placed a new emphasis upon the value of credit information.
‘With more than 900 businesses failing a week so far in 1992, no company can afford to offer credit without first investigating the financial stability of a prospect.
The growth in consumer debt levels has also reinforced the value of credit information to support responsible lending decisions.’
In the trade credit sector, Infolink's customer base has grown, as many companies — which may not have used credit information when times were good — have become far more careful about offering credit to customers or suppliers.
‘What lenders are looking for is comprehensive, accurate and relevant information, upfront, to build up a fuller picture of the credit applicant, before making a decision to grant credit’, confirmed Mr McKiernan.
Exclusive business data
Infolink is well placed to respond to this need.
In 1990 it became the first company to offer on-line access to data from Companies House on all limited companies operating in the UK.
This information is supplemented by a wealth of subscriber-supplied data from a wide-ranging customer base.
In many cases, Infolink can offer exclusive data about those companies most susceptible to failure.
Mr McKiernan explains: ‘Research has shown that the most vulnerable business is less than two years old with a net worth of less than £40,000.
Yet public data about these companies is limited, since most small businesses, sole traders and partnerships are not required to register with Companies House.
‘We have overcome this problem with a vast resource of subscriber-supplied information from an extensive customer base, covering a wide range of industry sectors.
Each week we receive exclusive notification of thousands of commercial credit agreements relating to sole traders and partnerships as well as limited companies.
This breadth of coverage allows our subscribers to obtain the best possible value for money.’
Value for money service
Infolink's Business Update is one service for the trade credit sector which offers value for money in the present economic climate.
For less than a penny a day Business Update will monitor the financial progress of any company or business in the UK.
‘We can provide information for over 3.5 million companies, businesses and organisations in the UK, giving immediate notification of changes in the financial status of the organisation, as the data is loaded onto our commercial database’, confirmed Mr McKiernan.
Another service attracting a growing number of subscribers is Commercial Payment Profile.
Subscribers to Commercial Payment Profile recognise that the principle of information-sharing offers the key to better, more relevant financial information, claims Mr McKiernan.
‘The credit grantor not only requires confirmation of the existing loan commitments of a business prospect; he also needs details of previous repayment patterns in order to assess how a commercial borrower is likely to cope with his own repayment structure.’
Commercial Payment Profile provides details on individual loan commitments, the type of loan agreement held, the start data and the monthly payment status.
This service is updated monthly to provide a current picture, a vital requirement at a time when business fortunes can fluctuate overnight.
Flexible enquiry levels
To ensure that subscribers can make the most cost-effective use of its information resource, Infolink has developed a flexible enquiry service to allow subscribers to select only the information which is relevant to their particular needs.
‘As soon as we identify a real market need, we will introduce a new level of enquiry.
Whether a subscriber requires the simple verification of a customer's registered name provided by our Corporate and Business Index or a detailed financial analysis of a company balance sheet, we can provide the appropriate level of detail’, stated Mr McKiernan.
Indeed, Infolink has recently introduced Reportline, a document-ordering service to supplement the immediate availability of online commercial information.
Report line provides on-line access to hard copies of any document registered at Companies House as well as Infolink's own in-depth Company Status Reports.
In the words of Mr McKiernan, ‘subscribers can now match their search requirement to the risk potential of the enquiry subject’.
Infolink has also launched a number of value-added services to support its customers in the consumer credit sector.
The company is about to launch the Historic Voters Roll, which will complement Infolink's Electoral Register.
The new service will provide an additional means of confirming the accuracy of residential credit information supplied by applicants.
Historic Voters Roll
Whilst the Electoral Register remains the most reliable means of confirming the name and address of a credit applicant, tens of thousands of names have disappeared  from the Register in the last year.
The Historic Voters Roll will address this problem by providing a mechanism to confirm the existence of any supplied address, irrespective of whether an elector is currently registered there.
It will also confirm the identity of the applicant who, for whatever reason, does not appear on the electoral rolls.
‘This service was introduced in direct response to the needs of our customer.
Rising payment default  levels have made it essential for lenders to confirm the accuracy of a credit applicant's residential history’, explained Mr McKiernan.
The Consumer Early Warning Service is another product introduced to help lenders limit consumer bad debt levels.
This service will identify those consumers experiencing payment difficulties and inform the lender, who can then take early steps to limit the extent  to the problem.
‘For example, the lender can arrange loan repayments over a longer period, to help his customer through a difficult financial time and ensure that the loan is not written off’, reported Mr McKiernan.
The service is available to members of Infolink's consumer Payment Profile Service (PPS), which allows lending institutions to share details of the loan repayment history of customers, to support responsible lending decisions.
A pioneering approach
Established in 1984, Infolink's Payment Profile Service was the first service of its kind and has played a particularly valuable role in support of responsible lending decisions in the consumer sector.
Membership of this service is growing, as the retailers and building societies are recognising the predictive power of historical payment performance data.
Mr McKiernan believes that this service will have an even more important role to play in the financial services sector in the future.
‘At a time when the lending institutions are recognising the need for a careful analysis of potential customers’ ability to meet loan repayments, Consumer Payment Profile is another example of the added-value service which Infolink can provide.’
Payment Profile data has also been used by Infolink Decisions Services to improve the predictive power of credit scorecards, with impressive results — a good example of the benefits to customers of the cross marketing strategy between companies in the UAPT-Infolink Group.
Does Mr McKiernan see continued co-operation between Group companies following the implementation of the new corporate structure?
‘Definitely.
We will work closely with Infolink Decision Services to ensure that we provide solutions to all our customers’ risk assessment needs in the future.
At the same time the new corporate structure will allow us to consolidate the on- going expansion of the information services offered by Infolink Ltd.’
The Unisys A17 computer suite at Infolink's premises at Coombe Cross, Croydon
Business information going for gold
David Rosenbaum describes developments in BT's delivery of business information to Sam Tulip
BT's involvement in the provision of business information services derived originally from the development of delivery systems such as Prestel and e-mail (Telecom Gold).
Third party databases such as those of Infocheck have been available on Telecom Gold for up to ten years, but until recently selling services was secondary to selling Prestel and E-mail systems (and those two delivery options functioned as discrete entities).
Now, however, Prestel and Telecom Gold have been brought together under the BT Tymnet banner and information products have been separated from the delivery systems.
Services are grouped into a number of vertical market segments serving, for instance, insurance, travel and education, and the horizontal market of interest here — Business Information Services,(BIS), for which Mr Rosenbaum is Product Marketing Manager.
As a result BIS has been able to focus on service provision and customer care and support, and the development of an attractive portfolio of gateways to third party services.
Services available on Prestel and on Telecom Gold differ slightly, and new services are being introduced on both systems.
Looking first at Telecom Gold, the major services of interest to credit managers are CCN's Gazette and Status Reports, ICC's British Companies Database and Full Text Accounts/Stockbroker reports, Infocheck's Company Credit Information and Database Scan services, Jordans' Company Financial Information and, from last month, the Infocheck Global Scan service.
Also available are a range of City and business services including FT Profiles, Infomat Industry Watch, Citiwatch, Infocheck M&A database and Daily Business Brief, UK and European versions of Kompass and of course the indispensable Electronic Yellow Pages.
Telecom Gold requires a PC and a suitable modem (which many offices will have anyway) and costs are by subscription (£40 plus £5.50 a month) with services billed on a ‘pay as you go’ basis.
Most services are charged by the minute, but the new Global Scan service will be charged on a transaction bases and other services may follow this pattern, although this will require some alterations to BT's own billing software.
Now most credit managers will be familiar with farms such as CCN and Infolink, so why should they go through British Telecom?
Clearly, high volume users are probably better  off accessing the databases of their choice directly, and are probably able to negotiate discounts, but Mr Rosenbaum says that BT's own market research amongst small and medium sized companies suggests that while over two thirds saw the applicability of on- line services to their needs for, for instance, credit checking, less than one-third were actually using such services.
Perceived obstacles included the alleged complexity of on-line systems.
Perceived obstacles included the alleged complexity of on-line systems, especially when using several different sources (although this is far less true than it used to be) and the complexity of rate cards and billing (and this, alas, is still very true of some service providers).
Meanwhile research revealed that 80% of SMEs already used suitable PCs, and over 50% were strongly attracted to the idea of a ‘single source’ through which a variety of services could be accessed.
Clearly, a gap in the market.
BT BIS is addressing the needs of the smaller user by concentrating on developing its own support, training and customer help desk functions, by ensuring the simplest and clearest possible billing procedures, by developing the closest possible relationship with customers and by making the system even easier to use.
Ease of use, Mr Rosenbaum admits, still requires some work but ‘we are working hard to establish a common ‘log off’— important where billing is by the minute!
Training of users is also an issue and, helpfully, BT BIS has taken the line that their natural user group, the smaller firms, not only need training in how to use the system — which is, after all, not terribly difficult — but also in what the information available can be used for and, to some extent, how to use it.
The various  databases available come with BT-written reference guides explaining what the sources offer and what uses they are designed for.
In some instances, these certainly appear to be superior in utility to the literature provided by the sources themselves.
So far we haven't mentioned prestel services (generically, ‘videotext’ to readers outside the UK).
There is a smaller range of services available, although some Prestel services are not on Telecom Gold.
For credit managers, most of the Infocheck services are already available, Jordans' will be on Prestel in the near future and Prestel also has the ability, not currently carried by Telecom Gold, to interrogate the BT Directory Enquiry phone- base.
As noted, major users will probably prefer to establish direct links with their databases of choice, but if you're handling, say 100 credit checks a month, and a few other services (airline timetables are available on Telecom Gold — solve your boss's travel problems and got to the top of the class), information delivery via Prestel or Telecom Gold could be for you.
Enquiries:
Supporting literature includes specially commissioned guides to accessing and using each of the services
Eastern promises
Colin Hingston scrutinises the inscrutable
Those unfamiliar with doing business with Japan (ie most British firms) may be forgiven for thinking that there are no credit problems there.
After all, in such a super-rich environment and efficient culture, surely everyone can pay on short terms.
Indeed, one might be wary of suggesting to a customer that an invoice is overdue for fear that he commit hari-kari immediately (without paying first).
Also, though kite flying is a popular hobby in Japan, one would hesitate to suggest that this applies in any financial senses.
Whilst this is true to a large extent (short terms and good business practice, not hari-kari ), a glance at the rather special history of Japan reveals interesting developments.
For over 200 years, up to the middle of the nineteenth century, whilst the Industrial Revolution was in full swing in Europe and North America, Japan was in a state of almost total seclusion.
With very few exceptions, no foreigner was allowed in, and no native was allowed out.
Nevertheless, Japan's domestic economy expanded greatly during this period, so commercial and financial practices naturally developed as well, though along slightly different lines from those of the West.
Interestingly, the demand for credit was just as powerful, and I suppose, given the severe insularity, we should be surprised at how conceptually similar to the West their ideas were.
Whereas the western credit instruments mainly took the form of Bills of Exchange, the Japanese concentrated on Promissory Notes.
This is not to say that Bills were unknown in Japan, any more than Promissory Notes in the West, but Japanese commerce was heavily dependent on ‘P Notes’ as the basis of a complex credit system.
As one would expect, in more recent times western banking and financial methods have become increasingly acceptable in Japan, as well as the rest of Asia.
It is still the case today, though, that P Notes are used to settle about 20 per cent of business transactions.
They can have maturity dates of anything up to 189 days, and of course by their nature are not easily controlled by suppliers.
Who, for instance, would have the courage to return a 120 days Note, requesting replacement with one for 60 days?
The wish may well be granted, but possibly only after a further 90 days has gone by!
Modern use of P Notes is governed by the bill of Exchange and Promissory Note Law (1933).
Complex rules are laid down regarding types of note (ie for what proposes), the responsibilities of banks, endorsement, and dishonour.
One interesting practice, for example, is for two businesses, both short of funds, to exchange P Notes of the same value and tenor, and discount them at their respective banks — presumably when most other sources of finance have been exhausted.
A further challenge, to Western eyes at least, is the ritual surrounding the actual passing over of the P Note which still predominates.
A creditor does not generally expect P Notes to flood in by mail.
Typically, the debtor will notify creditors who are included in the next batch of Notes to be issued of the date that they will be available.
On that day, a member of the creditor's staff must dress in his best suit, proceed to the debtor's offices, and stand in line with perhaps 30 or 40 other representatives.
When his turn arrives, he enters into the presence of the one and only official responsible for P Notes.
Both men stand stiffly to attention, and give the traditional Japanese jerky bow to each other.
The P Note, usually rolled and tied with ribbon, is presented and received with two hands, bows are repeated, and the creditor's representative may then leave, having shown suitable gratitude for the debtor's benevolence throughout the performance.
Similar to Bills of Exchange, it is possible to either roll over the debt by replacing a Note with another of longer tenor, or by asking for the payee's consent to the extension of the maturity date.
Of course, the payee can request some form of security in return, but the usual choice in this situation appears to be between probably dishonour now, and possible dishonour later.
A dishonoured Note is normally quickly followed by insolvency proceedings.
The implications of dishonour can be very serious.
The process of endorsing Notes and passing them on to pay for goods or services from business to business is still quite common.
If the original payee is stumped for funds at maturity, the final holder can approach the last endorser for payment, who in turn can claim from the previous endorser,etc.
Obviously, this process is expensive both in terms of administration and time out of funds, and where large amounts are involved, can cause the down fall of other businesses in the chain.
Whilst we might still be envious in the UK of Japan's bankruptcy statistics, the Tokyo Commerce and Industry Research Company recently reported 677 cases there in February involving amounts above Y10M (£39,200).
This was just over 50 per cent above February 1990, and five per cent more than in January.
It was also the fifth consecutive month in which both the number and value of bankruptcies was above the prior year level.
Possibly the saddest cases are in the consumer credit field, where exactly the same rules apply as in business, but tend not to be fully understood by many of the general public.
A ‘Maursen’ Note, for example, provides for instalment payments.
If there is insufficient funds available to meet one instalment, the individual's name is included on a violator's blacklist at the Federation of Bankers' Associations.
A second offence causes suspension of bank transactions, usually for two years.
Such a record, which is not erasable, can be held against people when applying for jobs.
In the commercial world, a typical Note chain will start with a large corporation enjoying a powerful market position, and able to demand long terms from smaller suppliers.
These suppliers, having therefore a good stock of P Notes, but perhaps not much cash, will often use the Notes to pay their suppliers in turn, and so the chain builds up.
It usually follows that a large corporation has a high credit status, in which case there is not problem.
On the rare occasion where a good bargaining position is not supported by ready access to funds, however, the various chain reactions set in, and the implications and insolvencies become far-reaching.
The concepts of honour and trust, on which P Notes are based, are very highly developed in Japan.
Happily these days, when the system falls down,hari-kari is far more likely to be symbolic, in the form of bankruptcy, reorganisation, or composition, than physical.
Moreover, the pretty paper kites in the clear blue skies still outnumber the documentary versions by a long way.
Colin Hingston is Treasurer of the ICM 
ICM ONE-DAY SEMINARS APRIL
The big match
TI and NCM competing head-to-head will have some interesting implications for credit insurance customers, writes Nigel Bovingdon
For decades, there has been little choice within the UK credit within the UK credit insurance market.
If a UK company wanted export credit insurance, it utilised the Export Credits Guarantee Department (ECGD), part of the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) of the Government.
If domestic credit insurance was required, invariably the company utilised Trade Indemnity (TI).
For many years the only other credit insurance underwriter in the UK was Credit and Guarantee.
During the 1980s, a number of underwriters opened their doors offering whole turnover type cover or the ‘excess of loss’(catastrophe) type policies.
In 1981, Namur, based in Belgium, established an office in the UK, and then followed PanFinancial, AIU, London Bridge Finance, and, more recently, Sun Alliance, Alastair Malcolm Associates, Infocheck Credit Indemnity and various managed policies.
During this decade, whilst there was increased competition, comparatively few policyholders decided to change underwriters with one particular exception.
The exception occurred when Trade Indemnity decided to start writing export credit insurance and, because of ECGD's poor service at that time, large good quality business moved from ECGD to Trade Indemnity.
Deregulation within the Single European Market commenced on 1 July 1990 as far as credit insurance was concerned and two Continental European underwriters, Nederlandsche Credietverzekering Maatschappij NV (NCM NV) and Hermes, were noticeably more active in the UK market than others.
NCM NV went on to bid for and was successful part of ECGD.
On 1 December 1991, the purchase was complete and NCM Credit Insurance Limited (NCM) was born.
Hermes, earlier in 1991, decided to withdraw from the UK market citing catastrophic trading losses in the UK as their reason.
There are now over 15 credit insurance companies vying for business in the UK but the dominance of TI and, now, NCM is still apparent.
As a reflection of their previous specialisations and virtual monopolies, there are a good number of UK companies (some being readers of this article) who utilise TI for their domestic credit insurance and NCM for their export receivables protection.
Now that these two companies are offering both domestic and export credit insurance, they will both seek to protect and consolidate their position with their good quality policyholders by ousting their competitor.
Will this be a good idea for you, the policyholder?
What are and will be the differences between them?
What factors should companies consider before making any decision concerning their future underwriter or underwriters?
In assessing the suitability of any credit insurance underwriter, companies must be satisfied with a number of key issues.
These issues are continuously considered by all worthwhile credit insurance brokers and they are as follows:
Security of underwriter
Policy of Insurance
Underwriting strategy
Claims
Pricing
Security of underwriter
Underwriters must have financial strength and backing to honour its underwriting commitments and there are four areas which need to be considered:
Capitalisation
Reinsurance
Shareholders
Current trading performance
a) Capitalisation
The capitalisation of the company and the extent of its reinsurance arrangements are the basic ingredients which determine the level of business and underwriting commitments which it can undertake.
Both TI and NCM have comparatively low capitalisations but, with their reinsurance treaties, their financial resources are sufficient for their current underwriting obligations.
b) Reinsurance
Both TI and NCM ‘lay off’ around 60 per cent of all their underwriting liabilities to reinsurers.
The reinsurers, particularly the lead reinsurers, need to be substantial and have the experience in both commercial and political risk insurance.
In this area, TI may have the edge inasmuch as its reinsurance treaties have been in place for much longer.
This is not to denigrate the NCM treaty.
It is soundly led and NCM did well to place the bulk of its existing portfolio into the reinsurance market — not an easy feat.
The balance (so called non-vested markets) is retained by HMG for the time being.
On reinsurance, there are two issues which affect both TI and NCM.
The first relates to political risk reinsurance.
SwissRE, the world's largest reinsurer, has publicly stated its aversion to reinsuring political risk.
The Gulf War, the re-alignment of Eastern Europe, the breakup of the USSR, the Middle East and not to mention Africa and South America given little support for anyone to disagree with SwissRe's view.
Their particular concern is the potential flood of political risk reinsurance requirements if and when other Export Credit Agencies follow the UK lead in privatisation.
Those reinsurers who instinctively ‘follow’ SwissRe are likely also to take their lead on this issue.
Other major reinsurers may privately have a similar view.
Having said that, there are other reinsurers both in Lloyd's and in the commercial markets who have and who intend to run a profitable book of political risk reinsurance.
However the capacity will remain limited and fragile.
It needs careful and knowledgeable underwriters to monitor and hopefully improve the capacity in future years.
If reinsurers receive further adverse experience on political risk, they may withdraw their support for this class.
This may result in lower capacity and thus increase the inability for TI and NCM to respond to the needs of their exporting policyholders.
The second element relates to HMG's support for national interest cases.
The Government has stated that, as well as continuing cover on non-vested markets for NCM, it will provide reinsurance for those contracts which are deemed to be in the ‘national interest’ for as long as the Government considers its existence essential to meet the reasonable needs of exporters and so long as it performs satisfactorily as a trading facility.
Currently, that facility is only available to NCM in Cardiff.
In order to maintain a level playing field, it is  important that the Government make access available to well established credit insurance underwriters who have clients/policyholders to whom the national interest reinsurance may be appropriate.
c) Shareholders
Both TI and NCM have excellent major shareholders.
TI has the Commercial Union, Guardian Royal Exchange, SwissRe and MunichRe whilst NCM through its parent company in Holland, has a number of major Dutch banks (eg ABN Amro and Rado Bank) as major shareholders.
d) Current trading performance
Last year, Trade Indemnity announced substantial losses which required it to have a rights issue which all bar the Prudential took up.
The 1991 results are likely to be poor but, as the dominant UK credit insurer operating in the longest and deepest recession for many years, one can hardly expect to see good figures.
If TI did produce a good underwriting result, one would question whether TI was taking on any risk?
If there is another rights issue, a possible result may be that the major shareholders will decide to take out the minority interest.
Trade Indemnity, owned by 5–7 major shareholders, well known in the insurance and reinsurance market would be good for TI and good for its policyholders.
NCM has not been unaffected by the world economy and, in particular, the recessions in North America, France and Italy.
Losses arising from the Gulf War were also sustained although these are now historical and were ‘for the account’ of HMG.
Its loss ratio must accordingly be quite high and as the dominant UK export credit underwriter, this should not be surprising.
Policy of Insurance
Both TI and NCM use the ‘whole turnover’ policy as a bedrock of their business.
This policy gives them a much needed spread of risk of buyer and of export market and gives the policyholder the best ‘rate on line’:ie the percentage ratio between the amount of premium and the level of cover provided.
TI is currently more experienced in providing variations on the whole turnover policy, be it catastrophe, datum line, cover on a specific customers or multi-market cover.
However, NCM will need to learn fast and will doubtless respond to the needs of its customers.
NCM has now developed, with some help from my company, a domestic credit policy which follows traditional lines but which is written in plain English (ie with little insurance jargon).
It is expected that the wording will be well received by its current and future policyholders and does enable NCM to be flexible in its approach to domestic credit underwriting.
A more flexible approach to the policy structure by these two underwriters will be one of the major benefits of this more competitive market.
Underwriting strategy
a) Resource
TI, which was written export credit for some years with notable success, is already gearing up to expand its export credit activities in the UK.
It has recently recruited Dick Watt who formerly ran ECGD's City Office and he will enhance TI's underwriting expertise.
As I write, no news yet by NCM to acquire domestic credit underwriting expertise from outside the company.
It may well feel that there is sufficient resource and underwriting expertise within NCM already to enable it to convert some of its team onto domestic.
It also has access to the many years of experience on domestic credit underwriting in Holland from its parent company.
However, underwriting in Holland, where NCM enjoy 95 per cent of the market, may be different from the UK, and therefore NCM may have had little experience in working in a competitive market.
TI will find it hard to match NCM's credit limit service on exports.
The CLASS system was developed utilising ECGD's experience in the export credit market over many years and provides its policyholders with a very fast and effective credit limit service on over 70 per cent of all limit applications.
This system will not be duplicated on its domestic credit policy.
On domestic, TI has aggregation problems in certain trades and on certain major companies in those trades.
New capacity coming from NCM will improve this position — but only on acceptable risks.
This may give NCM the edge in certain trades where credit insurance has been traditionally well used.
In order to provide a workable level of UK buyer knowledge, NCM has appointed Graydons to be its main provider of status information.
Graydon will have to move fast if it is to enable to NCM to compete with TI's credit limit underwriting on UK exposures.
b) Information Technology
Both TI and NCM have and will invest significant sums in the development of their respective computer systems.
TI is already running trails to enable its policyholders, via a PC link, to apply for credit limits.
NCM in Cardiff will initially use the well established system of its parent company and then, in time, transfer its clients to its own system.
These PC based systems, already being utilised by Infocheck Credit Indemnity, significantly speed up the basic process which is a yes (you can have the limit you want on a buyer) or no (you can't).
These systems will not and will never replace the discussion and debate required between insured, insurer and credit insurance broker on ‘difficult’ major limit problems.
The systems will reduce the need for discretionary limits as, if required, policyholders will be able to seek approval for small limits from the computer system.
They should cut delays and charges in getting information from banks and status agencies.
TI Coverline, linked to Graydons database, is already available to TI policyholders.
However, total use of these computer systems may reduce policyholders' ability to ‘build up’ insured credit limits on small companies through good trading experience, a much valued facility for certain sectors of industry.
These systems do not and will not come free.
NCM will be introducing charges for both policy administration and limits.
The more limits you have and the more limits you apply for, the greater the cost.
TI has been has been levying limit charges for some years and these will be extended.
Continental European credit underwriters derive a significant amount of income from these charges and the underwriters based in the UK will seek to emulate them.
Pay particular attention to these charges.
If an insurance company seeks a charge on a per application basis — beware.
With NCM, if insured buyers exceed the allowable credit period (the maximum extension period), the policyholder is required to ‘revalidate’ the credit limit.
The revalidation will be charged as an application.
All credit limits need also to be revalidated once a year.
The benefit of this approach is the positive and regular vetting of all credit limits.
Claims
TI pays claim on domestic business, within 30 days of receipt of a satisfactory confirmation of debt from the administrator of the insolvent estate.
NCM will simply need to be satisfied that the debt is valid through the provision of invoices, delivery notes, bills of lading etc.
As administrators  can find it difficult to confirm debt to unsecured creditors and delays can be experienced, NCM's wording is to the policyholder's advantage.
In certain loss situations, NCM's definition of ‘Recoveries’ in its domestic policy is preferable to TI's.
Pricing
Much depends on the respective cost of reinsurance which TI has secured for 1992 and NCM has just purchased in December 1991.
Administrative costs including limit charges, and reserves need to be added to the price.
Whilst price is important, over the next two or three years at least, the quality and extent of cover will be the more important and overriding factor.
Across the range, it is likely that NCM may cost more on both export and domestic credit insurance, but the quality of cover, particularly in certain key trades, could be the deciding factor whilst Trade Indemnity labour under ‘aggregation’ problems.
However, for the policyholder, the pluses and minuses could confuse an issue where the client simply wants the most effective cover.
This is where the specialist credit insurance broker comes to the fore in negotiating a structure and pricing which is in keeping with the client's business.
We must also not forget the other 13 or so credit insurance underwriters who may well be able to structure cover which more accurately meets the policyholder's individual requirements, particularly where companies are trading only in OECD markets.
Nigel Bovingdon is Managing Director of The Credit Insurance Association    
ICM National Conference & Exhibition 4 March, Park Lane Hilton Hotel, London
THE CONFERENCE
The National Conference has long been established as the premier event in the Institute's calendar.
Politics in Credit Management (‘politics’ with a small p) is the theme of this year's conference — external politics such as the implications of the proposals for economic and monetary union, and internal politics, the need to manage your time effectively, avoid stress and improve the status of the credit function.
As in previous years, the Exhibition will take place adjacent to the conference and will be of interest to all those engaged in credit and associated areas.
THE SPEAKERS
Professor David Weir , Director of the Management Centre, University of Bradford,Credit and communication: why businesses go bust 
The University of Bradford Management Centre is one of the largest MBA schools in the UK and highly rated for its research tradition and professional relevance.
Professor Weir, a founder member of the British Academy of Management and a Fellow of the British Institute of Management, has been a consultant for several large organisations including the World Bank, the Scottish Development Agency, the Portuguese Government and UNESCO.
He is Managing Editor of the European Management Journal , and the author of several books including the Modern Britain series.
Blenyth Jenkins , Director of Corporate Affairs, Institute of Directors,A perspective from the boardroom 
The holder of a double First in Law from Trinity Hall, Cambridge, his posts have included Solicitor with Slaughter & May; Legal Assistant to the Secretary, Assistant Group Secretary and Divisional Secretary, British Aircraft Corporation; Company Secretary and Group Administration Director, Debenhams; and Director, Litigation and Advisory Department, British Telecom.
Mr Jenkins is a member of The Law Society and a lay member of the Audit Registration Committee, Institute of Chartered Accountants.
David James , Chairman, Eagle Trust and Davies and Newman Holdings,The future — fifteen years later 
In September 1989 Mr James was appointed Chairman and Chief Executive of fraud hit conglomerate Eagle Trust, with the objective to reduce bank borrowings of £100M and achieve restructuring of £240M turnover Group.
In November 1990 he was appointed Chairman and Chief Executive of Davies & Newman Holdings (Dan-Air), having arranged with the company's bankers a refinancing package.
In October 1991 he announced a £54M capital raising to support and complete rescue strategy.
Concurrent with the above projects, David James has performed a number of secondary roles on behalf of other industrial and commercial companies experiencing financial difficulties.
Christopher Taylor , Chief Adviser, European Division, Bank of England,Life after Maastricht 
Mr Taylor is a graduate in Economics of King's College, Cambridge, and has a further degree in Economics from McGill University, Montreal.
His principal area of responsibility is European economic developments and policy, with particular reference to monetary union.
Other posts he has held include Bank of England (1974–); seconded to the IMF, Washington, from 1981–83 as alternate Executive Director; and Head of Economics Division, Bank of England, 1983–90.
Professor Shirley Fisher , Director, Centre for Occupational and Health Psychology, University of Strathclyde,Debt can damage your health 
Professor Fisher is the author of 7 books including Stress and control ,Stress and health ,Homesickness and The psychology of change and transition .
She has been Visiting Professor at the Universities of  Fribourg , Switzerland; Natal, South Africa; and La Trobe, Melbourne.
Caroline Blaazer , Senior Consultant, the Industrial Society,time: its management and control 
Ms Blaazer has spent 14 years with The Industrial Society, where she is now Senior Consultant.
She has devised and delivered numerous courses on management and supervisory skills and techniques, administrative management, customer care and communications skills for organisations in both the public and private sectors in the UK and abroad.
Jeremy Mitchell , Consumer Policy Adviser,Credit, debt and the consumer interest 
Jeremy Mitchell works independently as Consumer Policy Adviser to international organisations, public bodies and consumer groups, specialising in the consumer aspects of financial services, telecommunications and broadcasting.
He was formerly Director of Consumer Affairs at the Office of Fair Trading and for nine years until the end of 1986 he was Director of the National Consumer Council.
His most recent book is banker's racket or consumer benefit — a consumer view of the Single European Market for financial services .
INSTITUTE NEWS
In the pink or just slightly red?
With the impending General Election and current deep recession, coupled with a possible world slow-down in trade, opposing political parties would have us believe different interpretations of the current state of the economy.
London Branch thought fellow members in other branches might like the chance to hear an insider's informed opinion, before they decide for themselves!
One of the most important areas of credit management is risk assessment, not only looking at the individual customer companies concerned, but also at the current financial background in which they operate.
This can, as we have all seen over the last year or so in particular, have very severe effects on normally solvent companies.
We therefore warmly invite all fellow members and students who are able to reach the venue to hear Anthony McDermott, the editor of the World Trade page of the Financial Times , give us his views form the ‘pink’ world of the most famous and possibly reputable financial publication in the world.
Mr McDermott has been the editor of this section of the Financial Times for the past four years, and has written two books on Egypt and peace keeping in the Middle East.
He was also a member of the Norwegian Institute of International affairs in Oslo for two years, and has served as a correspondent in Geneva and Cairo, among other places.
With such a varied and profound background in such sensitive areas, his views can only be described as useful to many of us, and of intense interest to all of us, as we struggle to keep abreast of complex daily developments which appear remote, but frequently have a direct influence on our daily lives.
On Wednesday 25 March, the Branch will be offering a complimentary buffet and soft drinks, plus a cash bar, at the Burleigh Suite of the Strand Palace Hotel, Strand, London (opposite Charing Cross stations), 6.00pm for 6.30pm.
Entrance by complimentary ticket only, from Jean Williamson on 071 263 3284 or Carole Lawrence on 081 874 0404, or any member of the Committee.
Cross pollination
East of Scotland Branch has started an initiative to develop relationships with other institutes where co-operation may be of benefit.
The Branch has been approached by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland to provide a speaker for a forthcoming two-day Seminar being organised by ICAS for its members and being held on 23 and 24 April at the Stakis Hydro Hotel, Dunkeld, Perthshire.
The topic of the presentation is ‘Effective credit management in industry’.
David Ancliffe, Credit Manager at Scottish & Newcastle Sales, Branch Student Liaison Officer at East of Scotland Branch and part-time lecturer at Telford College in credit Management, will give the presentation, before an audience of chartered accountants working in industry.
The second annual dinner at Henley College was again a sell- out for the Thames Valley Branch , with over 50 member sand guests enjoying another excellent evening.
Trevor Hughes bravely went where no salesman has gone before, bearding the credit controllers in their den.
His lively and entertaining speech proved our long-held view of the sales force that when they are not annoying us, they are out playing golf!
Trevor's daughter Tracy was the star of the evening, and has been voted the best raffle ticket-drawer we have had!
Thanks to all present the Sue Ryder Home received a good donation.
One of the highlights of the evening was the presentation of certificates to new members of the Institute by Ian McLellan, the Branch Chairman.
From left: Nicole Odey, Beverley Wallace, Angela Neville and Matthew Tuckey.
The man in the middle is not John Major's elder brother, but our indomitable Chairman!
Lunch date with the PM
A party of 10 from the Northumberland and Durham Branch attended the North East Businessman of the Year 1991 Dinner at the Swallow, Gosforth Park Hotel, Newcastle upon Tyne, on 7 January.
The speaker was the Right Honourable John Major, Prime Minister.
The dinner was attended by 500 leading business and professional people from the North East and was featured on local radio and television, and in the local newspapers.
This is the second time that the dinner, in its eighth year, has had the privilege of a Prime Minister as its guest speaker.
The former Prime Minister, Mrs Margaret Thatcher, attended in 1989.
Beware caller
We have had complaints from the Thames Valley area about a caller offering financial and mortgage advice, who purports to be acting on behalf of the ICM.
This is not the case and anyone who receives such a call from this man, Roy O'Day, is asked to pass the information to the Membership Secretary at Easton House so that this apparently unethical practice may be stopped.
REVISION WEEKENDS
We are pleased to offer revision courses for the May 1992 examinations at West Herts College, Watford and at Wulfrun College, Wolverhampton.
This is an excellent opportunity for students to consolidate their studies and deal with any outstanding aspects which may have been causing difficulty.
The revision classes will take place over two weekends.
At Watford, Final Stage subjects will be dealt with on Friday 1 and Saturday 2 May, and Intermediate Stage subjects on Friday 8 and Saturday 9 May.
At Wolverhampton, both Stages will be offered on Saturday 2 May and Sunday 3 May.
A booking form and details can be obtained from Catherine Sharpe at the Institute, 0780 56777.