

Have you ever wondered how we prepare all the food for the mouth-watering recipe photography in BBC Good Food Many people seem to think that we cheat by photographing mashed potato instead of ice-cream, and that we paint a chicken or make cotton wool pies.
But that's not true, as Cheryl Baker, of the children's programme Eggs 'n' Baker , discovered when she filmed a photography session with Linda Fraser, our cookery editor.
She was pleasantly surprised to see that we use real food and the only cheating is to under-cook it, sometimes brushing it with oil or water to keep it moist.
Read how it's all done on page 30 or watch Eggs 'n' Baker on Saturday, February 16, at 8.00am on BBC1.
Food photography is all about presentation and it takes a long time, which is why we have a new home economist on the team.
Sarah Barrass will be helping Linda, as well as writing her own recipe features.
Kitty Butterwick also joins BBC Good Food this month, with the enviable job of organising taste panels and the What's Cooking pages.
And we have a new secretary, Kirsty Rawlings, who has the unenviable task of organising me!
We look forward to meeting you at the BBC Good Food Show, which will be held at the Ideal Home Exhibition on March 21–24.
Send for tickets now to ensure you don't miss Michael Barry cooking a 3-course meal in 30 minutes, wine tastings with Jill Goolden and Oz Clarke, and a chance to meet other cookery celebrities.
Details on page 84.
NEWS
WHAT'S cooking
The very latest products on the market, plus news, views and hints
GO FOR A GRILL
For starving teenagers try these new vegetarian grills from Dalepak.
They have a crispy crumb topping and are free from artificial colours and flavourings.
Choose from Ratatouille Grill and Macaroni Cheese Grill, both £1.59 for a pack of four and Cheese and Vegetable Burgers, £1.49 for a pack of three, available from supermarkets and food stores.
DIAL DIRECT
Don't forget you can now ring in for offers, or to enter competitions in BBC Good Food .
Offer requests, both phone and postal, are chosen at random each month.
An answering machine will take details.
Calls cost 33p/per minute cheap rate; 44p/per minute other times.
Organic Food You Can Trust lists shops, wholesalers and market stalls.
Choose from: South & East (inc.
London), West Country, Midlands & North, Wales & Borders, Scotland & Borders.
Order from the Soil Association, 86 Colston Street, Bristol BS1 5BB, £2.50 each inc. postage & packing.
A new range of quality foods from developing countries, which includes Choice Mountain Coffee (£4.45), is available now.
Free catalogue from Traidcraft.
CATERING COURSES
Leith's School of Food and Wine offers a wide range of courses for those who want to start a career in a restaurant or catering firm, be it on the culinary or managerial side.
Evening classes and holiday courses are also available for aspiring amateur cooks.
If you simply want some inspiration for your dinner parties, why not include a half-day cookery demonstration on a trip to London?
These are offered once a month on Saturdays, from 9.30am.
Very good value at £28, which includes lunch and a glass of wine.
For details, contact Leith's School of Food and Wine on 071–229 0177.
CHOOSE LE CREUSET
We have 25 baking dishes to give away from the new Le Creuset range of Poterie Française.
Also on offer are 25 French Country Kitchen Cookbooks.
Send your details, by March 13, on a postcard to Le Creuset/ BBC Good Food offer , PO Box 43, St Leonards on Sea, TN38 9NB, or call (0839) 169110.
If you're looking for a new thirst-quencher, try Welsh mineral water for a change.
Pentre Nant comes direct from a spring in Montgomeryshire and has a pure and refreshing taste.
There is a choice of either still (about 48p) or sparkling (about 55p) both of which are user-friendly as they come in recyclable bottles.
Pentre Nant is available from regional supermarkets.
BANGERS — A RAW DEAL?
A recent Which?report confirms that we do not always get a good deal from British sausages.
Low fat sausages are not necessarily lower in fat than standard varieties.
Also, some ‘premium’ sausages contain no more lean meat than the cheaper kind.
The Which?panel's best buy bangers were Asda's Premium Pork and low fat brands, Real Meat Company's Pork, and Sainsbury's Premium Low Fat Extra Lean Pork.
BANISH THE BLUES
Fancy a change of scene this spring?
Michael Barry suggests you hop over to the magical island of Herm.
The smallest of the Channel Islands, only 1½ miles long, Herm has sandy beaches on one side and a rugged coast on the other.
It is family-run with only one hotel, and the number of visitors is restricted, so it's blissfully quiet.
For details of one-week or midweek breaks, call the White House Hotel on (0481) 722159.
COX AND BOX
A great idea for encouraging kids to eat more apples is the brightly coloured Junior Cox box from Home Grown Fruits Ltd.
It contains six small apples and has the sort of handle which makes it easy to carry to school or on outings.
Junior Cox, an apple- faced cartoon character, appears in adventures in the comic inside the box.
Children can also join the Cox Club and receive a special pack of goodies, including a badge and an apple poster.
The boxes will be on sale in supermarkets at 70p each.
The second National Prune Week takes place February 18–24, so look out for the California Prune Board's displays.
To celebrate, 100 readers will receive a free apron (worth £5), plus a 25g/1oz sample pack with recipe leaflets.
A further 500 sample packs will also be given away.
Send your name and address to Californian Prune Offer/ BBC Good Food , PO Box 43, St Leonards on Sea TN38 9NB, or call (0839) 168111 before March 13.
Offer requests (both telephone and postal) are chosen at random.
If you're fed up with poor food, consult The Good Food Guide 1991 , by Tom Jaine (Consumers' Association/Hodder & Stoughton, £12.95), giving details of the best value restaurants.
Or try Jeff Evans' Good Beer Guide 1991 (Camra, £6.99), an up-to-date survey of nearly 5,000 interesting pubs.
PERFECT PRESERVES
Recently available from France are the Bonne Maman soft-set jams.
Full of fruit with no artificial preservatives or colourings, they taste just like home-made jam.
The 25 varieties include: apricot, strawberry, orange extra marmalade and four berry fruits.
A 340g jar costs 90p–£1.69 from major food stores.
CALL CHRISTINE
…on our new BBC Good Food weekly recipe service.
Cookery expert Christine France will tell you how to prepare a different seasonal dish based on the freshest produce available each week.
Call her on (0836) 40 60 80 — 33p/per minute cheap rate, 44p/per minute other times.
INDEX LINK
A comprehensive 48-page index to BBC Good Food (not 64- page, as stated in February) is now available covering November 1989 (our first issue) to December 1990 inclusive.
It contains a general index to magazine features, a recipe index and an index to recipes in our popular, step-by-step cookery series, Secrets of Success.
Available for £1.95, or £1.50 to magazine subscribers.
Send a cheque or postal order (made payable to Redwood Publishing) to:BBC Good Food Index, 15 Moorhurst Road, Castleham Industrial Estate, St Leonards on Sea, TN38 9NB.
Delivery 4–6 weeks.
OFFER — THE TRELLIS EFFECT
If you want to try Kevin Woodford's recipe for Lamb in puff pastry (page 65), or you saw Delia Smith use a pastry trellis in her Christmas cookery series, you'll need one of these handy lattice pastry cutters.
The cutter is a roller comprising circular blades; each blade has three notches cut out, dividing it into sections.
When the blades are rolled over the pastry, they cut even slashes, which create the lattice effect.
The cutter is ideal for shortcrust or flaky pastry, perfect for open top pies, savoury quiches, tarts and fruit flans.
It's made of firm plastic with an easy-to-grip handle and costs only £9.99, plus £1 p&p.
Please allow 28 days for delivery.
If you're dreaming of the tropics but just can't afford the fare, treat yourself to Hutton's new Jamaica white rum.
Its enchanting aroma and taste are good value at £9 a bottle.
Available from large supermarkets.
WINE WINNER
Mrs Ruth Oliver of Lingfield, Surrey, is the lucky winner of our Marks & Spencer/ BBC Good Food Wine Taster of the Year competition.
She won a case of wine and is also looking forward to a super weekend break in Champagne, France, courtesy of Arblaster & Clarke.
For brochures, call (0730) 66883.
CRUNCHY CREPES
Padley's savoury pancakes are quick and easy to cook when time is at a premium.
Chunks of chicken are flavoured with herbs and spices, then wrapped in a light pancake and coated in crunchy golden breadcrumbs.
Chicken Tikka Masala, Chicken Français and Chicken Chinese cost about £1.80 for two, from most major supermarkets.
Buying wine can be a nightmare if you don't know enough about it.
So the Wine Development Board has produced Living with Wine with hints on buying and serving wine.
We have 200 to give away until March 13.
Write to: Living with Wine Offer/ BBC Good Food , PO Box 43, St Leonards on Sea, TN38 9NB; or call (0839) 168113.
Offer requests, both telephone and postal, are chosen at random.
FROZEN ASSETS
Ice-cream is a great dessert any time of year, so try the black box range of four dairy ice-creams and two sorbets from the French company, Miko.
The box also moulds the ice-cream, so it's ideal for parties.
Flavours include chocolate, caramel and toffee, and lemon and strawberry sorbet.
£2.59 from supermarkets and delicatessens.
SNAPPY SNACKS
Baxters of Speyside has produced Green Cuisine Recipe Cards.
The 22 delicious vegetarian snacks on easy-wipe laminate cards have been created by Sarah Brown.
We have 100 to give away until March 13.
…Offer requests, both telephone and postal, are chosen at random.
SWAN OFF
Indulge yourself in a gourmet food weekend at The Black Swan in Helmsley, Yorkshire.
Four are planned, with the first starting on April 5 and 6.
A seven-course dinner and wine tasting are part of the programme.
Cost: £240 per person.
For details call Paul Gill on (0439) 70466.
FAST FAMILY FILLERS
Make it with MINCE
Linda Fraser prepares five mouth-watering meals for the family, using that perennial favourite — mince
Spinach lasagne
Serves 4
2 tbsp oil
1 large onion, chopped
2 garlic cloves, crushed
750g/1½lb minced beef
425g/15oz can chopped tomatoes
2 tbsp tomato purée
150ml/¼ pint dry white wine
225g/8oz green lasagne
50g/2oz butter
50g/2oz plain flour
600ml/1 pint milk
175g/6oz frozen chopped spinach, thawed
50g/2oz Cheddar, grated
25g/1oz Parmesan, grated
seasoning
1.
Heat the oil in a large pan and gently fry the onion and garlic for 5 minutes.
Add the mince and fry until browned.
2.
Stir in the tomatoes, tomato purée, wine and seasoning and bring to the boil.
Cover and simmer for 30 minutes.
3.
Cook the lasagne in a large pan of salted, boiling water until just tender.
Drain lasagne and place in a large bowl of cold water.
Set aside.
4.
Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/Gas 6.
Melt the butter in a pan, stir in the flour and cook for 1 minute.
Gradually add the milk and bring to the boil, stirring, until thick.
5.
Spoon half of the mince mixture into a large ovenproof dish, cover with half of the spinach, a layer of lasagne, then half of the white sauce.
6.
Repeat the layers, finishing with the white sauce, and sprinkle with the cheeses.
Bake for about 30 minutes until the top is crisp and bubbly.
Serve at once with a green salad.
Pasta bows with pork
Serves 4
25g/1oz butter
2 tbsp oil
225g/8oz mushrooms, sliced
450g/1lb minced pork
1 tbsp plain flour
2 garlic cloves, crushed
4 tbsp chopped fresh basil
150ml/¼ pint white wine
350g/12oz pasta bows
50g/2oz Parmesan, grated
seasoning
1.
Heat the butter and oil in a frying pan, add the mushrooms and fry for 2–3 minutes.
Remove with a slotted spoon and set mushrooms aside.
2.
Fry the pork in the pan until well browned, then drain off any excess fat.
Stir in the flour, garlic, half of the basil, the wine and seasoning to taste, then bring to the boil.
3.
Cover the pan and simmer very gently for about 20 minutes.
Cook the pasta in salted, boiling water until just tender.
Drain.
4.
Mix together the pasta and mince.
Scatter the remaining basil and Parmesan on top.
Bobotie
Serves 4
2 slices bread
300ml/½ pint milk
2 tbsp oil
2 onions, chopped
1 garlic clove, crushed
750g/1½lb minced turkey
1 tbsp curry powder
50g/2oz blanched almonds
75g/3oz sultanas
1 tbsp chopped fresh parsley
juice of ½ lemon
2 tbsp mango chutney
2 eggs, beaten
seasoning
1.
Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/Gas 4.
Grease a shallow baking dish.
Using a separate bowl, soak the two slices of bread in the milk.
2.
Heat the oil in a large pan and fry the onion and garlic for 5 minutes.
Stir in the mince and fry until well browned.
Stir in the curry powder, almonds, sultanas, parsley, lemon juice, chutney and seasoning.
4.
Carefully remove the bread from the milk, squeezing the excess milk into the bowl.
Mix the bread into the fried mince, then beat the eggs into the remaining milk.
5.
Spoon the mince mixture into the greased baking dish and roughly level the top with a fork.
Pour over the milk and egg mixture and bake for about 40 minutes until set and golden brown on top.
Serve hot.
Bobotie (below left); Koftas (below); and Moussaka (far right).
Koftas
Serves 4
750g/1½lb minced lamb
2.5cm/1in piece root ginger, peeled and finely grated
1 tbsp ground cumin
1 tbsp ground coriander
1 tbsp garam masala
300ml/½ pint natural yogurt
4 tbsp oil
4 cardamom pods
4 cloves
seasoning
coriander leaves and thin strips of red pepper, to garnish
1.
Mix the lamb, ginger, ground spices, two tablespoons of yogurt and seasoning in a bowl.
With damp hands, roll mixture into 16 sausage-shaped koftas.
2.
Heat the oil in a frying pan and add the cardamom pods and cloves and fry for about 20 seconds.
Add the koftas and fry until lightly browned on all sides.
3.
Mix the remaining yogurt with 150ml/¼ point water and pour over the koftas.
Bring to the boil, cover and simmer gently for above 30 minutes until the liquid has been absorbed, stirring occasionally.
4.
Remove spices and serve hot, garnished with coriander leaves and red pepper strips.
Moussaka
Serves 4
2 aubergines, sliced
4–6 tbsp oil
1 large onion, chopped
2 garlic cloves, crushed
450g/1lb minced lamb
425g/15oz can chopped tomatoes
2 tbsp tomato purée
25g/1oz butter
25g/1oz plain flour
300ml/½ pint milk
1 egg, beaten
seasoning
1.
Arrange the aubergines in a large colander and sprinkle generously with salt, then set aside for 30 minutes to draw out the juices.
2.
Heat two tablespoons of the oil in a large pan and gently fry the onion and garlic for about 5 minutes.
Add the minced lamb and fry until brown.
3.
Stir in the tomatoes, tomato purée and seasoning and bring to the boil.
Cover and simmer for 30 minutes.
4.
Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/Gas 6.
Drain the aubergines, rinse in cold water and dry on kitchen paper.
Fry the aubergine slices in the remaining oil until golden, then drain on kitchen paper.
5.
Arrange a layer of aubergines in an ovenproof dish, cover with half of the mince, another layer of aubergines, the remaining mince and finish with a layer of aubergines.
6.
Melt the butter in a pan, stir in the flour, cook for 1 minute, then gradually stir in the milk.
Bring to the boil, stirring until thick.
Season, remove from the heat and beat in the egg.
7.
Spoon the sauce over the aubergines and bake for 40 minutes until browned on top.
Cook's HELPLINE
If you have a culinary query or want to share a tip with other readers, Linda Fraser and Janette Marshall can help you
Cold comfort
Is it possible to buy coconut ice-cream anywhere in the UK?
I have tried local shops and freezer centres without success; restaurants and cafes don't seem to have heard of it, even though it is available in several countries abroad.
There are several specialist ice-cream manufacturers who make good quality coconut ice-cream.
For stockists of the following brands, ring:.
Fridge facts
The temperature in my fridge/freezer reads 8C in the fridge and -20C in the freezer.
Is this correct?
I am particularly worried that the freezer is too cold as I find that ‘soft scoop’ ice-cream is always rock hard.
The recommended standard fridge temperature is below 5C.
Yet studies have shown that the average domestic fridge temperature is 8–9C, and in some cases as high as 15C.
Bacteria can grow rapidly at temperatures above 8C, so I would strongly advise you to adjust your fridge immediately.
Most domestic freezers operate at below -18C.
We suggest you remove ice-cream 15 minutes before you are ready to serve it.
Nutty problem
What are tigernuts and how do you eat them?
I find they resemble grit and taste the same — even the health store from which I bought them could not enlighten me.
Tigernuts are tubers not nuts, and are exceptionally hard.
You use them in a Spanish drink called horchata, which is made as follows:
1.
Cover the nuts in hot water and soak for 8–24 hours.
2.
Place nuts and liquid in a processor and liquidise.
Chill and serve with ice-cubes and a sprig of mint.
Chemical kits
I believe it should be possible for householders to check their own water supply for various chemical pollutants.
The problem is that professional kits are extremely expensive, and manufacturers of soil testing kits do not extend the testing range to aluminium, lead, iron and copper.
Yet if there were sufficient pressure and demand, I am convinced they could produce suitable kits.
Some tests may involve chemicals which need to be handled with care, but this should not preclude the sale of them to the general public in kits which include protective goggles and detailed instructions on their handling.
The production and marketing of inexpensive kits is workable and should be encouraged.
Copper wise
I am thinking of investing in a set of copper saucepans.
Can you advise me about the pros and cons and tell me the best way to retain their copper finish?
Copper saucepans are the best conductors of heat.
There are two types available — those with a tin lining have a low melting point and may well need to be relined if overheated, which can proves expensive.
Stainless steel lined copper pans are more durable, but twice the price.
To keep them clean, simply wash them and use a good copper polish.
Unless you are attracted to the look of copper saucepans, a better bet may be to purchase stainless steel saucepans with a copper base.
Blighted bacon
I hate the white substance that oozes from bacon when I cook it.
What is it and is there a sort of bacon that doesn't produce it?
The white substance is a mixture of salt and water and occurs because most bacon is cured in brine.
This process provides the manufacturer with more of a profit because the bacon soaks up the salt and water which increases its weight.
Traditional dry cure bacon is far less likely to produce this substance — don't miss our feature on dry cure bacon on page 77.
Doux de Montagne is a delicious, semi-hard cheese with a mild, fruity flavour and buttery after-taste.
It is recognisable by its cottage loaf shape and bronze coloured rind.
A portion of the cheese goes to the writer of every letter published this month.
Send your letters to: Cook's Helpline,BBC Good Food , 20–26 Brunswick Place, London N1 6DJ.
SEASONAL EATING
forcing THE ISSUE
Slender and succulent, make the most of spring rhubarb and its fresh, sharp flavour, says Linda Fraser.
And create tasty treats from roe
In the early spring, stalks of rhubarb are about the only fresh, home-grown fruit available — although it is technically a vegetable.
The thin, pink stalks don't look all that exciting, but you should make the most of its fresh flavour.
The deep red, main crop rhubarb — although much coarser with an often stringy skin — has a clean, tart flavour.
Rhubarb is perfect with rich meats and makes superb jams, jellies, puddings and pies.
Stews and sauces
When you are preparing rhubarb, cut off all the leaves, which are poisonous, and chop off the other end along with any brown parts.
The simplest way to cook it is cut into chunks with sugar, about 100g/4oz to each 450g/1lb rhubarb.
Cook gently until just tender, either in a pan for 5–8 minutes, or in the oven at 180C/350F/Gas 4 for 20–30 minutes, then leave to cool.
Delicious with Greek yogurt, roast pork or duck, or oily fish.
If you prefer a less sweet sauce, cook the rhubarb with a finely chopped onion, the grated rind and juice of one orange, one teaspoon of finely chopped root ginger, four tablespoons of water and seasoning to taste.
Cool compotes
Orange and either ginger or cinnamon are perhaps the nicest flavours to combine with rhubarb, and they work especially well as a compote.
Gently heat 600ml/1 pint of water and 100g/4oz sugar, and stir until the sugar is dissolved.
Add a cinnamon stick or a few slices of fresh root ginger, then simmer for a few minutes — check it has a good flavour, then remove the spices and add 450g/1lb chopped rhubarb.
Bring to a simmer, cover and cook for 2–3 minutes until just tender, but not collapsing.
Lift out the rhubarb with a slotted spoon and boil the syrup until it is thickened.
Stir in the juice and finely grated rind of one orange, pour over the rhubarb and leave to cool, then chill before serving.
In a jam
Fresh spring rhubarb makes a delectable jam or jelly, although the very early stalks may not have quite enough natural pectin to set properly.
To be sure of a good set, use preserving sugar with added pectin.
My favourite jam is rhubarb and ginger, which needs to be started a day ahead.
Put 1kg/2lb chopped rhubarb in a large bowl, layering it with 1kg/2lb sugar.
Then pour over eight tablespoons of lemon juice and leave to stand overnight.
Next day, tip the mixture into a large pan, add 15g/½oz bruised root ginger, tied in a muslin bag, and bring to the boil.
Cook for about 30 minutes until setting point is reached, then pot and cover while still hot.
To check for setting point, pour a teaspoonful of the jam on to a cold saucer.
If it is ready to set it will wrinkle when pushed with a finger.
If it's not ready, boil for a few minutes more and test again.
Rhubarb with either mint or lemon balm makes a tart, savoury jelly to serve with lamb.
Put 450g/1lb rhubarb in a pan with a little water and cook slowly until soft and pulpy.
Break up the chunks with a wooden spoon as it cooks, then strain the pulp through a jelly bag.
Measure the juice into a pan and to each 300ml/½ pint add 225g/8oz sugar.
Add a bunch of mint or lemon balm tied with string and heat, stirring, until the sugar dissolves.
Boil until setting point is reached, then pot and cover.
Perfect puds
Use rhubarb for a warming winter pudding with either a crumble topping or pastry.
For a simple filling, pub about 750g/1½lb chopped rhubarb in a deep 20cm/8in pie dish and sprinkle over 75g/3oz sugar.
Cover with thinly rolled out shortcrust pastry, brush with water and sprinkle with sugar.
Bake at 220C/425F/Gas 7 for 15 minutes, then reduce the heat to 180C/350F/Gas 4 for 20–30 minutes until well browned.
To make a crumble, sift 175g/6oz plain flour and rub in 75g/3oz butter until it forms a crumble mixture.
Spoon over the rhubarb and bake at 190C/375F/Gas 5 for about 40 minutes.
For a delicious flan filling, put about 450g/1lb chopped rhubarb in a 20cm/8in flan dish which is lined with shortcrust pastry.
Mix together two tablespoons each of plain flour and sugar with ½ teaspoon of ground cinnamon.
Stir in 150ml/¼ pint soured cream and spoon it over the rhubarb.
Bake on a hot baking sheet at 200C/400F/Gas 6 for 30–40 minutes until bubbling.
Fishy feasts
At this time of year, there's not a great choice of fish.
However, cod and herring do provide us with their wonderful roe.
Smoked cod roe can be turned into the tasty Greek appetiser, taramasalata.
Remove the skin from abut 100g/4oz roe and soak in cold water for two hours.
Cut the crusts from a thick slice of bread and soak in a little water.
Put the bread into a food processor with a crushed garlic clove and add a tablespoon or two of olive oil.
Blend together and gradually add the roe alternately with about 300ml/½ pint of olive oil until it forms a thick paste.
Add 4–8 tablespoons of lemon juice to taste.
Serve chilled with pitta bread or toast.
Soft herring roe has a delicious, creamy texture.
Whole ones need only be fried lightly in a little butter and served hot with a wedge of lemon.
If they are broken up, turn them into a fish paste.
Fry about 100g/4oz roe as before, then mash it and mix in 75g/3oz softened unsalted butter and 1–2 tablespoons of double cream.
Season with cayenne pepper and add a little lemon juice to taste.
VEGETABLES
Cape broccoli: looks like purple cauliflower, yet tastes like broccoli.
Cut into florets, boil in salted water until tender and toss with a little hazelnut oil and chopped toasted hazelnuts.
Celeriac: this knobbly root vegetable has a similar flavour to celery.
Boil and mash with butter and freshly ground black pepper or mix with mashed potato and use as a topping for Shepherd's pie.
Endive: sometimes called frisée or curly endive.
Slightly bitter-flavoured, but makes a good addition to winter salads.
Mix with chopped celery, sliced apple, orange or tangerine segments and sultanas and toss in a good quality mayonnaise dressing.
Leeks: choose thin, firm clean leeks.
Simmer chunks in milk until tender, then use the milk for a cheese sauce.
Pour the sauce over the leeks, sprinkle with fresh breadcrumbs and grill until crispy on top.
Parsnips: cut out the woody central core before boiling and puréeing with butter and freshly grated nutmeg.
FRUIT
Strawberries: Spanish and English fruit are available in the shops now, but the price of them is quite high.
Ugli fruit: a greeny-orange tangerine, orange and grapefruit hybrid.
They're only in the shops for the next few weeks, so do try one now.
MEAT
Lamb: home-produced lamb starts its season in March — it will cost more than imported lamb but is worth it.
FISH
Cod: look out for new catches.
Mussels: mussels keep longer in cold weather, so there may be bargains to be had.
Cooper's Column
Chocolate and chips are fine once in a while, but every day it's a disaster, says Derek Cooper
‘I can't think of two more depressing words then ‘healthy eating’— together they conjure up images of grated carrot, naked lettuce and slices of vegetarian quiche.
I don't want to eat healthily; I want to eat enjoyably and with some feeling of gusto.
Ask any caterer what sort of foods we make a beeline for and you'll be told that it's the fried things — fish in batter and double chips; bacon and egg with fried bread; burgers dripping in saturated fat; bangers and more chips.
Traditionally we see stodgy things as real food and the salad bar as an unattractive alternative for those who aren't seriously hungry.
And yet all our common sense ought to tell us that it doesn't always have to be chips with everything and meat with every meal.
I remember a recent visit to India where I hardly ate meat at all and never saw a chip.
For 12 days we enjoyed pulses, rice, vegetables, fish and fruit; we never felt hungry and every meal was a joy.
You don't need meat to make a meal.
What you do need, however, is an abundance of both taste and flavour and enough wholesome substance to relieve your pangs of hunger, and Eastern food delivers the goods every time.
The lift that lemon grass, ginger, turmeric, coriander, chilli, star anise, cloves and cardamom give to Indian and Chinese food is out of all proportion to the quantities in which they are used.
Why, then, is there such a nervous and often neurotic distaste for things which in other countries are as staple a part of the table as salt and pepper are here?
The two most common ingredients used in French, Spanish and Italian kitchens are garlic and olive oil, yet our consumption of both is minimal.
And that's a pity because olive oil is very high in monounsaturated fats, and doctors claim all sorts of therapeutic properties for the pungent garlic.
It's the smell that puts people off.
But as the writer Patience Gray, who has made her home in the Mediterranean, points out: ‘Pounding fragrant things — particularly garlic, basil and parsley — is a quite tremendous antidote to depression…it produces an alteration in one's being — from sighing with fatigue to inhaling with pleasure’.
I suspect that deep down most of us, if given the opportunity, would like our food to have more flavour.
Much of the factory food we eat is so tasteless that in desperation people reach for the brown sauce, tomato ketchup or pickles to perk it up.
And it says a lot for our low expectations that most people automatically go for the salt as soon as their plate arrives at the table.
The consensus of medical opinion suggests that too much salt, saturated fat and sugar is bad for us.
‘Throw away the chip pan!’ say the coronary experts; ‘Get stuck into fruit and vegetables’.
It's not a message the food industry is enthusiastic about.
The industry's line is that there is no such thing as bad food, only bad diets.
Debased, adulterated and cheapened products in which profit has been added and nutrition removed are not, the experts claim, bad in themselves.
They might be bad if you ate too much of them, but who would be as stupid as that?
The evidence seems to indicate that millions of us are simply not aware that a balanced diet is essential.
In Glasgow, for instance, it's estimated that one in five men never eats vegetables of any kind and one third of the population never knowingly consumes fruit.
One of the reasons why we are so ill-informed is that massive amounts are spent by the food industry advertising refined and heavily processed foods which often contain empty calories and excessive amounts of fats, sugars and salt.
These have over the years contributed to our unenviable record of ill health.
We have, we are told, a sweet tooth, and we're rather proud of it.
Last Christmas, despite the recession in the high street, we spent over £350 million on both biscuits and chocolates.
Nothing wrong with a choc, is there?
But on that scale confectionery becomes a health time-bomb.
What is good for the food industry can be fatally bad for the health of the entire nation.
Nothing wrong with junk food once a week, but living on it day in day out is a recipe for disaster.’
Derek Cooper, writer and broadcaster, has conducted a 10-year campaign for good food (and supplied information on less desirable ingredients and practices) on Radio 4's The Food Programme 
‘In Glasgow, one in five men never eats vegetables and one third of the population never knowingly consumes fruit’
A feast of good fortune
Celebrate the Chinese New Year with a special menu full of eastern promise by Chinese cookery writer Ken Hom
Ken Hom was born in Arizona of Chinese parents and he grew up in the Chinese community in Chicago — a creature of two cultures.
His appreciation of Chinese food was nurtured at his mother's table and also at his uncle's Chinese restaurant where he worked part-time from the age of 11.
Ever since he was a child Ken had longed to return to China and the village of his ancestors.
When he finally returned with his mother, he avoided official menus and the tourist cuisine, eating instead the simple foods which are served in good private restaurants, homes and even on street stalls.
And while on his travels Ken gathered those recipes for future use.
Ken Hom's latest book The Taste of China documents those travels, with beautiful colour photography and personal anecdotes mingled with history and, of course, authentic but simple dishes that are easily made in a western kitchen.
The Chinese celebrate the Lunar New Year (called the Spring Festival since 1911) which falls between January 21 and February 19 (this year February 15/16) to mark the return of the sun and the beginning of the agricultural year.
As such it is filled with meaning, hope and desire as well as Chinese fatalism.
The New Year holiday lasts for three days and is seen as a time of fresh starts, new resolutions and auspicious omens.
Many couples are married at this time; old debts must be repaid; homes are thoroughly cleaned; presents are exchanged and families get together to enjoy colourful meals and banquets featuring specially prepared foods.
Jiaozi — meat dumplings made of chopped pork, cabbage, salt, ginger and pepper in a thin wrapper of dough — are prepared by the thousand and dipped in soy sauce before being eaten as appetisers.
A whole pig is served up for the main New Year feast, and bean curd, sausages and special wine are prepared.
The main meal on New Year's Eve begins in the late afternoon.
There will be lavish servings of vegetables (cabbage, turnips, dried mushrooms), pork, chicken, fish (the trinity of wealth, luck and health) and shellfish with every imaginable condiment and delicacy, such as sliced jellyfish with vinegar and soy sauce.
‘Eight precious rice’ is another favourite — sweet, sticky rice with lotus and almond seeds, sliced red dates, candied fruits, sweet bean paste and sugar syrup.
The New Year feast is only one of a number of sumptuous meals that follow as relatives arrive over the next few days.
During this time, offerings are made to the gods and to ancestors in the hope that they will be pleased by such bounty and continue to send prosperity throughout the coming year.
Here follows a menu chosen by Ken Hom which you can easily prepare in your home to celebrate Chinese New Year.
(The more exotic ingredients can be found in Chinese supermarkets that serve local Chinese communities.)
What better excuse for a stunningly original dinner party?
Jiaozi-Guotie dumplings
(not photographed)
Makes about 32
FOR THE DOUGH SKIN
275g/10oz unbleached white flour
250–350ml/8–12fl oz very hot water
FOR THE FILLING
225g/8oz cabbage, finely chopped
100g/4oz minced pork
100g/4oz medium-sized uncooked prawns, peeled and finely chopped
25g/1oz black mushrooms, soaked, stems removed and finely chopped
1 tbsp light soy sauce
1 tbsp dark soy sauce
1 tbsp rice wine or dry sherry
1 tbsp sesame oil
1 tsp salt
1 tsp freshly ground pepper
3 tbsp peanut oil, for frying
250ml/8fl oz very hot water
FOR THE SAUCE DIPS
chilli bean sauce
white rice vinegar
dark soy sauce
1.
Place the flour in a large mixing bowl.
Add the hot water in a steady stream, mixing all the while with a fork or with chopsticks until most of the water has been incorporated.
If the mixture seems dry, add more water.
The dough should be moist but not sticky.
Remove the dough from the bowl and knead it on a floured board until smooth, about 5 minutes.
Return the dough to the bowl, cover it with a damp cloth.
2.
In a medium-sized bowl, combine the cabbage pork, prawns, mushrooms, both soy sauces, rice wine or sherry, sesame oil, salt and pepper and mix thoroughly.
Set the mixture aside until needed.
3.
Knead the dough on a floured board, dusting with a little flour if it is sticky.
Form into a roll about 46cm/18in long and about 2.5cm/1in in diameter.
Take a sharp knife and cut the roll into four equal lengths.
Cut each length into eight pieces to make 32 equal segments.
4.
Press each segment with the palm of your hand and then roll it into a 9cm/3½in round.
Continue rolling out all the rounds, covering them with a damp cloth.
5.
Pinch one side of the dough until you have four pleats along the side and the dough is rounded and shell-like.
Place two teaspoons of filling in the centre of each round, making sure it fills the hollow.
You may add more filling if necessary.
Then fold the dough over the filling, pinching the two sides together until you have a half-moon dumpling.
Continue until you have filled all the rounds.
The dumplings can be frozen at this point until ready to use.
6.
To fry the dumplings, heat a wok or large frying pan until hot.
Add the peanut oil, then add the dumplings, pleated edge up, in a single layer.
They should be crowded together.
Cook the dumplings over a medium heat until they are lightly browned underneath.
Pour in the very hot water, cover tightly and cook vigorously for 2 minutes.
Turn down the heat to a simmer and continue to cook for another 8–10 minutes or until most of the water has evaporated.
Uncover the pan and continue cooking until all the moisture has evaporated; the pan should also be sizzling again and the dumplings golden brown and crisp underneath.
Transfer to a serving platter and serve at once with the dipping sauces.
7.
If you are boiling the dumplings, drop them into a large pan of salted, boiling water for 2 minutes.
Remove the pan from the heat and leave them in the water for about 15 minutes.
Remove the dumplings with a slotted spoon and serve them the same way as the fried dumplings.
Chengdu wontons
Huntuns are simply dumplings, known in the West mostly by their Cantonese name,wontons .
The skins (usually made from wheat) are filled with meat or fish or vegetables in a seasoned sauce.
The filling and sauce will vary with the region and the season — I discovered this version in a delightful shop in Chengdu.
The authentic taste requires these wontons to be hot and spicy, but you may tone it down a bit by reducing the amount of chilli oil.
Serves 2–4 
1 packet wonton skins
FOR THE FILLING
350g/12oz minced pork
1 egg, beaten
1 tbsp sesame oil
2 tsp salt
½ tsp freshly ground black pepper
1 tbsp finely chopped garlic
4 tbsp finely chopped spring onions
3 tbsp dark soy sauce
1 tbsp sugar
1 tbsp chilli oil
2 tsp Chinese black vinegar
¼ tsp freshly ground black pepper
FOR THE GARNISH
1 tbsp Sichuan peppercorns, roasted and ground
1.
Combine the pork, egg, sesame oil, salt and pepper in a large bowl and mix well.
Then, using a teaspoon, put a small amount of filling in the centre of each wonton skin.
Bring up two sides, dampen the edges with a little water and pinch them together to seal.
Continue until you have used up all the filling or wonton skins.
2.
In a large serving bowl, combine the garlic, onions, soy sauce, sugar, chilli oil, vinegar and pepper.
Stir to mix well.
3.
Bring a large pan of water to the boil.
Drop in the wontons and simmer for 4 minutes.
Remove them with a slotted spoon and transfer them to a serving bowl.
Mix gently with the sauce and garnish with peppercorns.
Serve at once.
Steamed fish, southern style
Having seen their fish swimming around in a tank or pond only minutes before they eat it, the Cantonese know how fresh it is.
While few of us are so lucky, we can enjoy the flavour of fresh fish by simply cooking them whole.
Steaming fish the Cantonese way ensures that the delicate flesh remains moist.
1–1.25kg/2–2½lb firm, white-fleshed fresh fish, such as a small cod, halibut, haddock, scrod or red snapper, or a sole, cleaned and left whole
1 tsp salt
3 slices fresh root ginger, peeled and cut into shreds
2 tbsp light soy sauce
4 spring onions, finely shredded
2 tbsp peanut oil
1.
Make three or four shallow slashes on each side of the fish.
Rub the fish on both sides with the salt and let it stand for 20 minutes.
Blanch the fish in a large pan of boiling water for 2 minutes.
Drain well and place on a heatproof platter.
Scatter over the ginger shreds.
2.
Set up a large Chinese steamer or put a rack into a wok, fish kettle or other deep pan.
Fill with about 5cm/2in of hot water.
Bring the water to a simmer and put the platter of fish into the steamer or on to the rack.
Cover tightly and gently steam over a medium heat for 20 minutes.
3.
Remove the platter from the steamer and pour off the liquid.
Pour over the soy sauce and scatter the onions over and around the fish.
Heat the oil until it just smokes, pour over the fish and serve.
Spicy Sichuan noodles
Noodle dishes,xiao chi or ‘small eats’, are very popular and are found in hole-in-the-wall restaurants, places selling snacks and on food stalls.
225g/8oz minced pork
3 tbsp dark soy sauce
2 tsp salt
250ml/8fl oz peanut oil
3 tbsp finely chopped garlic
2 tbsp finely chopped peeled fresh root ginger
5 tbsp finely chopped spring onions
2 tbsp sesame paste or peanut butter
2 tbsp chilli oil
250ml/8fl oz chicken stock
350g/12oz fresh Chinese thin egg noodles
1 tbsp Sichuan peppercorns, roasted and ground
1.
Combine the pork, one tablespoon of soy sauce and one teaspoon of salt in a small bowl and mix well.
Heat a wok or frying pan until hot.
Add the oil and deep fry the pork, stirring with a spatula to break it into small pieces.
When the pork is crispy and dry, which should take about 4 minutes, remove with a slotted spoon and drain on kitchen paper.
2.
Pour off the oil, leaving two tablespoons in the wok.
Reheat the work or pan and add the garlic, ginger and onions and stir fry for 30 seconds.
Then add the sesame paste or peanut butter, remaining soy sauce, chilli oil, remaining salt and chicken stock and simmer for 4 minutes.
3.
Cook the noodles in a large pan of boiling water for 2 minutes, if they are fresh, or 5 minutes, if they are dried.
Drain well in a colander and divide them among individual bowls or put them in a large soup tureen.
Ladle over the sauce, garnish with the fried pork and Sichuan peppercorns and serve at once.
Long beans stir fried with silk squash and cloud ears
One of the best vegetarian dishes I have eaten anywhere, and it was prepared in the kitchen of my own family in Kaiping (Hoiping).
It's a combination of authentic Cantonese tastes and textures.
The long beans were fresh from the fields, crisp and extremely sweet, the silk squash had a soft, spongy texture and earthy flavour which provided a nice contrast to its coarse skin.
The cloud ears (see Chinese tree fungus on last page of feature) had a soft but elastic texture and a subtle flavour.
Quickly stir fried long beans and silk squash make this a unique dish, good as a vegetarian main course or with meat.
25g/1oz cloud ear fungus
225g/8oz Chinese long beans or green beans
450g/1lb silk squash or courgettes
2 tbsp peanut oil
2 tbsp finely chopped shallots
2 tbsp coarsely chopped garlic
2 tsp finely chopped peeled fresh root ginger
2 tbsp oyster sauce
2 tbsp rice wine or dry sherry
2 tbsp light soy sauce
2 tsp salt
1 tsp sugar
150ml/¼ pint chicken stock
1.
Soak the cloud ear fungus in warm water for at least 15 minutes.
Rinse several times in cold running water to remove any sand.
Drain thoroughly.
2.
If you are using Chinese long beans, trim the ends and then cut them into 7.5cm/3in segments.
If you are using green beans, trim the ends and cut them in half.
3.
Peel off the tough outer skin of the silk squash, or top and tail the courgettes.
Cut your chosen vegetable at a slight diagonal into 5cm/2in pieces.
4.
Heat a wok or large frying pan until hot and add the oil.
Add shallots, garlic, ginger, cloud ears and long or green beans.
Stir fry for 1 minute, then add the silk squash or courgettes, oyster sauce, rice wine or sherry, soy sauce, salt, sugar and chicken stock.
Cook over high heat, uncovered, until the vegetables are tender, about 5 minutes.
Serve at once.
Chicken cooked with rice
This dish is served by my cousin's son at his very successful food stall — I was especially impressed by it.
225g/8oz long grain white rice
225g/8oz boneless chicken thighs, skin removed
1 tbsp light soy sauce
1 tsp dark soy sauce
2 tsp rice wine or dry sherry
1 tsp salt
2 tsp sesame oil
1 tsp cornflour
1½ tbsp peanut oil
2 tsp finely chopped peeled fresh root ginger
FOR THE GARNISH
1 tbsp dark soy sauce
2 tbsp finely chopped spring onions
1.
Put the rice in a clay pot or a medium-sized pot.
Pour in enough water to cover it to about 2.5cm/1in.
Bring the rice to the boil and continue to cook until most of the water has evaporated.
Reduce the heat to the lowest possible point and cover tightly.
2.
Coarsely chop the chicken and combine it with the soy sauces, rice wine or sherry, salt, sesame oil and cornflour.
3.
Heat a wok or larger frying pan until hot.
Add the oil and ginger and stir fry for 10 seconds.
Then add the chicken and stir fry for 2 minutes.
Pour the mixture on top of the rice, cover and cook for 10 minutes.
4.
Just before serving, drizzle the soy sauce on top of the chicken and rice and garnish with the spring onions.
Deep-fried glutinous rice cakes
Glutinous rice is sweet and its sticky texture makes it easy to mould.
A delicious snack.
450g/1lb glutinous or sweet rice
1 tbsp peanut oil plus 475 ml/16fl oz peanut oil
sugar, for dipping
1.
Combine the rice with enough cold water to cover it by at least 5cm/2in.
Soak for 8 hours or overnight.
Drain.
2.
In a pan, combine the rice and 475ml/16fl oz water.
Bring to the boil, reduce the heat, cover and cook for 40 minutes.
3.
Using kitchen paper, rub one tablespoon of oil on all sides of a 20cm/8in square cake tin.
Press the rice into the tin, cover it with foil and press down on all sides until it is compressed.
Allow rice to cool thoroughly.
4.
Turn the rice out on to a cutting board.
It should fall out in one piece.
Cut the rice into 7.5x4cm/3x1½in pieces.
5.
Heat a wok or large frying pan until hot.
Add remaining oil, and when it is hot, drop in the rice squares, a few at a time, and deep fry until golden and crispy.
Drain the squares thoroughly on kitchen paper.
Serve warm with a dish of sugar for dipping.
Chinese long beans
These beans can grow up to 90cm/3ft.
There are two varieties: pale green, or dark green, thinner ones.
Buy them fresh and bright green, with no dark marks.
There is no need to string them before cooking.
Delicious stir fried with meats, they have a crunchy texture similar to string beans, but they cook faster.
Store fresh beans in a plastic bag in the fridge and use within four days.
Chinese tree fungus
These tiny, black, dried leaves are also known as cloud ears; when soaked, they puff up to look like clouds.
Soak in hot water for 20–30 minutes until soft.
Rinse well, cutting away any hard portions.
These leaves are valued for their crunchy texture and slightly smoky flavour, and are usually sold in plastic bags.
They will keep indefinitely in a jar stored in a cool, dry place.
Silk squash (Chinese okra)
This thin, tapering squash has deep, narrow ridges.
Choose firm, unblemished, dark green ones.
Peel away the ridges but if it's young, leave on some green; if older, peel the skin.
The flesh turns spongy and tender as it cooks; tastes like a cross between a cucumber and courgette.
Sichuan peppercorns
These pungent, dried berries from a citrus shrub are reddish- brown.
The taste is sharp, numbing and mildly spicy.
They can be ground in a mill, but should first be roasted in a frying pan.
Expensive to buy, they are sold in plastic bags, but will keep indefinitely in a well-sealed container.
Chilli oil
This is sometimes used as a dipping condiment as well as a seasoning.
You can buy chilli oil from Chinese supermarkets or make it yourself.
It will keep for months in a sealed glass jar in a cook, dark place.
All you need is 175ml/6fl oz peanut oil, two tablespoons of chopped dried red chillies, one tablespoon of unroasted Sichuan peppercorns and two tablespoons of whole black beans.
Heat a wok over a high heat and add the oil and remaining ingredients.
Cook over a low heat for about 10 minutes.
Allow to cool undisturbed and then pour into a jar.
Let the mixture stand for two days, and then strain.
Peanut oil
Chinese peanut oils are perfect for stir frying and deep frying.
If you cannot find a Chinese brand, use a peanut oil from your local supermarket.
Rice wine
Used extensively for cooking and drinking in China, it is made from glutinous rice, yeast and spring water.
A quality, dry pale sherry can be substituted, but cannot equal its unique, rich, mellow taste.
Ken Hom — pictured in London's Chinatown — returned to his cultural roots for his latest book.
Clockwise, left to right: Spicy noodles, Rice cakes, Chicken with rice, Steamed fish, Chengdu wontons, Long beans with silk squash.
Wherever there's a local Chinese community, you'll find a market.
Variety — that's the spice of life!
From top: Chinese long beans, Chinese tree fungus (cloud ears) and silk squash (Chinese okra).
The Taste of China by Ken Hom is published by Pavilion Books, £20.
READER OFFER
Bowled over
Serve up in style with a set of traditional blue decorated porcelain rice bowls, rice spoons and cups.
The dinner set comes with authentic bamboo chopsticks.
And to complement your oriental meal, serve fragrant China tea from a lovely matching 1 litre/2 pint teapot.
Wok on
This heavy gauge Chinese wok with wooden handle is 33cm/13in in size — large enough to toss the tastiest stir fry for the hungriest family.
With its flat bottom, the wok can be used on both gas or electric hobs, without the need for a separate stand.
Oriental success
Create a truly oriental flavour with this larder set containing jasmine rice, cooking soy sauce, Tit Koon Yum tea, prawn crackers, rice noodles, and Bart spices.
Szechuan peppercorns, star anise and five spice powder.
Steaming ahead
This 3-tiered steamer set is ideal for cooking vegetables, fish, poultry and Chinese dumplings for healthy eating.
Just place as many tiers as you need over a pan of simmering water of in the wok, and bingo!
You'll be saving energy as well as calories.
The set comes with a handy wooden ginger grater and 200 15cm/6in wooden sate skewers.
Special free offer
For orders over £45 (excluding p&p), we are giving away FREE of charge a 20cm/8in Chinese carbon steel chopper for cutting your ingredients down to size, worth over £5.
And the first 50 readers to order any of our offers will receive a FREE Bart spice recipe book, worth £2.95.
Get set…
A six-piece Chinese cooking set which consists of a bamboo holder, cooking chopsticks, a spatula and ladle, a mesh skimmer and a bamboo wok scrubber.
You can recreate the tastes and style of the Orient for yourself with these authentic Chinese cooking utensils and ingredients
HOW TO PAY
BY POST: Complete the details on the order form very clearly in capitals and send it with your payment to BBC GOOD FOOD OFFER, Harrington Dock, Liverpool XL70 1AX.
BY TELEPHONE:.
If you wish to pay by Access or Visa, you can telephone your order 24 hours a day (answering machine outside working hours), by dialling (051) 708 8202.
Please have your credit card details to hand — we suggest you complete the order form before you telephone, quoting the reference number GF91/2 at the bottom of the order form.
TV SPECIAL
Make it SNAPPY
Cheryl Baker and the team from BBC1's Eggs 'n' Baker join cookery editor Linda Fraser to see how delicious dishes find their way into the pages of BBC Good Food
9.00am Linda pops into the Savoury Delicatessen in Clapham High Street to pick up a few essential items.
Half an hour later she's unloading the car outside the studio — that's her job too.
Linda brings along her box of tricks to every session — it holds a tool for most jobs, from opening oysters to piping cream.
9.30am Madeleine Brehaut, the stylist (near right), discusses the props with Linda and the photographer Alan Newnham.
Together they choose the best plate to display the food, then Linda gets to work in the kitchen preparing the food for photography with a little help from Cheryl Baker.
10.30am It's Alan's job to set up the picture, arrange various props and decide on the complicated lighting.
In the meantime, Linda is busy working on the range of dishes.
Everything is prepared very carefully; food that won't spoil or collapse is made first and other dishes of a more fragile nature are left to the last moment so they are picture for the picture.
12.00 The day's photography is extra complicated because the Eggs 'n' Baker camera team is filming its own television programme.
We would normally do three or four photographs in a day, but filming slows things down, so we have scheduled only one picture.
To make it look light and fresh, the swiss roll has to be made from scratch in Alan's well equipped kitchen.
But because Linda has to stop half way through so that other stages can be filmed, the swiss roll dries out and cracks and she has to start all over again.
4.00pm Linda adds the final touch to the swill roll.
Everything is checked for detail.
The banana mustn't look brown and the fondue mustn't splash when it's poured.
Check out these recipes in Cook's Directory — p.89.
FOOD FILE
Farmhouse cheese THE LANCASHIRE WHEY
The number of cheese-making farms in Lancashire may be dwindling but the tradition survives, as Linda Fraser reports
Farmhouse cheese has been made in Lancashire for centuries.
In the past, the farmer's wife or daughters made the cheese and then it was matured and ripened on a shelf near the cooking range.
It was traditionally eaten after two months, when it was mild and soft.
Nowadays, Lancashire cheese is kept for three months, so it has a slightly fuller flavour.
The taste is slightly salted and the texture is crumbly, yet creamy.
It makes superb cheese on toast because it melts very easily.
At one time it was called the ‘Leigh toaster’ after the small town near Manchester where it was made.
Unfortunately, the number of cheese-making farms has dwindled and there are now only four or five left to maintain the tradition.
One farmer who still continues the old craft is Keith Leeming.
His cows produce 1,400 gallons of milk a day, of which all but 300 gallons are used to make the traditional Lancashire cheese.
Keith's cheese dairy is, unusually, run by a woman, Karen Jeffries, and together with her two female assistants, she makes twenty four 45lb cheeses every day.
Their work begins at around 6.30am when all the pasteurised milk is transferred into the 1,150-gallon vat in readiness for the cheese-making to start.
While this is happening, the previous day's curds are milled (cut), salted and put into moulds for pressing overnight.
The day's cheese-making gets going at around 8am when Karen adds a specially prepared culture or ‘starter’, which is designed to slowly increase the milk's acidity.
Rennet is added too, which makes the milk clot and set firmly into a junket.
In the meantime, Karen and her two assistants fetch the previous day's pressed cheeses, which are first bound and trimmed, then dipped in wax.
Once the milk has clotted and the cheese-maker is satisfied that it has set firmly enough, the curd is cut by hand, using large metal paddles.
The cutting process, together with a little heating, forces the whey to drain off, leaving huge banks of creamy curd that are turned constantly by hand until the acidity reaches the correct level.
This is hard work which Karen and her assistants tackle with enthusiasm and dexterity.
Once the acidity is right, huge, mechanical, stainless steel forks are switched on to cut the curd into large chunks.
Next, a big metal plate presses the curd against one end of the vat, squeezing out the last of the remaining whey.
The dryish curd is cut into big chunks and piled into huge tubs that are left to stand in the dairy overnight to allow the acidity and flavour to develop.
The following day, the pressed cheeses are turned out of their tubs and the traditional cylindrical ‘truckles’ are wrapped in muslin and then dipped in wax.
Once a week, cheeses are graded by Malcolm Webster of the Milk Marketing Board.
He uses a special tool called a cheese iron to pull a long plug of cheese out of one truckle from each day's production.
He assesses the equality by checking the smell, texture and colour of the cheese and awards it a grade, then he replaces the plug to reseal it.
Only ‘superfine’ and ‘fine’varieties can carry the special Farmhouse cheese logo — so look out for this and you'll be guaranteed quality cheese made to traditional high standards.
Until recently it was difficult to buy authentic Farmhouse Lancashire anywhere but in the local area.
Improvements in distribution and packaging mean that it is now available all over the country, in supermarkets, delicatessens and specialist cheese shops.
Happily, unlike many regional products, Farmhouse Lancashire can still be bought from the farm.
During my visit this year, several local people popped in to buy a chunk of freshly made cheese, which was cut straight from the truckle and cleanly wrapped in greaseproof paper.
STORING AND EATING CHEESE
Cheese needs to be stored and handled correctly.
It should be stored in the fridge, wrapped in foil to keep it moist.
Never serve cheese cold, take it out of the fridge at least one hour before it is needed and allow it to come to room temperature still wrapped.
Uncover cheese just before you eat it.
If you are arranging a cheeseboard, place some Farmhouse Lancashire alongside a traditional Stilton, a ripe Brie, a tangy goat's cheese and a low fat cheese to a well-balanced selection to please most tastes.
Although we usually serve cheese with red wine, a well-flavoured cheese, such as Lancashire, is excellent with a rich, sweet white such as Sauternes or Muscat de Beaumes de Venise.
Strong Farmhouse cheeses are good value for money as well, especially in cooking, because less cheese is needed to achieve a full flavour.
The crumbly texture is perfect for many dishes.
The cheese-making process.
1) Milling the curds (below).
2) Initial cutting of the junket (right).
3) Whey is drained off during the cutting process, leaving banks of curd that are turned constantly by hand until the correct acidity level is finally achieved (centre).
4) The last of the whey is squeezed out by pressing the curd against one end of the vat (left).
5) Curd blocks are put in containers for overnight storage (right).
6) The cheese is wrapped in a cloth bandage (far right).
7) Cheese is waxed (above).
8) Grading cheese in the cool store (left); and the final product (below).
TV SPECIAL
Bayou tapestry
Cajun and Creole cooking's roots are reflected in the foods of France, Spain, Africa and Germany, as Roz Denny discovered when she visited Louisiana with the Food and Drinks team
Lagniappe or ‘something extra’ is the catchphrase of the cooks of south Louisiana.
It means ‘to give a bit more’ and reflects the love that Creole and Cajun people have for their cuisine, but it can refer to a helping of food, a cookery tip, or even just giving more care and attention to an everyday dish.
Creole and Cajun cooking are broadly French-based, but they reflect the great American ability to assimilate other cultures, turning them into something uniquely their own.
Creole food has its heartland in New Orleans, the colourful, vibrant city which is the birthplace of jazz and a place where fun and enjoyment is serious business.
Nearly 300 years ago, French aristocratic refugee settlers founded New Orleans as a trading post and brought with them a taste for good food and classic cooking.
A spell of Spanish dominance introduced colour and richness in the guise of tomatoes, peppers and the spicy heat of chillies.
Negro slaves brought okra seeds (some say they were smuggled in their hair!), which they called gumbo, and they introduced slow-cooked African stews.
German immigrants brought their sausage-making skills, while native Red Indians introduced the early settlers to corn and sassafras leaves, which were ground into a unique thickening and flavouring agent called filé powder, which is used in Gumbo.
The name of the great Louisiana spicy rice dish Jambalaya is a mixture of French and African words —jambon à la ya (‘ya’ is African for rice).
Today's typical dishes reflect their French past with bisques, ragoûts, fricassees (Cajun French for ‘smothered’ dishes) and grillades.
Popular foods are oysters and frogs' legs, boudins and andouille sausages; and sweets, such as pralines and beignets.
Many Creole and Cajun cooks set great store on the mixing of a good roux — blending flour and fat (often lard) and cooking them until the correct golden brown degree is achieved.
Cajun cooking, on the other hand, reflects the food found in the Louisiana countryside — the many woods, swamps, bayous (inland waterways) and lakes — although the two cultures now have many dishes in common and the distinctions have become blurred.
If anything, Cajun food is more earthy in colour and some would say that it is spicier.
Cajuns were originally French/Canadian settlers, driven out by the British in the mid-18th century from what was then called Arcadia, now Nova Scotia.
Known as Cadians, they founded a new homeland in the backwoods of south Louisiana, where they discovered bountiful supplies of game — rabbit, squirrel, pigeon and deer, and helpful native Indians who taught them how to make the most of local wild produce.
They brought with them a number of French country traditions, such as the boucherie (preserving hogs by a process of salting and smoking), a tradition which is still continued today.
The Cajuns are a very tight-knit and family-orientated community.
They love big gatherings and dances, where whole families will take part in waltzes and two-steps.
Gumbo, rice dressings and Jambalaya are all one-pot dishes, which are perfect for feeding large numbers.
Rice is prominent in both cuisines; Louisiana's swampy areas are ideal for its cultivation.
Fish and seafood are common too, especially freshwater crawfish and catfish, oysters and softshell crabs; and popular sea fish are snapper and the local fish pompano.
Pecan nuts, which were first popular with native Indians, have found their way into Creole cooking as pralines and in countless variations of Pecan pie.
The two cuisines of Louisiana can both be sampled in these recipes brought back from John Folses' plantation restaurant White Oaks, in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
John's advise is to garnish dishes liberally with chopped parsley, red cabbage and yellow peppers so as to reflect the Mardi Gras colours — green, gold and purple.
Buttermilk biscuits
American biscuits are richer versions of our scones.
Just like scones, they should be served on the day that they are baked.
In Louisiana, they are served at brunch with savoury dishes.
Makes about 12 biscuits.
450g/1lb plain flour
4 tsp baking powder
1 tsp bicarbonate of soda
1 tsp salt
175g/6oz butter
1 tbsp caster sugar
250ml/8fl oz buttermilk
1.
Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/Gas 6.
Sift the flour, baking powder, bicarbonate of soda and salt into a large bowl.
2.
Rub in 150g/5oz of butter until the mixture resembles breadcrumbs.
Stir in sugar.
3.
Mix in the buttermilk to make a firm but soft dough, kneading lightly until smooth.
4.
Roll out to a 1cm/½in thickness on a lightly floured board and cut out twelve rounds, using a 6cm/2½in cutter, re-rolling pastry once.
5.
Melt the remaining butter and brush over the biscuit tops, then bake for about 12–15 minutes until golden brown and the sides spring back when squeezed.
Cool on a wire rack, then split in half and butter them liberally.
Grillades
Despite its name, this is a meat stew popular in bayou country.
Grillades are traditionally cooked in a black, iron Cajun pot over an open fire and lovingly stirred until thick, then served with either grits (which is a savoury cornmeal porridge) or boiled rice.
It is a traditional Sunday brunch dish.
750g/1½lb topside of beef, cut into large cubes
flour, to dust
50g/2oz bacon dripping or lard
1 onion, finely sliced
2 celery sticks, finely chopped
1 small green pepper, seeded and finely chopped
4 tomatoes, skinned and chopped
6 spring onions, finely chopped
2–3 garlic cloves, crushed
750ml/1¼ pints beef stock
100g/4oz mushrooms, sliced
chopped fresh parsley
seasoning
1.
Toss the meat in the flour and season well.
Heat the dripping or lard in a large, iron casserole and brown the meat.
2.
Add the onion, celery, pepper, tomatoes, spring onions and garlic.
Cook for 5 minutes until softened.
3.
Pour in the stock, bring to the boil, then cover and turn down to a gentle simmer for about 1 hour and cook until tender, stirring occasionally.
4.
Add the mushrooms and parsley, reheat for 10 minutes.
Serve hot with rice or grits, which is coarse cornmeal boiled in water until it is thick, then flavoured with butter and a little cheese and garlic.
Candied yams
Cajuns love to eat these syrupy yams with baked ham which are popular at Thanksgiving.
Cane syrup is a light treacle, first made in the days of the plantations when sugar was refined by boiling it in huge, black, iron vats.
If you cannot find cane or maple syrup, substitute golden syrup and a teaspoon or two of black treacle.
50g/2oz butter
500g/1¼lb yams, sliced
1 tbsp soft brown sugar
1 tsp ground cinnamon
1 tsp freshly grated nutmeg
2 tbsp cane syrup or maple syrup
1.
Heat the butter in a heavy-based frying pan until it stops foaming, then add the yam slices in a single layer.
2.
Cook for about 2 minutes, shaking the pan until the yams are lightly browned.
3.
Sprinkle over the sugar and spices, then pour over the syrup.
Stir carefully to mix together, then cook for 3 minutes over a medium heat.
4.
Turn over each slice with a palette knife and cook the other side for another 2 minutes.
Spoon into a serving dish and serve warm — but not too hot or the syrup will burn.
Crawfish omelette
Cajun omelettes are more like scrambled eggs.
Crawfish are very difficult to find in Britain (freshwater crayfish can be substituted, although they are expensive) so use good quality prawns or diced monkfish instead.
John Folses likes to use Cajun cracked black pepper, which looks similar to coarsely ground pepper.
2 tbsp butter
1 tbsp corn or sunflower oil
1 small red pepper, seeded and chopped
1 small yellow pepper, seeded and chopped
3 spring onions, chopped
100g/4oz peeled and cooked crawfish tails or prawns or diced monkfish
4 eggs, beaten
2 tbsp chopped fresh parsley
seasoning
1.
In a heavy-based frying pan, heat the butter and oil until it stops foaming then fry the peppers and most of the onions for about 3 minutes until they have softened.
2.
Add the crawfish tails, prawns or monkfish and cook for 1 minute.
3.
Season the eggs and pour into the pan.
Cook for a minute or two until it begins to set, then stir gently to lightly scramble.
4.
Stir in the parsley, then spoon into a serving dish and scatter over the remaining spring onions.
Riz jeune (Yellow rice)
Any smoked pork sausage can be substituted for andouille sausage.
The yellow colour comes from the eggs.
2 tbsp butter
2 tbsp corn or sunflower oil
50g/2oz andouille sausage or other smoked pork sausage, sliced and cut
into thin strips
1 small red pepper, seeded and chopped
1 small yellow pepper, seeded and chopped
1 garlic clove, crushed
250g/9oz cooked long grain rice
4 eggs, beaten and seasoned
2 tbsp chopped green spring onion tops
seasoning
chopped yellow pepper and red cabbage, to garnish
few leaves of curly kale, to garnish
1.
Heat the butter and oil in a large, heavy based frying pan, then fry the sausage, peppers and garlic for 5 minutes until softened.
2.
Stir in the rice and cook, stirring constantly until it is completely reheated, about 2–3 minutes.
3.
Pour in the eggs and stir once or twice, allowing the eggs to set lightly around the edges.
Season, then sprinkle over the onion tops and stir again.
4.
When lightly set all over, spoon the rice into a serving dish and garnish with the pepper, cabbage and kale.
Serve warm.
Roz Denny's reports from New Orleans and Louisiana can be seen on Food and Drink on Tuesday, February 19 and 26, at 8.30pm on BBC2.
Below: wild rice and grits are staple elements in Cajun cooking.
Far right: Buttermilk biscuits and Grillades.
Left: Crawfish omelette.
Right: Riz jeune (yellow rice).
COMPETITION
Win a holiday in NEW ZEALAND
Amaze us with your special recipe for New Zealand Lamb, and we'll send you on the dream holiday of a lifetime
New Zealand Lamb has been enjoyed in Britain for more than 100 years.
Over that time, it must have been cooked in an enormous variety of ways.
Recipes for lamb appear in every kind of cookery book, from dishes as simple as Lancashire hotpot through to the magnificent Guard of Honour.
A tender meat with a fragrant flavour, New Zealand Lamb is available in a wide range of cuts.
If you have a special lamb recipe, here is a chance to share it with others — and win a tremendous trip ‘down under’.
The New Zealand Lamb Information Bureau is offering BBC Good Food readers and local BBC radio listeners, a marvellous first prize of a fortnight's holiday for two people in New Zealand, worth £6,500.
The winner will also receive £700 spending money.
And there is a whole host of other fabulous prizes (listed below) which are sure to thrill all enthusiastic cooks.
FIRST PRIZE NEW ZEALAND TRIP
After flying by Air New Zealand to Auckland, the winner and a partner will be provided with a luxury motorhome by Newmans Tours, New Zealand's longest established holiday company.
The motorhome will be the lucky winners' base for the next two weeks, offering them freedom to go where they please to explore New Zealand's unspoilt areas of breathtaking, natural beauty.
RUNNER-UP PRIZES
The 10 second prizes are five-piece Le Creuset saucepan sets, attractively displayed on a handy wooden storage rack.
Le Creuset enamelled cast iron cookware is both practical and superb to use.
This traditional French cookware is the choice of many professional cooks and is a range you will undoubtedly want to add to during its years of service.
There are also 30 third prizes of Kitchen Devil Professional Carving Sets, which comprise a 20cm/8in carving knife, a steel sharpener and carving fork.
A sharp knife is essential when carving any joint.
Keeping a knife as sharp as possible also reduces the risk of accidents in the kitchen and makes the cook's job much easier.
This handsome and practical carving set will take pride of place in your kitchen and dining room.
HOW TO ENTER
All you have to do is create a delicious family dish for four using naturally tender New Zealand Lamb.
It can be anything from a rich and succulent casserole to a stir fry recipe with a subtle hint of the Orient.
To whet your appetite, try the Wanaka lamb in orange sauce recipe on this page.
Remember, the judges will be looking for originality, ease of preparation and nutritional balance, as well as family appeal.
So, start testing out ideas on willing mouths now!
When you are satisfied with your recipe, write it out clearly, add your name and address and send it to: New Zealand Lamb Competition/ BBC Good Food , PO Box 43, St Leonards on Sea, TN38 9NB.
Wanaka lamb in orange sauce
4 New Zealand lamb leg bone steaks
1 tbsp arrowroot
150ml/¼ pint orange juice
150ml/¼ pint dry white wine
3 tbsp Cointreau
2 tbsp ground coriander
1 orange, cut into segments
1 tbsp grated orange rind
seasoning
fresh mint, to garnish
1.
Season the lamb with salt and black pepper.
Fry or grill the steaks in their own juices until they are cooked through and golden brown.
2.
Blend together the arrowroot and one tablespoon of the orange juice and set aside.
Place the remaining juice, wine, Cointreau and coriander in a pan.
3.
Bring to the boil and slowly add the arrowroot mixture, stirring constantly until the sauce has thickened.
Add the orange segments and rind.
4.
Place the steaks on a hot serving plate, pour over the sauce and garnish with mint.
Serve with new potatoes, broccoli and cauliflower.
RULES
1.
All entries must be received by March 31, 1991.
2.
The competition is open to UK residents, except employees of the BBC, Redwood Publishing Ltd, and The New Zealand Meat Producers Board, and their families and agents.
3.
Entrants under 18 must supply parental consent.
4.
Proof of postage will not be accepted as proof of receipt.
5.
The prizes are as stated.
No cash alternative is available.
6.
The holiday must be taken either between Oct–Nov 1991, or between Feb–April 1992.
Above, the astonishing, mountainous Mitre Peak at Milford Sand, and below, Wanaka lamb in orange sauce.
SECRETS OF Success
PART 12 PULSES
Protein-rich pulses can be used as the basis of many delicious hot meals, snacks and salads.
Joanna Farrow shows you how to get the best from beans, dried peas and lentils
PEAS AND CHICKPEAS
Bought whole or skinned and split, dried peas are classically combined with smoked ham or bacon in a richly flavoured soup.
The more versatile chickpea can be spiced up in salads or puréed with garlic for deep frying or serving in dips.
Chickpeas are used as the basis of many southern Mediterranean and Middle Eastern dishes, including hummus and couscous.
Both peas and chickpeas need thorough soaking to soften them before cooking, and cooking times will vary, depending on the freshness of the peas.
All dried peas have a shell life of up to a year — any longer and they may well need extra cooking, or possibly not soften at all.
1.
Place 450g/1lb whole dried peas in a large bowl.
Cover with plenty of cold water and leave to soak overnight in a cool place.
Drain peas, place in a large pan and cover with plenty of clean water.
2.
Bring the peas to the boil and cook rapidly for 10 minutes, skimming off any scum that rises to the surface of the water with a spoon.
Drain the peas in a colander and set them aside.
3.
Fry two chopped carrots, one chopped onion, two chopped celery sticks, two bay leaves and a sprig of thyme in three tablespoons of oil.
Add a 450–900g/1–2lb bacon knuckle and the drained peas.
4.
Just cover with cold water and bring to the boil.
Reduce heat and simmer on lowest possible heat for 2–3 hours until the meat is tender.
Remove the meat and transfer it to a chopping board.
5.
Cut meat into chunks, discarding skin and bones.
Return to pan with seasoning and a little chopped mint, if you like.
Serve as a chunky soup, blend coarsely, or process to a smooth purée.
Trio of stuffed vegetables
1 onion, chopped
2 garlic cloves, crushed
3 tbsp olive oil
175g/6oz yellow split peas, soaked
½ tsp dried thyme
2 tbsp chopped fresh chives
300 ml/½pint chicken or vegetable stock
1 small aubergine
2 courgettes
2 beefsteak tomatoes
100g/4oz mozzarella, grated
seasoning
1.
Fry onion and garlic in two tablespoons of the olive oil.
2.
Add drained peas, herbs and stock and bring to the boil.
Reduce heat and simmer gently until liquid is absorbed and peas are tender, about 25 minutes.
Season well.
3.
Simmer aubergine in boiling water for 8 minutes.
Halve aubergine and courgettes lengthways.
Scoop out centres, leaving a 5mm/¼in shell and chop the flesh.
Remove a slice from the tops of the tomatoes and scoop out seeds.
Brush inside aubergine and courgettes with remaining oil.
4.
Add the cheese and chopped courgette and aubergine to the peas and pack into the vegetable cases.
Bake at 180C/350F/Gas 4 for 30 minutes.
Curried chickpeas
350g/12oz chickpeas, soaked
2 large onions, chopped
3 garlic cloves, crushed
1 red or green chilli, chopped
4cm/1½in piece fresh root ginger, peeled and grated
1 tsp ground coriander
1 tsp cumin seeds
½ tsp ground turmeric
5 tbsp oil
400g/14oz can chopped tomatoes
2 tsp muscovado sugar
1 tbsp garam masala
seasoning
1.
Boil chickpeas for about 30 minutes until they are just tender, then drain.
2.
Fry the onions, garlic, chilli, ginger, coriander, cumin and turmeric in the oil.
3.
Add the chickpeas, tomatoes, sugar, garam masala and seasoning to taste, and cook for 30 minutes over a very gentle heat, stirring frequently.
Serve hot as a main course; also tasty cold.
LENTILS
Whole brown and green lentils are quicker to cook than other pulses and do not need soaking beforehand.
Split red lentils, smaller and milder, cook even more quickly and soon turn to ‘mush’— so keep an eye on them, if you intend to use them in salads.
The bland, slightly earthy flavour of lentils needs plenty of fresh spices, herbs and seasoning to transform them into tasty soups or spicy Indian dhals .
Cooked almost to a purée with plenty of garlic they make a truly delicious accompaniment to sausages and red meats.
Rinse lentils before use and check for stones and husks.
Store for one year.
1.
To cook lentils for salads, add to a pan of water, chunks of onion and a bay leaf.
Bring to the boil and simmer for 10–25 minutes until lentils are just tender.
2.
For casseroles, cook the lentils, as follows.
Fry one sliced onion, ½ teaspoon of turmeric, two cinnamon sticks, 12  cardamom pods and one dried chilli in oil.
3.
Add 6–8 chicken pieces and fry for 5 minutes on all sides.
Weigh and rinse 175g/6oz split red lentils and add to the casserole, spooning around the meat.
4.
Pour water into casserole until the chicken portions are just covered.
Add a tight-fitting lid or foil and cook at 180C/350F/Gas 4 for 1 hour.
5.
Once cooked, the lentils should have absorbed all of the water and feel soft in texture.
Season them with salt and pepper, then serve hot.
Mixed lentil salad with watercress mayonnaise
150g/5oz natural yogurt
4 tbsp mayonnaise
½ bunch watercress, finely chopped
100g/4oz each of brown, green and split red lentils, cooked and drained
1 bunch spring onions, chopped
1 small orange pepper and 1 red pepper, finely chopped
grated rind of 1 lemon
6 tbsp olive oil
2 tbsp chopped fresh parsley
frilly lettuce leaves
12 quail eggs, hard-boiled
seasoning
1.
Beat together the natural yogurt, mayonnaise, watercress and seasoning.
Spoon into a serving bowl.
2.
Mix together the brown, green and red lentils, spring onions, both peppers, lemon rind, oil, parsley and seasoning.
3.
Line serving dishes with the lettuce leaves and spoon the salad into centre.
Garnish with halved quails eggs and serve as a starter or as a main course with the watercress-flavoured mayonnaise.
Garlicky mixed lentils
2 onions, chopped
2 garlic cloves, crushed
3 tbsp olive oil
3 bay leaves
½ tsp dried thyme
900ml/1½ chicken stock
225g/8oz green or brown lentils
225g/8oz split red lentils
3 tomatoes, finely diced
2 tbsp chopped fresh parsley
½ tsp salt
1.
Fry onions and garlic in oil until soft.
2.
Add the bay leaves, thyme, stock and green or brown lentils.
Bring to the boil, then reduce the heat, cover and simmer gently for 15 minutes.
3.
Add red lentils and cook for a further 10 minutes until they are tender but still retain their shape.
Stir in the diced tomatoes, parsley and salt.
Serve the lentils hot on warmed plates with crusty bread.
BEANS
There are several varieties of dried beans: black, red, white, butter, black-eyed, pinto, flageolet, soya, mung, haricot and aduki.
Packs of sprouting beans are readily available and make a refreshing addition to mixed salads.
Most beans need soaking (preferably overnight) before use, and all beans must be boiled rapidly for 10 minutes to destroy any toxins.
Always boil beans first, if you are adding them to a stew or casserole.
To make beans digestible you must always cook them thoroughly and season with salt towards the end of the cooking time as the salt may toughen the beans.
1.
To make baked beans, bring 350g/12oz haricot beans to the boil in unsalted water.
Boil for 10 minutes, skimming off any scum.
Then simmer for 1 hour until tender.
2.
In a large flameproof casserole, fry one large chopped onion and 100g/4oz salt pork or streaky bacon for 5 minutes until they have turned golden brown.
3.
Drain the beans, reserving 600ml/1 pint of the cooking juices.
Add the beans to the onion and pork or bacon in the casserole and stir thoroughly.
4.
Blend a little cooking juice with two tablespoons each black treacle and tomato purée and one tablespoon of coarse grain mustard.
Stir in remaining liquid.
5.
Pour the liquid over the beans and cover the dish with a tight fitting lid.
Bake at 150C/300F/Gas 2 for 2–3 hours until beans are completely tender.
Serve hot.
Beans with pasta and pistou
Serves 4
large bunch of fresh basil
3 garlic cloves
1 tomato, diced, plus 100g/4oz tomatoes, halved
50g/2oz Parmesan
100ml/4fl oz olive oil
25g/1oz butter
4 courgettes, sliced
1 onion, sliced
100g/4oz mushrooms, halved if large
175g/6oz tagliatelle verde
100g/4oz each black-eyed, butter and aduki beans, cooked and drained
black olives and basil leaves, to garnish
1.
To make the pistou, blend the basil, garlic, diced tomato and Parmesan in a food processor or blender.
Gradually add the oil, blending to a thick paste.
2.
Melt the butter in a pan.
Add the courgettes and onion and fry gently for 4 minutes.
Stir in mushrooms and tomatoes.
3.
Cook pasta in plenty of boiling, salted water until just tender.
Drain and add to the pan with the beans.
Heat through gently while tossing all the ingredients together.
Remove from heat.
4.
Divide among four hot plates, garnish with olives and basil and serve with pistou, which can be tossed into the salad.
Cassoulet
225g/8oz smoked streaky bacon, cubed
450g/1lb pork, cubed
2 duck breasts
4 tbsp oil
2 onions, sliced
6 garlic cloves, crushed
1 celery stick, chopped
3 bay leaves
1 tbsp chopped fresh oregano
450g/1lb mixed beans, boiled and drained
100g/4oz breadcrumbs
seasoning
1.
Fry bacon, pork and duck in oil and transfer to a large casserole.
Gently fry onions, garlic and celery in a frying pan.
2.
Add bay leaves and 300ml/½ pint water to pan and bring to boil.
Add oregano, beans and vegetables to casserole, pour pan juices over beans and water to almost cover.
Sprinkle with half the breadcrumbs.
3.
Cover and bake at 150C/300F/Gas 2 for 2 hours.
Push breadcrumbs into dish to thicken juices, sprinkle with remainder and bake for 1 hour.
RAPID PULSES
Large supermarkets stock a varied range of canned beans and peas.
Keep a few cans in store for whizzing up quick and nutritious meals for the family
Lemony bean Stroganoff
Serves 4
Fry one sliced onion in two tablespoons of oil.
Add 100g/4oz sliced mushrooms, the grated rind of one lemon, one teaspoon of sugar, two teaspoons of coarse mustard, ¼ teaspoon of mixed herbs and 85ml/3fl oz double cream.
Add a drained and rinsed 400g/14oz can of red kidney beans and a drained and rinsed 225g/8oz can of flageolet or haricot beans.
Season and heat through, adding water if too thick.
Spicy sausages with black beans
Put 450g/1lb spicy sausages in a large frying pan with two tablespoons of oil, two garlic cloves, two bay leaves and one cinnamon stick.
Fry gently for 10 minutes.
Add a drained 400g/14oz can of black-eyed beans, 150ml/¼ pint water and ¼ teaspoon of nutmeg.
Season and cook for 15 minutes until the sausages are cooked through.
Pulse and pasta râgout
Lightly fry one bunch of chopped spring onions, and two garlic cloves in 40g/1½oz butter and one tablespoon of oil.
Add 100g/4oz brown rice, 100g/4oz whole lentils and 300ml/½ pint stock.
Cover and simmer until tender, adding more water if necessary.
Stir in three chopped tomatoes, 100g/4oz cooked pasta shapes and two tablespoons of chopped fresh mint.
Season well and heat through gently before serving.
Chilli beans
Fry one chopped onion and one chopped celery stick in three tablespoons of oil.
Add ½ teaspoon of chilli powder, ½ teaspoon of ground coriander, a 225g/8oz can of chopped tomatoes, ½ teaspoon of sugar and a drained and rinsed 400g/14oz can of red kidney beans.
Simmer gently for 20 minutes.
Serve with slices of avocado and soured cream.
Sprouting bean salad
Lightly fry 225g/8oz baby sweetcorn and one bunch of chopped spring onions in five tablespoons of sesame oil.
Add 100g/4oz oyster or button mushrooms and 100g/4oz trimmed mangetout to the frying pan, then cook for 2 minutes, stirring constantly.
Add 225g/8oz mixed sprouting beans and two tablespoons of soy sauce.
Heat through gently, mixing thoroughly with the other ingredients.
TO PRESSURE COOK PEAS AND BEANS
Weigh the dried beans or peas, soak them overnight in cold water, then drain.
Use 1.2 litres/2 pints of water for every 450g/1lb dry weight of the beans or peas.
(It is important that the cooker should not be more than half filled).
1.
Place the required amount of water and the beans or peas in the pressure cooker.
Bring to the boil, then skim the surface to remove any foam.
Reduce the heat, cover and bring to high pressure.
2.
Allow about one third of the usual cooking time.
Normally, most beans take about 45 minutes to cook, so allow 15 minutes in the pressure cooker.
Peas will take a few minutes longer than beans to soften.
There is no need to rapid boil peas or beans beforehand when using a pressure cooker as the high temperature removes the toxins.
COMING NEXT MONTH: CHOCOLATE
STAR WINES from DOWN UNDER
Jill Goolden appraises Australian wines which are produced from some pretty vibrant vine varieties
Less than twenty years ago, Australian wine was considered a bit of a joke.
Barry Humphries' cartoon hero Barry McKenzie made cracks about Château Chunder, the star wine from down under, fondly describing it as a great emetic.
That gag was consciously played for laughs, of course, but the really funny thing is that the pioneering Australian brands which were on the shelves in the ‘70s were actually called the much more comical names of Kanga Rouge and Wallaby wine.
This marsupial duo were the flagship Australian wines in the UK, and although they were really quite good, as you can imagine, they were rather difficult to take seriously.
Unfortunately, Australia's initial sortie into the British wine trade was a complete fiasco.
Almost all of the early wines were fortified with a good glug of grape spirit tossed into the fermenting brew, which made them mighty bruisers.
But it is only in the last 30 years that Australia has secured the knowledge, technique and the desire to produce the sort of subtle, light wines which we enjoy — and at which Australia excels.
With sales soaring to more than 12 million bottles last year, the Australian wine presence is certainly a force with which to be reckoned.
By selling 12 times as much wine as it did only five years ago, Australia outsells the US, and with the exchange rate currently working in our favour, prices are getting cheaper all the time.
It is interesting to contrast Australia with Burgundy.
In Burgundy, there is evidence that suggests the vine was well established as early as pre-Christian times, and that wines with a reputation for excellence were soon being produced.
At that time, grape varieties weren't exactly classified, but Chardonnay, for instance, could have been among them.
On the other hand, it was not until 1973 that good Chardonnay, the most prized of all Australian white wines, was being produced.
Unlike the classic examples of the ‘old world’, Australian are generally produced from single grape varieties or simple blends, and are usually named after the grape varieties concerned.
Cabernet Sauvignon, the backbone grape of claret, holds the most prestigious position.
It travels easily and has taken a tremendous shine to Australia, where it is planted successfully in all wine areas.
It is usually forward with a pungent blackcurrant aroma on the bouquet and it is ripe, fruity and friendly.
The most widely planted red grape is the Shiraz, known as Syrah in France, where it is the leading grape of the Rhône.
In the early days before the new age of light table wine-making, the wine industry tended to prefer grapes that were as little bother as possible in the vineyard or winery.
Shiraz fitted the bill perfectly, but because it was widely planted it was poorly regarded.
Some eminent wine-makers have since nurtured it to produce distinctive wines on its own — leathery, creamy and spicy, with a soft slick of redcurrant jelly.
The Cabernet Sauvignon and Shiraz grapes produce well-orchestrated, complex blends, combining fruit, backbone and spice.
Pinot Noir, Burgundy's top red grape, is less willing to travel and has not been entirely amenable to efforts to tame it in Australia.
But the wine-makers are winning, so watch out for a new wave of pretty, vibrant, strawberry-scented Australian Pinot — unlikely to be cheap — but Pinot seldom is.
Chardonnay is the most highly revered white grape of the southern hemisphere, and in Australia it produces buttery, honeyed wines, broadened and enriched by maturation in oak, sometimes so oaky it stings.
Although Sémillon is one of the grapes behind the star sweeties of Sauternes (and the majority of dry Bordeaux wines) it was never able to flaunt itself before it arrived in Australia.
But the Australians have given it its own identity and the result is a number of big, peachy, buttery wines with a characteristic whiff of straw.
Germany's noblest grape the Riesling, called the Rhine Riesling in Australia, is the most widely planted classic variety in Australia, although it does have difficulty in finding a niche in our market.
Rhine Riesling runs the gamut from dry to sweet, but it is generally dry.
These dry whites are flowery and unripely green, possibly with a faint oily whiff, leading you into the soft, honeyed fruit.
Sauvignon, that quintessential crisp, dry white variety, is popular in fashion-led Australia where it produces clean dry whites — but with a difference.
The long hot summers, coupled with perhaps a spell in oak casks, dish up the gooseberries in the friendlier guise of stewed fruit with sugar.
Other whites to look out for are Marsanne, the darling of the Northern Rhône, coming into its own down under where it marries well with oak to produce unusual, lush, oily wine tinged with the scents of pine and sap.
And Muscat, produced in either a dry, sweet and sour style, pungent and uniquely grapey, or the unctuously sweet, late-picked versions.
NEXT MONTH: ALSACE WINE
Cabernet Sauvignon barrels are stored vertically.
Harvest time in the Coldstream Hills, Yarra Valley.
Cabernet Sauvignon grapes are grown 1,000 feet up in King Valley, Victoria.
HEALTH MATTERS
Healthy start on the farm
Are farmers responding to the food needs of the '90s?
Janette Marshall argues for stronger links between the food industry and the consumer
Our farmers are already beleaguered by critics for their use of pesticides and chemical fertilisers and the inhumane intensive animal rearing that has resulted in salmonella and BSE.
Now another criticism has been added.
British farmers are not producing the right kind of food for a healthy diet.
‘Farmers and growers do need to recognise the distinction between food fads, food scares and new concepts of health relating to heart disease, high blood pressure and cancers,’ says Professor Philip James, who is director of the Rowett Research Institute, Aberdeen, and a member of several government committees on medical aspects of food.
‘Food fads create a market niche which may be short-lived; food scares induce a glut of specific vulnerable products and economic distress, but the emerging concept of ‘healthy foods’ is bound to become progressively more important as the population follows the trend to healthy eating.
Producers and food manufacturers ignore this trend at their peril.’
Ring the changes
Professor James believes that the average British diet is too rich in fat, saturated fat, sugar and salt, contains too few starchy foods, such as cereals and bread, and not enough fruit and vegetables.
‘The adverse trend in our diet since the war is only now being reversed, and it will require substantial changes in the food chain if healthy goals are to be met.
For example, the fat content of our diet represents over 40 per cent of our energy compared with an ideal 15–30 per cent .’
Because of poor diet and the illnesses associated with it ‘one in four of young men in Britain today will not draw their old age pension, likewise one in five women.’
In a world ranking of premature death before the age of 60, Northern Ireland and Scotland are near the top and England and Wales are about a third of the way down.
Professor James believes that the main changes are going to come from prevention and that improving our diet is the surest way to lower the risk of heart disease.
‘If you have a brilliant medical service you can save three to five per cent of people, but management of heart disease has barely changed since the ‘50s.
Our health problems are actually related to lack of health promotions and prevention schemes.’
For instance, nearly 90 per cent of men in their fifties require immediate advice to change their diet.
If they reduced their blood cholesterol level by 10 per cent, within two years their risk of heart attack would go down by 20 per cent .
And if British farmers do not anticipate the changes needed, then supermarkets, responding to consumer demand, will simply import more and more foreign food instead, warns Professor James.
Meat myths
Meat is one of the highest contributors of fat in the typical British diet (along with milk, margarine, other fats, sausages and meat products, cakes, biscuits and pastries).
While many people are aware that meat pies are extremely high in fat — around half the calories in some pork pies come from fat — few realise that modern chicken-rearing is producing birds with a higher fat content.
Chicken may in the past have been lean, but modern farming does not allow the birds to exercise and it also ‘fattens’ them quickly, so their meat may not be quite as lean as current nutritional data indicates.
‘Consumers are now misled by traditional perceptions that chicken is necessarily a lower fat product than beef or pork,’ says Professor James.
‘They cannot be expected to know this, given inadequate food labelling.’
So we are faced with a fundamental problem.
How can consumers initiate healthy eating plans when they are not receiving the information they need in comprehensible form?
Audrey Wise, Labour MP for Preston and a member of the Commons Select Committee on Health, agrees that education is vital.
‘We can only get things done if there is sufficient public clamour and we will only get that if the public is aware.’
‘It really is physically and mathematically impossible,’ continues Professor James, ‘to work out the implications of my needs whenever I go into a supermarket unless I happen to know my metabolic rate, what it means in terms of my food needs and how to calculate this information so that I can select the correct diet.’
Policy problems
While chicken may be growing fatter, pork has become leaner during the last 10 years.
‘I think it is splendid the way the Meat and Livestock Commission has gone on to anticipate consumer needs.
There has been a 30–40 per cent reduction in the amount of fat on pigs over the last 10 years,’ says Professor James.
However, there has been only a one to three per cent reduction in fat on sheep and cattle carcases during that period.
‘We have institutional processes inhibiting the opportunities for farmers to provide what the consumer wants,’ says the professor.
Farmers are simply not moving fast enough to allow people who are desperately keen to change their diet to do so effectively.
Agricultural policy which involves paying the highest prices for the fattest lamb and cattle has changed little during the last 10 years.
Minor changes in meat grading have occurred, leading to higher prices for leaner meats, but this has resulted in only a five per cent swing towards leaner meat reaching the market.
‘Why are farmers so timid in this respect?’ asks Professor James.
So, while the Government has put some effort into educating people about healthy eating, it has not made the necessary changes in policy and practice that are required to make a healthier diet possible.
Most consumers ‘certainly fail to recognise the implications of agricultural practices and policy’, such as subsidies for producing and promoting full-fat milk rather than semi-skimmed or skimmed milk, and those for butter and meat.
The National Consumer Council (NCC) is critical of the European Community's agricultural policies, which produce the wrong sort of food to maintain good health as well as keeping food prices too high.
‘Producers and consumers ought to have a simple relationship — supply and demand,’ says chairperson of the NCC, Lady Wilcox.
‘It's ironic that the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) means that the richest farmers are subsidised by the poorest consumers in Europe through food prices which are kept high by production quotas.
‘Two-thirds of price support goes to fewer than one third of farmers — the biggest.
While their richer brothers rake in subsidies, the poorer farmers continue to go out of business.’
Subsidies would be far better utilised as rewards for environmentally friendly farming methods or for protecting the countryside.
The money could be allocated openly rather than through ‘hidden tax in the form of food prices which hit hardest those least able to pay’.
Europe needs a farm policy, admits Lady Wilcox, but it must be one in which social concerns are separate from price policy.
‘So far, European politicians just haven't understood the impact of their decisions on the consumer.’
Closer links
The chaotic policy of subsidies has also led to the scandal of vast food mountains which taxpayers have to foot the bill to store — and which are then dumped at cut price on the world market.
This practice is particularly damaging to Third World countries trying to sell their goods.
In 1989, the current system cost the average European family of four an extra £14 per week in prices and taxes.
‘Farmers too would be better off without all this worry about the vagaries of politicians,’ says Lady Wilcox.
‘Farmers, like supermarkets, have to recognise the basics of marketing,’ says David Bootle, group marketing director of Safeway.
‘It's the right product in the right place at the right time, and the only way you can ever deliver that is if you fully understand your current consumer needs and demands and can accurately anticipate the next ones.’
He identifies the following issues as important to all British farmers:
‘Firstly, quality: by improving the quality of British apples and pears, the threatened takeover of the market by French imports in the '70s was fought off.
‘Secondly, taste: excessive production and cultivation methods have led to a reduction in flavour.
In the next few years, consumers will be prepared to pay a small premium for real taste.
They are disillusioned by bland products.
‘Animal husbandry will also be a key concern.
Practices should be re-examined in the light of consumer awareness.
Excessive use of growth promoters, nitrates and pesticides will continue to be an emotive issue, and farmers and retailers must respond to consumer expectations.’
These are concerns that are shared by Jonathon Porritt, the former director of Friends of the Earth.
But despite all the difficulties, he still remains optimistic.
‘There is much new and dynamic thinking among farmers, environmentalists and consumers, and a very great deal of common ground among them.
Unfortunately, many of the ideas on which they are working simply disappear into the black hole of the Ministry of Agriculture.’
To counteract this, he suggests a new alliance to bridge the gap between farmers and consumers.
The Labour Party thinks it is time for a fresh start.
‘Labour will reorganise MAFF, transforming it into a Ministry of Food and Farming.
It is vital that the link between food and farming is retained, for the food chain is seamless,’ says shadow Minister Dr David Clark.
Whether or not the talking will bring about the revolution we need for healthier food, the problems of both world trade and the CAP remain after the breakdown of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) talks.
Too many farmers are simply being subsidised to produce too much food of the sort that we do not want.
At present, 40 per cent of our daily calories come from fat; the ideal amount should be about 15–30 per cent Farmers should spend time talking to retailers in order to build up a much closer dialogue between all the links in the country's chain
With the EC spending two-thirds of its budget on agriculture, the food mountains continue to grow.
In the past decade demand for food rose by just 0.5 per cent each year while production went up by 1.8 per cent each year
TV SPECIAL
THE flying COOK
Can you feel a culinary crisis coming on?
No matter what the problem, chef Kevin Woodford is on hand with a myriad menus for any occasion
When Kevin Woodford, owner and chef of Woodfords restaurant on the Isle Of Man asked viewers of ITV's This Morning programme to write to him about any culinary problems, the letters simply flooded in.
The most common culinary crises were narrowed down to: seduction cuisine — how to cook a romantic dinner to impress; budget cuisine, coronary cuisine, comfort cuisine — for those not feeling on top of the world; spoil yourself cuisine — for anyone on their own; student cuisine; survival cuisine — for those who've never had to cook for themselves before; sports cuisine — for those needing a carbohydrate boost before a sporting activity; trim cuisine — for cooks wanting to entertain but still stick to a diet; creep cuisine — to impress the boss; and finally, oat cuisine — for vegetarians, of course!
After a quick discussion on the phone with the participants, Kevin flew off in a helicopter to all corners of the country to cook miraculous meals.
You can watch Kevin every Wednesday on ITV's This Morning programme at 11.00am until early April.
Mother-in-law cuisine
Tabitha Dingwall has been married to John for two years.
Tabitha is part Indian, part Russian and part English.
To add to the combination, she has lived in Scotland for eight years and her Indian father is a vicar.
With her exotic background, she tends to cook very spicy food which, unfortunately, is not to her mother-in-law's taste!
Tabitha wanted to cook some British dishes and, with Kevin, decided to update classic dishes to please both parties.
No one can cook bread and better pudding quite like the mother-in-law, can they!
But instead of making the pudding with stale bread and milk, Kevin and Tabitha used fresh bread and cream, cooked it in ramekin dishes and served it with a whisky and honey cream, which would be a new experience for anyone.
Mussel and watercress soup
1kg/2lb mussels, scrubbed
4 shallots, sliced
3 parsley sprigs
300ml/½ pint dry white wine
½ bay leaf
100g/4oz butter
2 leeks, washed and sliced
1 garlic clove, crushed
100g/4oz onions, sliced
175g/6oz potatoes, sliced
3 bunches watercress
600ml/1 pint chicken stock
2 tbsp lemon juice
1 bouquet garni 175ml/6fl oz milk
250ml/8fl oz double cream
pinch of curry powder
2 egg yolks
seasoning
8 watercress leaves
1.
Place the mussels in a large pan with the shallots, parsley, wine and bay leaf.
Season lightly, cover and bring to the boil.
Allow to simmer for 5–8 minutes, just enough time for the mussels to open.
Check that they are all open, any that haven't should be discarded.
2.
Strain the liquid through a colander covered with muslin, and retain the liquid.
Remove mussels from their shells, allow to cool and chill until required.
3.
Melt the butter in a thick-bottomed pan, add the leeks, garlic and onion.
Cover and allow to cook without colouring until soft.
4.
Add the potatoes and watercress.
Cover with the chicken stock and mussel liquid, then add the lemon juice and bouquet garni and simmer for 30 minutes.
5.
Put the soup in a food processor or blender, or push through a fine sieve, and return to the pan.
Add the milk and 150ml/¼ pint of the cream and season to taste.
Gradually return to the boil.
6.
Lightly whisk the remaining cream with the curry powder and egg yolks.
7.
Pour the soup into soup cups, add the mussels and float the egg/cream glaze over the surface.
Place under a hot grill until the top of the soup turns golden brown.
Garnish with watercress leaves.
Lamb in puff pastry
Don't miss our lattice pastry cutter offer on page 10.
1 tbsp vegetable oil
2 x 8 bone best end of lamb, boned and trimmed
75g/3oz butter
1 garlic clove, crushed
2 fresh rosemary sprigs
1 tsp peppercorns, crushed
1 glass red wine
450g/1lb puff pastry
175g/6oz mango, peeled, stoned and diced
100g/4oz wild mushrooms
50g/2oz onions, diced
1 egg, beaten
seasoning
1.
Preheat the oven to 220C/425F/Gas 7.
Heat the oil and seal the lamb on both sides without colouring.
Remove and place on one side.
2.
In a wide pan fry the butter, garlic, rosemary and crushed peppercorns.
Cook for 2 minutes, add the wine and reduce by half.
Season lightly.
3.
Halve pastry and roll both pieces to twice the size of the meat.
Place the meat on one half of the pastry and run a lattice cutter over the other half to within 5mm/¼in of the pastry edges.
4.
Mix together the mango, mushrooms and onions.
Cover meat with mango mixture and bring the rest of the pastry over mixture.
Seal and trim edges and brush with egg.
5.
Bake for about 20–30 minutes until cooked.
Serve hot with the sauce.
Bread and butter pudding with whisky and honey cream
50g/2oz caster sugar
3 eggs
300ml/½ pint single cream
85ml/3fl oz milk
8 slices bread, buttered (crusts removed)
25g/1oz currants
25g/1oz sultanas
FOR THE WHISKY CREAM
150ml/¼ pint double cream
1 tbsp honey
2 tbsp whisky
1.
Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/Gas 4.
Whisk the sugar and eggs together and add the single cream and milk.
2.
Cut the bread into rounds with a scone cutter to the diameter of a large ramekin or small soufflé dish.
3.
Place a round of bread on the bottom of four dishes, cover with half the currants and sultanas and half the custard mixture.
Finish by repeating the process again.
4.
Sit the dishes in a roasting dish containing water and bake for 25–35 minutes.
Whisk the double cream with the honey and whisky to form soft peaks and serve with the pudding.
Trim cuisine
Anne Lucas from Staley Bridge in Cheshire wrote to Kevin saying she was losing her will power to stick to her diet.
Anne had already trimmed down to a reasonable weight with the help of Weight Watchers, and she pleaded for new ideas to strengthen her resolve.
As Anne has a couple of children and is at home all day she often does lots of baking but also lots of nibbling!
She is married to a Frenchman and is an extremely good cook who enjoys entertaining.
She loves chicken and wanted ways to liven it up without using fattening butter or cream sauces.
One idea Kevin had was to make concentrated chicken stocks for flavour.
Clear beef and celery soup
225g/8oz minced beef shin
225g/8oz celery, sliced
100g/4oz carrots, sliced
100g/4oz onions, sliced
100g/4oz leeks, sliced
3 egg whites
6 black peppercorns
1 bouquet garni 1.75 litres/3 pints cold brown stock
½ onion, peeled and unsliced
seasoning
FOR THE GARNISH
100g/4oz celery, washed, diced and cooked
1.
Place beef in a large pan, add the celery, carrots, onions and leeks and mix together.
2.
Add the egg whites and one tablespoon of cold water and mix thoroughly.
3.
Add the peppercorns and bouquet garni and the cold stock, season lightly with salt and gradually bring to the boil.
4.
Meanwhile, place the half onion in a dry frying pan and allow the cut surface to burn.
Once black, add the soup, without disturbing the packed meat and vegetables (this will enhance the colour).
5.
Allow to simmer for 4 minutes and then, using a ladle, very carefully strain the liquid through a conical strainer covered with a muslin cloth.
It is imperative that you do not disturb the meat layer which has formed at the top of the soup.
6.
Adjust the seasoning and serve garnished with the cooked celery.
Supreme of chicken set on a casserole of devilled pimiento
75g/3oz celery, sliced
75g/3oz carrots, sliced
50g/2oz leeks, sliced
50g/2oz onions, sliced
4 peppercorns
1 bouquet garni 450ml/¾ pint chicken stock
4 chicken breasts, skinned
1 tbsp vegetable oil
75g/3oz onions, finely diced
1 garlic clove, crushed
100g/4oz button mushrooms, finely diced
1 tsp freshly crushed black peppercorns
1½ green peppers, sliced
1½ red peppers, sliced
2 tomatoes, skinned, seeded and diced
2 tbsp chopped fresh basil
small glass dry white wine
2 drops Tabasco sauce
3 drops Worcestershire sauce
seasoning
1.
Place the celery, carrots, leeks, onions, peppercorns, bouquet garni and chicken stock in a large pan and simmer for 5 minutes.
Season very lightly with salt.
Add the chicken breasts to the stock and simmer gently until cooked.
2.
Meanwhile, in a separate pan heat the oil and add the diced onions and garlic, cook for 2 minutes without colouring.
Add the mushrooms, crushed peppercorns, green and red peppers, tomatoes and basil.
Cook for a further 4 minutes, stirring gently, frequently.
3.
Add the wine and reduce by two-thirds.
Season with Tabasco and Worcestershire sauce, salt, and if it's necessary, more black pepper.
4.
Transfer the pepper mixture to four lightly greased ramekins and cover.
5.
Remove the chicken, cover and keep hot.
Increase the heat under the stock and reduce by half.
Unmould each casserole of pimiento on the centre of a large plate.
6.
Cut the supremes of chicken into collops across the breast and arrange them overlapping around the pimiento casserole.
7.
Moisten the chicken using the reduced stock and garnish with the cooked vegetables from the stock, but discard the bouquet garni.
Crème brulée with chilled exotic fruit
50g/2oz pineapple, peeled and finely diced
50g/2oz mango, peeled, stoned and finely diced
50g/2oz kiwi fruit, peeled, quartered and sliced
1 tbsp kirsch
85ml/3fl oz whipping cream
85ml/3fl oz Greek strained yogurt
25g/1oz golden granulated sugar
1.
Mix the prepared fruit with the kirsch and divide equally among four small ramekins.
2.
Whip the cream into soft peaks and fold in the yogurt.
Spoon the mixture over the fruit and smooth over the surface.
Cover and chill in the fridge for 2 hours.
3.
Sprinkle the sugar over the surface of each dish and place under a hot grill until browned.
Creep cuisine
Pam Large from Banbury in Oxfordshire wrote to Kevin to say that her husband was trying to secure a big business contract with a new company for his kitchen and bathroom furniture business.
He had invited the new client over to dinner at his own home.
Poor Pam!
She confessed to being a good but plain cook and she wanted to create the right setting to clinch the deal.
The meal was the central element in the evening and the pressure was certainly on.
Pam needed a good pinch of inspiration and a great dollop of confidence.
Kevin came to the rescue with a meal that certainly impressed, so much so that Pam's husband won the deal!
Bavarois of smoked salmon
4 slices smoked salmon
75g/3oz smoked salmon, blended in a processor
2 tbsp lemon juice
6 peppercorns, crushed
few fresh parsley stalks
50ml/2fl oz dry white wine
150ml/¼ pint double cream
2 tsp powdered gelatine
pinch of cayenne pepper
4 tsp golden caviar
4–8 asparagus spears
150ml/¼ pint natural yogurt
1 tbsp snipped fresh chives
seasoning
FOR THE GARNISH
8 lemon segments
8 dill leaves
grated rind of 1 lemon
1.
Grease four small ramekins with a little vegetable oil.
Line with the sliced smoked salmon.
2.
Place the processed smoked salmon in a large bowl set on ice.
3.
Put half the lemon juice, the peppercorns, parsley stalks and wine in a pan and bring to the boil.
Allow to reduce by half.
Leave to cool for a few minutes, and then add to the processed salmon.
Mix well.
4.
Gradually beat the cream into the mixture taking care not to overbeat; the consistency should be light yet firm.
Sprinkle gelatine over three tablespoons of water and leave to swell, then set the bowl in a pan of hot water and heat until gelatine dissolves.
Stir the gelatine into the processed salmon mixture.
5.
Mix well and season lightly with salt, pepper and a pinch of cayenne pepper.
6.
Half fill the dishes with the salmon mixture, then place a teaspoon of caviar in the centre.
Cover with the remaining mixture and chill until set.
7.
Purée the asparagus in a processor, retaining the tips for a garnish.
Add the remaining lemon juice, yogurt and chives.
Season highly.
8.
Flood four plates with the sauce.
Unmould the bavarois and place on the sauce.
Garnish with asparagus tips, lemon segments, dill and rind.
Fillet of beef
750g/1½lb beef fillet
4 garlic cloves
50g/2oz fresh root ginger, peeled
100g/4oz butter
1 tbsp vegetable oil
50g/2oz celery, sliced
50g/2oz carrots, sliced
50g/2oz leeks, sliced
50ml/2fl oz red wine
300ml/½ pint brown stock
75g/3oz bamboo shoots
75g/3oz mangetout
50ml/2fl oz double cream
1 egg
75g/3oz Stilton, grated
pinch of cayenne pepper
4 individual pastry cases, baked blind
seasoning
1.
Preheat the oven to 220C/425F/Gas 7.
Make several deep incisions in the beef fillet using a small knife.
Cut the garlic and ginger into thick slices and insert them into the incisions in the meat.
2.
Heat 50g/2oz of the butter with the oil in a roasting dish and add the beef.
Season and add the celery, carrots and leeks.
Cook for about 20 minutes.
3.
Once cooked, remove from the pan.
Strain off the surplus fat and swill out the pan with the wine and stock.
Allow the liquid to reduce by half, remove from the heat and beat in 15g/½oz butter.
Strain into a sauce boat.
4.
Melt the remaining butter in a wide-bottomed pan, add the bamboo shoots, mangetout and seasoning.
Cook, stirring for 1–2 minutes.
5.
Meanwhile, mix together the cream, egg.
cheese, cayenne pepper and seasoning.
Pour into the pastry cases and bake for 6–9 minutes.
6.
Cut meat into medallions.
Place a nest of bamboo shoots and mangetout in the centre of each plate.
Set two pieces of meat over the nests, a pastry case to the side and a ribbon of sauce around the outside of each plate.
Raspberry soufflé
50g/2oz icing sugar
120g/4½oz fresh or defrosted raspberries
1–2 tsp lemon juice
1 egg yolk
2 egg whites
pinch of salt
15g/½oz unsalted butter
15g/½oz caster sugar
FOR THE SAUCE
10 apricot halves
40g/1½oz caster sugar
1 vanilla pod
½ small glass brandy
1.
Preheat the oven to 220C/425F/Gas 7.
Place the apricots, sugar, vanilla and 50ml/2fl oz water in a pan and simmer for 30 minutes.
2.
Remove the vanilla pod and pass through a sieve or purée in a processor or a blender.
Add the brandy.
Blend 40g/1½oz of the icing sugar, the raspberries and lemon juice in a food processor.
Add the egg yolk and blend for 25 seconds.
3.
Place the egg whites and pinch of salt in a clean, large bowl and whisk until it nearly peaks.
(Take care not to overwhip the egg white).
Add the remaining icing sugar and beat thoroughly.
4.
Stir one third of the egg white into the raspberries, then fold in the remaining egg white, using a metal spoon.
5.
Grease four small soufflé dishes with the butter and sprinkle with caster sugar.
6.
Fill the dishes to the top with the mixture and ensure that the surface is smooth.
Using a knife, gently ease the mixture away from the sides of the dish.
7.
Bake the soufflés for 12 minutes.
Serve immediately with the brandy and apricot sauce.
For further recipes, turn to the Cook's Directory.
Menu Mussel and watercress soup Lamb in puff pastry Bread and butter pudding with whisky and honey cream
Ann Lucas gets advice on delicious dishes that won't add inches
Menu Clear beef and celery soup Supreme of chicken set on a casserole of devilled pimiento Crème brulée with exotic fruit
Menu Bavarois of smoked salmon Fillet of beef with bamboo shoots and mangetout Raspberry soufflé
10 GREAT GINS
A gin and tonic is a refreshing and classic drink, especially when served with ice and lemon.
Jill Goolden gives her verdict on ten brands of this enduringly popular and distinctive tasting spirit
There are between 50–60 different brands of gin — excluding ‘own labels’— on sale in Britain, each with its own personality.
By definition, gin is ‘a spirit drink with a predominant taste of juniper’.
In practice, there are between eight and 12 ‘botanicals’ or natural flavourings included, such as coriander, cassia bark, angelica, almonds, orange and lemon peel, orris root, liquorice, cardamom, nutmeg and juniper.
Most have an alcohol content of 40 per cent which is the same as whisky, but higher than most brands of vodka.
Gin is produced by three different methods.
One: it may be distilled with the botanicals to the desired strength.
Two: concentrated distilled gin may be watered down to the correct strength.
Or three: alcohol, water and flavouring essences may be mixed together.
Gin produced by one of the first two processes will usually be labelled London gin or distilled gin (sometimes both).
Most products simply called gin or dry gin will have been produced by the third cheaper method.
Gin produced anywhere in the country may be called London gin, whereas Plymouth gin is an ‘appellation’ and can be used only when gin is made in Plymouth.
Included in our run-down are the best-selling brands plus those which are not so familiar.
Interestingly, the best-sellers were by no means the best tasting.
Bombay
Coarse and raw on the nose with sweet rubbery notes but little perceptible juniper.
Not very pleasant to taste, owing to a lack of sufficient juniper flavouring.
London Hill
Contact Atkinson and Baldwin, tel: 071–223 7634 for your nearest stockist.
About £8.50.
Recently introduced, smartly presented, quality gin with a penetrating, heathery aroma and refreshing, citrus edge to the taste.
White Satin
Intensely junipery on the nose with a hint of sweetness and a certain rubberiness.
On the taste it's fresh and clean enough, but there is a slightly unpleasant finish.
Bombay Sapphire
Fortnum and Mason, Oddbins, selected Peter Dominic outlets in the south-east, £13.95 (available duty free) Newly launched high strength gin (47 per cent) claiming to include 10 botanicals.
Disappointing; sweet, rubbery bouquet and a dominating, coarse, fiery spirit with a nasty aftertaste to it.
Gilbey's
Clumsy spirit with a nebulous, unfocussed bouquet.
Juniper is noticeable on the taste, but otherwise it is sharp and one dimensional.
Not a particularly interesting gin.
Booth's High and Dry
There's an odd, baked edge to the bouquet, offset by good, herby aromas and a positive, junipery character.
Sweeter than some, softening the fieriness of the spirit; ends on a refreshing note.
Gordon's
Most spirits stockists, £8.59–£8.99
The juniper flavour is good and there is a fresh, lemony bite, but the overall impression is of an unexciting gin, which does not marry well with the botanicals.
Plymouth (Coates)
Delicious!
Bouquet is like heathland in hot weather plus bags of juniper and seemingly, rosemary.
Highly flavoured, although clean and fresh.
Good on its own, great with the right tonic.
Beefeater
Most spirits stockists, £8.49–£8.99
A subtle gin, if a bit sweet on the nose, with an attractive, lemony edge rather like a Gordon's.
There is an interesting medley of flavourings.
Clean and very likeable.
Booth's Finest Dry Gin
Distinctively tinted, the aromatics are so strong you could confuse it with cologne as it glugs out of the bottle; there is almost a lavendery quality.
Fresh, powerful flavour; well-rounded and soft.
Tonic Water
Tonic water has its origins in India (hence the name ‘Indian tonic’) where the British were encouraged to take the flavouring quinine as a natural antidote to fever.
Quinine is still an important ingredient, although the taste of different tonic waters varies considerably.
From a tasting of the 15 most widely available brands and ‘own labels’(both regular and diet), two diet tonics from Gateway and Tesco emerged as the best drinks to have straight.
When mixed with gin they produced less satisfactory results, introducing intrusive flavours into the gin/tonic marriage.
As a mixer with gin, Schweppes came through with honours — its tonic is the only one on the market which is sweetened with sugar, whether it be diet or regular.
The rest contain artificial sweeteners.
TRIED AND TASTED
Your pull-out-and-keep guide to GIN
All prices correct at time of going to press.
CAUSE FOR CONCERN
The Guild of Food Writers is campaigning to improve the quality of catering food — its vice chairman Claudia Roden talks to Janette Marshall
RAISING STANDARDS
Britain's standard of food in national institutions and mass catering is some of the worst in terms of health and palatability in Europe.
It is commonly assumed that it is impossible to change this state of affairs, but the Guild of Food Writers believes it can be done, and that it is all-important, even vital, to do so, says Claudia Roden, its vice chairman.
‘We believe it is no more difficult, no more expensive and no more labour intensive to provide healthy, nutritious, tasty, well-presented food than it is to provide unhealthy food.
Good food is cheaper and far less wasteful because a lot of inedible food is simply thrown away.
We believe there are ways to improve the national diet and that these should be studied and then carried out,’ says Roden, who is leading the current campaign.
The Guild argues that the Government should take more action.
‘The Government is the largest caterer in the country and therefore has huge buying power and control of the food supply.
It could have enormous influence over the nation's diet.
‘Yet with responsibility for catering divided among the ministries, local authorities, the army, prisons, nursing homes, hospitals and schools, any efforts to improve the situation are fragmented and not very effective,’ says Roden.
United effort
The Guild would like to see a government committee on catering food set up to coordinate with other ministries, such as Health and Education and local authorities to bring about improvements.
But it also believes that the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (MAFF), which is officially responsible for the whole food chain, should now consider accepting overall responsibility for institutional catering, but in consultation with the Ministries of both Health and Education.
The Guild sees a need for MAFF to be restructured so that food comes first.
The new emphasis could be reflected by renaming MAFF the Ministry of Food and Farming.
Initially, the Guild has focussed its campaign on hospitals and schools because the sick and the young are usually the most vulnerable.
The situation in hospitals
‘Meal-time is all that many patients have to look forward to — it is the highlight of the day, and good food contributes greatly to both their well-being and recovery as much for psychological as nutritional reasons,’ says Roden.
During the last six months, the Guild has spoken to a number of representatives of caterers, dieticians, nurses, doctors and, in particular, the Patients' Association and the College of Health, and discovered that the quality of hospital food is highly variable.
In some hospitals, standards have improved enormously since the mid '80s as a result of the NACNE and COMA reports which found strong links between diet and health.
And Claudia Roden is currently working with Guy's Hospital in London to improve recipes and menus.
Some local authorities have developed their own food policies, and individual catering managers have made efforts to produce healthy, tasty, well-presented meals.
But on the whole — judging by letters in response to pieces placed in newspapers and by the Guild's members' own experience — the quality is still poor.
Most hospitals continue to provide fatty, stodgy, sugary, canned, highly processed, dried and reconstituted foods which many patients will not eat.
‘We are told that food in many hospitals is too high in fat and sugar and too low in fibre,’ says Roden.
According to a Which?report, 40 per cent of menus in NHS hospitals claiming to have a healthy food policy failed to reach an acceptable score in a nutritional values survey.
The need for better food
Patients recover quickly if they are well nourished.
Vitamins and nutrients help to prevent and fight disease and are essential for the healing of wounds and bone fractures.
Many patients, especially the old and economically weak, are already malnourished when they go into hospital.
And people suffering from a severe injury or illness usually need to regain weight.
But surveys show that the nutritional status of patients tends to deteriorate during hospitalisation, and that many fail to receive the quality of food necessary to meet their needs in terms of energy, protein, vitamins and iron.
Long-stay hospital patients, especially the elderly and mentally ill, have been found to be suffering from malnutrition.
Schools for scandal
The Government's own dietary surveys of British school children show that they eat too many crisps, chips, biscuits and chocolates and very little fresh food.
The majority of children who choose to leave the school campus at lunchtime buy crisps, chocolate and soft drinks.
Although a number of schools offer good healthy food, some school meals are often fatty, sugary and low in fibre — sometimes not much better than the food children eat at home.
At the other extreme there are many malnourished children who do not make up those essential nutrients, which lacking in school meals, when they return home to eat.
Starved of vitamins and nutrients, such as the B vitamin riboflavin; and minerals, such as iron, zinc, magnesium and calcium, which are important for growth, badly fed children suffer minor recurring illnesses and their development is possibly retarded.
And as long-term malnutrition impairs learning ability, these children may never reach their full potential.
Trouble in store
‘Children in all social groups are storing up health problems by eating the wrong foods during their developing years.
They will be affected for the rest of their lives by the kind of diet which is condemned by nutritionists all over the world as likely to lead to a whole variety of illnesses in later life.
These could include premature heart attacks, diabetes and weight problems, diverticular disease and colon cancer,’ reports Roden.
‘It is all-important for their future health and their capacity to learn that children adopt balanced eating habits.
If we don't feed them well, we are defeating the process of education.
At this vulnerable stage of their lives, they must be given the best possible food — a balanced diet including fresh vegetables, fruit, grains, fish and meat.’
Positive attitudes
While being critical of current standards, the Guild also wants to be positive.
‘We know that hospital caterers are struggling with some severe economic constraints,’ says Roden.
Hospital caterers have a budget of about £10 per person per week with which they are expected to provide three meals a day plus drinks.
Caterers also face other difficulties, such as keeping food hot and coping with the long travelling distances between the kitchens and wards.
Bring back guidelines
Although many hospitals, schools and institutions are making a big effort, there is still a need for the Government to provide guidance for the less enthusiastic or efficient.
The Guild wants the Government to introduce a set of practical guidelines for all nutritional and health standards of meals served in our schools and hospitals.
Previous standards for school meals were abolished in 1980 and there are now no mandatory guidelines.
Members of the Guild are also demanding that government advice on healthy eating should be clarified because many hospitals and schools (which have food policies and guidelines with perfect aims and objectives) still serve meals to patients or pupils that are unacceptable.
Roden points to the irony that often good standards are only theoretical.
‘Hospitals are full of posters with tips on healthy eating, urging people to eat fish and vegetables, to grill and steam instead of fry, yet often there is little on the hospital menu that is healthy.
On paper the menu may sound marvellous, but in practice the food can be unappetising and nutritionally poor.’
Subsidies and staff
Government purchasing power should also ensure that all ingredients are better quality, healthier and fresher.
At the moment, caterers buy cheap EC subsidised butter and high fat cheese in preference to much healthier alternatives.
Government incentives should be used to discourage the purchase of products which are high in saturated fats.
To this end, the Guild has asked John Gummer, Minister of Agriculture, and his Labour shadow, Dr David Clark, to try to change the programmes by which the EC disposes of cheap full fat milk, butter and cheese.
But pay and career prospects have to be improved and formal training programmes need to be established.
‘Just as important,’ says Roden, is the need to make sure recipe manuals are in touch with grass root tastes, as well as being nutritionally balanced.’
What you can do
People are not keen to complain about food in hospital because they are grateful for the medical attention and because the majority of patients are not there for long.
Equally, caterers who try to improve the standard of food often face resistance.
A caterer in Scotland reported to the Guild that many patients turn down salads, pulses, wholemeal bread and fresh fruit salad, preferring the traditional stodge and fried foods.
Yet there must be a healthy balance, and improvements in hospital and school catering can be achieved more quickly if there is public pressure.
Complain to your local authority, community health council or MP if the school or hospital meals in your area are not putting enough emphasis on healthy eating.
Starved of vitamins, badly fed school children suffer recurring illnesses
The Guild of Food Writers is the professional association and forum of food writers in Britain.
Its membership includes restaurant critics, dieticians and nutritionists, editors and broadcasters including BBC Good Food's editor Mitzie Wilson, deputy Janette Marshall and columnist Derek Cooper, presenter of Radio 4's The Food Programme.
Aims of the Guild include: promoting awareness of, and campaigning for improvements in, food.
Long-stay hospital patients have been found to suffer from malnutrition
What makes a nice meaty rasher?
The BBC Good Food team tasted the best bacon on the market
Bring home THE BACON
TRIED AND TASTED
Just 20 years ago, half of us were eating bacon for breakfast before starting work in the morning.
Today, our lifestyles have become more busy, and only 10 per cent of us eat a full cooked breakfast.
Yet despite that small percentage, each of us on average manages to munch our way through some 3.5kg/8lb of bacon per year.
Nowadays, bacon is cured by injecting fresh pork with brine, or soaking it in bring which contains permitted nitrite and nitrate preservatives.
Polyphosphates (E450) may also be added.
These enable the meat to ‘hold’ water, increasing the weight, which means in effect that you get less meat for your money.
The bacon is then put through the smoking process or left as it is.
Some traditional bacons use the dry cure method of rubbing salt into the pork's surface without adding water.
Others are injected and cured in brine and allowed to hang dry and mature.
The BBC Good Food panel tasted a range of bacons.
We were looking for a good flavour and meaty texture.
We were surprised to find that the supposedly meatier dry cures didn't come out tops.
1st Marks & Spencer traditionally cured bacon
A good meaty texture with a balanced, not too salty flavour.
£3.20 a lb.
2nd Asda traditional bacon
Thick rashers with appetising aroma.
Little shrinkage, full flavour which is rather overpowered by saltiness. £2.79 a lb.
3rd Waitrose traditional bacon
Natural looking rashers.
Thick, meaty texture, if a little dry.
Full flavour; not too salty.
£2.65 a lb.
4th Danepak original cure bacon
Long, meaty rashers with a mild, cooked, porky aroma.
Pleasant flavour, if slightly sweet.
£3.86 a lb.
5th Safeway British dry cured bacon
Small, neat, moist rashers.
Reasonable flavour, although some found it a little bland.
£2.99 a lb.
5th Tulip dry cured Danish bacon
Rather mild bacon flavour, but clean on the palate.
Quite a good meaty texture.
Bland aroma.
£3.56 a lb.
6th Heal Farm traditional cure bacon
Fatty, coarse, rather chewy; weak flavoured.
£4.56 a lb.
7th Morrisons traditional dry cure bacon
Good colour and texture; over sweet though.
£2.79 a lb.
The BBC Good Food team was joined by Derek Andrews from the Meat and Livestock Commission, and the tasting was held at the Commercial Gas Centre in London.
The panel also tasted prime bacon rashers from Gateway, Meatmaster, Tesco and the Co-op.
All prices were correct at the time of going to press.
EQUIPMENT
on the BLOCK
There's more to getting the chop than meets the eye, as Gill Kersley looks at blocks across the board
Every cook needs a chopping board — or two — but these can be a prime source of cross-contamination, leading to potential food poisoning.
Always scrupulously wash and dry a board between uses, preferably drying with disposable kitchen paper rather than a tea towel to avoid transferring flavours or bacteria.
Ideally, keep separate boards for raw meat, fish and especially poultry; cooked meat and fish, and another for fruit and vegetables.
Colour-coded plastic boards can make life easier in this respect.
Wooden boards are still popular, but the surface of cheap ones can crack and absorb bacteria.
End-grain wooden boards, which have a chequered look, are the toughest and allow less knife penetration.
Wood is also reasonably kind to the knife edge.
Some wooden boards have an oiled finish which can be replenished with a little vegetable oil, enhancing appearance and durability.
It also helps prevent the wood from absorbing any strong flavours and stains — both are disadvantages of wood.
Alternatively, rub the surface with lemon, which helps to keep it smelling fresh and reduces staining.
If you're short of worktops, a wooden block on wheels can be moved to a free space and allows you to work at a similar height to your kitchen worktop.
Easier-to-clean materials include toughened glass which is non-absorbent, heat and impact resistant, but unkind to knives.
Melamine boards aren't as durable as wood or polythene and as they wear, they can absorb bacteria.
Polythene and polyethylene are virtually non-absorbent and hygienic since most are dishwasher safe.
Little beechwood board looks like a butter pat, but it is for chopping garlic.
ICTC oval-ended board made from rubberwood, an ecologically sound by-product of rubber production.
From major department stores and cookshops, about £15.
Fiskars Kitchen Devils polyethylene board with colour-coded symbols — red bull for raw meats, yellow joint for cooked meats and so on.
Kind to knives.
From major department stores and grocery outlets.
Round Chinese chopping block (actually a section of a tree).
About 30cm diameter and 5cm thick (available larger).
Needs to be soaked to close any cracks; must be kept clean.
From most Chinese supermarkets.
Butcher's block end-grain maple, 84cm high, 56cm deep, 78cm wide (inc handle), has drawers and a shelf and wire basket for vegetables.
Woodstock Furniture for enquiries .
End-grain, £413; long-grain, £336.
Rowplas colour-coded boards in polyethylene/polypropylene.
Textured, non-absorbent surface is kind to knives.
Maple end-grain cutting block (30cm square, approx 75cm thick) with handle.
Round sycamore chopping block (30.5cm diameter, 3.5cm thick), hand turned by Ray Key.
Junckers beechwood chopping board.
Generous size (45×55cm×40mm; also available 27mm thick), pre-oiled, with curved lip at front and back to fit standard worktops.
From John Lewis and all good cook shops, about £75.
Fox Run Worktopper toughened glass board with Country Kitchen design.
Heat and impact resistant.
Dishwasher safe.
From department stores and independent cookshops, about £18.
Polythene board hygienic and kind to knives.
ICTC rubberwood board with integral handle.
From major department stores, about £20.
KITCHEN GARDEN
IT'S A gardener's WORLD
Adam Pasco, editor of the new BBC Gardeners' World, brings you a guide to kitchen crops
Action for March
Where you intend to grow early vegetables cover the soil with cloches to warm it before sowing and planting begins.
Asparagus crowns can now be planted in well prepared soil.
Two excellent all-male varieties are Franklim and Lucillus.
They will produce succulent spears from next spring onwards.
This is your last chance to plant bare-rooted fruit trees and bushes.
Clear away weeds and dig over an area, preferably in full sun, 1m/3ft x 1m/3ft to a depth of about 60cm/2ft.
Fork in plenty of mushroom compost, well rotted manure, or soil conditioner, such as Mulch 'n' Mix, from garden centres.
Spread out the roots before putting back the soil.
Stake and tie trees securely.
Rake a little rock potash fertiliser into the soil around fruit trees and bushes.
Birds can quickly strip swelling buds from fruit bushes.
To ensure a crop for yourself, protect them with nets.
Dig over and weed vacant ground set aside for vegetables, being careful to dig up roots of perennial weeds, such as dock.
Always put these in the dustbin.
Improve your soil by mixing in home-made compost, well-rotted manure or mushroom compost.
This helps break down heavy soil and enables free-draining soil to hold water.
Buy seed potatoes from garden centres or by mail order.
Lay them, eyes upwards, in trays in a light, frost-free position.
This is called ‘chitting’, and it will encourage small shoots to form before planting.
Gooseberries and red and white currants can now be pruned if this was not done during the winter.
Cut out crowded or crossing branches from the bush centre, and cut back side shoots to two buds from their base.
Parsley plan
Parsley seed can now be sown.
Fill a pot with compost, sow a thin layer of seeds on top and sprinkle with a light covering of compost.
Stand the pot in water until the surface of the compost looks moist, then pop a clear, polythene bag over the top and place it on a warm and sunny window-sill.
The seedlings should be visible within 14–21 days, and by then the bag can be removed.
Parsley seedlings can be grown in terracotta pots and placed on a patio, or they can be planted outside.
It is a good idea to grow a selection of 13–15cm/5–6in parsley pots for the kitchen to ensure a crop for the whole year round.
Going to seed
If weather permits and the soil isn't too cold and wet, the following crops can be sown outdoors at this time.
However, delay sowing for a few weeks if conditions are poor.
Broad beans
Kohlrabi
Parsnips
Peas
Radishes
Spinach
Spinach beet
Spring onions
Brussels sprouts, summer cabbage, calabrese and leeks can be sown in a seed bed — a nursery area of the vegetable plot where seedlings are grown and then transplanted to rows on the main plot at a later date.
At this time of the year, the following crops can now be sown in a heated greenhouse.
Aubergines
Capsicums (peppers)
Chilli peppers
Cucumbers
Melons
Tomatoes
The following crops can now be sown under cloches.
Broad beans
Cabbage
Cauliflowers
Early carrots
Early peas
Lettuce
Spinach
Turnips
Set for success
Every cook appreciates a regular supply of onions for the kitchen.
Onions are a very easy crop to grow, especially if you grow them from sets.
An onion set is a small onion which can be bought at garden centres or ordered from seed catalogues.
Good sets are Super Ailsa Craig, Giant Fen Globe, or for larger onions, choose Showmaster.
Sets can be planted from March–April.
Choose an open, sunny site and rake a general fertiliser, such as Growmore, into the soil.
Make rows 23cm/9in apart with a stick or hoe and plant them about 10cm/4in apart with the tips just out of the soil.
Firm the soil around each set and water in if necessary.
To prevent birds pulling them up, net the rows until they root and cut off any wispy tips.
Weed the plot weekly and water onions only if the soil is very dry.
As the bulbs begin to swell, expose the tops to the sun to help ripen them to a golden colour.
By August, the foliage will begin to topple and go yellow.
Ease a fork under each onion to break the roots and leave them on top of the soil to ripen in the sun.
Store in a cool, light place in trays, on ropes or down the legs of old stockings.
Creating a herb wheel
Herbs are more than just a culinary delight — they are among the most colourful plants you can choose for the garden.
The secret is to use them to create a striking feature, and not just hide them away in a shady corner of the garden.
Before you plant any herbs, work out how much space you have.
An open, sunny site is best as many herbs originate from the Mediterranean where they get thoroughly baked during the summer.
Draw your allotted area to scale on graph paper, sketching out patterns that you find attractive.
Designs using triangles, squares or circles are the best.
Your design can be created, using bricks and stones to make interesting shapes or by using herbs alone.
A cartwheel is one of my favourite ways to grow herbs.
At the centre you need a bushy herb, such a rosemary or fennel for height.
Choose herbs to graduate between the spokes.
For instance, tarragon or sage followed by shorter-growing marjoram and chives, and then low-growing thyme or parsley.
If the spokes of the herb wheel are very long, plant mint or lemon balm for interesting high points among the low growers.
Have fun with colourful herbs too.
Many herbs have brightly coloured varieties.
Sage, for example, has the purple leaves of Purpurascens, the golden Icterina and multi-coloured Tricolor in purple, pink, green and white.
Look out for other herbs with coloured leaves, especially mint and thyme.
Your herb wheel can be any size, and as part of a lawn or a paved area.
Lay some stones to allow you to step in to the wheel to pick your herbs.
But be careful with mint.
This is one of the most invasive herbs, sending out underground shoots that pop up where you don't want them.
Control mint by planting it in a large pot with drainage holes.
Sink it into the soil and snip off any shoots growing over the rim.
Many herbs can be raised from seed.
Some are best sown in pots indoors for planting out in summer, while others can be sown straight into the soil.
Check out the latest varieties on sale at garden centres.
Early strawberries
Act now and you could be enjoying ripe strawberries from your own garden during late June and early July.
Cover plants in rows with a cloche tunnel of polythene stretched over wire hoops.
This encourages early flowering and fruiting.
Open the cloche sides on sunny days and when plants are in flower to encourage bees.
Without good pollination, the crop will not be successful.
Push dry straw under the ripening fruits to lift them off the soil and deter slugs.
Protect from birds with nets, and water regularly for a large, juicy crop of strawberries.
For attractive flowering and fruiting plants, it's worth potting a few rooted strawberry runners this summer.
Use 7.5–10cm/3–4in pots, soil-based compost and feed and water regularly.
Bring into the greenhouse or conservatory next February.
Meet Adam and the team
BBC Gardeners' World (on sale February 14) contains expert advice from your favourite BBC television gardening presenters.
A herb wheel makes an attractive feature
Sticky Fingers
GOOD COOK OF THE MONTH
The 1990 Sainsbury's Young Cook of Britain is Gillian Nutter, 10, from Preston.
She won herself a trip to Disney World after beating 30,000 others with her recipe for Chicken in a tangy sauce.
Chicken in a tangy sauce
2 chicken breasts, skinned
25g/1oz carrot
25g/1oz courgette
1tbsp oil
6 leaves each of lettuce (eg lollo rosso) and endive
6 watercress sprigs
fresh chives, to garnish
FOR THE DRESSING
1 tbsp red wine vinegar
½ tsp Dijon mustard
1 garlic clove, crushed
25g/1oz sugar
2 tbsp olive oil
1 tbsp soy sauce
1 tbsp tomato ketchup
Worcestershire sauce and Tabasco sauce, to taste
seasoning
1.
Cut the chicken, carrot and courgette into thin strips.
Blanch vegetables in boiling water for 1 minute.
Heat the oil and fry the chicken for 10–15 minutes.
Drain on kitchen paper.
2.
Mix together all the dressing ingredients.
Put lettuce, endive and watercress on two plates and pour over half the dressing.
3.
Heat the remaining dressing.
Add the chicken and vegetables and warm through.
Place on top of the leaves and garnish with the chives.
Mother's Day
If you had been a young person at the beginning of this century, you may have been in ‘in service’, working as a maid or servant for a wealthy family.
Once a year you would have been given a Sunday off to visit your own family; this became known as Mothering Sunday.
Instead of giving your mum chocolates (or cake as they did in those days), you could treat her to a special melon basket, which can be prepared the day before.
MELON BASKET
Buy a ripe Honeydew melon, a small orange, a kiwi fruit and a few black grapes.
1.
Ask an adult (not mum!) to help you cut the melon in half using a sharp knife on a chopping board.
Scrape out the pips and use a melon baller or teaspoon to scoop out small ball of the melon flesh and place them in a bowl.
2.
Scrape out (and eat!) the remaining flesh from one half of the melon.
Peel and slice the kiwi fruit.
Segment the orange and wash the grapes.
3.
Pile the melon balls, orange and kiwi fruit into the empty shell and decorate with the grapes.
Cover with a bowl (not foil) and keep in a cool (and secret!) place overnight.
PIPS
You can wash melon pips and spread them out to dry before painting them.
Use the pips to make a necklace or stick them onto card to make a design.
But remember to keep them away from very young brothers or sisters who may think they are sweets and try to eat them.
Who was green and sat on the throne?
Alfred the Grape!
This cartoon illustrates a poem called ‘Have you ever done any cooking?’ in Michael Rosen's new book Never Mind .
The book is part of a series of 12 books (£2.50 each) and listen- along cassettes (£3.50 each), published by BBC Longman.
READER OFFER
COME TO THE BBC GOOD FOOD SHOW MARCH 21–24
Come and see celebrity cooks in action, sample foods and wines from around the world and look at the very latest in kitchen equipment.
The first ever BBC Good Food Show is being held in conjunction with the Ideal Home Exhibition at London's Earl's Court in the new Earl's Court 2 exhibition hall.
Come along between March 21–24 and meet all your favourite television cooks, chefs and food and wine authors.
Top chefs will be demonstrating their skills every day in the BBC Good Food Theatre sponsored by British Gas and British Meat.
Book now for your tickets for the show, where there will be a number of stands exhibiting new foods and wines as well as a variety of useful kitchen gadgets which you can buy.
IDEAL HOME PLUS THE DAILY MAIL IDEAL HOME EXHIBITION EARLS COURT 14 MARCH–7 APRIL 1991
Demonstrations in the BBC Good Food Theatre
Is it possible to cook a three-course family meal in under 30 minutes?
With Michael Barry, it is certainly possible.
Michael plans to prepare complete meals before your very eyes.
See him in action at 11.30am and 4.30pm on March 21, March 22 and March 23; 11.00am and 2.00pm on March 24.
If you enjoy wine but would love to savour the taste like the experts, who better to teach you than Jill Goolden and Oz Clarke of BBC2's Food and Drink ?
Join them as they sample wines from all over the world at 12.30pm and 7.30pm on March 21; 12.30pm and 6.30pm on March 22 and March 23.
Enjoy a taste of Italy with writer Valentina Harris and restaurateur Antonio Carluccio.
Watch the experts make delicious new creations and old favourites.
Their demonstrations are at 2.30pm and 5.30pm on March 21, March 22 and March 23; 1.00pm and 3.00pm on March 24.
Mustard, cheese, salami, butter, Italian sauces, Greek yogurts and desserts, prunes and posh preserves, flapjacks and chocolate cookies, Spanish olives, ham, tea, taste-tingling spice mixes, the best of British meat, revolutionary vegetarian protein and the world's first olive oil spread.
These are just some of the foods to be discovered at the exhibition.
Come and talk to experts on food preparation and hygiene and pick up useful leaflets from the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
Other interesting features of the show include tasty recipes from British Meat and displays of quality cuts from the butcher's shop, microwaves demonstrations plus cake icing ideas from Tate & Lyle, and cooking and carving hints from New Zealand Lamb.
You'll be able to sample wines from around the world, including Australia and Israel, Sheep Dip whisky from Scotland and sherry from Spain.
Among the latest kitchen appliances on display will be revolutionary new cookers from British Gas, juice mills, double skillet cooking pans, ‘Micro Crisp wrap’(for browning and crisping pastry in the microwave), the latest range of Tupperware containers and the best non-stick bakeware.
And to top all of this, there will be competitions galore, with terrific holidays, goods and equipment to be won at a number of stands.
How to book
Use the coupon below to order advance tickets for the Ideal Home Exhibition, which will also admit you to the BBC Good Food Show.
VIP advance booking facilities have been arranged to allow BBC Good Food Show visitors to avoid the queues, by using the special VIP entrance.
A few cookery demonstration tickets may still be available at a cost of £2.50 each, so fill in the relevant part of the coupon with details of your choice.
Remember to tick the box if you still want tickets to visit the Ideal Home Exhibition and the BBC Good Food Show, even if the demonstrations have already sold out.
How to get there
The BBC Good Food Show is open daily from 10.00am to 8,00pm (10.00pm, Thursday).
Seagrave Road is the most convenient car park for the exhibition, but we recommend that you travel by public transport as the area can become terribly congested.
Bus routes and underground services are as follows: Buses 30,31,74 and C3.
Underground Earl's Court Station is on both the District and Piccadilly lines.
West Brompton station is on the District line.
Entry to the Warwick Road entrance of Earl's Court can be gained by following the signs marked Warwick Road.
NEXT month! in BBC GOOD FOOD
Secrets of Success concentrates on cooking with chocolate for dainty sweets and stunning dinner party desserts.
PLUS
Gilli Davies brings us a taste of Easter in Cyprus with a traditional Easter luncheon.
There are also recipes for Simnel cake, Hot cross buns and spicy biscuits from our very own shores.
If you or your children are turning to a vegetarian diet, Roselyn Masselin has lots of advice and recipes for the whole family.
In Cause for Concern, we take a look at the kinder alternative methods of animal farming.
We also explain how you can revolutionise your eating habits and lead a healthier lifestyle.
There's a profile on that most useful item of kitchen equipment — the cake tin, and we also put wholemeal bread through its paces for Tried and Tasted.
On the savoury side, there are lots of quick one pot meals.
Raymond Blanc, chef and owner of the world-famous Le Manoir aux Quat' Saisons restaurant and hotel, shows us around his new kitchen and shares his secrets.
And Jill Goolden will be telling us all about wines from Alsace.
BBC COOK'S DIRECTORY VOL 16
Including recipes from your favourite BBC cookery programmes
FOOD AND DRINK
Michael Barry conjures up the taste of the Deep South with Shrimp gumbo
BAZAAR
Clare Connery creates dishes with dash — Mexican tacos, left, and Tomato, pear and tarragon soup, above
DAYTIME UK
Rosemary Moon provide recipes for success every day and for special occasions too
EGGS 'N' BAKER
Kids' cookery from Cheryl Baker — recipes to rave about
BAZAAR
Clare Connery brings the taste of summer to spring, plus a touch of spice
Clare Connery's Storecupboard Cookery is on Bazaar, Mondays, BBC1 at 3.25pm
Mexican beef tacos
Mexican taco shells, the perfect finger food, are fried and shaped tortillas — flat cakes made from stoneground wheat or maize flour.
When warmed through, tacos make wonderful containers for any variety of filling, from a simple combination of leftover meats to the more traditional minced beef and bean mixture, flavoured with taco seasoning and topped with lettuce, tomatoes and olives.
For convenience, a can of taco filling can be used instead.
1 pkt taco shells
FOR THE FILLING
1 tbsp sunflower oil
1 large onion, finely chopped
1 garlic clove, crushed
450g/1lb lean minced beef
1 red pepper, seeded and chopped
1 pkt taco seasoning or tsp chilli powder
400g/14oz can plum tomatoes
425g/15oz can red kidney beans, drained and rinsed
freshly ground black pepper
shredded lettuce, chopped tomatoes, chopped cucumber, chopped green
pepper, to serve
few olives, to garnish
1.
Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/Gas 4.
Heat the oil in a large pan and fry the onion and garlic until soft but not coloured.
Stir in the beef and red pepper and continue to fry until the meat has browned.
Stir in the taco seasoning and fry for 1 minute to develop the flavour.
Add the tomatoes and kidney beans and bring to the boil.
2.
Season with pepper, reduce the heat and steadily simmer, uncovered, for 20 minutes or until the flavours have blended and the meat is well cooked.
By this time, the mixture should be rich and pulpy with very little liquid.
3.
Place the taco shells on a baking sheet open end down — this will prevent them from closing while they are being heated.
Warm through in the oven for 2–3 minutes.
4.
Put a layer of the meat and bean mixture in the base of each shell, add a layer of lettuce, top with the other chopped salad vegetables and sprinkle with a few olives.
Serve immediately.
Tomato, pear and tarragon soup
A fruit and vegetable mixture with a delicately balanced flavour and more than a hint of summer.
Good both hot and cold.
2 tbsp sunflower oil
1 medium onion, roughly chopped
400g/14oz can plum tomatoes
400g/14oz can pear halves, drained
1.2 litres/2 pints vegetable stock
1 tbsp dried tarragon
pinch of grated nutmeg
1 tsp soft brown sugar
seasoning
parsley sprigs or a few fresh tarragon leaves, to garnish
1.
Heat the oil in a large pan and fry the onion until it is soft but not coloured.
Add the tomatoes and their juice along with the drained pear halves.
Pour on the stock and season with the tarragon, nutmeg, a pinch of salt, some pepper and the brown sugar.
2.
Bring to the boil, chopping through the mixture with a spoon to break up the tomatoes and pears.
Cover, reduce the heat and simmer for about 20 minutes or until the mixture is pulpy and the flavours are well blended.
Put the mixture into a blender or food processor and blend until smooth.
3.
To serve hot, return to the pan and bring to the boil again, adjusting the seasoning as necessary.
Garnish with sprigs of parsley or a few fresh tarragon leaves and serve with crusty bread.
Gooseberry and mango whip
The tartness of the gooseberries and the sweetness of the mangoes combine well to create this refreshing dessert which can literally be made in minutes.
An even quicker alternative is to omit the tinned fruit and use two commercially prepared gooseberry fools mixed with chopped fresh orange segments.
300g/11oz can gooseberries in syrup
300g/11oz can sliced mangoes in syrup
1 small orange, cut into segments
240g/8½oz Greek strained yogurt
1 tsp caster sugar (optional)
fine shreds of orange rind, to decorate
1.
Drain the syrup from the tins of fruit.
Put the fruit into a blender or food processor.
Set aside four orange segments, for decorating the dessert before serving.
Add the remaining orange segments to the other fruit in the processor.
2.
Process until all the fruits are well blended but still have a slightly lumpy texture.
Carefully fold in the yogurt and sugar (if using) and divide the whip among four individual serving dishes.
Decorate each dish with the reserved orange segments and the shreds of orange rind.
Chill and serve.
Please check your Radio Times for up-to-the-minute transmission details
FOOD AND DRINK
Michael Barry brings you two tasty supper dishes and a delicious dip
Food and Drink can be seen on Tuesdays at 8.30pm on BBC2
Venison casserole
There are many versions of this stew but, in fact, they don't differ all that much.
Some have mushrooms, others not; some lard the meat, others not.
What they all have in common is slow, moist cooking, strong flavours and usually a slightly sweet and sour note to the sauce.
Serve with plenty of mashed potato and either red or green cabbage.
1kg/2lb stewing venison, cut into chunks
4 tbsp seasoned flour
3 tbsp olive oil
1 large onion, chopped
bouquet garni of celery, thyme and parsley
250ml/8fl oz fresh apple juice
225g/8oz button mushrooms
1 tbsp English mustard
1 tbsp redcurrant or quince jelly
seasoning
1.
Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/Gas 4.
Roll the venison in the flour.
Heat the oil in a large casserole and fry the venison until will browned.
Add the onion and fry together fur a further minute.
2.
Add the bouquet garni and apple juice.
Cover tightly, put into the oven and bake for 1–1½ hours.
When the meat is very tender, add the mushrooms and cook for a further 5 minutes.
3.
Stir in the mustard and the redcurrant or quince jelly, check seasoning and serve hot.
Raita
1 bunch spring onions
4 medium tomatoes
½ cucumber
150g/5oz natural yogurt
1 tsp salt
1 tbsp lime or lemon juice
fresh mint, to garnish
1.
Trim and cut up all the vegetables into fine slices.
Mix with the yogurt, salt and lemon or lime juice.
2.
Add the mint and allow the flavours to mingle for 1 hour.
Shrimp gumbo
Gumbo is the New Orleans answer to the daubes of France or the stir fries of Canton; a rich, thick, highly flavoured sauté that is considered the definitive Cajun dish.
Serve it piping hot with boiled rice.
2 tbsp oil
2 onions, chopped
4 celery sticks, sliced
2 red peppers, sliced
2 green peppers, sliced
225g/8oz okra, cut into 2.5cm/1in pieces
4 ripe tomatoes, skinned and chopped or 200g/7oz can chopped tomatoes
1 tbsp tomato purée
½ tsp dried thyme
½ tsp chilli powder
450g/1lb raw prawns, headless and shelled, if possible
seasoning
fresh parsley, to garnish
1.
Heat the oil in a large sauté pan.
Fry the onions, celery, peppers and okra for about 10 minutes until soft.
2.
Add the tomatoes, tomato purée, thyme, chilli powder, seasoning and 250ml/8fl oz water.
Bring to the boil and simmer for 30 minutes.
3.
Add prawns for 7 to 10 minutes.
Check seasoning and garnish with parsley.
EGGS 'N' BAKER
Cheryl Baker gets clever in the kitchen with recipes that appeal to all ages
Eggs 'n' Baker can be seen on BBC1 every Saturday at 8.00am
Banana cream pie
1 ready-made shortcrust pastry case
2 tbsp chocolate chips
FOR THE FRUIT CREAM FILLING
1 cup miniature marshmallows
1½ cups sliced bananas
3 tbsp lemon juice
3 tbsp honey
150g/5oz natural yogurt
1.
Fold together all the filling ingredients, taking care not to break up the marshmallows and banana slices.
Pour into the pastry case.
Sprinkle the top evenly with chocolate chips and serve at once.
Don't worry if you can't buy any miniature marshmallows — cut the large ones into pieces with scissors.
Use the traditional pink and white marshmallows or go wild with lots of assorted shapes and colours.
Heaven and earth with frankfurters
750g/1½lb potatoes, cubed
800g/1¾lb cooking apples, cored and sliced
1 tbsp granulated sugar
1 tsp vinegar
4 long or 8 short frankfurters
50g/2oz butter
seasoning
1.
Place the potatoes, apples, sugar, one teaspoon of salt and the vinegar in a large pan and just cover with water.
Bring to the boil and cook for about 15 minutes until the potatoes and apples are cooked.
2.
Heat the frankfurters by leaving them to stand in a pan of water that has just boiled for about 5 minutes.
3.
When the potatoes and apples are cooked, drain them well and mash them.
Mix in the butter, season with salt and pepper and spoon into a warmed serving dish.
Serve with the frankfurters on the side.
Sweet lasagne
1 pkt pre-cooked lasagne
100g/4oz sultanas
450g/1lb cooking apples, cored and very thinly sliced
4 large bananas, sliced
50g/2oz flaked almonds
pinch of ground cinnamon
600ml/1 pint thin custard
1.
Preheat the oven to 190C/375F/Gas 5.
In an oblong glass ovenproof dish, starting with the pasta, make alternate layers of all the ingredients above with the exception of the custard.
2.
Pour the custard over the top and bake for about 30–40 minutes until the custard is golden brown.
If you don't have fresh fruit to hand, just use an equal weight of canned or frozen fruit instead.
Try canned apricot halves and pineapple chunks, or frozen raspberries and blackberries.
Cheese and courgette caterpillar
1 short French loaf
50g/2oz butter, softened
50g/2oz Emmenthal cheese, grated, plus extra for sprinkling
4 tbsp single cream
1 small courgette, sliced
2 tomatoes, sliced
100g/4oz thinly sliced ham, cut into pieces
1.
Preheat the oven to 200C/425F/Gas 7.
Cut the loaf into about 12 slices, making sure that it still holds together at the base.
2.
Mix together the butter, cheese and cream.
Spread half of the mixture inside the slots and tuck a slice of courgette, tomato and ham into each slot.
3.
Spoon the remaining cheese mixture over the bread, sprinkle with the extra cheese and bake for 5–10 minutes until the loaf is hot through and the cheese has melted.
Serve hot with salad.
Chocolate swiss roll
3 eggs
75g/3oz caster sugar
few drops vanilla essence
75g/3oz plain flour
25g/1oz cocoa
FOR THE FILLING
300ml/½ pint whipping cream, whipped
glacé cherries, to decorate
1.
Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/Gas 6.
Grease and line a 23x33cm/9x13in swiss roll tin with greaseproof paper.
2.
Whisk the eggs, sugar and vanilla essence in a bowl over a pan of hot water until the mixture holds a trail.
Sift together the flour and cocoa, then fold into the egg mixture with one tablespoon of warm water.
3.
Tip the mixture into the prepared tin and tilt the tin to level the mixture.
Bake for about 12 minutes until golden and springy to the touch.
4.
While the swiss roll is cooking, dust a large sheet of greaseproof paper with plenty of caster sugar.
Turn the cooked sponge on to this and carefully peel off the paper.
5.
Mark a dent along one short side, about 1cm/½in from the edge.
Lay another sheet of greaseproof paper on top and roll the sponge up with the paper inside.
Leave on a wire rack until completely cool.
6.
Carefully unroll the sponge and remove the paper.
Spread with two-thirds of the whipped cream.
Starting with the marked end, roll up fairly tightly and place on a serving dish.
7.
Spoon the rest of the cream into a piping bag fitted with a star nozzle and pipe a ‘rope’ of cream along the top.
Decorate with the glacé cherries.
Chocolate fondue
225g/8oz plain chocolate
4 tbsp pineapple juice
175g/6oz can evaporated milk
grated rind of 1 orange
sponge finger biscuits and chunks of fruit, to serve
1.
Break the chocolate into squares.
Place them in a bowl over a pan of simmering water.
Add the pineapple juice and stir constantly over the heat until the chocolate melts.
Remove from the heat at once.
2.
Whisk the evaporated milk until it thickens, then fold into the chocolate mixture with the orange rind.
Return the bowl to the heat to warm through.
3.
Serve with the sponge finger biscuits and fruit.
THE FLYING COOK
Kevin Woodford zooms in to solve your culinary crises with more tempting dishes
Kevin Woodford appears on This Morning on ITV, Wednesdays at 11am
Scallops with warm asparagus and chilled oysters
100g/4oz fresh asparagus, trimmed and pared
4 oysters
75g/3oz butter
50g/2oz shallots, finely chopped
225g/8oz fresh scallops
1 tsp chopped fresh parsley
50g/2oz fennel, diced
1 glass white wine
25ml/1 fl oz brandy
2 tsp French mustard
150ml/¼ pint double cream or 150g/5oz yogurt
seasoning
leaves such as frisée and oak leaf, to garnish
1.
Carefully cook the asparagus and keep warm.
Open and clean the oysters and place immediately in the fridge to chill.
2.
Heat the butter in a wide frying pan.
Add the shallots, cook for 1 minute and add the scallops, parsley and fennel.
Season very lightly with salt and freshly ground pepper and cook for 2 minutes, turning the scallops over very carefully.
3.
Add the white wine, brandy and mustard and cook for 1 minute, then pour in the cream or yogurt and bring to the boil.
Adjust the seasoning as necessary, to taste.
4.
Lay the leaves on a large plate, place the scallops and sauce on the leaves and dress with the drained asparagus and chilled oysters.
Passion fruit mousse
3 eggs plus 2 eggs, separated
75g/3oz caster sugar
6 passion fruit, scooped from the skin
2 tsp powdered gelatine dissolved in 2 tbsp warm water
50ml/2fl oz Armagnac or brandy
85ml/3fl oz double cream, lightly whipped
2 passion fruit, to garnish
1.
Place the three whole eggs and two yolks in a large mixing bowl with the sugar.
Whisk over a pan of hot water until the mixture becomes thick.
2.
Add the passion fruit, gelatine and  Armagnac or brandy.
Allow to cool down.
3.
Whisk the egg whites to a soft peak and fold them into the cooled mixture.
Do the same with the whipped cream.
4.
Transfer to small soufflé dishes and refrigerate for at least 3 hours.
5.
Serve either in the little dishes garnished with whipped cream and passion fruit or turn them out into plates.
To do this, dip the moulds in warm water for a few seconds, ease the mousse away from the sides of the moulds and carefully tip out, then garnish as before.
Baked potato skins with a chive and garlic dressing
450g/1lb potato peelings, washed
2tbsp Worcestershire sauce
1 tsp Tabasco sauce
2 tbsp dark soy sauce
1 tbsp vegetable oil
FOR THE DRESSING
175ml/6fl oz single cream or 175g/6oz natural yogurt
2 garlic cloves, crushed
2 tbsp snipped chives
pinch of paprika
juice of ½ lemon
seasoning
1.
Preheat oven to 200C/400F/Gas 6.
Place the sauces and oil in a bowl and mix well.
Season.
Soak the potato skins in this marinade for 15 minutes.
2.
Transfer to a roasting tin and bake for 30 minutes until crispy.
3.
Mix dressing ingredients together and season to taste.
Serve as a dip.
Try these deliciously crunchy potato skins with garlic mayonnaise as an alternative to the chive and garlic dressing.
Yorkshire pudding with curry filling
An easy to prepare dish that makes an unusual combination of tastes and textures — ideal for student cuisine.
Serve with plain boiled rice and raita.
1 tbsp vegetable oil
175g/6oz topside beef, cut into cubes
50g/2oz onion
1 garlic clove, crushed
50g/2oz carrot, diced
50g/2oz celery, sliced
50g/2oz leek, sliced
40g/1½oz curry powder
25g/1oz plain flour
50g/2oz mango chutney
25g/1oz tomato purée
750ml/1¼ pints beef stock
50g/2oz apple, peeled and cut into cubes
15g/½oz desiccated coconut
FOR THE PUDDING
75g/3oz plain flour
1 egg
85ml/3fl oz milk
vegetable oil or beef dripping
seasoning
1.
Heat the oil in a heavy-bottomed pan and add the beef.
Fry, turning frequently to seal the meat.
Add the onion, garlic, carrot, celery and leek and cook for 2 minutes.
2.
Stir in the curry powder and, if necessary, a little flour (only if there appears to be an excessive amount of fat in the pan).
3.
Mix well and add the mango chutney, tomato purée and stock.
Add the apple and coconut, bring to the boil and simmer for 45 minutes to 1 hour.
4.
Preheat the oven to 220C/425F/Gas 7.
Prepare the Yorkshire pudding by sifting the flour into a large bowl.
Add the egg and beat thoroughly.
Slowly beat in the milk, 2fl oz of water and seasoning to taste.
5.
Place a little oil or dripping in a 18cm/7in round cake tin and place in the oven for 10 minutes to heat through.
6.
Add the Yorkshire pudding batter to the tin and leave to cook on the highest shelf for 25–30 minutes until golden brown and crisp.
7.
Remove the Yorkshire pudding from the cake tin.
Transfer to a large serving dish and fill with the hot curry mixture.
Serve at once with chosen accompaniments.
If you don't have all the ingredients for the curry sauce, you could add a can of prepared curry sauce to the beef and chopped vegetables and simmer the same way.
Wild mushrooms in filo
175g/6oz butter
50g/2oz onion, finely chopped
1 large garlic clove, crushed
225g/8oz wild mushrooms, finely chopped
1 tbsp snipped chives
1 tbsp red wine
225g/8oz filo pastry
1 glass white wine
120ml/4fl oz double cream
seasoning
1.
Melt 50g/2oz of the butter.
Add the onion, crushed garlic, mushrooms, chives and red wine and season with salt and pepper.
Cook for 2 minutes.
Strain excessive liquid into a pan and retain the mushrooms and liquid for later use.
2.
Cut the filo pastry into 10cm/4in squares.
Place three on top of each other, lightly buttering each square using 50g/2oz of butter.
3.
Preheat oven to 200C/400F/Gas 6.
Place a spoonful of the mushroom mixture in the centre of each top piece of filo.
Bring all four edges to the top to form a little parcel and squeeze to secure.
4.
Bake for a few minutes, to allow the pastry to just cook.
5.
Place the cooking liquid from the mushrooms on the stove, add the white wine and bring to the boil.
Add the cream and reduce the heat slightly.
Allow to reduce by one third and then remove from the heat and slowly add the remaining butter.
6.
Place sauce on individual plates and set parcels on top.
Vegetable shashlik
selection of vegetables, eg 1 aubergine, 2 green peppers, 1 red pepper, 4 tomatoes, 8 mushrooms, 2 courgettes 120ml/4fl oz vegetable oil
FOR THE SAUCE
50g/2oz butter
100g/4oz onion, chopped
2 garlic cloves, crushed
1 tbsp chopped oregano
½ bay leaf
450g/1lb tomatoes, skinned, seeded and chopped
1 tbsp tomato purée
1 glass white wine
seasoning
225g/8oz cooked basmati rice, to serve
1.
Cut the vegetables into uniform size.
Thread them onto skewers and brush with the oil.
2.
Heat the butter and add the onion, garlic and oregano and bay leaf.
Cook for 2 minutes.
3.
Add the tomatoes, tomato purée and wine, season and gently cook for 5 minutes.
4.
Grill the kebabs and place on the hot rice to serve.
DAYTIME UK
Rosemary Moon cooks up warming family fare to suit every occasion — from casseroles to crumbles
Rosemary Moon presents cookery demonstrations every morning on Daytime UK, BBC1 at 9.25am
Rhubarb and ginger crunch
100g/4oz butter
225g/8oz gingernuts, finely crushed
450g/1lb forced rhubarb
grated rind and juice of 1 orange
2 eggs
50g/2oz caster sugar
2 tbsp cornflour
½tsp ground ginger
1 orange, segmented, and a little orange rind cut into strips, to
decorate
1.
Melt the butter in a small pan.
Add the gingernuts and stir well until all the butter is absorbed.
Place mixture into a lightly greased 23cm/9in round flan dish and press the mixture over the bottom and up the sides.
2.
Cut the rhubarb into 2.5cm/1in lengths.
Place in a pan without water and cook gently until the rhubarb falls into a pulp.
Add the grated orange rind and juice, eggs, sugar, cornflour and ginger.
Cook over a gentle heat, stirring until the mixture turns thick.
3.
Spoon the mixture into the prepared flan case and chill until set.
Decorate with orange segments and rind, if you like.
Dales plait
175g/6oz hard margarine
250g/9oz strong plain flour
2 tbsp sesame seeds
pinch of salt
FOR THE FILLING
250g/9oz minced pork or pork sausagemeat
1 tbsp grated onion
250g/9oz minced ham
1 tsp chopped fresh sage or ½tsp dried sage
2 tbsp brown breadcrumbs
1 egg, beaten
seasoning
1.
Place the margarine in a freezer or ice-box for 1 hour.
2.
Place the flour, sesame seeds and salt in a large mixing bowl.
Grate the frozen margarine into the flour (hold in a piece of foil if it becomes sticky).
3.
Lightly mix the margarine into the flour with a knife, making sure all the margarine is well coated.
Add about five or six tablespoons of cold water to mix to a soft, but not sticky dough.
Refrigerate dough for 1 hour, wrapped in foil.
4.
If using minced pork, cook gently in a pan with the onion and 1–2 tablespoons of oil for 10 minutes; cool.
Combine the sausagemeat or pork with the onion, ham, dried sage, breadcrumbs and seasoning.
5.
Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/Gas 6.
To make the plait, roll the pastry out to a rectangle 35x28cm/14x11in.
Place the filling down the centre and make diagonal cuts down each side about 5cm/2in apart.
(Don't cut right up to the filling.)
6.
Brush the top of each strip with beaten egg.
Cross the pastry strips alternately over the filling to form a plait.
Lift the plait onto a greased baking sheet with a fish slice.
Brush with egg and bake for 30–35 minutes until crisp and golden brown.
Fish casserole
450g/1lb cod or haddock, skinned
250g/9oz smoked haddock, skinned
300g/11oz can sweetcorn kernels, drained
100g/4oz peeled prawns (optional)
FOR THE SAUCE
40g/1½oz butter or margarine
40g/1½oz plain flour
300ml/½ pint milk
1 tsp English mustard
1 tbsp lemon juice
4 tbsp soured cream
2 tbsp chopped fresh parsley
seasoning
1.
Preheat the oven to 190C/375F/Gas 5.
Cut the fish into 2.5cm/1in cubes.
Place in a shallow casserole or glass ovenproof dish.
Add the sweetcorn and prawns, if using.
2.
Make the sauce by melting the butter or margarine in a pan.
Add the flour.
Cook for minute then gradually add the milk, stirring well.
Bring slowly to the boil, stirring until thick.
Stir in the mustard, lemon juice, soured cream, parsley and seasoning.
Pour the sauce over the fish.
3.
Cover the casserole dish and cook for 35–40 minutes or until the fish flakes easily.
Garnish with whole prawns and a sprig of parsley if you have any left.
To vary the casserole, add 3–4 prepared scallops or a small jar of drained mussels.
Warm winter salad
Pep up jaded palates with this unusual vegetable dish
1 small onion, finely chopped
1 garlic clove, crushed
25g/1oz butter
4 tbsp olive oil
grated rind and 250ml/¼ pint juice of 2 large oranges
1 tbsp lemon juice
1 tsp clear honey
½ tbsp chopped fresh parsley
250g/9oz carrots
250g/9oz leeks
350g/12oz celeriac or turnips
chopped fresh parsley or coriander, to garnish
1 orange, segmented, to garnish
1.
Cook the onion and garlic in the butter and two tablespoons of olive oil until softened.
2.
Remove from the heat.
Add the orange rind, orange juice, lemon juice, honey, parsley and the remaining olive oil.
Leave to cool, then strain.
3.
Cut the vegetables into matchsticks.
Add some lemon juice to celeriac and cover with cold water to prevent browning.
Drain before cooking.
4.
Steam the vegetables until just tender, or cook briefly in boiling, salted water.
Gently reheat the dressing and spoon over.
Garnish with parsley or coriander and orange segments.
Pickled herrings
3 whole herrings, boned
1 small onion
FOR THE MARINADE
150ml/¼ pint dry cider
150ml/¼ pint cider vinegar
1 tsp soft brown sugar
2 cloves
1 bay leaf
few black peppercorns
good pinch of allspice
few shakes of sea salt
black pepper
1.
Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/Gas 4.
Place all the marinade ingredients in a pan.
Bring to the boil and simmer very gently for 5 minutes to allow the flavours to develop.
2.
Place the herrings flesh side uppermost on a board.
Slice the onion into rings and lay half of the rings along the fish.
Roll up carefully from head to tail and secure with one or two cocktail sticks.
3.
Place rolled herrings in an ovenproof dish and pour over the marinade.
Add the rest of the onion rings.
4.
Cover with foil.
Cook in the centre of the oven for about 25 minutes.
Leave to cool in the marinade, then chill.
Serve with crusty rolls and salad.
The herrings will keep for 4–5 days in the fridge.
Rhubarb orange crumble
750g/1½lb early rhubarb
grated rind and juice of 1 large orange
25g/1oz soft light brown sugar
100g/4oz plain flour
50g/2oz wholemeal flour or oatmeal
75g/3oz butter or margarine
40g/1½oz icing sugar, sifted
¼tsp ground cinnamon
1.
Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/Gas 6.
Cut the rhubarb into chunks, then place with orange rind, juice and sugar in a greased 1.5 litre/2½ pint ovenproof dish.
2.
Place both the flours in a mixing bowl.
Rub in the butter or margarine until the mixture resembles fine breadcrumbs.
Stir in the icing sugar and the ground cinnamon.
3.
Sprinkle the crumble mixture over the rhubarb and gently smooth the top.
Bake for about 30 minutes until the topping is crunchy and golden.
Serve hot with fromage frais, custard, yogurt or cream.
MY FAVOURITE MENU
TONY DE ANGELI
‘My parents were Italians who came to England as children.
My father was the head waiter at The Savoy, my mother opened one of the first milk bars in Soho, and my grandmother was a vegetable cook at London's Park Lane Hotel.
I also lived in France for several years — this background has definitely given me my love of food.
My family constantly warned me not to go into catering.
‘You're treated like soup — heated up, stirred around and then thrown out,’ they said.
I took their advice, but I must have had an inclination towards food to have ended up as I have.
I love cooking at home, although Susan is such a good cook that I tend to fulfil the role of kitchen assistant.
I like to think I can do what she does, but perhaps not as well.
We are totally in tune and I don't interfere.
I carve the meat and prepare vegetables and stuffings — all my life I have been preparing things for somebody!
We cook Italian and French dishes, but we enjoy all types of food — we have no ethnic preferences.
What I'd like to know is, what's wrong with English food?
The English are the most self-loathing race I can imagine.
I feel that for a country with so much to offer, it's a great pity that people do not take more advantage of what's available.
I am a firm lover of simple meat dishes — my all-time favourite is garlic lamb.
And I do prefer slow cooking methods.
If it's chicken, I like it to be cooked in a clay pot, and as a treat I think a rib of beef is lovely.
It has to be cooked for a long time because of its size, but it will still be pink in the middle and have a succulence to it.
We like to entertain, but these days we wouldn't necessarily offer meat.
One of the greatest things that I have become aware of is that if you have eight people to dinner, one or two of them will be vegetarians.
The dining room in our town house is smaller than the one we had in our big, Victorian family house, so we don't hold as many large dinner parties as we used to.
When we finish our house in Sussex, we will do more entertaining.
I have always wanted a dining room under glass, so we are having a conservatory built along with a super, big kitchen complete with labour-saving appliances, including a microwave, which I find particularly good for cooking fish; I don't believe in ‘sweatshop’ kitchens.
We have two grown-up children and one grandchild and I enjoy big family gatherings — the Italian influence again — with everyone seated at a round table.
Meals are not just about eating, they are about talking and not wishing to hurry into another room for coffee.
I only drink wine and I love champagne.
I really can't stand the taste of whisky or brandy.
If it's right for the meal, I would probably serve champagne all the way through.
In fact, I cannot drink champagne without having food with it — Lanson Black Label is my preferred ‘standard’ accompaniment.
I am afraid I snack.
I eat tremendous amounts of bread and jam and bowls of cornflakes with cold milk — delicious!
I also have a very sweet tooth.
Nobody can match the English when it comes to puddings.
The French may have their fancy patisseries, but give me an English pudding any day.
My idea of heaven is a meal starting with champagne and smoked salmon and then followed by a whole series of pudding  trolleys rolling up one by one!’
Tony de Angeli talked to Sian Kinsey
Tony de Angeli has the ear of millions each Thursday as presenter of Food News, his slot on BBC Radio 2's Jimmy Young Show .
He is also managing editor of the trade magazine The Grocer and author of Great Meat Cookery .
He and his wife Susan live in London and are renovating a house in Sussex.