

update
Norman Lamont's pre-Christmas announcement of a moratorium on Stamp Duty levied on the purchase of property is welcome news for homebuyers.
Stamp Duty is charged at one per cent, and the money has to be found up-front, so anyone buying a property costing £60,000 will save £600, which can't be bad.
The Chancellor has set a ceiling of £250,000.
Properties costing more will still have to pay the tax.
However, those who really need help, including all first-time buyers, will benefit from the Government's give-away.
The moratorium on Stamp Duty will last until August 1992, by when it is hoped the market will have received a kick-start and will begin moving again.
The Chancellor has been able to offer this help because he has found some extra money in the Exchequer's coffers.
However, since Stamp Duty has already been removed from share dealing, why has he set a moratorium on house purchase?
Shouldn't the removal of Stamp Duty become a permanent feature?
ANDREW STUART EDITOR
Your Guide to the Magazine
Which Mortgage has been designed to make the job of finding the right mortgage for your particular needs as easy as possible.
Although you may be tempted towards a lender by the promise of an initial discount, a far better way of telling how competitive they are is by looking at the history of what borrowers have been charged over the last few years.
We have made a survey of the overall mortgage costs in the last one, three and five years.
The results make startling reading — you can save up to £1,000 a year on a £100,000 loan, simply by choosing the right lender.
Turn straight away to page 6 to read all about Savings and Loans.
As the date of the General Election approaches, we look back at the Tories' record on housing and mortgage rates.
After 13 years in power, have the Conservatives fulfilled all their promises?
Find out in the article starting on page 42.
At one time, young professionals could borrow as much as they liked to buy their home, on the promise of their growing salary and sure prospects.
Nowadays, although lenders are not quite so lenient, professionals can still have their pick of a whole range of mortgage products.
Find out what's on offer on page 15.
Understanding the ins and outs of all your mortgage options is never simple, but we have made it as easy as possible in the comprehensive Money Matters section starting on page 20.
If you are in the market for a new home, read the round-up on page 47 and 48, which gives details of new home developments across the country.
For a fully comprehensive guide to moving, turn to the special section starting on page 35.
Free Admission
Readers of this month's Which Mortgage are being offered free admission to the National Homebuyer Show and Overseas Property Exhibition, the country's largest residential property exhibition, which this year takes place at the Wembley Exhibition Centre from 21 to 23 February 1992.
The coupon below entitles two people to attend the show free of charge — the normal admission price is £2 per person.
The exhibition is open from 10am to 6pm daily, and there will be 150 companies offering advice on all aspects of house purchase.
Exhibitors include housebuilders, estate agents, building societies, brokers, solicitors, conveyancers, surveyors, removal firms and package build specialists.
Which Mortgage Hotline
For the up-to-minute mortgage information or if you have any enquiries about how to buy your home and require general advice, telephone Which Mortgage information service on 071 833 5566.
The service is available on weekdays from 10am to 5pm.
Competition winner
In the November 1991 issue we ran a competition for five lucky winners to receive Crosby front doors — the total value of the prizes is worth up to £1,000.
The winners are Mr Berry of Burgess Hill, Mr McCombe of Maghull, Mrs Misrahi of Tottenham, Mr Johnston of Aberdeen and Mr McLaren of Edinburgh.
Savings and loans
All lenders are NOT the same!
The Which Mortgage survey of the true costs of a mortgage shows that there are real savings to be made simply by choosing your lender carefully.
When you are weighing up which lender to go to for your loan, you ignore their differences at your peril.
It is all too easy to assume that since they all offer the same types of mortgages there is little to choose between them.
Jumping to the conclusion that the biggest must therefore be the best could be a mistake.
In fact, there is a wealth of difference between the lenders.
And our survey shows up the most important variation — the overall costs to you, the customer.
We asked all the lenders to calculate exactly what its individual borrowers have had to pay out on endowment mortgages of £30,000, £60,000 and £100,000 before tax relief is taken into consideration.
We chose these three prices because most larger loan discounts come into force when you borrow more than £60,000 or £100,000.
The lenders were requested to work out these costs over three periods —one year, three years and five years.
Although most borrowers take out a loan over 25 years, five years is the average amount of time homeowners spend in one property before they move to another.
Consequently, this category is a vital one.
The results were startling.
Borrowers of £100,000 can pay up to £1,000 a year over the odds if they chose the wrong lender five years ago.
And it is not just those with larger loans who can make great savings.
Even with a £30,000 loan, a customer could have saved up to £2,600 over the last five years.
That is no mean pickings — it is the price of a brand new Armitage Shanks bathroom suite, or a two week cruise for two in the Caribbean on the Cunard Countess.
So why do the figures vary so enormously?
Especially when all the lenders seem to have roughly the same mortgage interest rate on offer to borrowers most of the time?
The mortgage market has become a more competitive arena in the years since the early 1980s.
Many new lenders have entered the fray — High Street banks, foreign banks, specialist lenders and insurance companies.
The result has been that discount deals have proliferated.
Borrowers are bombarded with all types of special schemes, designed to save them money.
But many borrowers choose an appealing discount deal as the sole criterion when they take out a loan.
And yet this does not automatically mean they will be quids in.
The reasons for this phenomenon is as follows: firstly, each lender has its own system of calculating gross interest and secondly, when base rates rise or fall, lenders are at liberty to delay or hurry up passing on the benefits/bad news to their customers.
Add these facts to the evidence displayed in the charts section (pages 65 to 73) at the back of the magazine) of the variety of interest rates charged by the lenders and it is no wonder that a £100,000 borrower can save the price of a new car simply by doing a little homework.
Our survey evoked responses from 50 lenders.
Those who refused to give the figures ranged from tiny building societies, who simply did not have the technology to work out the sum, to large multi-national banks with copious staff and computers to hand.
Barclays Bank would not divulge its figures despite repeated requests over a period of three weeks.
Its excuse was that it did not have a computer programme that would fit the bill.
However, its subsidiary, Barclays Direct Mortgage Services, was able to come up with the sums in a matter of days.
You should draw your own conclusions.
Small is beautiful
Predictably, the smaller building societies figure prominently in the upper echelons of the result tables.
Many of them, such as the Hanley Economic, Darlington, Harpenden, Chesham, Vernon and Clay Cross, pride themselves on the low interest rates they offer discerning borrowers.
But some big names have crept in as well— Abbey National, the Woolwich, Northern Rock, National & Provincial and the Leeds have all demonstrated a commitment to keeping overall costs as low as possible.
One society which has featured for the first time in this year's results is the Standard building society.
But before you get on the phone to the North Shields headquarters, be warned: the Standard will only lend to those living in the North East and as far south as Hartlepool.
It might be worth moving there, though.
Of course, the lenders cannot all be the cheapest.
One building society which serves a special purpose to its customers, even if it is more expensive, is the Ecology Building Society.
Its unique policy of lending only on houses that encourage self-sufficiency and homes that promote a saving in non-renewable energy makes it worth every penny.
While this survey is an invaluable tool when you are weighing up the pros and cons of each lender, it provides no guarantee that the lenders who have performed well will continue to do so.
And, as the Ecology proves, money isn't everything.
It may be worth paying a bit extra for luxuries such as a personal service or a special lending facility.
And, of course, you can make sure you avoid all the highs and lows of variable interest rates by opting for a fixed or capped rate loan.
However, when you are choosing a lender for a standard variable mortgage, make sure you use the following charts, in conjunction with the details of special deals regularly featured at the back of the magazine.
There can be no better indication of the lenders' competitiveness.
For full results of the survey turn to pages 8, 10 and 13.
THE PROFESSIONALS' LOAN
If you are a professional person, you will have no trouble getting a mortgage.
Or will you?
Joanne Tearle finds that the blue chip loan comes in many guises and choosing one may be your greatest problem.
What makes a professional person?
Once upon a time, the title was only given to those with a good handful of letters after their name.
Then, it was granted to a special breed of psychopath with a penchant for leather jackets and flared trousers.
More recently, the lenders became interested in the professional.
Anyone who could name their career and promise a steadily rising salary could be a prospective candidate for a mortgage.
In the late eighties, this could mean almost unlimited credit, in some cases the facility to borrow as much as four times their annual income to buy a house.
Of course, the mortgage market today is neither so generous nor so vague.
But it still remains as hard to pin down a professional.
And there are still just as many options open to them when looking for a loan.
To decide which one is right for you, you have to consider more than just the job you do.
Your age, your ambitions, and your career potential are just some of the criteria that should be taken into consideration.
And remember, just because a lender brings out a loan with the ‘professional’ as its target market, this does not mean that it is necessarily the right one for you, no matter what your taste in trousers.
HIGH FLYERS
1.
SARAH BEETON — SOLICITOR
Three years ago, Sarah became a fully qualified solicitor.
Her salary has been growing to the point where she feels she can afford to buy a home and it promises to climb much further over the next few years.
Sarah falls into the classic professional bracket.
As such, she qualifies for The Professional Plan that is on offer from BNP.
The traditional careers of doctor, dentist, lawyer, solicitor, accountant, actuary, vet, structural engineer and pharmacist are united by the certainty that their salaries will continue to rise steadily until they reach the top of their professions.
BNP will offer high income multiples of up to four times the first income (which has to be that of the professional) plus three times the second.
Sarah needs to borrow £100,000 and her salary is presently £27,000, so the BNP plan is ideal.
The beauty of the plan is all the options that are available with it.
A discount of 2.5 per cent is given on the variable rate, currently 11.85 per cent, until June 1992.
A LIBOR loan, a fixed rate and a five year stabilised schemes are other alternatives.
Borrowers can choose from a whole range of repayment vehicles — endowment, pension, PEP, interest-only, repayment loans, any one or a combination are acceptable without any loading on the rate.
2.
MARTIN ARNOLD — ADVERTISING SALESMAN
It is relatively recently that Martin has been classified as a professional.
His salary of £40,000 will cover the £100,000 loan on the house he has his eye on, even using standard income multiples, and his father will lend him the deposit.
But he is already top salesman in his company and dreams of being able to give it all up to start his own small business.
With no mapped out career path, his options are more limited than the young doctor or dentist.
With his particular ambitions, he would do well to consider how best to shorten his mortgage term.
This way he will not be stuck with a loan around his neck when he would rather be doing his own thing.
One way of doing this is by taking a unit-linked endowment.
This is an insurance policy that buys funds which are invested on the stock market.
If they do well, the loan could be paid off early.
However, there is a slim chance that they will not perform well enough, in which case there will be a surplus to pay at the end of term.
If Martin is prepared to take the risk, he could be quids in.
One of the first-time buyer discounts that Martin should consider is from Abbey National.
A cut of 1.5 per cent until January 1993 can be combined with an indefinite larger loan discount that is a full one per cent off the variable rate — a real bonus.
(The Abbey's building and contents insurance must be taken out to qualify for the first time buyer's discount).
FAMILY FAVOURITES
3.
GEOFFREY DUNNE — ACCOUNTANT
As a fully qualified professional, Geoffrey is eligible for a scheme that will advance him a larger loan for his new house than normal income multiples would allow.
However, Geoffrey is almost at the top of his salary scale and does not want extra commitments .
He has one small child and wants to move to a bigger home in order to have some more.
With household costs inevitably rising, the last thing he wants is a larger mortgage than he can reasonably afford .
In fact, he would be much better taking a wholly conservative approach to his new mortgage and plump for a fixed rate .
With interest rates in doubt over the next 12 months at least, a five, seven, even 10 year fixed rate would provide the peace of mind the father of a young family needs .
Although he is currently with the Halifax, as an existing borrower he is not allowed to apply for the fixed rate currently on offer from this society .
A change of lender is the only solution .
Leeds' Permanent building society's new range of fixed rates allows borrowers to set their rate for three to five years at 10.6% or between 20–25 years at 11.25% .
4.
JOHN MORRIS — COMPANY DIRECTOR
Happy with his home, his high-powered job and his not inconsiderable salary, John's only ambition is to own a holiday cottage in France .
He has lived in a large house in Buckinghamshire for several years .
He paid £55,000 for it in 1981 and it is now worth over £150,000 .
A remortgage would be the simplest step to make his dream come true .
A remortgage is one of the cheapest ways of borrowing money and the money raised by this money can be used for a host of purposes.
However, although it is the ideal course of action for John — allowing him to take advantage of some of the excellent schemes around at the moment as well as releasing cash that has been building up in his home over the years — he should look out for excessive costs that a remortgage can incur.
Solicitor's fees, valuation fees and arrangement fees all have to be paid .
Fortunately, John's present lender, Bradford and Bingley does not charge a redemption penalty, although this charge can be an expensive shock to some remortgagors .
Abbey National has woken up to the extra expense that a remortgage brings and is offering £200 towards legal fees on completion .
If John decides he wants to remortgage for more than £100,000, he will qualify for the Abbey's one per cent larger loan discount .
FIRST TIMERS
LINDA MERILL — LIBRARIAN
Although Linda is older than many first time buyers, there are still plenty of options open to her.
Her salary is not excessive so she is setting herself a strict budget for her homebuying.
Her age makes her the ideal candidate for a pension mortgage.
Younger first time buyers would find such a scheme an unnecessary burden since, presuming that they retired at the standard age, they would have to continue paying their mortgage for 30 or 40 years before the pension plan matured to pay it off.
Another plus of the pension mortgage is that you can claim tax relief on your pension contributions.
Undoubtedly, a fixed rate mortgage would also appeal to Linda's cautious nature.
Many fixed rate schemes allow you to use a pension plan as a repayment vehicle.
The Newcastle's cap and collar mortgage, where the interest cannot rise about 10.75 per cent or fall below 9.5 per cent for a full seven years is a good bet, especially when you consider that over the last 10 years, the average interest rate has been around 12 per cent.
Should Linda want to move over the next seven years, she does not have to worry because the loan is fully portable.
Consequently, she can carry the scheme over to her new mortgage.
The only stipulation the Newcastle makes is that borrowers take out the society's Homecover buildings and contents insurance.
6.
MELANEE TIMMS — MODEL
Melanee does not have a fixed career pattern planned ahead,(models acknowledge that they have a short shelflife).
But she currently has a steady good income with a reputable model agency and wants to buy a flat as a first time buyer.
With a probable career change in the future, Melanee would be wise to limit her borrowing as much as possible.
Fortunately, she has saved a large deposit to put down on a flat so she only has to borrow £45,000.
Since Melanee wants a loan of less than 70 per cent of the value of her first home, she can have the pick of the first time buyer discounts.
An especially good short term one is on offer from the Yorkshire building society.
This society will knock 2.55 per cent off its variable rate for six months.
In the longer term discount range, Melanee could choose the Halifax, which is offering a first time buyer offer of 1.5 per cent until the end of January 1993.
Alternatively, the Lambeth offers an exceptional 2.25 per cent off for one year for loans of less than 60 per cent.
Money MATTERS
The next few pages tell you everything you'll ever need to know about mortgages.
But if you are a first-time buyer (or need to refresh your memory with the basics) start here…
INDEX
20–21 The beginner's guide to endowment and repayment loans
22 How to choose a lender AND a discount
25 Common problems when getting a loan
27 How to get money from a remortgage
28 Risks and rewards for high-flying borrowers
31 Your options when money gets tight
32 Find out how much you can afford to borrow
BEGINNERS LEVEL
Do a little homework before you put yourself at the mercy of a mortgage lender.
It could save you thousands of pounds, not to mention hours of anguish.
This is no small claim.
If you ignore your options now and simply walk into your nearest bank or building society, you could regret it later.
Nowadays, there is no excuse for getting into trouble.
Buying a home, although a serious business, can be straightforward, even fun.
All it takes is a little forward-planning.
Savings and Loans
If you are in no hurry to own your home, take a year out and start saving.
All the costs of getting a mortgage, moving and setting up home can run into thousands.
If you cannot pay cash for these extras, they will have to be added to your loan.
That way you will be paying interest on them for many years.
Reckon up
If you cannot wait any longer to buy, the next step is to work out what you can afford to borrow, and from there the likely price range of your new house.
Filling in the two charts on page 32 gives the best indication of what you can afford.
Most lenders will advance three times your annual income (some go to 3.5 times, others limits it to 2.5).
If there are two of you buying, you can borrow 2.5 times your combined income.
Once the lender has decided that you can afford to repay it, you agree on the payback period, or term, which is usually 25 years.
You make monthly payments until the end of the term.
But, of course, there are important decisions to be made before you take out your loan.
And the first one you will encounter as a first-time buyer is the choice between the two basic types of loan — repayment and endowment.
Repayment Mortgage
Simplicity is the essence of the repayment loan.
As with any transaction in which you borrow money, you are charged interest.
With a repayment mortgage, you pay back a monthly sum which is not only a proportion of the outstanding debt but also interest on the remainder.
If you take out a £25,000 loan over 25 years, each year you will pay back a proportion of the sum borrowed plus interest on whatever is left over.
The rate of interest is set by the lender and is governed by a host of economic factors, all widely publicised in the national press.
When you pay interest on a mortgage, the amount payable on the first £30,000 is eligible for tax relief, although as the interest makes up a smaller proportion of your payments, the tax relief also lessens.
The attractions of your monthly payments dwindling over the years are obvious.
But there are drawbacks to the repayment mortgage.
It has to be paid off in full when you move and a new one taken out.
A new loan means a new term, i.e. another 25 years of monthly payments.
However, term periods are flexible within a repayment loan.
This flexibility can also help if you are having trouble meeting your monthly payments.
Extending the term by five years or so means you have to pay out less each month.
To ensure that the loan will be repaid if you should  die before the term is up, it is essential to take out a mortgage protection policy (also called term assurance).
A few pounds a month will guarantee the loan is repaid if the worst happens.
Endowment Mortgage
This type makes up 70 per cent of new loans, although it was almost unheard of a decade ago.
Your monthly payments are solely made up of interest: you do not repay a penny of the capital sum.
Concurrently with these interest charges, you contribute a monthly sum to an endowment policy.
Taken out with an insurance company, this policy is invested on your behalf.
Finally, at the end of term, the profits are realised, paying off the loan.
It is also hoped that there will be a surplus of profit, allowing you to take a tax free lump sum.
While it is not guaranteed, it is this possibility that attracts most borrowers to the endowment loan.
No extra insurance is needed with an endowment: life cover is built in, guaranteeing to pay off your debt if you die.
As with repayment loans, the interest you are paying is eligible for tax relief (see under MIRAS on page 25).
You can take your endowment loan with you when you move, topping up the policy to cover the extra amount.
The 25 year term is fixed — there is no chance that you will still be paying off your loan into your retirement, as is the possibility with a repayment type loan.
Over the first years or so of paying into an endowment fund, most of your money will be paid straight to the lender or broker who arranged the policy.
Since your fund is initially penniless, if you cash it in during this period (if you decide not to have an endowment mortgage any more) you will get little or no return for your investment.
The endowment is not the loan for everyone — elderly borrowers or people with a serious medical condition, such as diabetes, would be charged too high premiums to make this type of mortgage worthwhile.
There are several types of endowment to choose from.
Turn to page 25 for a fuller explanation.
WHICH IS CHEAPER?
Repayment
Anthony Hayward, 27, bought his flat in Putney in November 1988 for £58,000.
His loan, from a building society, was for £50,000.
He chose a repayment style mortgage because: ‘I didn't want any complicated insurance product governing my future — the stock market crash of 1987 made me suspicious of all those sort of schemes.’
His monthly payments have got slightly smaller in the last three years.
‘I only get tax relief on the first £30,000, so that has remained the same.
But seeing the debt on your house reduce is a very satisfying feeling.’
Endowment
Paul Gordon, also 27, partly financed the purchase of his house in Chatham with an inheritance.
Consequently, he only had to borrow £50,000 from a building society to buy a £85,000 home.
He likes the flexibility of his endowment loan: ‘I will probably move in a couple of years, and then who knows?
I don't want to have to take out a new mortgage every time I move up the ladder.
With an endowment, you can top it up to cover the extra borrowing and it will still be repaid 25 years after you bought your very first house.
This system seems more sensible in this day and age.’
Summary
Both these buyers have sound reasons for their choice.
But who is saving the most money?
Comparisons are difficult.
When interest rates are low, the endowment loan becomes more cost effective and may allow you to pay it off early.
Repayment loans seem cheaper when rates are high.
The only way to compare them is to calculate what they would be paying over the whole 25 years if neither of them moved from their present home.
We also have to assume an average interest rate of 12 per cent over the 25 years.
TYPICAL COSTS OVER 25 YEARS
Repayment Loan £142,280.53
Endowment Loan £147,527.2
LOAN ADVICE
Just as there are hundreds of lenders to choose from, when you take an endowment loan you also have to decide on an insurance company who can provide you with a policy.
Few people feel qualified to choose from the vast array of companies, so many leave the decision to their lender or a specialist financial adviser.
Before you wash your hands of the affair, find out if the lender or adviser is tied or independent — it could make all the difference.
Tied agents have made an arrangement with an insurance company to only recommend their products.
Independent advisers are bound by the Financial Services Act to pick the best insurance product for each case, choosing from all the products.
Independent advice from the top lenders is rare — currently only NatWest and Bradford & Bingley offer it.
Most independent mortgage brokers will display a FIMBRA logo, but also look out for signs of the regulatory bodies SIB and RPB.
Although most borrowers take out a loan over 25 years, five years is the average amount of time borrowers spend in one property before they move to another.
Consequently, this category is a vital one.
INTERMEDIATE LEVEL
Now you have got the basics under your belt, read on to find out all your discount options.
BUDGET SCHEMES
This is a common way of paying off a mortgage — 70 per cent of the Halifax's borrowers are on a budget plan.
Such a scheme does not save you money.
Neither will it cost you any more than the normal variable scheme.
What it does is annually adjust your interest rate taking into account the previous year's rate changes.
This means that your monthly payments are the same for 12 months at a time, unlike the standard variable rate, which goes up and down as base rates change.
While this saves the lenders thousands on administration bills, it does tend to take the thrill out of falling interest rates.
Borrowers on a budget plan have to wait till the year is up before they can reap the benefits.
Many lenders automatically put their borrowers on a budget plan without asking them their preferences at the outset.
If you want to stick to the variable rate, make sure you specify at the start of the loan.
The array of discounts on offer from the lenders is breath-taking.
First-time buyer deals usually offer a straight interest rate cut from the lender's standard variable rate for a specified period.
Several lenders also offer a discount for larger loans, which in some cases lasts indefinitely.
There are many other deals on offer.
But they do not all offer equal value for money.
If in doubt, always contact an independent financial adviser.
Fixed rates
The variable rate, which all lenders charge, goes up and down.
In contrast, a fixed rate mortgage has a constant rate of interest which is charged over a specified period.
By fixing your rate, you know exactly what you will be paying for the next months.
The risk is that interest rates will drop below the level you are fixed at.
If you want to get out of the scheme, you will be charged three month's interest payments as a penalty.
PROS
Peace of mind — you are certain of your payments
Helps budgeting
CONS
May turn out more expensive than standard rates
Early redemption penalties
Capped Rates
Similar to a fixed rate loan in that you have a ceiling above which your payments will not rise.
But if interest rates fall below the capped rate, your rate will decrease with them.
Heavy redemption penalties also apply; but you are unlikely to want to redeem such a good deal.
PROS
You can't lose out
CONS
Early redemption penalties
Low start
A low start scheme allows you to reduce your monthly payments in the early years of the loan.
For example, some offer a 30 per cent reduction in the first year, after which your payments increase by five per cent a year.
Thus after year six, your monthly payments are higher than the standard rate demands.
PROS
Allows you to borrow more
Less outgoings at first CONS
Expensive in the long run
Early redemption penalties
Deferred
Although you pay less interest in the first years of a deferred interest mortgage, you are being charged the prevailing rate during the deferred term.
Meanwhile the difference is added to your loan.
Consequently, at the end of the deferred term, you will have a larger outstanding loan to pay off.
PROS
Costs less at first CONS
Increases your debt
Stabilised
Your payments are fixed at a specific rate, but you are charged at a variable rate.
When the time comes to settle up (this can be after 25 years) you may owe money or have made some.
PROS
Helps budgeting
Can reduce your outgoings
CONS
Can increase your debt
THE LENDERS
Building societies are the traditional source for a homeloan.
Largely relying on their savers for their funds, they have to borrow from the City when savings run low.
This self-reliance gives them a competitive edge when the base rate (set by the Bank of England), is high, while when it is low, societies can switch to these wholesale funds to cut costs.
Also in the market are banks which are a good idea if you want to keep all your financial affairs under one roof.
Not so high profile are the centralised lenders, who operate through mortgage brokers and insurance companies.
Their number includes many foreign banks and specialist lenders.
Their lending terms are strict (100 per cent loans are rare).
Their money is largely from wholesale sources so interest rates are uncompetitive during times of high base rates.
Insurance companies offer mortgages from banks and building societies, as well as their own brand.
Estate agents also offer a mortgage service.
But they are usually tied to a particular building society or insurance company and so will only arrange loans with them.
Finally, brokers scour the market for the best deal.
Not everyone is a first-time buyer with a deposit already saved in the bank.
Here are some of the complications that may arise and how to overcome them.
100 per cent You may have seen the home of your dreams and not have a penny saved up to pay for it.
If this is the case, you will need a 100 per cent loan.
These are harder to come by now than in the boom period of the late 1980s.
But it is the lenders' generosity with their funds during that era that has been partly blamed for the continuing rise in the number of arrears and repossession cases.
However, there are still a few lenders who will consider 100 per cent of the property's purchase price.
Most are building societies.
Always find out whether you will be charged a higher interest rate for the privilege.
Other lenders may advance 95 per cent of the purchase price and then top it up with a five per cent loan from an insurance company.
This second loan will incur inflated interest charges.
Non status
Also known as self-certified loans, these mortgages are for the self-employed, or those who, for one reason or another, cannot supply an employer's reference.
This reference is usually required by lenders as proof of earnings with which to support your loan.
If you wish to self-certify your earnings, you will have to supply accounts for the last year.
If you are applying for a loan with your own bank, this may not be necessary.
Since there are no employer's references to be sought, self-certified loans are quicker to process, often taking only a few days.
Consequently, they are sometimes taken by employed people who wish to hurry things through.
However, those who self-certify their loans may be charged a slightly increased rate.
TYPES OF ENDOWMENT
There are several types of endowment.
Both with-profits and non-profit endowments guarantee to pay off your loan and provide built in life cover.
But only the with- profits type will pay out a tax free lump sum at the end of the term.
However, both are expensive.
To bring costs down, an element of risk is introduced.
A low-cost with-profits, makes no guarantees to repay your loan.
There is a slim chance that you will have to make up the shortfall.
A lump sum on top is a more likely outcome.
With a low-start, low-cost with-profits endowment, payments are reduced in the first few years, and the difference has to be made up in the remaining period.
The high risk option is the unit-linked endowment.
Your premiums buy units in funds invested on the stock market.
If the funds do well, you could pay off your mortgage early.
However, you will have to pay if they do badly.
Unless you opt for the insurance company's managed fund, the safer option, you will need to employ a professional adviser.
COMMON QUESTIONS
1.
What is APR?
All lenders must quote an Annual Percentage Rate , as well as their standard interest rate, which is designed to help you compare different schemes.
There are many ways of calculating the APR, but it should always take into account upfront fees, which building societies don't usually charge.
2.
What is an MIG?
The Mortgage Indemnity Guarantee is a charge for which you should be prepared when you take out your loan if it is for more than 70 or 80 per cent of the property's value.
Calculated at around four per cent of the loan over the 70 or 80 per cent, the money is used by the lender to take out an insurance policy which covers them if you should default.
3.
What is MIRAS?
Most mortgages qualify for tax relief.
Mortgage Interest Relief at Source is a system through which the lender takes the tax relief into account when calculating your monthly payments.
Borrowers whose lenders do not offer MIRAS have to claim interest relief from the Inland Revenue, and their tax codes are adjusted accordingly.
DESIGNER MORTGAGE
Sheila Hay runs a small print restoring business in Gloucester.
When she decided to buy a bigger house, she approached a financial adviser about a self-certified mortgage.
He put her on to Mortgage Business, a company which offers high equity loans for the self-employed.
She wanted a 65 per cent loan to buy her £110,000 home.
Mortgage Business will lend up to 75% on a self-certified basis.
‘I filled in a  questionnaire giving details of my previous lender and my bank.
But there was no need to give any other references.
It all went very smoothly — I received a confirmation of loan within a week.’
CCJs
People who have been in trouble with repayments to another creditor in the past may have a County Court Judgement (CCJ) against them.
Those with CCJs often have difficulty finding a lender willing to advance them a loan but it is not impossible.
Specialist mortgage brokers are often a useful source of advice if you have a CCJ.
ADVANCED LEVEL
Once you are safely settled in your home, that is not the end of your mortgage options.
Homeloans are one of the cheapest ways of borrowing money — find out how to use them to your advantage.
Remortgaging is the answer for people who do not want to move, but want to make a change in their finances.
If you have owned your property for a number of years, it will probably be worth more than you paid for it.
Remortgaging unlocks this capital, allowing you to use it for other purposes.
Alternatively, you may be paying an interest rate that is over the odds.
Remortgaging can effectively deliver you a cheaper deal.
You can use a remortgage for a variety of schemes — to start up your own business, to buy a car or a second home overseas.
Or if you have a number of outstanding debts, such as credit card charges and hire purchase deals, a remortgage can pay them all off at a much lower rate of interest to help you reduce your outgoings.
When you remortgage, you automatically lose any of the tax advantages you may have enjoyed from dual tax relief.
If you are claiming this, when you remortgage, you will only receive tax relief on the first £30,000 — a loss worth considering before you take the plunge.
Tax relief is only granted on the part of the remortgage that is used to buy a property.
Therefore, if you had a £20,000 mortgage and wanted to raise a further £8,000 for home improvements, you could only claim tax relief on the first £20,000.
Lenders' policy varies on what they will allow remortgage funds to be used for.
Some state ‘any legal purpose’, others want to know specifically.
Always be honest about your intentions or you may regret it later.
There are several costs involved in remortgaging which you should weigh up against the savings you will be making.
You will have to pay for a new survey, solicitor's fees, lender's solicitor's fees, arrangement fees, and sometimes your existing lender's redemption penalty.
All this could amount to several hundred pounds that will be added to your bill.
If you only want to borrow a small amount, a better option is to take a further advance from your existing lender (less than £100 to arrange) or, alternatively, a top-up loan from a second lender.
PROS
Chance to reduce interest rate
Cheap way of raising cash
CONS
May lose tax relief
Costs involved in changing loan
Long term loan to pay small debt may work out expensive
Equity release
These schemes have been designed for the elderly who have built up a significant amount of equity in their homes, but who have no means (or no desire) to service a new loan.
Equity release is available to anyone over 60 although 65 to 70 is normal.
Lenders will advance 25 to 30 per cent of the property's market value with nothing to repay until the sale of the property.
Once sold, the original amount has to be paid, along with all the accrued interest.
This interest is charged at a higher rate than a standard loan.
Although these schemes result in instant cash to be enjoyed during your lifetime, they can cut a sizeable chunk out of the legacy you may be planning to leave your surviving dependants.
INSTANT CASH
John and Angie Clifford bought their house in Poole in 1986 for £30,000 with a £25,000 mortgage.
Today, it is worth over £70,000.
‘The last thing we wanted to do was move,’ explains John, ‘But we needed some extra cash to build an extension for our growing family.
We thought we would have to move in order to realise the money locked into our home.’
‘I decided to go to a financial adviser,’ continues Angie, ‘He advised me to remortgage with a lender with a lower standard rate and for £20,000 more than we had originally borrowed when we bought the house.
Our repayments are now £200 more a month but our wages more than cover it.
The work on the extension is well under way— we haven't regretted our decision for a moment.’
REMORTGAGE COSTS
Early Redemption Penalty.
Your existing lender can charge up to three months interest to cancel your present mortgage, especially if you have a deferred or fixed rate mortgage.
This may make any savings you anticipate by remortgaging immaterial in the long run.
Arrangement fees on your new loan can cost up to £200.
Lender's valuation survey.
The new lender will need to ascertain the current value of your property and, inevitably, you will have to foot the bill.
Solicitor's fees.
The new lender will charge its legal expenses to you.
Loss of joint tax relief.
Once you remortgage, tax relief will be limited to the first £30,000 of your loan.
If you were claiming dual tax relief with your partner before remortgaging, this limitation may come as a serious financial shock to the system.
Only read this section if you are ready to accept the risks and rewards offered by the more sophisticated loans.
CURRENCY LOANS
SINGLE CURRENCY
The single currency mortgage allows you to take out a loan in Sterling, which the lender converts into another currency.
You pay interest at that country's rate.
When the pound is weak, your standard payment will not be enough to buy the currency, so you will have to pay more and your actual mortgage debt increases.
Now Britain is in the Exchange Rate Mechanism, the risk of exchange rate fluctuation with other ERM currencies is reduced.
ECU
The ECU (European Currency Unit) is a basket of European currencies.
The pounds you pay will buy ECUs at the current exchange rate, which can fluctuate.
MANAGED CURRENCY
The managed multi-currency loan was devised to minimise the risks of the single currency type by switching your loan between currencies.
Aims are to reduce outstanding debt and achieve low interest payments.
Managers charge a fee and a cut of any debt reduction.
After your second or third mortgage, you may feel ready to branch out from the standard endowment or repayment mortgage.
There are several ways you can experiment with your homeloan to make it more profitable.
But most require that you already have security, either in the form of equity in your home (i.e. if it has risen significantly in value since you bought it) or as money in the bank.
These fallbacks are essential to ensure that you are not putting your home at risk if your money-saving plans go awry.
Pension Mortgage
Similar to an endowment mortgage in that you pay interest only to the lender.
Meanwhile, you make regular contributions to a pension plan which undertakes to pay your mortgage off when you retire.
Popular with high earners because tax relief can be claimed at the highest rate, the pension loan also allows borrowers to claim tax relief on their pension contributions.
When considering this option, bear in mind how long it might be before your retire — if it is likely to be 35 years, then the pension loan is not for you.
Also consider that the tax-free lump sum you receive on retirement will be needed to pay off your loan for the most part.
As well as your pension plan you will also need separate term assurance in case you die before the end of the mortgage term.
PROS
Extensive tax relief for high earners 
Benefit of tax-free lump sum lessened
Have to pay mortgage interest until you retire — young people take note.
Needs separate life cover.
CONS
Unit Trusts
This interest only loan ties the profits from a unit trust savings plan to repay it at the end of term.
As with a unit-linked endowment, you invest directly on the stock market and are exposed to rising and falling prices.
If you do well, some lenders will allow you to pay off part of the loan before the end of the original term — a huge bonus.
Another advantage is that you lose less of your money through commission in the early years.
But it is a good idea to arrange separate term assurance in case there is another crash on the stock market.
May repay your loan early
Less money swallowed up by commission
Vulnerable to stock market fluctuations
Needs term assurance
PROS
CONS
PEPs
Similar to a unit trust mortgage, you take out an interest only loan.
But to repay the loan, you pay monthly contributions to a Personal Equity Plan which is commonly known as a PEP .
Although the plan is used to invest in unit trusts, the added advantage of a PEP is that it s free from Capital Gains Tax, which is charged on the straight unit trust mortgage.
Again, separate life cover is required to pay off your loan in any eventuality.
Less lost in commission
Free from Capital Gains Tax
Exposed to stock market
Needs separate life cover
Offered by few lenders
PROS
CONS
FOREIGN AFFAIRS
Aileen Baker was delighted to find that she only needed to borrow 60 per cent of the purchase price of a three-bedroom flat she had her eye on.
‘I bought my house in Surrey eight years ago.
In that time it has more than doubled in value.
I wanted to move back to London because my job is getting more demanding.’
Aileen had read about multi-currency mortgages in the newspapers and so gave a specialist broker a call to find out more.
‘They said that I had enough equity to qualify for a multi-currency loan.
There was an upfront charge and they will take a proportion of any reduction in debt.
My friends as me if am nervous having such an esoteric homeloan.
But I work in the City and so I fully understand the risk element.’
Cut your COSTS
Moving to a new home is one thing, staying there is another.
If you are in trouble with your mortgage repayments, follow this guide to cutting your costs, and staying in your home.
A mortgage may be the largest financial commitment you will make in your life, but that doesn't mean it has to ruin it.
High interest rates are crippling and an unstable economy can produce them at any time.
If you should find yourself feeling the pinch, there are several ways to reduce your outgoings, some could save you as much as £200 a month on a £60,000 loan.
But above all, do not panic.
Get in contact with your lender as soon as you realise that you may have a problem meeting the repayments and continue to pay monthly as much as you can afford.
Losing your home is not on the cards while you can demonstrate a willingness to repay your debt.
Step by Step
Talk to your lender .
Most will arrange a payment holiday, reduced payments for a specified period or devise a special scheme for you.
If you find your local branch is unhelpful and unwilling to understand your difficulties, contact head office.
Organise your finances .
Work out a day-to-day budget and stick to it.
If you have several outstanding debts, pay them in order of what recourse they have if you don't, i.e. make sure gas, water, telephone and electricity accounts are kept up to date or the supply will be switched off.
If your debtors are numerous and getting angry, contact the Citizen's Advice Bureau (071 833 2181) who can intervene on your behalf.
Extend your mortgage term .
Repayment mortgages payable over 25 years can be extended to 30 or 35 years, earning you a few extra pounds a month because you will be paying less for longer.
Paid-up endowment .
Your lender and insurance company may put your endowment on ice for a few months.
After this, your payments will be increased to make up the shortfall.
Change lender .
A lower interest rate or a special deal from another lender may make a remortgage worthwhile.
Make sure that you are fully aware of the costs involved and the nature of the deal if you do not want to regret it later on.
Take in a lodger .
If you have a spare room, put it to work for you.
The most cost effective of all these steps.
But make sure you tell your lender and the Inland Revenue if you don't want to get into trouble.
DIRECTORY
If you come across a word you don't understand, or a difficult concept, the following index will point you in the right direction for vital information.
Reckon UP
Now you know everything you need to know about mortgages, take the time to work out how much you can afford to spend on a loan.
Finally, see how much your loan will actually cost you.
Be honest when you fill out your monthly expenses below.
They are vital statistics if you want an accurate estimate of how much you have left over.
The figure you place in the final column is how much you can afford to spend repaying a mortgage every month.
The table above calculates your interest payments per month, although it should be used only as an approximate guide.
Column A shows you how much you will pay per thousand pounds of your loan (for mortgages of up to and including £30,000).
Simply pick out the current interest rate from the left hand column and look across.
Then multiply the figure in the column by the number of thousands you wish to borrow (e.g. for a £120,000 loan, multiply to 20).
For loans over £30,000, multiply the figure in Column A by 30.
Then move across to Column B, and multiply the remainder by that figure (e.g. for a £40,000 loan, multiply it by 10).
Then add the two figures together.
Moving HOME
Make sure you read the following pages and use the handy checklists to ensure a smooth move into your new home.
INDEX
35–36 BUYING A practical guide to home purchase
37 SELLING How to help sell your home
38 COSTS How much your move will really cost
39 VIEWING CHECKLIST How does the property measure up?
40 CONTACTS CHECKLIST Who to notify about your move
41 MOVING COUNTDOWN A day by day guide to help plan every stage of your move
BUYING
Now you have read the money pages, you will have a good idea of the price of the properties you can afford to buy, so you can start home hunting.
First, it's a good idea to decide where you want to live.
In the town or country?
Which part of town? of course, your budget is going to rule out many areas — for example , Knightsbridge is out of bounds for all but the super-rich.
Do you want to be close to work or near transport facilities?
Next, decide on the type of property.
Remember, you get more for your money if you buy an old house or flat, but upkeep costs will be higher.
Do you want a house or a flat?
How many bedrooms do you require, and is the size of kitchen a top priority?
Is a garage important, or is a garden a must and, if so, does it have to be south facing?
What importance do you place on a good pub within walking distance, or a supermarket round the corner?
Fill in the checklist and work out priorities.
Having decided on the area or areas, contact a number of local estate agents and ask them to send details of suitable properties.
You will find them listed in the Yellow Pages.
Advertisements in local papers are a good source of information on new homes developments as well as estate agents.
Otherwise, devote a Saturday to touring the area.
You will discover the estate agents on high streets, and you will also get a better idea of the facilities — shops, transport facilities, shops and so on.
Viewing
Then the fun begins.
Having sifted through the estate agents' details, arrange appointments to view as many properties as possible.
Even if you fall in love with the first one you see, it's important to be able to make comparisons.
YOUR IDEAL HOME
We have printed a handy Viewing Checklist on page 39 — make photocopies and fill in one at each property you visit.
There's a legal term,caveat emptor , which means buyer beware, so when viewing it pays to be suspicious.
Look at the outside and don't be fooled by appearances.
A fresh lick of paint might hide many evils.
Look for a sagging roof or missing tiles.
Does the brickwork need repointing.
Do the walls bulge?
Is the woodwork rotten?
Any of these are reason for alarm as they could be expensive to rectify.
When you look inside try not to be put off by the decor — if it's hideous, you can always redecorate.
Try to assess the general state of repair — look for signs of damp as well as cracks in walls and ceilings.
Has it been rewired and is the plumbing new?
If any work has been carried out, ask the seller whether it is covered by a guarantee, and make sure you see written proof.
Are there adequate power points in every room?
Check whether your cooker, fridge-freezer and other appliances will fit in the kitchen.
If you like what you see, go back at least one more time, but make sure it's a different time of day.
The seller won't admit to having noisy neighbours, but you are more likely to find out if you make further visits.
You might discover that the street is used as a short-cut by commuters.
And make sure you run through the checklist again, looking for potential problems.
Ask to see the previous year's bills so you can assess the running costs.
Offers
If you find a house that fits the bill, it's time to make an offer.
The price is what the seller hopes to get, and not necessarily w hat he expects.
The estate agent might tell you what the seller will accept, but you can make a lower offer.
However, if this is too low, the seller might not take you seriously.
Make your offer subject to survey and subject to contract, which will allow you to withdraw if problems arise.
If the offer is accepted, the estate agent might ask for a deposit as a commitment but you are not obliged to hand this over.
Surveys
Contact your lender.
The lender will want to make sure the property is worth the price you have agreed to pay and will send out a valuer or surveyor to make an assessment.
You will have to pay for this report; around £100 for a £60,000 property.
Unfortunately, the report only picks up obvious defects.
You can arrange a further intermediate Flat Buyers or Home Buyers Report, costing around £200, or a Full Structural Survey, at £300 which buys peace of mind.
The full survey will ensure every nook and cranny is inspected.
The surveyor will pull up carpets and crawl into the loft, looking for defects that might be missed in the valuation survey.
If everything i s all right you can proceed, or if a problem is detected, the surveyor will give an estimate of the likely costs required to put it right.
You can pull out of the purchase or negotiate a discount to cover the costs.
Legal work
Assuming everything is satisfactory, the lender will issue a formal mortgage offer.
The legal process of transferring ownership of the property from the seller to you begins — this is called conveyancing.
The work is usually conducted by a solicitor (see Legal Alternatives panel), who checks all the legal documents like the title deeds and lease, in the case of a lease-hold property, to make everything is in order.
The solicitor also checks with the local authority to make sure there is no rail link or other plan that will adversely affect the value of your property.
If these searches turn up anything untoward, you will have the chance to pull out or renegotiate a new price.
Your solicitor also checks with the seller's solicitor to make sure what items are included in the sale.
Once everything is in order, you sign a contract, which is exchanged with the seller who signs an identical contract.
now you are committed to the purchase and have to pay a 10 per cent deposit, which is non-returnable if you pull out.
At exchange of contracts, it becomes your responsibility to insure the property, so you must make sure that you arrange buildings insurance cover.
A date will be fixed when completion takes place.
This is usually in two to four weeks, but can be longer or shorter.
Once you have exchanged contracts, the countdown to completion and the day of your move begins.
On page 40 you will find a list of who to inform of your change of address.
And on page 41 there is an invaluable week by week guide to help you plan your move and make sure everything goes smoothly.
Don't forget the Survival Pack, which is bound to come in handy.
On completion day, the legal ends are tied up, you collect the keys and move into your new home.
Order a take away and open the bottle you have stowed in your Survival Pack.
LEGAL ALTERNATIVES
Most people use a solicitor to do the conveyancing.
If you don't have one already, ask friends and relatives for recommendations or contact the law society for a list.
An alternative is a licensed conveyancer; a fully-trained specialist who has to pass professional exams.
Some people choose DIY conveyancing.
However, when you have so much on your mind do you want further hassle?
And the lender will employ its own solicitor, whose bill you will have to pay.
Often, the lender will allow your solicitor to do their work as well, which will reduce your costs.
If you want further information and details contact the following:
SELLING
Most house sellers use an estate agent, who will help set a selling price, circulate your property's details to potential buyers, put up a For Sale sign, arrange appointments, take viewers round and negotiate the sale.
You will have to pay a commission once the property is sold, which is likely to be between 1.5 and three per cent of the sale price, depending on the area of the country and type of agency agreement.
Sole Agency
One agent has exclusive selling rights for a given period.
Don't give them sole selling rights, because you will have to pay them commission even if you sell your property privately.
Joint Sole Agency
Two agents take the property on their books and split the commission, whoever arranges the sale.
Multiple Agency
Several agents market the property, but the one making the sale pockets the commission.
Agents aren't keen on multiple agency agreements as they have no guarantee of commission, despite incurring the marketing costs.
Alternatives
There are also property shops which charge a flat rate fee, whether they sell your home or not.
There are also computer agencies who will circulate your details for a fee.
If successful, both methods offer hugs savings: if not, your cash is wasted.
DIY Selling
Given hefty estate agents fees, many people decide to DIY sell.
There are several reference books to help.
However, you will have to advertise the property in the press which will cost a fair amount of money, and arrange the printing of the property details.
However, the advertisement departments will help you write and design your ads.
Remember, For Sale boards are subject to a maximum legal size, so make sure you don't fall foul of the law by going over the top.
There's nothing stopping you putting your own small ads in local papers and newsagents' windows, as well as using an estate agent.
However, if the agent finds out, they are unlikely to work so hard to sell your property.
BRIDGING FINANCE
It makes sense to complete the sale of your existing property and purchase of your new home on the same day.
Otherwise, you will require bridging finance to tide yourself over.
There are two types:
CLOSED:
Where you have bought your new property and exchanged contracts on the sale of your existing home but haven't completed.
Widely available from banks and building societies.
OPEN:
Where you have bought your new home but haven't exchanged contracts on your existing property.
You will have to approach a specialist bridging loan company.
Bridging finance is more expensive than a mortgage, and open is more costly than closed.
SALES TIPS
You will want your home to look at its best.
Unless your home is totally dilapidated, steer clear of a complete redecoration prior to selling: it will arouse suspicion.
Put out flowers or house plants.
Try placing a vanilla pod or coffee bean under the grill just before the viewers arrive.
In the summer, open windows and in the winter, turn on the heating so it is warm and welcoming.
Tidy up the garden, as this can be one of your best sales aids.
If you don't have one, get a window box or hanging basket.
When the viewers arrive, make sure you have the details ready and take them round room by room as listed.
Also make sure you have old bills and any guarantees to hand.
Allow the viewers to look around on their own.
They are likely to be fairly nosey — don't be put off by adverse comments!
Offer them coffee or a drink, explain exactly what is included in the sale, and sell your home.
Your estate agent will negotiate with potential buyers, keeping you informed of offers and how the sale is progressing.
COSTS
The costs mount up when you buy a home, and if you are selling too, your move can work out to be extremely expensive, requiring a large budget.
Buying
Buyers will have to pay your solicitors' fees, plus expenses (called disbursements) and Stamp Duty, which is charged at one per cent on properties costing more than £250,000.
Don't forget your lender's solicitor's fees.
You will have to pay the lenders' valuation charge, plus your own report or full survey.
Don't forget to budget for your removal expenses.
Even if you are moving a couple of miles and decide to do-it-yourself, hire a van.
Don't be tempted to use your car — it's a false economy, as you will discover too late just how much you own, after countless journeys.
If your mortgage is for more than 70 per cent of the property's value you will also have to pay a special insurance premium.
Few borrowers will have heard of this, perhaps because there are so many names: Mortgage Indemnity Guarantee (MIG) and Mortgage Indemnity Premium are two common versions.
This is a one-off payment which protects the lender in case you default on the loan.
It is likely to amount to several hundred pounds and the higher the percentage borrowed, the more you pay.
Once contracts have been exchanged, you will have to arrange buildings insurance, unless it is a leasehold flat, when it is the freeholder's responsibility.
Selling
You must also budget for:
Solicitor's fee for work involved in purchases.
Estate agent's fees.
General Expenses
When you are working out your overall budget, don't forget to allow for:
Material for decoration, including paint and wallpaper, brushes, mops, brooms and so on.
Furnishings and fittings, including carpets, curtains, tables and any other essentials for your new home.
VIEWING CHECKLIST
Cut out and fill in this viewing guide
Use this checklist to make sure you have a record of every property you view.
Try to assess the state of repair of the outside of the property on a scale of one to 10.
Inside, assess the repair and also the size of the rooms.
And does it have central heating and, if so, what type?
It's important to make at least one other visit, at a different time of day, before you make an offer.
Also, assess the general area and facilities.
CONTACTS CHECKLIST
INFORM THE FOLLOWING ABOUT YOUR MOVE
COUNTDOWN
Follow this step-by-step guide to moving
FOUR WEEKS BEFORE
Get quotes from removal-van hire companies
Arrange meter readings disconnection at your existing home and confirm taking over gas and electricity at new address
Notify BT of when you want phone to be read and account closed.
Also confirm connection, or taking over new number.
If renting, confirm written notice with landlord.
Start collecting boxes and packing cases
Make sure home contents insurance covers you for the move.
ONE WEEK BEFORE
Confirm date and time with removal company
Settle paper & milk bills
Arrange care for your pets on moving day
Defrost fridge
Turn freezer to maximum
Arrange for post to be re-directed
Send change of address cards
Start packing
ONE DAY BEFORE
Finish packing everything bar overnight essentials
Put down dust or plastic sheets to protect carpets in hall
Make sure you have cash, keep credit cards and cheque book handy
Put valuables and documents in a safe place
MAKE SURE YOU HAVE A SURVIVAL PACK CONTAINING:
ON THE DAY
Pack the van
Roll up carpets
Check you have left nothing behind
Lock up
Collect keys and move into your new home
Most people sell their homes through an estate agent.
A computer agency is a cheaper alternative but does not provide a guaranteed sale.
Make sure the removal van is large enough to take all your possessions — otherwise you will waste time and money making repeated journeys.
The TORY Story
With record repossession figures, house prices that are at best static, and interest rates still uncomfortably high, the property-owning democracy is going through a rough period.
Andrew Stuart charts the Tory party policy that has helped create this situation.
The 1979 Tory party manifesto promised the introduction of a property-owning democracy.
13 years later, the government can look with some satisfaction at its achievement.
The percentage of homes in private ownership has increased to 67 per cent.
Under Mrs Thatcher, the shopkeeper's daughter, and Mr Major, Britain has become a nation of homeowners.
However, a democracy can vote as it feels fit, and the Tories are in very real danger of losing the next election as homeowners desert to the opposition parties.
What has gone wrong?
The answers are to be found in the same 1979 manifesto which, Mrs Thatcher warned, contained ‘no lavish promises’.
The Tories said: ‘Unlike Labour, we want more people to have the security and satisfaction of owning property.’
Over the last couple of years, the security of property-ownership has been called into question.
Bricks and mortar used to much more than a sound investment — it was the best way to make serious money.
Not any longer.
The graph to the right shows that house prices have been falling in the last year or so, after 11 years of rises.
Homelessness
Furthermore, the graph on page 44 shows that homelessness has become an ever-increasing feature of the Tory years, Homelessness began to hit home in a big way when the property-owning democracy started suffering at the hands of the repo-man.
In the week before Christmas 1991, and just after John Major's ‘three-nil’ victory at Maastricht, the Government suddenly realised  house repossessions had reached crisis point.
Pundits' predictions of repossessions topping 80,000 during 1991 hit the headlines.
At the eleventh hour, the Government decided something had to be done, and fast.
On 16th December 1991, the building societies and bank bosses were called in by the Government for an emergency briefing and were told to come back in two days with solutions.
Overnight, sorting out the repossession scandal had become the Government's main priority.
John Major, placing the blame on borrowers and, obliquely, the lenders, told the House of Commons: ‘It is a sad fact that many people over-extended their mortgage commitments and now face difficulties.
The Government is playing its part to alleviate their difficulties.
We expect the mortgage lenders — the responsible ones — to play their part in that.
The sensible ones know it is in their interest to do so as well.’
Lectures
In private, the lenders bristled, but Mike Blackburn, chief executive of Leeds Permanent Building Society was outspoken in his criticism of the Government.
He said lenders did not require ‘lectures in home economics’ and pointed out that the chief executives don't make the country's economic policies.
Referring to a speech by John Major, he added: ‘It wasn't a building society chief executive who said ‘If it isn't hurting, it isn't working’’.
The repossession epidemic is largely the result of a single factor — the record interest rates during 1989 and 1990 (see the main graph).
Amazingly, the 1979 Tory party manifesto warned: ‘The prospect of very high interest rates deters some people from buying their homes and the reality can cause acute difficulties to those who have done so.’
Faced with mortgages charged at 15.4 per cent and higher, borrowers couldn't afford to keep up their payments and so fell into arrears.
Worse still, high interest rates caused unemployment rates to soar (see the graph on page 44).
Those borrowers finding difficulty in making ends meet when in work couldn't afford their homeloan payments when they were made redundant.
Buyers stopped buying as mortgages were so expensive.
House prices started to fall as there weren't any buyers.
And people in arrears who had bought at the top of the market couldn't sell as their outstanding loan was often more than the value of their property.
They were trapped in a vicious circle.
KEY DATES
Council house sales introduced
Abbey National breaks cartel
LAPR removed
MIRAS introduced across the board
Stock Market crash
Dual tax relief abolished
Abbey National becomes plc
Poll Tax introduced Scotland
Poll Tax introduced England & Wales
Britain joins ERM
Major replaces Thatcher
Council Tax, replacement to Poll Tax announced
AVERAGE HOUSE PRICES AND MORTGAGE INTEREST RATE DURING THE TORY YEARS
Mismanagement
And who was to blame for the high interest rates?
In 1979, the Tory party knew where to point the finger: ‘Mortgage rates have risen steeply because of the [Labour]Government's financial mismanagement.’
When the Tories allowed rates to fall in late 1990, the damage had been done.
And because it takes several months, and often a year or more, before a lender seeks to repossess, the 1991 repossession figures reflect the interest rates charged in 1990.
Throughout 1991, the lenders had warned that interest rate cuts were too little and too late.
The repossession problem was apparent a long time before the politicians decided it was an issue — the figure of 80,000, which is equivalent to a town the size of Coventry, referred to homes that HAD already been repossessed.
However, the lenders duly offered stop-gap measures designed to alleviate the repossession problem for 1992.
Leading building societies and banks, including Halifax, Abbey National, Nationwide and NatWest, agreed to set millions of pounds to allow hard-pressed borrowers to convert their mortgages to rent.
Ownership of the homes will pass to either the lender or a housing association, and borrowers on low incomes will be able to qualify for income support to help pay their rent.
In return for the lenders' initiative, the Government agreed to pay lenders directly the mortgage interest for unemployed borrowers receiving income support.
Kick-start
A big surprise was the Chancellor's decision to introduce an eight month moratorium on Stamp Duty (charged at one per cent) on properties costing less that £250,000, which is hoped will kick-start the housing market.
Should people take advantage of this offer?
It should be remembered that the average house price has risen by over 200 per cent during the Tory years.
Anyone who bought before the 1988 boom has seen a good return on their investment.
And industry experts expect house prices to pick up during 1992, although the heady escalation in prices experienced in the mid 1980s is unlikely to return.
Renting may not be better solution than home purchase.
A recent survey by stockbrokers UBS Phillips & Drew calculated that in an average year, someone with a mortgage would pay £540 less to live in a £65,000 home than a person paying a market rent.
Furthermore, homeownership continues to provide satisfaction.
British Social Attitudes ,The Eighth Report , recently published by Dartmouth Publishing Company, shows that homeowners have a much greater level of satisfaction than those who rent.
The report says: ‘Further evidence of the appeal of owner-occupation is that the proportion of council tenants expecting eventually to buy their present home has actually increased over the years.’
And while the proportion of those people who would recommend a young couple with a steady job to buy as soon as possible has fallen from 78 per cent in 1989, the latest survey shows 70 per cent would still offer this advice.
Britain will continue to be a nation of homeowners.
However, whichever party wins the next election will do well to learn from recent years.
Sky-high interest rates are a recipe for disaster.
Thatcher: ‘No lavish promises’
EXECUTIVE Homes
TV HOMES FOR SALE
Java Wharf at Shad Thames shared star billing with Lenny Henry in ‘Bernard and the Genie’ which was shown on BBC over Christmas.
Bovis Homes points out that the exterior and lobby area were used for location shots, but not the interiors.
People should visit Docklands to find out what is going on inside, and to also check out what Docklands has to offer.
The show apartment is open Thursdays to Mondays, between 11am and 5pm.
Prices range from £75,000 for a dockside studio to £195,000 for a two-bedroom flat, with balcony, on the dockside.
Telephone 071 407 6785 for more details.
CAMELOT COMES TO ESSEX
Knight Developments is ,literally ,selling a Lancelot at Camelot and ,for good measure ,is also offering a Galahad and Ivanhoe .
Buyers might be surprised to discover the Lancelot is a five-bedroom ,three-reception luxury home ,priced at £185,000 and that Camelot is a small development of just four houses in Coggleshall ,Essex —Galahad and Ivanhoe are the other house types .
Telephone the selling agent ,Bairstow Eves ,on 0376 571818 .
PRICES SLASHED IN THE NORTH WEST
It's sale time at Alfred McAlpine Homes, with discounts of up to £10,000 available at selected developments in the North West.
Buyers will have to move quickly as the discounts apply to anyone who can complete by the end of January.
Examples include the four-bedroom detached Windsor at the Lawtons Acre development, in Alsager, Cheshire, down from £107,950 to £102,950.
At Keepers Fold in Middlewich, Cheshire, the four-bedroom Denham has been reduced to £99,950 from £109,950.
The Oakbaraton development at Chew Moor, near Bolton, has a four-bedroom Frensham priced at £119,500, representing a £5,000 reduction.
For more details telephone 0925 830315.
MAKING MOVES
Fran and Peter Carr were able to exchange contracts just six weeks after making an offer on a new four-bedroom house, thanks to the part exchange scheme provided by Crest Homes.
Their new house is at Woodlands Chase, in Binfield near Bracknell.
Three houses remain to be sold at the development, with prices currently between £164,950 and £189,000.
For further property details and information on the part exchange facility, telephone 0425 580880.
RESTORATION PROPERTY
The Oast House is a recently refurbished Grade II listed building in the Essex town of Witham.
The living accommodation comprises three bedrooms, kitchen-breakfast room, dining room and first floor lounge with stairs leading to a galleried study.
There is also a garage.
The asking price is £132,000, and for more details, telephone Bairstow Eves, 0376 519292.
SCOTS HOMES SELL LIKE HOT CAKES
Five of eight houses offered for sale at Sanquhar Den in Forres ,near Inverness ,were snapped up within days of being placed on the market .
When complete ,there will be 37 three- ,four- and five-bedroom detached houses ,and the second phase of 10 properties is just about to be released .
The location is surrounded by mature woods ,and Sanquhar Den is near Forres town centre ,with a secondary school and swimming pool close at hand .
Prices range from around £76,500 to just over £100,000 .
Telephone the developer ,Stewart Milne Construction ,on 0224 743000 for more information .
STARTER Homes
HOUSE BUILDER PAYS UP
Fairview New Homes has a number of sites in North East London designed and priced for first-time buyers.
As well as competitive asking prices, Fairview offers a choice of cash benefits, including payment of legal fees and stamp duty, and the payment of a five per cent deposit or free management charges for a year.
Greenacres Gardens, a new cul-de-sac development in Walthamstow, offers studios and one- and two-bedroom flats, just two minutes' walk from Wood Street BR station.
Prices start from £40,995 for a studio and £49,995 for one-bedroom flats.
Check out the sales office from Thursdays to Mondays, 10am to 5 pm.
Telephone 081 503 7678.
Nightingale Park is in Edmonton and offers a few remaining studios and one-bedroom apartments, priced from £42,000 and £48,000 respectively.
For more details, telephone 081 345 6676.
EQUITY SHARING IN ESSEX
To complete sales on its Felmores development in Basildon, Essex, Lovell Homes is offering special equity share deals — 80 per cent payable now and the balance in five years or on re-sale, whichever is sooner.
This brings the up-front price of the last remaining single-bedroom apartment down to £39,960.
Similar deals are available on the remaining two- and three-bedroom properties, but Lovell is also offering free mortgage protection insurance for the first three years, which will pay up to £1,000 per month if the buyer is made redundant.
As another extra, Lovell will pay legal fees and survey costs up to £1,500.
Telephone 02688 741111 for full details.
MORE HOMES COME ON STREAM
Although just two properties remain for sale at Birse Homes' Hutton Grange development in Weston-Super-Mare ,Avon ,the builder promises more bungalows are soon to be released .
One- and two-bedroom bungalows are priced from £47,995 ,while two-bedroom terraced houses start from £54,950 .
The development is sited three miles from Weston town centre and backs on to green belt land .
Local shopping and other amenities are close at hand and the sea is only a few minutes' drive away, when the tide is in .
The show homes are open Thursday to Monday ,11am to 5pm .
Telephone 0934 814317 .
KENTISH HOMES FOR £50,000
Botany Bay — near Margate, not Sydney — is the location for Sunley Estates' Northdown Park development, which offers a whole range of houses for first time buyers.
Prices for a one-bedroom Penhurst style house currently starts from a shade under £50,000, while the two-bedroom Ash house type is priced from £57,750.
For those buyers with a larger budget, two-bedroom cottages and bungalows are priced from £67,5000 and £69,950 respectively.
For more information, telephone 0843 227254.
THE HEAT TREATMENT
Energy-efficiency is top of the agenda at Laing Homes' latest development in Surrey, the soon to be released Woodland Rise on the site of the former Cheam Hospital.
Laing is building studios, and one- and two-bedroom apartments from its Charter range, which recently gained a 9.2 New Homes Energy Rating certificate (on a scale of one to 10) at a development in Essex.
In real terms, a similar rating means, according to experts, £5.40 will cover the weekly running of cost of heat, light, cooking, hot water and standing charges.
Prices for the first properties to be released are likely to be from just £49,995.
For more details and property specifications, telephone 081 669 8119.
The habit of lending
Abbey National, the UK's second largest lender, is widely recognised as a major market player.
And it looks like maintaining its high standing for years to come.
When Abbey national became the first lender to win no less than three Which Mortgage awards: Best Overall Lender, Best First-time Buyers Product and Best High Street Bank in 1991, the company proved how efficient and comprehensive its mortgage services are.
‘The mortgage market in the UK is a very mature one,’ reflects Hendrik Vos, Marketing Manager, ‘therefore you have to things exceptionally well to stand out from the crowd.’
Abbey National's winning formula includes excellent service, innovative products and competitive interest rates: the combination of which lead to the hat-trick in the recent awards.
Keeping in mind the needs of both new and existing borrowers — throughout the duration of the mortgage — resulted in Abbey National's runaway success in the Best Overall Lender category.
For instance, Abbey National is the largest lender in the south of England, where property prices are generally high.
Vos explains Abbey National's rationale: ‘We simply wanted to assist those customers who had to take out larger loans and therefore had higher repayments.’
The result was the introduction of the larger loan discounts for loans over £60,000 and £100,000 respectively.
Unlike many similar discounts which sprang up after Abbey National had made its move, this one is for an indefinite period.
And this discount is offered in conjunction with a first-time buyers' discount if the borrower qualifies for both.
In fact, Abbey National was voted as offering the Best First- time Buyers' Product on the basis of the good value of this good facility.
But Abbey National is not interested in attracting customers with short-term sweeteners.
It is more concerned about the long- term needs of existing borrowers and investors.
‘We encourage first-time buyers to think beyond their present repayments.
By the time they become experienced buyers, they will realise that the partnership between them and the lender is like a marriage — it's not that easily broken!
So they will need to look for a company that is reliable and responsible over a long term, and offers a variety of ancillary services.’
A consistently competitive rate is part of the deal, and one need only look at Abbey National's interest rates over the past few years.
In the Which Mortgage survey of overall mortgage rates, carried out in July 1991, Abbey National's were among the cheapest in the long-term mortgage chart — the only top ten lender to achieve this.
‘We always try to be the first to drop our rates when they are falling, but the last to increase them when they are on their way up,’ assures Vos.
This explains why Abbey National regularly echoes a Bank of England cut in base rates.
Competitive rates are only one factor in good customer service.
Abbey National gives attention to its after-sales care too.
A customer magazine ‘Dialogue’ keeps borrowers up to date with Abbey National's latest products and services, and offers discounts on home-related purchases.
Borrowers are also informed about special customer offers such as fixed rate mortgages.
High service standards are reflected in the more customer-friendly refurbished branches, which allow for prompt personal attention and privacy.
A standard feature is the Personal Financial Advisor (PFA), a helpful expert who is available to answer customers' questions.
Their area of expertise includes complementary products such as pension plans and insurance policies.
In answer to the plethora of products on the market, Abbey National has simplified matters by creating its own assurance company, Abbey National Life, which can offer a whole range of investment and insurance products, as well as advice on which to choose.
A PFA will also be able to advise on the products and services that Cornerstone, Abbey National's estate agency, can offer customers who wish to move home.
With all the changes that have taken place in Abbey National since its historic conversion to plc two years ago, Vos is convinced that customers will have noticed an improvement in the quality of service.
In fact, the continuing satisfaction of customers was one of the reasons for conversion.
‘We want to offer a wider range of services than building societies are able to.
As a public limited company, we have greater access to the money markets and we can thus offer more competitive rates.
‘The public is becoming aware that we can cater for all financial needs, from cheque books to travel insurance.
Buying a house and arranging a mortgage is complicated enough — but by coming straight to us customers can keep their financial affairs as simple and convenient as possible.’
The increase in benefits to the customer, coupled with the fact that the company has strengthened its share of the mortgage market almost to rival that of the Halifax, meant that Abbey National was the obvious choice for Best High Street Bank.
Abbey National continues to break ground fast in the service and products offered to some ten million investors and two million borrowers, providing, in the words of its mission statement, ‘excellence and value in meeting personal financial needs’.
The three Which Mortgage awards are merely the culmination in a long list of achievements in Abbey National's impressive history.
‘The public is becoming aware that we can cater for all financial needs, from cheque books to travel insurance.
Buying a house and arranging a mortgage is complicated enough — but by coming straight to us customers can keep their financial affairs as simple and convenient as possible.’
Abbey National's area of expertise includes complementary products such as pension plans and insurance policies, as well as professional advice on which products to choose.
TWO OF A KIND
Discount Deals
There are some cracking discount deals around at the moment as lenders attempt to drum up new business, but watch out as the headline interest rate doesn't always tell the whole story.
At first glance, Lambeth's 2.25% discount from its standard rate for the first 12 months of the loan looks a slightly better deal than Portman's 2.0% discount for the same period.
And, while both discounts are available to first-time buyers, Lambeth extends its offer to include all new borrowers.
Better still, Lambeth allows the borrower to choose the repayment method, as the discount is available on repayment mortgages as well as endowment and pension loans.
Portman's discount is restricted to mortgages backed by a Scottish Life endowment policy.
Lambeth also offers slightly more generous income multiples, with a maximum three times first income plus 1.5 times second income.
Portman also has a maximum of three times first income, but pegs its second income multiplier to 1.25 times.
However, Lambeth sets a ceiling on the amount it will lend with at 80% of the property value or purchase price; whichever is the lower.
clearly, first-time buyers will require a healthy deposit to qualify for the Lambeth deal.
Portman's maximum loan to value is 95%, which is more user friendly for many first-time buyers.
Furthermore, as a condition of the discount, Lambeth insists borrowers take the society's combined buildings and contents insurance (called Homecover), as well as its accident, sickness and unemployment insurance (LBS Mortgage Cover).
Portman, however, makes no demands, but recommends that borrowers should take buildings and contents insurance, and if this is arranged through the society the premiums can be combined with the monthly interest payments, thus avoiding separate standing orders or direct debits.
In addition, Portman recommends that for complete peace of mind borrowers should take its Mortgage Care policy providing cover against accident, sickness and redundancy.
Clearly, borrowers have to weigh up the pros and cons of each mortgage offer — greater flexibility in one area of the lending terms is likely to be balanced by restrictive conditions in another area.
Often the cheapest offer might not be the best deal.
LONDON LAW
A flat fee of £195 plus VAT buys the expert conveyancing services of a firm of London solicitors, David Paul & Partners.
When buying or selling your home, the one certainty is that you will have to go through the legal process commonly known as conveyancing.
Since the transaction is such a large one, involving the acquisition of land and buildings, there is a strict legal code that has to be followed to ensure a watertight purchase or sale.
Employing the services of a professional to carry out the necessary legalities is imperative.
But finding the right one can be tricky.
The biggest variable you will find if you are shopping around is price.
Some solicitors charge per hour, but since there can be so many complications when you are buying or selling, it is almost impossible to get an accurate quote of what it will cost.
Others take a proportion of the cost of the house and, consequently, the fee can run into thousands.
David Paul & Partners charges a flat fee for its conveyancing services, no matter what the value of the property, or how long the process takes.
At its offices in High Holborn in London, one of the firm's partners explains why it sets one rate for all its customers.
‘We estimate that most solicitors will charge a minimum of £325 on a property of £100,000.
If the property costs more, their fee will be higher, and if it is a leasehold flat, it will be higher still.
We decided that we would charge £195 plus VAT plus disbursements, whether the client is buying or selling, whether the property is freehold or leasehold, worth £10,000 or £10 million.’
Added value
The flat fee, which has remained the same since the company was set up over three years ago, has proved to be a winner with both buyers and sellers.
The firm now employs 14 solicitors and associates, who are completing 10 to 15 house purchases a day, and has clients all over the country and across the globe.
Although the prestigious London address certainly adds to the appeal of David Paul & Partners' services, would the person buying a cottage in their home town in Lancashire be better off using a High Street firm of solicitors with local knowledge?
‘Not at all,’ asserts David Paul & Partners.
‘It is a misconception that you need a local firm to carry out your conveyancing.
Everything is computerised and we use the most advanced system.
‘Although the majority of our business is in London, we do have customers as far away as Australia, North America and the Middle and Far East.
The public are becoming aware that they don't need an Oxford solicitor to help them buy a home in Oxford.
You simply need a solicitor to highlight the legalities of the contracts you are signing.’
Even if you are buying a home in darkest Snowdonia, you will still be treated to a personal service at the hands of David Paul & Partners.
‘When you telephone us for a quote, we will assign a member of staff to you, whom you can contact whenever you need to, without fear of being charged extra in costs, as some solicitors are wont to do every time you telephone them.
Our service is friendly, quick and, above all, efficient.’
Another bonus in going to David Paul & Partners for your conveyancing is that the company can handle any other legal matters for which you require its assistance.
Although residential conveyancing is its main line of business, it also specialises in commercial purchase and all forms of litigation.
The company was set up at the height of the property boom.
And although the housing market is far from booming today, business has not suffered unduly, thanks to its good reputation among homebuyers.
However, the firm plans to offer another service that aptly reflects the state of today's housing market: a repossession advice centre.
At the head of this department, which is to be called RAC, will be Kelly Mahmod.
‘With repossessions taking place at around 100 a day, it seemed like proper advice was sadly lacking from the range of services available to homeowners.
Of course, lenders have their own advisers to help borrowers who are in trouble, but often an independent voice is needed.
The fact that so many repossessions take place needlessly, proves that there is something wrong with the service borrowers are getting.
In my estimation, the vast majority of repossessions could be avoided.’
RAC will operate via an 0898 telephone number and, of course, all counsel will be confidential.
Advice will be given on how to write letters to the lender in order to avert repossession.
However, if you require RAC to correspond on your behalf, it will incur a charge of £12 per letter.
Similarly, if you wish them to attend court, the charge is £50.
Even with these extra expenses, it seems a small price to pay to increase your chances of staying in your home.
David Paul & Partners' commitment to the UK property market is considerable.
As Kelly Mahmod reflects, property will always be at a premium in this country: ‘Since Great Britain is an island, our main investment is our bricks and mortar.
Consequently there will always be a demand for properties, especially in London, which has become the financial centre of the world.
With our London office, we are perfectly placed to compete with solicitors all over the country, and, what's more, we charge less.’
David Paul & Partners charges a flat fee for its conveyancing services, no matter what the value of the property or how long the process takes.
The firm now employs 14 solicitors and associates, who are completing 10–15 house purchases every day.
PROBLEM PAGE
Stuck for an answer to your moving or mortgage problem?
Send your letters to:
Q
I am buying a £110,000 house with my girlfriend and we plan to take out an endowment to cover the £100,000 mortgaged sum.
Although it will be my first mortgage, my girlfriend already has one of £50,000 for which she has an endowment up and running to cover that amount.
If we take out a joint mortgage, will she have to cash in her endowment policy so that we can take one out together?
Or can I take out my own policy for half the mortgaged sum, or £50,000?
And, if I do, does this mean that should one of us die, only half of the loan will be paid off?
A
Taking out an endowment on a joint mortgage can be done in one of two ways.
The first method is to take out two separate policies that cover half the loan amount (this can be stretched so that the higher earner of the two parties has a policy covering a greater amount).
If one of the parties dies before the end of the mortgage term, their endowment will pay off their portion of the loan, and the surviving partner will continue paying into their policy exactly as before.
The other method is to take out an endowment policy in both names.
This policy, especially useful for those who plan to stay together, such as couples or blood-related buyers, covers the whole amount so that if either of you die, the whole mortgage is paid off in full.
Although the second method sounds like it gives twice the cover, it is far from twice as expensive.
In fact, once you take into account all the set-up costs of the two endowments needed for the first method, having a joint policy becomes quite competitive, as well as offering extra peace of mind.
In your case, however, there is an extra factor to consider.
The endowment that your girlfriend has at present can be used to cover part of your new loan.
If she has had it for a few years, there will be another bonus in that it will mature before the end of your mortgage term, saving thousands in extra interest payments.
The final point to consider is that if you decide on a joint endowment, your girlfriend may decide to cash in her present endowment.
The length of time it has been operation will determine how much money she gets back, but it is unlikely to have made much of a profit, because endowments are designed to make money over a long period of time.
If you have your hearts set on a joint endowment, you have two alternatives to cashing in the present one.
You can make it paid up, i.e. freezing the policy so that you do not pay into it any more, but wait until the end of the term to take any profits it has made.
Alternatively, if you can afford it, you can continue paying the premiums on the first policy as well as taking out your second joint endowment.
Q
When I took out my mortgage with the Halifax, I plumped for a fixed rate.
This is just about to run out, so I was overjoyed when I saw that the Halifax had brought out another fixed rate offer.
but when I made enquiries about taking up the loan, I was told that I was not eligible for the funds because I was an existing borrower.
Are building societies allowed to do this?
And if they are, why do they discriminate against their existing customers in this way?
A
Banks and buildings societies are perfectly within their rights to choose who should benefit from their special offers.
Existing customers may feel that they are being unfairly barred from a cut price deal, but there are often good reasons for this.
A spokesperson for the Halifax says: ‘We try to be fair to all our customers.
When we offer a fixed rate, we have an issue of, say, £50 million to share between our borrowers.
When you consider that we have a mortgage book of roughly £50 billion, you can see that it would be impossible to offer it to all our borrowers.
Rather than offer it to them on a first-come, first-served basis, we offer it just to new business coming in.
‘This is not to say that we ignore our existing borrowers.
We do operate a customer loyalty scheme, whereby any existing borrower who moves home and remortgages with us is entitled to a one per cent discount for one year.’
However, some lenders offer exclusive fixed rates deals to their existing customers.
COMPETITION
This month Which Mortgage has joined forces with leading bathroom manufacturer Armitage Shanks to offer the very latest in bathroom design.
Our lucky winner will receive a complete new bathroom worth £1,000 chosen from the Armitage Shanks Cottage range in the new Chablis shade.
We're offering everything shown in the picture opposite — a Cottage bath, washbasin with pedestal and w.c. in Chablis, plus a set of Armitage Shanks' new traditionally styled Hathaway taps in chrome finish.
Whether your home is traditional or modern in style, the Cottage suite will create a striking look which will bring out the best in any bathroom.
The Cottage suite is distinguished by its pretty shapes and proportions, featuring a charming fluted design, which extends from the pedestal basin to the bath and w.c.
The new colour — Chablis — has been unveiled as the perfect shade for the 1990s.
The first in a new generation of colours, it has been developed as a result of Armitage Shanks' research in to the tastes of today's consumers.
The results indicated overwhelmingly that people are nowadays looking for a colour that has the versatility of white, but which displays its own unique warmth and character.
As a result of this research, Armitage Shanks came up with Chablis — a soft and subtle shade which will add warmth to its surroundings, with the added advantage of co-ordinating with a wide range of other colours from pastels to bold primaries.
How to enter
Answer the three questions below and then complete the tie breaker in no more than 12 words.
This will be judged on originality and style.
Entries must reach the offices of The Brass Tacks Publishing Company Limited no later than 15 February 1992.
The winners will be notified by post and the correct answers published in the April 1992 issue of Which Mortgage .
Send your entries to :
Questions
1.
Who was Anne Hathaway?
(A)
The third wife of Henry VIII
(B)
Shakespeare's wife
(C)
The first female member of the European parliament.
2.
What colour is the new Chablis shade?
(A)
A sparkling rose
(B)
A warm white
(C)
A rich red
3.
Which of the following is famous for playing the flute?
(A)
Nigel Kennedy
(B)
Mary O'Hara
(C)
James Galway
Rules
1.
There is no cash alternative to the prizes.
2.
Entrants must be UK residents aged 18 and over.
3.
Employers and their relations and their agencies of either Armitage Shanks or The Brass Tacks Publishing Company Limited are not eligible.
4.
No correspondence can be entered into and the judges' decision is final.
5.
The judges reserve the right to disqualify any entry.
6.
This competition, its results and entry forms are the property of The Brass Tacks Publishing Company Limited and must not be used or adapted by any other party.
MORTGAGE UPDATE
A round-up of the latest fixed rate mortgages currently on offer, plus new insurance schemes for homebuyers.
Abbey National has launched two new fixed interest mortgages — one for three years, and the other for five years.
Borrowers can opt for a rate of 10.55 per cent until 31st March 1995, or 10.8 per cent until 30th April 1997, with the loans available for repayment, endowment, pension and interest-only loans.
The shorter term deal carries a £135 arrangement fee, while the five year offer has an up-front charge of £195.
Early redemption of a loan carries a penalty of 90 days' extra interest, except during the first year of the five year deal, when an additional 150 days' interest is levied.
However, both fixed interest loans are portable, so borrowers can take their mortgages with them when they move home with no penalty charge.
For full details of the deals contact a local Abbey branch or telephone Abbey National Direct on 0800 555100.
Skipton Building Society is offering free insurance cover worth up to £250, which protects homebuyers against losing their valuation fee if their purchase falls through.
The Valuation Protection Scheme is being offered to all new  applicants free of charge.
If the potential buyer is gazumped, if the seller pulls out of the deal, or if there is an adverse report (when the valuation is lower than five per cent of the agreed price), Skipton's customers will receive a voucher of up to £250 to cover the lost valuation fee.
This voucher can be used with their next mortgage application through the society, as long as this is within six months of the original application.
For more information, contact a Skipton branch or telephone 0756 700500.
Equity & Law has added an optional extra to its endowment plan, which will cover a borrower's mortgage repayments in the event of a serious illness.
For a slightly higher monthly premium, according to Equity & Law, mortgage payments are covered in the event of a heart attack, stroke, cancer, organ transplant, and many other serious conditions.
First-time buyers, who don't take the Lifecare option at the outset of their loan, can buy the additional cover at a later date.
Further information can be obtained from your financial adviser.
Barclays Bank recently announced a new range of fixed interest rate mortgages.
10.8 per cent is charged for all the loans, but borrowers have the option to fix for either two, three or five years.
There is also a choice of repayment, endowment or pension type loans.
Barclays charges a £150 arrangement fee which can be added to the loan, although the charge is waived if an endowment, pension or mortgage protection policy is arranged with the bank.
Two months' interest is the standard early redemption charge on the two and three year fixed rates, while the five year option carries a charge of five month's extra interest.
The loan is portable, so if the borrower moves home during the fixed rate period and retains the loan, no charge will be made.
More details can be obtained from a Barclays branch.
Otherwise, telephone 0203 694242.
Leeds Permanent has launched a range of ‘pick ‘n’ fix’mortgages with terms of up to 25 years.
Borrowers can choose to fix their loans for between 20 and 25 years at a rate of 11.25 per cent, or they can choose terms of three, four and five years at a fixed rate of 10.6 per cent .
Both deals are available across the full range of loan types, and arrangement fees are charged at £150 to £250.
Early redemption penalties for the shorter term fixed rates are one moth's interest in the final year, two month's interest in the penultimate years and three months' interest prior to this.
Borrowers taking the 20 to 25 year fixed rate will be charged six months' interest in years one to four, three months' interest in years five to nine and one month's interest from year ten onwards.
Contact a local branch or telephone 0532 438181 for full details.
CHARTS
MORTGAGE TABLES
The latest interest rates, terms and conditions of all the building societies, banks, specialist lenders and insurance companies active in the mortgage market.
The following pages of Charts are designed to help you select a mortgage lender.
In addition to the standard interest rate and special discount deals available, the Charts contain useful information which will help you make your choice.
You may find that the lender with the lowest interest rate will not advance sufficient funds.
For example, if you require a 100 per cent loan, glance down column 4.
Are you looking to borrow as much as possible?
Then use Columns 6 and 7 to work out how much the lender is prepared to advance.
Do you think you will be moving shortly?
In which case, check whether the lender you are interested in penalises early redemptions using Column 10.
Use the Charts to help narrow your selection of suitable lenders, which will save considerable time and money in the long run.
Please note
All interest rates and lending criteria were correct at the time of going to press but readers should check with the lenders for the latest up-to-the-minute information.
Which mortgage cannot be held responsible for any out date of information that may have occurred due to changes taking place after the editorial deadline.
The information is broken down as follows:
1.
Lender's name.
2.
Head office Tel.
No.
3.
The standard interest rate before any discounts.
4.
The maximum percentage of the property's value that the lender will advance.
5.
The maximum sum in pounds that a lender is prepared to advance.
6.
How many times a single or main borrower's income, the lender advances.
Multiply your salary by this to get your maximum loan.
7.
The figure by which a second borrower's income can be multiplied, or by which the two incomes added may be multiplied.
8.
The maximum number of years over which a mortgage can be taken.
9.
If you are buying a leasehold property this column shows how long must be left on the lease after the mortgage term has been deducted.
If you want a mortgage over 25 years and the lender's minimum lease remaining term is 40 years, you cannot buy a property with a lease less than 65 years at the outset.
10.
Shows whether you will be penalised if you cash in your mortgage ahead of the term.
11.
Whether it will consider lending on converted leasehold flats.
12.
Shows which insurance companies' endowment and pension products the lender sells.
An independent lender has access to every insurance company.
13.
Details of discounts for first-time buyers or new borrowers and deals for larger loans.
BEST BUYS
The table below shows the lenders offering the 10 lowest standard mortgage rates currently available before any discounts are taken into account.
Most lenders' discounts are for a limited period only, after which you will revert to paying the standard rate — this table provides a guide to lenders' competitiveness, which should be taken into account when making your mortgage choice.
10 LOWEST RATES
NAME OF LENDER
Telephone number
Interest rate
Max loan %
Max advance £000s
Maximum multiplier first income
Maximum multiplier second income
Max mortgage term — years
Min lease remaining term — years
Early Redemption penalty
Lend on leasehold flats
Additional information
Building Societies 
First year's endowment or pension plan paid for FTBs
1% discount for one year or 2% for six months
1% discount for first year for FTBs
1.25% discount for first year for FTBs in local area
11.25% for loans over £60,000
0.25% discount for loans under £40k, 0.5% discount for loans £40k–60k, 1% discount for loans over £60k
PEPs, 1% discount for new borrowers
FTB, interest only, 2% discount for six months for first-time buyers, 0.6% discount for loans over £40,000
3% discount for first six months for loans up 70% of valuation
ONLY LEND IN SCOTLAND
1% discount for new borrowers for loans up to 80% of valuation for 12 months
10.5% over £60,000 to 80% of valuation
1.5% discount for first 12 months and 0.5% for next 12 months
1% off until Dec 92 for new purchases
Repayment mortgages only
Mortgages available only within 100 miles of Gainsborough
0.5% discount for FTB for two years
1.55% discount for first 12 months for new loans
£40,000 + 0.65% below base rate for 12 months, 1.25% discount first year for first-time buyers 
Banks & Specialist Lenders
10.85% for loans between £60,000 & £100,000.
Terms and conditions may vary in Northern Ireland telephone 0232 246559 or contact a branch
*Minimum loan £150,000
LS, *100% expatriate loan
Capped and fixed rates available
*11.65% if paid in arrears
FTB, 1.75% discount for FTBs 1% discount for loans over £60,000. 0.5% discount for existing customers
ECU mortgage available at 9.75% fixed until June 1993.
Variable rate 11.125%
For loans under £75,000.
Over £75,000 — 0.25% + 0.25% for capital repayment loans
LS, *under review