

Welcome to Gloucester
By the 1920s other ports had taken much of Gloucester's corn trade and some of the dock warehouses became used for purposes other than corn storage.
Llanthony Warehouse was for many years a showroom and store for Western Trading Co.
Ltd.
Builders' Merchants.
General cargo continued to flow through the port but there was a gradual decline in dock activity.
By the 1960s there was talk of redevelopment and the future of many of the buildings came under threat.
A port since the granting of its Royal Charter in 1580, Gloucester became a centre for the corn trade in the 1840s when foreign grain was first allowed into Britain.
Llanthony Warehouse, now the home of the National Waterways Museum, was the last great corn store to be opened in Gloucester Docks in 1873.
In the hey-day of trade in the docks there were 15 major corn warehouses, two dock basins and a complex network of rail lines covering some 22 acres.
It was not until the 1980s that redevelopment began to take place.
North Warehouse, the oldest in Gloucester Docks, although in poor structural condition, was the first to be saved from demolition and redeveloped as the new headquarters for Gloucester City Council.
An ambitious programme involving British Waterways, the City Council and private developers was begun and the docks headed for a new future.
Between September 1986 and April 1988 work took place to restore Llanthony Warehouse in which to house the National Waterways Museum and offices for British Waterways.
Though lifts and fire stairs have been newly built, many of the original structures — particularly the timber beams and cast iron columns — remain.
On April 1st 1988 Llanthony Warehouse opened as the National Waterways Museum where the fascinating story of the inland waterways is told as never before…
The NATIONAL WATERWAYS MUSEUM at GLOUCESTER
NATIONAL WATERWAYS MUSEUM
Llanthony Warehouse, Gloucester Docks Gloucester GL1 2EH Tel. (0452) 307009 Fax No. (0452) 300072
OPENING HOURS
Open every day except Christmas Day
Summer 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.
Winter 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.
(Last admission 1 hour before closing time)
ADMISSION
Admission is charged.
There are reductions for children, senior citizens and pre-booked parties.
For rates please see the current publicity leaflet.
CAR PARKING
Ample parking space is available in front of Llanthony Warehouse.
CAFE
Refreshments and light snacks are available from the cafe which overlooks Llanthony Yard and the Docks.
DISABLED VISITORS
There is access to all parts of the indoor displays and to Llanthony Yard for disabled visitors.
Lifts are available.
Toilets are located on Level 3 and in the courtyard.
The boats can be viewed from the Quay but disabled visitors may find difficulty boarding them.
TOILETS
Toilets are located in the car parking area in front of the Museum, in the courtyard under the clock tower and on Level 3.
GIFT SHOP
There is a well-stocked shop which sells souvenirs, gifts, books, guides, postcards, educational resources, etc.
EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES
The Museum makes special provision for school parties.
For Teachers' Packs, details of facilities and resources please contact the Education Officer.
PHOTOGRAPHY
Photography is permitted with hand-held equipment for non-commercial purposes only.
Permission must be obtained from the Curator if photographs are to be used for any other purpose.
SPECIAL EVENTS
There is a programme of special events which take place during the year.
Please see the notices or ask for details.
The Museum displays are found on the lower three floors of Llanthony Warehouse.
These are referred to as:
LEVEL 1 (Ground Floor)
LEVEL 2 (First Floor)
LEVEL 3 (Second Floor)
Canal Mania
LEVEL TWO
‘Your money, Sir, will be doing its patriotic duty to make our nation wealthy.’
The Museum's displays take up the story of Britain's canals in 1793 — the height of canal mania — the year when more proposals for the building of canals were put before Parliament than ever before.
It seemed that the whole country had gone mad clamouring to put money into the new transport system which was destined to make fortunes for its investors.
Opinion was divided about the merits of the new canals.
Among those who expressed concern were the landowners across whose land a waterway would be cut ruining the view from their homes and changing their way of life.
Agents of the various private canal companies would visit  landowners and offer incentives to persuade them to buy company shares and to sell parts of their land.
The ordinary folk also had mixed feelings.
Some feared the canal-digging ‘navvies’ about whom they had heard terrible tales, or saw the canals as a means for the rich to become richer.
Others were more positive and planned how they might use the waterways to improve their way of life.
For example, some localised industries would now be able to offer their goods to a wider market.
One thing was certain: the countryside would never be the same again.
‘Pa and me will be able to get the old claypit open again.’
‘Mark my words!
These canals are for gentry with their finery and their coals.’
The Hey-Day of Canals
Canals soon became big business.
At first most traffic was localised, for example, between coal mine and village wharf; as more canals were built and became inter-connected boats travelled further afield and carried a greater variety of goods.
Administration
There was a considerable amount of administration for the clerk of a canal company.
It was his responsibility to keep records of boats which used the canal and of the tolls, the major source of income, charged for carriage of goods along its length.
It was also the clerk's duty to keep shareholders informed of the progress and financial state of the company.
Passengers
Canals were used not only for transport of goods but also for ferrying passengers and for the occasional pleasure trip.
The first passenger packet boats operated from Warrington to Manchester and later became part of a through route from Liverpool to Manchester via Runcorn.
They were run by the Bridgewater Canal Company.
The boats averaged four to six miles an hour, and had right of way over cargo boats on the canal.
One particular boat, ‘Duchess-Countess’, carried a large curved knife with which to sever the towline of any boat which got in its way!
Passenger routes developed throughout the country over both long and short distances.
Canals also linked together the stagecoach and railway networks making long distance journeys easier.
Railways
The coming of the railways had a considerable effect upon the prosperity of canal companies but was not the sole cause of their decline.
Investment in canals had brought prosperity for many shareholders and there was similar enthusiasm to invest in the railways.
Once railways had actually proved their viability new investment shifted to the railway companies who were able to offer better returns on capital than the canal companies.
In many places canals and railways co-existed.
Sometimes the canal companies were bought by the railway companies and the channel converted to take the rail track.
Many canal companies continued independently but, as the rail network grew, passengers and perishable goods traffic together with many bulk cargoes gradually transferred from the canals to the railways.
Competition
Narrow canals suffered most from rail competition; where they ran through towns there was often little physical space for expansion.
The broad canals proved to be more suitable for further investment.
They took larger boats, had fewer engineering problems and provided good links to the northern seaports.
It was, however, often necessary for the owners to cut their carriage rates to remain in competition with the railways.
After World War 1 motor lorries took away a great deal of the short distance carrying from the narrow canals.
Nationalisation
In 1947 waterways became part of the nationalised transport industry, investment being concentrated on the wider rivers and canals.
Trade was gradually lost, however, as new industries opened away from the banks of the waterways.
Some carrying on the narrow canals continued until the early 1960s.
This stopped after the bad winter of 1962–3 in the face of increasing competition from road transport on the new motorway system.
Some cargo is still carried on the waterways, although mainly on the broad canals and rivers.
Most of the traffic on the narrow canals is now of a different kind: growing numbers of pleasure craft owned or hired by those who have discovered the fascination of the inland waterways.
Warehousing & Trade
A variety of cargoes, as diverse as Britain's industries, has been carried on the inland waterways.
Many of the canals were built to serve specific industries and for short distance haulage taking coal or other raw materials from mine to factory.
The canals whose routes connected up to the major ports carried Britain's exports to the coast and brought imported raw materials inland.
Scotland's major canals were built across the country to link the western and eastern coasts providing a route which was safer and shorter than the sea passage around the northern coast.
In the North East of England the waterways developed as a network linked to the wide rivers Aire, Calder, Ouse and Trent.
As a result of the excellent links towns like Leeds and Wakefield grew as manufacturing centres; coal from the area's coalfields was easily transported to factories and to the ports.
In the North West links to the River Mersey were established.
Many raw materials were imported through Liverpool and distributed by canal or river navigation.
The mills of Lancashire were supplied with coal and cotton via the canal network.
Saltworks on the River Weaver could be economically supplied with Wigan's coal to dry the salt.
Industry in the Potteries needed china clay and flint which were brought from Weston Point at Runcorn by canal.
Midlands canals tended at first to link local industries with their raw materials.
In later years many of the canals became linked by rail to goods yards where transhipment of materials from rail to canal and vice versa could take place.
The focus of the South Eastern canal network was London.
Goods brought in  through the Port of London were widely distributed by way of the River Thames and the Grand Union Canal which linked to the Midlands.
The River Severn is the major navigable waterway in the South West of England.
In South Wales canals linked the valleys with the seaports.
Devon and Cornwall's canals connected agricultural areas with the goods they needed which came in through the many small ports.
Right: Barrels on Puffer Anzac.
This Clyde ‘Puffer’ has brought whisky from Islay to the bonded warehouses at Port Dundas on the Forth & Clyde Canal.
Right Centre: A Leeds & Liverpool ‘short’ boat piled high with wool.
The bales are gripped by ‘wool dogs’: tongs which bite into the soft filling as the crane lifts the load.
Right Below: Timber at a yard on the Gloucester & Berkeley Canal.
It was used for industries from match making to house construction, from pit props to railway sleepers.
The canal can accommodate vessels up to 1000 tons.
Left: Pitch handling at Doncaster.
Special clothing was worn for handling this very dusty cargo.
Certain cargoes were transported in compartment boats.
Left Centre: Cadbury's had several canalside depots; milk and chocolate crumb were regular cargoes on the Shropshire Union Canal.
Below: Walker's Yard, Camden.
Hand carts and horsedrawn carts wait to carry away building supplies brought from the gravel pits of Middlesex.
Building the waterways
Since very early times the rivers of Britain have been used for water transport.
The Romans and Vikings used them first as routes into the country for conquest and later for trade.
In Medieval times rivers were used for water supply and to power mills as well as for navigation.
Natural rivers, however, pose problems as the speed of flow and amount of water are not constant.
They are prone to silting which slows the current and causes shallows; water levels can vary so that both in flood and drought rivers can become impassable.
Where rivers meet the sea dangerous tides creating surges of water such as the Severn Bore can be a hazard.
From fairly early times many efforts were made to improve the courses of Britain's rivers so that boats could travel with fewer interruptions and greater safety.
Navigation improvement schemes included not only the building of locks but the digging of the new river channels or ‘cuts’ to by-pass meandering river courses.
By the mid-18th century trade had begun to expand and money became  available for more adventurous schemes.
Francis Egerton, Duke of Bridgewater, hired James Brindley, a millwright, to cut a new waterway from his coal mines at Worsley to Manchester.
This marked the beginning of the major period of canal building in England.
The early canals were narrow and followed the contours of the land avoiding changes in land level wherever possible.
Later canals, built by engineers such as Telford and Smeaton, had more changes of level and used a greater variety of structures; locks, tunnels, embankments, cuttings and aqueducts which demanded large amounts of money and considerable engineering skill.
It should be remembered that the canal engineers had very few existing structures from which to obtain ideas.
Although canal bridges all perform the function of providing access across water, they come in a host of shapes and sizes and are made from many different materials.
A ‘flash lock’ on the River Thames — an early method of controlling the flow of water.
The paddles are being removed so that the level of water is raised allowing a boat to pass through and continue in deeper water.
The stonemason worked on many canal structures.
He would have cut and dressed stone for bridges, towpath edges and locksides.
LEVEL THREE
James Brindley 1716–1772
Far Left: This turnover bridge on the Macclesfield Canal changes the towpath to the opposite side of the canal so that a horse pulling a boat does not have to be un-hitched.
Left: The simple counterbalance mechanism on this bridge on the Llangollen Canal is easily operated to allow the boat to pass through.
Locks, Tunnels and Aqueducts
These structures all provide a means of negotiating changes in land level when constructing a canal.
Locks
Locks, or more correctly, ‘pound locks’, are a means of raising a boat over a rise or fall in level by a series of steps.
They are a development of the system of weirs and flash locks where a stretch of water was impounded to provide a good depth of water to flush or ‘flash’ a boat along its way.
The lock chamber is usually built of brick (as is the Museum's lock at the entrance to the displays) or stone.
Where ground conditions are unsuitable less conventional materials such as cast iron and turf have been used.
The size of the lock chamber restricts the size of boats which can use a particular canal.
On ‘narrow’ canals no boat larger than 70 feet (21 metres) long and 7 feet (2.1 metres) wide can travel through the locks.
On the broad canals of Yorkshire the locks were built to accommodate the sailing keels which were about 60 feet long and 14 feet wide.
Aqueducts
Aqueducts usually take a canal over a road, river or another canal.
They vary considerably in size ranging from the magnificent Pontcysyllte Aqueduct on the Llangollen Canal (over 300 metres long and 36 metres above ground level) to the much smaller Engine Arm Aqueduct on the Birmingham Canal Navigations at Smethwick.
Tunnels
Early tunnels were often surveyed by using two high points from which to make sightings.
Shafts were dug along the line to depths calculated by the engineer and the main tunnel dug from the bottom of each shaft in the direction of the next one.
The first canal tunnels were built without towing paths which meant that horses had to be unhitched and led over the top of the tunnel while the boat was taken through it.
The boat was propelled either by ‘legging’) the crew lying on their backs or sides and pushing on the tunnel walls with their feet — or by ‘shafting’— pushing with the boat shaft (pole) against the tunnel roof.
The latter practice was discouraged because of the damage it could cause to the roof of the tunnel.
On some busy canals full-time leggers worked boats through tunnels for a fixed charge.
Later tunnels were built with towpaths which dispensed with the need for legging.
The last tunnel to be built at Netherton in the Black Country has a towing path on each side.
Tugs were used to tow strings (trains) of boats through some tunnels.
At Blisworth on the Grand Union Canal tugs were used from 1870 to 1936.
In Harecastle Tunnel on the Trent & Mersey Canal electrically-powered tugs were used until the 1950s because poor ventilation prevented the use of engines which produced exhaust fumes.
Hatton Locks on the Grand Union Canal where the 21 locks rise over 45 metres through the Warwickshire countryside.
Main Picture Centre: Materials are lowered down a ventilation shaft for Blisworth Tunnel on the Grand Junction Canal.
Inset Left: Hazlehurst Aqueduct carries the Leek branch of the Caldon Canal over the main line which goes to Froghall.
Inset Right: The Engine Arm Aqueduct at Smethwick.
The arduous task of legging through a long tunnel like that under Castle Hill at Dudley could take over 3 hours.
Cuttings and Embankments
Foxes use the canal towing paths as routes to the centre of towns and cities where they go to scavenge for food.
Heron like the gently sloping muddy sides of canals.
They search in the shallow water for small fish and frogs.
Woodseaves Cutting on the Shropshire Union Canal.
Where a small hill or depression had to be crossed in the course of building a canal, a cutting or an embankment was often the engineering solution.
Embankments can vary considerably  in size; many cater for just a slight change in the level of the ground.
On a grand scale they can be used instead of aqueducts or as approaches to them.
Cuttings and embankments are often a haven for wildlife.
Although found on the canals coots are more common on reservoirs and ponds.
They prefer shallow, undisturbed water.
Moorhens live on many canals.
Their nests are frequently threatened by fast moving craft as they are built on the water's surface, anchored only by reeds or branches.
Breaches or bursts on embankments can be caused by tree roots or even burrowing animals like moles and water rats.
Mole catchers were employed by some canal companies because of the problems which the animal could cause.
Maintaining the waterways
Canal channels and structures need general repair and maintenance in order that the waterways can remain open to traffic.
Well-maintained locks, for example, play an essential part in the smooth running of waterways for they are the vital links between the different levels of canal.
Maintenance work varies from paddle gear lubrication to the rebuilding of brick locksides.
Many jobs such as replacing a balance beam can be done with the lock still in use: replacing or repairing a gate often requires a major stoppage.
The No 4 Steam Dredger, now part of the museum's collection of vessels, was used to scrape a trench for cables leading from the Castle Meads power station at Gloucester.
The diver went down to guide the cable into the trench.
LEVEL THREE
Diving
Canal companies employed divers to investigate underwater problems.
Sending the diver into the canal meant that there was no need to drain off millions of gallons of water.
Divers are still used today although their equipment is rather more sophisticated than is shown in the museum display.
They are used mainly for inspection of foundations, assessing the condition of lock gates and checking the progress of repair work.
Much use is now made of video cameras to record underwater conditions which can then be viewed as a guide for maintenance staff.
Inset Left: Designed for deep sea work but often used on relatively shallow canals this diving gear allowed men to work safely underwater for long periods.
Air was supplied by hand pump.
Inset Far Left: A member of a modern piling gang inserts a steel pile to strengthen the canal bank.
Many waterways were originally constructed with soft banks but passing boats washed mud into the channel which had to be cleared by frequent dredging.
Over the years canal banks have been strengthened with a variety of materials; brick, stone, timber, concrete and steel.
Main Picture: A major stoppage on the Grand Union Canal which involved large gangs of labourers and skilled men.
Notice has to be given of the intention to close a stretch of canal.
In the past this was vitally important because of the effect it could have on trade.
Water Supply — and the many varied uses
A guaranteed supply of water is vital for the canal system.
Supply comes from many sources including reservoirs, mines and rivers.
Back-pumping returns water from the lower levels of a canal so that it can be re-used.
The success of any navigation is governed by the ability to supply the right amount of water at the right time.
Restriction notices designed to keep the canals and their water supply safe.
Main Picture The pumping station at Saltley on the Birmingham Canal Navigations.
LEVEL THREE
Most canal companies built reservoirs to keep a constant supply even in the driest weather.
The water is often at some distance from the canal and is fed to the navigation in a series feeder channels.
Restriction notices designed to keep the canals and their water supply safe.
Main Picture: The pumping station at Saltley on the Birmingham Canal Navigations.
The Grand Union Canal's reservoir at Ruislip was marketed by the canal company as a leisure amenity in the 1930s.
Leisure activities still take place here although they are more likely to be water skiing, wind surfing and sailing rather than bathing.
Water from the railway-owned Stratford Canal could be used by engines on the branch railway at Edstone.
Life Afloat
Romance
Centre: The romantic image of narrow boat life in the contemporary print contrasts with the stark reality of the family working through Foxton Locks on a wintry day.
Above: The elaborately decorated cabin of a narrow boat.
The range used for cooking also provides heat: an oil lamp provides light.
A large fold-down flap makes up a double bed, a small flap fulfils a dual purpose as cupboard door and table.
‘Ribbon plates’, crochet work and brasses brighten up the confined space which represents the entire living space for the family.
In the early days of the Canal Age, up to about 1840, most boatmen received a rate of pay which compared very favourably with that of agricultural workers of the time; they could often afford to keep a house as well as a boat.
The coming of the railways, however, caused considerable changes in the way of life for many boatmen.
The cheaper carriage rates forced the canal companies to lower their charges; in turn this reduced the boatmen's wages and many of them were obliged to move off the land and take their families onto the boats.
Although many boatmen's wives acted as crew they were not recognised as such and could not get compensation for injury or sick pay.
Only after World War 1 did Fellows, Morton & Clayton, and then the  Grand Union Canal Carrying Company, recognise their role by paying them formal wages.
Earning a living on the canals was hard work.
The whole family travelled with the boats.
Days began early and ended late so that maximum distances could be travelled.
Children seldom had time for schooling since life was spent on the move.
They often helped by leading the horse, setting the locks or steering the boat.
Very small children were sometimes sat on the cabin top and tied to the chimney to keep them safe.
The earliest narrow boats were very simply painted with the owner's name and address and basic geometric designs, but during the mid-19th century a form of decoration now known as ‘Roses and Castles’ developed introducing a rich and varied tradition which has lasted to this day.
Left: Most wide waterway craft were built with a more spacious cabin and many boatmen lived on board although they may also have kept a house on shore.
The simpler decorative style of the wide boats echoes that of the seagoing ships alongside which they were built.
On the Leeds & Liverpool Canal boats such as this one were often much more elaborately decorated.
Moving the Boats
LEVEL ONE
Right: An early engraving of a boat horse on the Bridgewater Canal.
Centre: Bowhauliers move a small trow on the Thames & Severn Canal.
Below: As technology improved there were various attempts to fit engines in horse drawn narrow boats.
Hooke's Patent Detachable Motor represents one of the less successful attempts.
The boats and barges of the early river navigations were moved along by the current or tide, by sail or by gangs of men.
On the rivers Thames and Severn fifty or more men were sometimes needed to pull one boat against the strong flow.
Bowhauliers developed a reputation for dishonesty and violence.
Most canals were built with horse towing paths.
A single horse could easily pull a boat loaded with 60 tons.
On some canals a pair of donkeys might be used instead of a horse.
Horses were still used until the 1950s on some canals and can still be seen today pulling some trip boats.
Early steam engines were not very suitable for powering canal boats because of their large size.
Many experiments were tried throughout the canals.
The steam narrowboats which operated from the Midlands to London could carry only 12 tons but could tow an unpowered ‘butty’ boat behind.
Four crew members were needed for a ‘steamer’ which frequently operated day and night or ‘fly’, as it was called.
Around the beginning of the twentieth century ‘crude oil’ engines were first fitted in canal boats.
These were safer than petrol engines, more suitable because they could be run more slowly and could be connected directly to the propeller.
Early oil engines were mostly semi-diesel  engines and had to be started by heating the ‘hot bulb’— part of the cylinder head — with a blowlamp.
Some of them could be reversed by making the engine almost stop then run the opposite way.
Some ‘hot bulb’ engines were fitted with gearboxes which gave a proper reverse gear.
The ‘direct’ reversing Bolinder engines remained popular, however, because they were simple and easier to maintain and had a long life.
Above: Charles Nelson's steam narrowboat ‘Jason’ tows a heavily laden butty.
Far Left: Heavy duty marine diesel engines such as the Widdop were fitted mainly in wider canal craft.
Left: Bolinders were supplied by James Pollock & Sons, Shipbuilders of Faversham, Kent, who also designed many of the motor canal boats in which the engines were fitted.
Building the Boats
Above: ‘Progress’ under construction.
This experimental wide beam motor boat was built in 1934 by Bushell Bros at Tring for the Grand Union Central Company.
Centre: Sephton's Dock on the Coventry Canal.
Below: Caulking — filling the gaps between planks with rolled oakum.
Thousands of boats were constructed and maintained in the hundreds of boatyards or ‘docks’ found on Britain's canals and rivers.
At first boats were made of wood which was available in large quantities.
They were easily built and repaired using tools and skills often passed down from father to son.
Designs resulting largely from trial and error remained virtually unchanged over 200 years.
Wooden narrow-boats were built throughout the canal system.
Most docks were around the Midlands; over a hundred of these were on the Birmingham Canals.
Some specialised in building boats quickly and had large numbers of boatbuilders but most docks were very small with a work force of only two or three men.
Iron boats eventually became cheaper to build as the technology for iron production improved.
Fewer rivets were needed because rolled iron sheets could be made in larger sizes.
Many narrowboat hulls were ‘composite’ with iron sides and wooden bottoms.
When steel became available in the 1880s it was used instead of iron.
Steel was stronger so boats could be built with thinner plates, making them lighter and so able to carry more cargo.
Steel, however, rusts much more quickly than wrought iron.
When canal boats are taken out of the water for repairs they are winched sideways up a slipway.
The large engine in the boat gallery was used for this purpose at the Liverpool Lighterage Company Yard in Northwich, Cheshire.
Supplied by Edwin Foden, Engineers of Sandbach in Cheshire, it is thought to have been built around 1870.
The steam cylinder is 12 inches  in diameter, has a stroke of 18 inches and would provide up to 20 horse power with steam from the boiler at a pressure of about 80 pounds per square inch.
The engine drove four winches in either direction.
It took about four hours to raise full steam in the original boiler.
When this boiler wore out during the 1940s the electric drive was added.
The motor came secondhand from a Liverpool Corporation electric tramcar.
The controller from the tram was used as well.
It gave a number of different speeds forwards and backwards.
The winches could then be run instantly without having to wait for steam to be available.
Above: Harland & Wolff's yard on the River Thames built many boats at a time.
These ‘composite’ boats were for the Grand Union Canal Carrying Company.
Left: Most boatyards had a signwriter who painted the boats in their company liveries and added the decorative touches.
There were varying degrees of decoration.
The Museum's Boats
ON THE QUAYSIDE
Right: Sabrina 5 undergoes extensive work at Saul on the Gloucester — Sharpness Canal.
Above: The boat moored in the Barge Arm.
Sabrina 5
Sabrina 5 was built in Bristol by Charles Hill & Son and launched in 1944, one of a class of six boats.
She was built to carry dry cargo such as fruit and groceries in crates, aluminium or copper.
Sabrina 5 is 90 feet (27.4m) long, 18 feet (5.5m) wide and could carry 160 tons.
The Sabrinas and related ‘CS’ and ‘Bird’class boats operated between the Bristol Channel ports and the inland docks on the River Severn.
They were towed in trains behind canal company tugs.
Sabrina 5 was last used in the early 1970s and lay derelict until restored by the Museum in 1987.
Northwich
Northwich is an unpowered narrowboat which was towed by horse or a motor boat.
She belonged to the firm Fellows, Morton & Clayton.
Built in 1898 of ‘composite’ construction, with iron  riveted sides and an elm bottom, she could carry up to 25 tons.
Most of her working life was spent on the canals between London and Birmingham.
When the company went into liquidation in 1948, Northwich transferred to the north and worked from Preston Brook on the Mersey, often carrying chocolate for Cadbury's or aluminium for Rover to Wolverhampton.
Motor Boat Oak
Oak is a ‘Severner Motor’ built by Charles Hill in 1934 for the Severn & Canal Carrying Company.
She was one of the first narrowboats to be welded rather than  riveted , but was built with an elm bottom.
Unlike most narrowboats, Oak was built with a cabin forward of the engine in an attempt to provide more living space.
This design was not popular with the boatmen as it gave a less comfortable steering  position — it was noisier and closer to the exhaust.
The motor is a 9 horse power Petter — not very powerful for use on the River Severn.
Oak worked between Gloucester and Birmingham until the early 1960s carrying a variety of cargoes which included chocolate for Cadbury's at Bournville.
She was then used on the Trent & Mersey Canal as a crane barge for maintenance of the waterway.
She lay derelict for 10 years before she was restored for the Museum in 1988.
Bantam Tug Walsall
The ‘pusher’ tug, Walsall, is a major exhibit in the museum's boat gallery on Level 1.
Built by E C Jones of Brentford in the 1950s, she worked until the early 1980s.
Most of her life was spent pushing barges loaded with silt dredged from the narrow canals around Birmingham.
The hull is cut away so that the engine, gearbox and propeller shaft can be viewed.
Left: Oak under restoration.
The boat was carefully restored by Warwickshire Fly Boat Company.
Below: A late evening view taken as Oak's engine runs for the first time since restoration.
Around the Quay
Right: No 4 Steam Dredger at work in Sharpness Docks in the 1950s.
Above: At work on the museum site.
Below: Engine detail.
Two large leather drive belts operate the bucket train.
These are designed to slip if the buckets hit an obstruction.
A hopper boat is used alongside to catch the dredgings.
No 4 Steam Dredger
The No 4 Steam Dredger was built at Sliedrecht in Holland by the De Klop shipyard.
She was built to keep the docks at Gloucester and Sharpness free from silt but could also work in the River Severn outside Sharpness Lock and on the west bank of the river at Lydney docks.
Delivered in 1925 No 4 completed her trials just before the General Strike of 1926 and was laid up until 1927.
Until her retirement in 1982 the huge machine moved up to 140,000 tonnes of mud each year.
The steam boiler was originally coal fired but is now fuelled by oil.
It provides the power to drive the chain of buckets each of which can lift 7 cwt (356 Kg) of silt.
As the chain turns the buckets bite into the canal bed and scoop out the  mud.
The contents of the buckets run down chutes into hopper boats which take the silt away.
To move over long distances the dredger has to be towed by a tug.
Whilst dredging two steam winches on the deck are used to move her along on wire ropes the ends of which are attached to the canal banks.
Balmforth Steam Crane
Built in about 1880 by William Balmforth & Co of Rodley, Leeds.
The crane was originally in use at Kirkstall Forge.
After being sold to a Leeds scrapyard in about 1920 the crane became derelict until 1988 when it was salvaged and restored by Dorothea Restoration Engineers.
The steam boiler and jib have been replaced.
The crane will lift 1 tonne.
Llanthony Yard
Centre Right: Blacksmiths in the forge at Ellesmere Repair Yard in Shropshire
Llanthony Yard has been created at the museum as an example of a canal repair yard and has a layout typical of the many found around the canal system.
A yard of this size would have employed about twenty staff.
The buildings include a blacksmith's forge, carpenter's workshop, stable and tackroom, engine house, and a general workshop where museum conservation and maintenance work are carried out.
Access to the Schools' Workshop is through Llanthony Yard.
Canal companies tried to be self sufficient and carry out repair jobs in their own premises.
Most had one large repair yard where major jobs could be undertaken and several smaller maintenance yards where day to day work could be carried out.
Jobs ranged from lockgate making to boat building and repairs to company housing.
The Blacksmith's Forge
There are two hearths in the forge — one from Gayton on the Grand Junction Canal in Northamptonshire and the other from Enfield on the Lee & Stort Navigation.
Draught for the fire comes from an air pump from Enfield and there are hand bellows from Hatton on the Grand Union Canal.
The small tools have come from yards all over the country.
The blacksmith was involved in many canal repair jobs.
Most of a canal's metalwork would at some stage pass through the blacksmith's forge.
As special jobs arose the blacksmith would work with an assistant to complete them.
In between times he made nails, chains and tools or turned out spare parts for canal machinery.
Many small jobs for canal bank workers — mending scythes, making fence fittings and nails — would be carried out in the forge.
From time to time decorative work was needed: railings, weather vanes, iron gates or scroll work.
Sometimes the blacksmith would take on commissions from other organisations such as repair work for local factories or railway companies.
When stoppages were called so that the canal could be repaired the blacksmith would go on site to fit the ironwork he had made.
Weighbridge
The machinery and plates came to the Museum from Enfield, North London.
The weighbridge  was formerly used to weigh in materials brought to the yard for storage before being used on the maintenance of the Lee & Stort Navigation.
Machine shop
The larger machinery in the workshop includes shears, power hammer, rollers for metal bending and a threader for cutting the thread onto bolts and tie rods.
There are many examples of wooden patterns — the most impressive are those for the 1830s cast iron lock gates on the Oxford Canal.
There are many smaller patterns for cranes, winches and pulleys.
Engine House
The horizontal heavy oil engine was built in the late 1920s by Fielding and Platt Ltd at their Atlas Works in Gloucester.
The engine was originally installed at Godwins Engineering Works at Quenington in Gloucestershire where it drove some 400 yards (369 metres) of line shafting, powering the entire factory.
During World War II the Fielding engine powered a 90 KVA generator and in later years was kept as a standby in case of power failure.
The engine was left in a derelict state following a fire at the works.
It was given to the Mid-Gloster Engine Preservation Society in trust for the museum and has been restored to full working order by members of the society.
Technical details
80 bhp horizontal four stroke high compression oil engine.
14 inch bore and 22 inch stroke.
Currently run on central heating oil at a rate of one gallon per hour.
The hipped timber roof of the Engine House was salvaged from a canal pumphouse at Diglis Basin, Worcester.
The 6m × 9m structure was transported by boat down the River Severn.
It was craned into position and then re-slated.
Below: The piston is lifted into place by volunteers who painstakingly restored the Fielding engine.
Below: The Engine House roof is lifted onto the boat at Worcester for its journey to Gloucester Docks.