

STEVE BEST
CONSERVATIVE
PLEASE DISPLAY THIS POSTER IN YOUR WINDOW
The Conservative Way Forward for Oxford
PAYING FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT
The Government is taking £140 off your Community Charge bills this year and also many will benefit from the new Community Charge Reduction Scheme.
ENVIRONMENT
The Government's Environmental Protection Act has paved the way for environmental improvements; in particular they have strengthened the law against litter and encouraged re-cycling.
RECREATION & LEISURE
The Government is introducing competitive tendering for leisure facilities which under Labour is costing the City nearly £7 million.
TRANSPORT
Thanks to Government deregulation of buses we now have a dramatic improvement in Oxford's bus service.
HOUSING
In Oxford, Labour has used up the housing reserves and still owes £22 million on its council houses.
Conservatives believe in good management and not paying out £ millions in interest.
NO ALTERNATIVE
Liberal Democrat views vary, but on Oxford City Council they nearly always support Labour policies — so remember a vote for the Liberals is a vote for Labour.
THE CONSERVATIVE CHOICE
A streamlined and efficient council
A fair deal for traffic and parking throughout the City
Protection of City villages such as Binsey, Old Headington, Iffley, Old Marston, Quarry, and Wolvercote
Oxford people in need of housing given priority
An accessible bus station
THE LABOUR ALTERNATIVE
Staff doubled — more and more committees since Labour took control
Labour's favoured areas given priority
Threat of overdevelopment
70% of vacant council houses given to those not on the waiting list
Inaccessible Gloucester Green against Conservative advice
VOTE CONSERVATIVE, THURSDAY MAY 2ND POLLING STATIONS OPEN 8.00am-9.00pm
Dear Elector,
LOCAL ACTION
The Conservatives are acting on the issues that affect your local area — in the coming year we will…
Oppose plans for the redevelopment of the open space by the Ice Rink.
The proposed ‘Leisure Village’ will cause an unacceptable amount of disruption in the local area.
Continue to apply pressure on the City Council to modify the dangerous junction at the Redbridge ‘Park and Ride.’
Support the campaign to keep the path along the Thames behind Shirelake Close private.
Oppose inappropriate plans for commercial development on Wytham Street.
Attempt to persuade the City Council to discontinue its dangerous and extravagant traffic schemes near the Donnington area.
Steve Best 
OXFORD CITY COUNCIL ELECTIONS
ABOUT STEVE BEST
I am currently an economics teacher working in the South Ward area.
I have been involved in local politics for several years and I am running in South Ward for the second time.
In the last year I have been helping residents with a variety of local problems and have successfully applied pressure on Oxfordshire County Council to act on the problems caused by the gypsies at the end of the Abingdon Road, near the Rivermead Rehabilitation Centre.
If elected I would work within the council to eliminate the waste and extravagance that makes the current level of local taxation, in whatever form, an unacceptable burden on local residents.
STEVE BEST CONSERVATIVE on Thursday 2nd May
MAGDALEN BRIDGE APPEAL
The balustrade on the South Side of Magdalen Bridge has been restored.
Funds are urgently required if this work is to be completed on the North Side.
This leaflet shows how you can help;
Make a small donation,
Make a larger donation and receive a baluster birdtable,
Sponsor a baluster and your very own time capsule will be buried in the bridge.
This is a joint venture between Oxford Preservation Trust and Oxfordshire County Council 
Oxfordshire County Council Caring Countywide
Restored Baluster Birdtable
Would you like a birdtable commemorating your contribution to the restoration of this historic bridge?
The ‘Restored Baluster Birdtable’ is in limited supply, but donations of £150 plus to the Magdalen Bridge Appeal Fund will, subject to availability, secure a birdtable made from a baluster removed from the bridge.
These balusters, made from reconstituted stone and fitted to the bridge earlier this century, have a steel rod embedded in them.
They have been removed from the bridge because many similar ones have broken apart as the steel rods have corroded.
Expert craftsmen have repaired the stonework and treated it with silicone prior to fitting plinths and top made from new Cotswold stone.
However, because most of the material of which the baluster is made, there can be no guarantee against future cracking and frost damage.
The double plinth features a brass plaque commemorating the 1990 Restoration Project.
To obtain one, send a donation to Oxford Preservation Trust and specify ‘Restored Baluster Birdtable’.
They are available for collection from Speedwell House, Speedwell Street in Oxford on receipt of your donation.
Alternatively, you may prefer an unmodified but repaired baluster to adorn your garden as you choose.
These are available in recognition of a gift of £75 towards the Magdalen Bridge Appeal Fund.
Orders and collection as above stating ‘Restored Baluster’ only.
The Magdalen Birdtable
The ‘MAGDALEN BIRDTABLE’ is a magnificent copy of an original baluster, carved from new Cotswold Limestone.
It will be given free to any donor of at least £500 to the Magdalen Bridge Appeal Fund.
Slightly smaller that the real balusters, the Magdalen Birdtable is hand-turned on a lathe by the same stonemasons who are rebuilding the bridge parapet.
A brass plate may be engraved to a special order, perhaps to commemorate a special person or an occasion such as a Golden Wedding.
Choose your own words (up to 20) or select from the following:
1.
Magdalen Bridge, Oxford.
Restoration 1990.
2.
Presented to…in recognition of a generous contribution to the Magdalen Bridge Appeal Fund, 1990.
3.
Wording of your own choice (20 words maximum)
4.
(No brass plate)
To obtain one please send your contribution to Oxford Preservation Trust with details of the wording required, and stating ‘Magdalen Birdtable’.
General Information on Birdtables.
Samples of these birdtables are available for inspection in the Botanical Gardens, High Street, Oxford
Donors will be sent a voucher to exchange for a birdtable, which must be collected from Speedwell House, Speedwell Street, Oxford.
Donors will be responsible for assembly, for which simple instructions will be provided.
These birdtables are being made specially to order.
Delays may be inevitable but they will be kept to a minimum.
Sponsor a Baluster and bury a ‘Time Capsule’
This is a unique opportunity both to help the Magdalen Bridge Appeal Fund and to leave something of your life to posterity.
In return for a £250 donation to the Appeal Fund we will give you an engraved Time Capsule measuring 75mm dia. × 230mm long (3″ × 9″).
You may fill and seal this capsule, and we will bury it deep within the bridge structure.
You will be given a plan on which ‘your’ baluster is identified, and you will be told the day the capsule is to be buried should you wish to attend.
What you bury is private, but why not records of your family, or your memories of Oxford, or something you would like mankind in the future to know.
Or you may simply say who sponsored the baluster.
Your donations should be sent to Oxford Preservation Trust, and you will be sent the time capsule.
This should be returned as soon as possible.
Vale of White Horse District Council
HOUSEHOLD WASTE MANAGEMENT 1991–92
BANK HOLIDAY WORKING SCHEDULES AND RECYCLING FACILITIES
Recycling for the future
All enquiries regarding these schedules should be directed to: Biffa Waste Services Ltd, 154E Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4SD (0235–863141) whose staff will be pleased to assist you 
MAY 1991 — MAY DAY
Monday 6th May (May Day): No collection
Monday 13th May: Double collection
HOUSEHOLD COLLECTION
Please ensure bins are at the kerbside by 7.00 a.m.
Garden refuse: one bag or bin per premises per week collected FREE.
Bulky household items: up to 3 items at a time collected FREE.
Refrigerators and freezers are collected separately, for removal of CFCs
Please contact Biffa (0235–836141) to arrange this service.
The following are NOT removed: soil, stones, builders or DIY materials.
Ensure broken glass and other sharp items are thoroughly wrapped or left in a marked open box.
MAY 1991 — SPRING BANK HOLIDAY
Monday 27th May: No collection
Monday 3rd June: Double collection
BOTTLE BANK SITES
The following will be opened in Summer 1991 
The following Drinks Can Banks will be opened in Summer 1991  
AUGUST 1991-LATE SUMMER HOLIDAY
Monday 26th August: No collection
Monday 2nd September: Double collection
MOTOR OIL
The following garages will accept used motor oil for recycling:
NEWSPAPER AND MAGAZINE BANKS
To be opened during 1991 
For advice on outlets for recycling other types of paper, please telephone the Recycling Officer.
CHRISTMAS 1991
Wednesday 25th December: No collection, will be collected on Saturday
28th December: Single collection
Thursday 26th December: No collection
Thursday 2nd January: Double collection
NEW YEAR 1992
Wednesday 1st January: No collection
Wednesday 8th January: Double collection
PLEASE NOTE
Special arrangements can be made for the collection of refuse from elderly and disabled people; and for the disposal of clinical waste and hazardous waste.
Please telephone Environmental Health Dept. for details.
CIVIC AMENITY SITES
DRAYTON
Recycling facilities for glass, paper, scrapmetal & mixed cans and CFCs.
STANFORD-IN-THE-VALE
Recycling facilities for glass, paper, motor oil, scrapmetal & mixed cans and CFCs.
For up-to-date information and opening times consult the OXCIS terminal in your local library.
EASTER 1992
Good Friday 17 April: No collection
Friday 24th April: Double collection
Monday 20th April: No collection
Monday 17th April: Double collection
The companies listed in this leaflet have all shown their commitment to recycling by sponsoring recycling facilities in the Vale.
For your company to participate in this scheme, contact the Recycling Officer.
(Inclusion in the leaflet does not imply endorsement of the goods & services provided).
ENQUIRIES
Any enquiries regarding household waste or recyclable materials should be directed to:
UNTIL JULY 1991
Environmental Health Division, 66 Bath St, Abingdon Telephone: 0235–520361
FROM AUG 1991
Environmental Health Division, Abbey House, Abingdon Telephone: 0235–520202
VALE OF WHITE HORSE DISTRICT COUNCIL
ENVIRONMENTAL CHARTER
AN ‘ELEMENTAL’ APPROACH
VWHDC ENVIRONMENTAL CHARTER
AIR
Implement the Environmental Protection Act in respect of processes emitting gaseous pollutants (6k)
Combat excessive noise from industrial and domestic properties (7b, c)
Endeavour to contain or reduce noise levels within the Vale (7)
Monitor and control gas emissions from closed land-fill sites (6h)
Encourage smoke-free areas in workplaces, shops, restaurants and public transport (6n)
Use vehicles with catalytic converters where possible (6f)
Enforce laws against selling tobacco to minors (6l, m)
Apply ‘Planning and Noise’ policy to all new developments (7a)
Control emission of dust and other effluvia (6h)
Enforce stubble-burning bye laws (6a, b)
Encourage use of smokeless fuels (6j)
Monitor & reduce emissions from industrial premises (6i)
Use lead free petrol (2m,6d)
Control construction site noise (7f)
WATER
Support plans to open up Wilts & Berks Canal (14a)
Reduce pollution in drinking and recreational waters (140
Act against river pollution wherever it occurs (14c)
Support National Rivers Authority in improving rivers and their immediate surroundings (14b)
Provide adequate refuse disposal for all river users (14d)
EARTH
Combat graffiti, flyposting and unsightly hoardings (10)
Set aside ‘Vale Heritage Woodlands’(15a)
Encourage use of car parks rather than on-street parking (12h)
Use products made from recycled materials (2h, j)
Reduce waste sent to landfill by promoting and increasing collections for recycling (5a)
Encourage use of footpaths and bridleways (13)
Campaign for much needed by-passes (12e)
Provide more paper, can and bottle banks (5c)
Work in partnership with Tidy Britain and other groups (4b)
Continue to replace ageing trees by new planting (15d)
Provide dog-free areas and support anti dog-fouling bye laws (8a, b)
Support ‘traffic calming’ where appropriate (12a)
Combat litter by effective cleansing and by education (4a)
Encourage recycling (5b)
FIRE
Use low-energy lighting (2f)
Pursue energy conservation and efficiency in the Council's own property (2e)
Promote energy efficiency in private housing, office and commercial developments (16e)
Encourage cycling by provision of cycle tracks (16f)
Switch off and save energy (2f)
Since earliest times, mankind has classified the world into four elements — earth, air, fire and water.
This summary of the Vale's Environmental Charter follows this division, and clearly shows how the Vale's policies are designed to protect and develop each aspect of the environment — both globally, and locally in this unique and beautiful area.
EARTH
includes transport, waste management, tree planting and litter control.
AIR
as well as obvious pollution and emission controls, this covers noise and smoking.
FIRE
this section treats the efficient use of modern sources of heat, light and energy.
WATER
includes preservation of natural and man made waterways in the Vale.
This leaflet can only include a selection of the topics covered by the Environmental Charter.
(The numbers in brackets refer to paragraphs in the Charter.)
Copies of the Charter will be available from District Council Offices in Abingdon, Faringdon & Wantage.
The tasks before us are not simple, but we believe that are achievable through…
PARTNERSHIPS…
with Parish Councils, voluntary groups, and you, as a resident of the Vale.
INITIATIVES…
to develop new ways of tackling new problems, and to rethink our approaches to existing problems.
EDUCATION…
so that the environmental consequences of the simplest action are understood.
IMPROVEMENTS…
to strive and continually find ways to secure, cherish and enhance.
1991
Labour
Value for people
Labour is working for the community
JOBS & BUSINESS
Start-up grants for small businesses
Skills group for ex-Rover workers
City Centre Manager scheme
Women's training scheme
PEOPLE
Pensioners 20p fares kept (cost £500,000)
Improved recreation discounts for residents
Improved playgrounds & after-school clubs
HOMES
Improvements for private and public housing
Enforcement of standards in the rented sector
ENVIRONMENT
£334,000 added to street cleaning
More recycling facilities
Planting trees for the ‘Forest of Oxford’
KEEP LABOUR WORKING FOR OXFORD PEOPLE
VOTE LABOUR THURSDAY 2nd MAY 8am-9pm
OXFORD CITY COUNCIL ELECTIONS THURSDAY MAY 2nd
BOB PRICE for South Ward 
IF YOU WOULD LIKE TO HELP OR CONTACT THE LABOUR CANDIDATE
NEED TRANSPORT TO AND FROM THE POLLING STATION
PLEASE RING US ON OXFORD: 725218
VOTE Labour Thursday 2 May
Printed and published by Bryan Keen,(Election Agent) 46 Cowley Road, Oxford
MARGARET FLYNN
CONSERVATIVE
PLEASE DISPLAY THIS POSTER IN YOUR WINDOW
CONSERVATIVES — FOR A FAIRER OXFORD
Why is Oxford's Community Charge so high?
Oxford City Council has been a high spender since Labour got control.
They practically doubled the council staff in 5 years.
They are also paying top officials 10% over the normal pay scales.
The total staff bill is now over £15m.
Many are doing jobs which councils are not obliged to do.
Recreation costs some £7m a year.
The Ice Rink and Temple Cowley Swimming Pool cost us well over £1m a year.
Blackbird Leys Leisure Centre alone counts for £600,000 a year.
These should be run by private enterprise.
Council house rent arrears amounted to over £1m, though they are at long last being reduced.
The East Oxford Traffic Scheme has cost nearly £100,000 and is causing more problems than it solves.
The council is even considering buying Medley Boat Station for over £¼m.
Meanwhile Labour has voted for one miserable saving — doubling pensioners' concessionary fares.
Conservatives voted to keep them at 10p, but were defeated.
NO WONDER OXFORD IS ONE OF THE TOP TEN HIGH SPENDERS IN ENGLAND!
Our Ten Pledges
WHEN RETURNED TO POWER ON THE CITY COUNCIL THE CONSERVATIVES WILL:—
Cut the Community Charge
Stop top-heavy bureaucracy
Reduce Council House rents for older properties
Speed up Council House repairs
Provide lower-cost homes for first time buyers
Eliminate waste and distribute funds for recreation & amenities more fairly
Make Oxford pavements safer
Encourage the new bus services and keep concessionary fares down
Make parking schemes a priority
Clean up the City's environment, starting with the streets
A Fairer System
All political parties are agreed that everyone should pay towards council services if they can afford it.
People object to the Community Charge because it is so high.
Oxford is one of the highest in the country.
But they must blame the Councils not the Government.
City Conservatives produced a budget showing that we could easily save more and keep to Government guidelines.
But Labour and Liberal Democrats turned down the Conservative budget.
Only the Conservatives will substantially reduce the Community Charge in Oxford, and bring it down to a level that people can afford.
Meantime, please remember that over nine million people will be eligible for rebates — students, many pensioners, all those in receipt of housing benefit or income support, and many more.
Your council will provide details.
The Government has just announced that pensioners with savings of £16,000 or under will be eligible for rebates.
Many of those protesting most loudly are well able to pay.
Why should those living alone or elderly couples be paying as high rates as large wage-earning families?
Remember that Labour and Liberal Democrats would not go back to rates — they want people to pay a double income tax — and Labour want a property tax as well.
When councils start charging half what Oxford is paying (as they are already doing in most parts of Scotland) the Community Charge will seem a much fairer system.
Conservative councillors will cut unnecessary expenditure — and slash your community charge bill.
But we will only win if you vote for us on 3rd May.
27 Horwood Close Headington
Dear Elector,
This May, you are being asked to vote in the Oxford City Council Elections, when our Labour City and County Councils have been shown up for what they are — with no concern for the people to whom they are responsible.
This election, is a clear choice between over spending, and over zealous ideas, resulting in an unnecessarily high Poll Tax being levied on us all by a Labour Council out of control, up to its eyes in debt, overspent and overstaffed — or a sane, reasonable planned Conservative Council of common sense.
This MAY ask why?
Ask why so high, and find out the real reasons.
Vote for common sense.
Vote Conservative.
Vote FLYNN on Thursday, 3rd May.
Yours sincerely, Margaret Flynn
SPOT THE DIFFERENCE
Socialist Oxford City Council's charge £489
Government's Community Charge estimate £269
THE PRICE OF LABOUR £220
(82% above target is the second worst performance in the country — including London!)
MARGARET FLYNN
A lifelong Conservative who has always been politically active, and who has fought this seat in the last two local elections, Margaret lives in Headington Ward, and understands, and cares about the local issues.
Over the last seven years she has worked as a manager in the retail industry in Oxford.
She has two children, both educated at Oxford Schools.
Margaret Flynn has enjoyed meeting electors, learning their views, and helping them with their problems.
She cares deeply about environmental issues and is a true blue ‘green’.
IF YOU NEED A LIFT TO THE POLLING STATION OR IF YOU WANT TO HELP IN OUR CAMPAIGN RING US ON 771300 
Margaret Flynn Conservative on Thurs 3rd May