

COMMENT
Jargon is everywhere and the outdoor world is not exempt with its SSSIs, AONBs, MNRs and ESAs.
We might have got used to the names — Sites of Special Scientific Interest, Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty, Marine Nature Reserves, Environmentally Sensitive Areas — and perhaps even the initials, but how many people are aware of what they actually mean?
Most will have a dim idea that it's something to do with conservation and looking after nature.
And I'm sure there'd be few objections to such a worthwhile cause.
Except of course from the landowners, many of whom find having an SSSI on their land not a privilege but a curse.
Landowners can't do exactly what they want for a start, and if they intend to do anything which might damage the site they have to inform the Nature Conservancy Council in writing and try to work out a compromise.
Or at least they did.
All this could change as a result of an amendment to the Natural Heritage (Scotland) Bill which is jut about to become law.
The purpose of the Bill is controversial enough.
It intends to create a new conservation agency in Scotland to replace the existing Countryside Commission for Scotland and Nature Conservancy Council for Scotland.
And the Government-backed amendment, introduced by the landowning lobby, has a direct implication for SSSIs.
When it becomes law, Scottish Natural Heritage will have to refer objections to proposed and existing SSSIs to yet another body, a new committee set up by Scottish Secretary Ian Lang.
It is too early to say exactly what powers the committee will have, or indeed how sympathetic they will be to the aim of preserving such areas, but this sets a dangerous precedent.
The more difficult things are to achieve, the less thy are likely to happen.
This amendment adds yet another layer of bureaucracy to the establishment of SSSI and opens the way for existing sites to be deregistered.
And what applications does it have for other important nature conservation areas such as the AONBs, MNRs and ESAs?
This is a dangerous Bill for all those who care about the countryside.
Laura McCaffrey EDITOR 
ACTION UPDATE
OFF ROAD CYCLING EVENT
August 3–4.
Get set for the Kielder Classic, the final race in the Moore Large Series of mountain biking events which have been raising money for Help the Aged throughout the year.
This weekend of off-road events will include the 30 mile Enduro and a fun ride to the Scottish border and back again in the Saturday.
Then on the Sunday there will be observed trials and a race programme for a wide range of ages and standards.
More details and entry forms can be obtained by sending a SAE to Moore Large MTB Series, Sport Age, Rutland House, 38–42 Call Lane, Leeds LS1 6DT.
Tel: 0532 441200.
BIRDWATCHING IN LANCASHIRE
August 12.
Bring the whole family for this RSPB birdwatching day for beginners in the Leighton Moss Nature Reserve in Lancashire.
Get tips on identification, good birdwatching areas and equipment and be guided on a walk around the reserve which is home to such rare birds as bitterns, marsh harriers and bearded tits.
Wear sturdy footwear and bring binoculars if you have them — if not they can be hired on the day.
Meet at the Leighton Moss Nature Reserve, Silverdale, Lancashire at 10.30am.
Price £1 for adults, 50p for OAPs and children.
For more information contact the reserve on: 0524 701601.
BRONZE AGE WALK IN THE PRESELY HILLS
August 25.
Uncover the fascinating history of the Presely Hills in a nine mile walk to the source of the Stonehenge Bluestones.
Part of the walk will follow the ancient Bronze Age trading route.
The walk starts at 10am and finishes at around 4.30pm.
Bring lunch, waterproofs and sturdy footwear.
Meet at Bwlch Gwynt on the B4329 Haverfordwest/Cardigan Road.
For more information contact: 0437 764519.
ORIENTEERING IN KENT
August 25.
Try your hand at orienteering on an informal afternoon event aimed at families and beginners in the Oldbury Hill area of Kent.
Entrants will guide themselves to various fixed points on a simple route which sticks to tracks and existing paths.
Everyone will be given a start and finish time and a small prize will go to the person who finishes in the fastest time.
The event will take place between 1pm and 5pm.
Meet at Oldbury Hill picnic site, north of the A25 to the east of Sevenoaks, near the Crown Point Inn.
Price 50p per individual and family.
Contact: 0732 871500 for more details.
BALLOON FIESTA IN BRISTOL
August 9–11.
A spectacular 130 balloons will take off at 6am and 6pm on all three days of this highlight event in the European ballooning calendar.
It will also be a rare opportunity to witness the silent magic of six hydrogen balloons drifting away.
The event is suitable for all the family and added attractions will include craft, food and collector's fairs.
Entrance to the fiesta is free and there will be charge of £1 for car parking.
For more information contact: 0272 824646.
WALK AROUND THE BROADS
August 25.
Attention all wildlife enthusiasts!
Don't miss this great opportunity to look out for are swallowtail butterflies, hawker dragonflies and spectacular orchids on a natural history ramble around Blue Marshes National Nature Reserve in the Broads.
The trip starts with a boat ride across Ranworth Broad.
Meet at the Broadland Conservation Centre, Ranworth at 11am, 1pm or 3pm.
Advance booking is essential.
Cost: £3 for adults and £2 for children.
Contact: 060 549 479.
AUGUST DATES FOR YOUR DIARY
1 Dry stone walling in the Lake District.
Starts 10.30am until 4pm.
Meet at Martindale Old Church near Howtown.
Contact: 0966 26601.
1–4 Green World Exhibition.
West of England Exhibition Centre, Shepton Mallet, Somerset.
Contact: 0797 26426.
2 Seven hour strenuous walk in the Cheviot Hills.
Starts at 10am at Alnham, six miles due west of Bridge of Aln on the A697.
Contact: 0434 605555.
3 Walk part of the Pennine Way on a eight and a half mile circular walk, north of Calder.
Meet at 10.30am at the Woodman Inn, Charlestown on the A646 West of Hebden Bridge.
Contact: 0422 359454 ext 248.
3–18 British Trust for Conservation Volunteers Town Trails Campaign to open up urban footpaths.
Find out about opening up blocked paths and protecting existing ones.
Contact: 0491 39766.
4 Eight mile walk on the Ridgeway, through open downland past Ashdown House and Wayland's Smithy.
Meet 10.30am where the Ridgeway crosses the Ashbury to Lambourn Road.
Contact: 0865 810224.
4 Spend a day drawing and sketching on Carn Brea with local artist Stuart Ross.
Contact: Kerrier Groundwork: 0209 211364.
4 Walk with an ornithologist in Northumberland learning about birds, butterflies and flowers.
Starts 2pm Holy Island car park.
Contact: 0434 605555.
7 Evening walk by the Nottingham Canal learning about the historic industrial life of the city.
Meet 6.30pm opposite the Midland Station, Carrington Street.
Contact: 0602 824207.
7 Three hour family discovery walk in the Lake District.
Starts 10am Ullswater Information Centre, Glenridding.
Contact: 07684 82414.
10 Learn about basic route finding in Northumberland.
Starts 10.30am at Ingram Visitor Centre.
Bookings only.
Contact: 0434 605555.
11 Walk to see lambs in summertime in the Yorkshire Dales National Park.
Meet 2pm at Hurries Farm, Otterburn near Malham.
Contact 07293 363.
11 Learn about traditional country crafts in West Cumbria.
Contact: 0946 813677.
14 Conservation work in Ravesby Wood from 10am till 4pm, organised by the Sutton Conservation Group.
Contact: 081 669 5025.
15 Three hour walk in the Breamish Valley, Northumberland, rounded off with a farmhouse tea.
Starts 2pm at Ingram Bridge car park.
Bookings only.
Contact:0434 605555.
17 Scenic cycle tour in Suffolk with a Broads Authority Countryside Officer.
Starts from the Broads Information Centre, Beccles at 2pm.
Bookings only.
Contact: 0603 610734.
18 Six hour guided walk starting at 10.30am at Grasmere Information Centre.
Contact: 09665 245.
19 Discover the countryside around Kettlewell in the Yorkshire Dales.
Meet at Kettlewell post office at 2pm.
Contact: 0756 752774.
19 Explore a quiet inlet of Milford Haven on an afternoon canoe trip suitable for beginners.
Bookings only.
Contact: 0437 764591.
29 Night journey through How Hill Nature Reserve in the Broads from 8.30pm to 10.30pm.
Bookings only.
Contact: 0603 610734.
29 Discover the landscape and archaeology of Conistone in Yorkshire.
Walk starts at 2pm at the maypole in Coniston.
Contact: 0756 752774.
30–Sep 1 British birdwatching fair at Egleton Nature Reserve, Rutland Water.
10am to 5pm.
Contact: 0522 535596.
30–Sep 1 RYA Under 19 Windsurfing Festival and National Championships.
Contact: 0703 629962.
31 Harvester Trophy relay orienteering event in Guildford, Surrey.
Contact: 05827 63978.
LETTERS
Why not drop us a line here at Outdoor Action ?
We want to hear your views about any issue affecting the countryside.
A £10 prize will go to the best letter published each month.
Write to Outdoor Action , 13 Park House, 140 Battersea Park Road, London SW11 4NB
This month the £10 prize for the best letter goes to Pat Weatherley, wife of Outdoor Action Chief Gear Tester Dave Weatherley.
A TESTER'S WIFE'S LAMENT
Oh Henry what have you done to me?
I'll get my own back wait and see
The gear is piled up to the beams
Our house is bursting at the seams
With rucksacks, tents and sleeping bags
The floorboards soon will start to sag.
Night after night I'm left alone,
Left to cope with door and phone
While David heads towards the hills
In search of camping sites near gills
To photograph another tent
And test some boots that Henry sent.
He must sleep out to test his gear
And personally try each bit I fear.
I'm even asked to lend my back
To model different rucksacks!
After days feeding thirty-eight
Dave said ‘Pat, you need a break.
How would you like to leave the house?’
Said my ever loving spouse.
‘Let us all go out tonight.’
It really gave me quite a fright.
Help, whatever shall I wear?
For such a treat is very rare.
Then all my hopes were quickly dashed
And silently my teeth I gnashed
When I found out that his idea
Was to camp and test more gear
Behind our home, on the Howgill Fells.
(His idea of heaven, mine of hell).
We found a good site for the kit
It was full of bones and sheep-shit!
We spent a rather restless night
‘But were the sleeping bags alright’?
The tents and rucksacks all passed muster
But the boots gave me a blister.
At home once more with his computer
Ignoring both his wife and daughter,
Dave worked on all the gear reports
And in his mind the words he sought.
But some are rather hard to spell
So I'm called in to check them well.
He might be good as a gear-test,
But as proof-reader I'm the best!
And though it's Dave's idea of bliss
I'm not sure I can cope with this.
Now I ask in fear and trembling
What next is our Henry sending?
AVOID LONG DISTANCE FOOTPATHS
Recent experience of walking Long Distance Footpaths (LDPs) has led me to believe that there is a case for de-emphasising certain routes (I understand that the RA currently recommends Duke of Edinburgh Award Groups to avoid the Three Peaks for example).
Perhaps we should be getting back to the roots of organisations like the RA and footpath preservation societies in encouraging people to wander more freely and make use of neglected local paths.
For heaven's sake let's all do our bit to give LDPs a well earned rest!
David Singleton Loughborough
NO POLLUTION
Given that so many kinds of pollution are avoidable, it really is high time that we all did something to bring an end to this needless damage.
Let's all start by using environmentally-friendly products and backing anti-pollution campaigns.
Caroline Kingstone Dorset
KEEP OUR PARKS LITTER-FREE
Although I would love to be able to take regular trips to the countryside, I am often unable to indulge myself in this luxury and so instead I choose to walk and cycle through Richmond Park in London.
I must admit that selected areas of the park are well looked after and a delight to wander through, but unfortunately by far the greater area of ‘Old Deer Park’ is spoiled by litter.
The odd crisp packet, beer can or carrier bag may not seem to make a lot of difference, but they soon add up and begin to poison and suffocate pond and wildlife, as well as encouraging the spread of disease.
I'm not getting at the park officials because I feel sure that they do their utmost to keep Henry VIII's ancient hunting ground healthy and litter-free.
But I do hope to encourage a sense of responsibility in all park users throughout the country and persuade them to think before tossing away their litter.
After all, for those of us limited to public parks, it is important to keep them clean, green and user-friendly.
Samantha Mangwana Surrey
QUERIES
Q I have been trying to locate a manufacturer of a walking boot or walking shoe which is synthetic, ie not leather or suede for a vegetarian friend, but so far have had no luck.
Can you help?
Rob Whitehouse Shropshire
A After much detective work we traced an artificial suede and Cordura walking boot with a rubber sole known as the ‘Vegan Boot’.
The boot is available by mail order from Designer Wares Limited, 8 Ashwell Road, Heaton, Bradford BD9 4AU.
Tel: 0274 483390.
It comes in sizes 34–47 and costs £37.50 + £2.50 p&p.
Q We have just opened a new gymnasium on our army camp and are desperate to get hold of any posters illustrating outdoor activities.
I would be grateful if you could tell me where I can get hold of such posters.
J. Dyson Distribution Airfield
A The organising bodies for various sports such as the British Canoe Union and the British Amateur Gymnastics Association might be the best people to approach for posters in their own particular activities.
None of the organisations we contacted had large ranges to choose from but they might be able to help you out with information charts and publicity posters for a small or no charge.
The Sports Council should be able to provide you with details for contacting such groups, contact them at 16 Upper Woburn Place, London.
Tel: 071 388 1277.
Alternatively the Scout Association sell a range of training charts.
These charts are priced between 85p and £1.20, available from Scouting Magazine, Churchill Industrial Estate, Lancing, West Sussex.
Tel: 0903 755352.
OUTDOOR UPDATE
NEWS
OUTRAGE OVER CONSERVATION BILL
Conservation groups are outraged over a recent government decision which they claim could cause massive environmental damage in some of Scotland's most beautiful areas including Rannoch Moor and much of the Flow Country.
The bone of contention stems from a government-backed amendment to the Natural Heritage (Scotland) Bill.
The bill was introduced last November to create a new government conservation agency in Scotland — Scottish Natural Heritage (SNH).
This will replace the existing conservation agencies, the Countryside Commission for Scotland and the Nature Conservancy Council for Scotland.
The amendment forces Scottish Natural Heritage to refer objections to proposed and existing Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) to a new committee set up by Scottish Secretary Ian Lang.
Although the structure and powers of the new committee have yet to be decided, conservationists argue that the additional bureaucracy will slow down the process of designation, cost a lot of money, reduce the power of SNH and may result in designated sites losing their status.
In a letter to John Major, RA Director Alan Mattingly said that the new advisory committee would seriously damage the effectiveness of SNH.
‘The new clause is an open invitation to every landowner and occupier of an SSSI to challenge the scientific validity of the notification process and the credibility of SNH staff and its advisory boards.
It will be seized upon by a powerful clique of landowners who control vast areas of land in Scotland as the ideal mechanism by which they and their expert advisers can thwart the process of conservation in Scotland.’
Large areas around Caithness and Sutherland in the far north of Scotland are especially under threat as there is enormous pressure for afforestation in the area.
It has been estimated that retrospective appeals from Scottish landowners over previously designated SSSIs — there are currently 1300 — could cost SNH £1.5m a year, 7.5% of their budget.
Barry Mayes of the RSPB said the money will have to come from priority conservation work.
‘I think it is a disgraceful waste of taxpayers’ money’he added.
Conservation groups are particularly aggrieved because the amendment was introduced by the powerful landowning body in the House of Lords.
They believe the motivating force behind the amendment was Lord Pearson who is opposed to part of his land being designated an SSSI.
Mayes says that it is a blatant example of the government ‘bowing to the pressure of vested landowning interest.’
And in his letter to John Major, Mattingly said ‘Such an overwhelming desire to satisfy the demands of those who own large tracts of Scotland is hardly consistent with your ambition of creating a classless society in Britain.’
GRAZING THREATENS MOORLAND BIRDS
Continuing grazing by sheep in upland areas of northern England is a serious threat to moorland birds.
This is the opinion of two quite different organisations — the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB) and the Moorland Gamekeepers Association (MGA).
Birds under threat include dunlin, golden plover, black grouse, merlin and hen harrier.
At a recent meeting between the two bodies they agreed that countering habitat loss is a high priority.
The RSPB are preparing a conservation plan for the relevant areas which include the Forest of Bowland, the North York Moors and parts of Northumberland.
BIKE FOR DISABLED
Disabled people will have better access to the Upper Derwent Valley in the Peak National Park following the acquisition of a specially designed tandem bicycle.
The £2200 bike, with a detachable wheelchair facility at the front, was brought with contributions from the National Park Authority, Severn Trent Water, the Countryside Commission and a grant from the Sports Council.
The bike will be available for hire from the Fairholmes Cycle Hire Centre, run by the National Authority at the northern end of Ladybower reservoir.
The centre already has a cycle for the less able and two tandems used to transport disabled and blind visitors.
Some of Scotland's most beautiful areas could be threatened following a recent government decision
Golden plover are one of many birds threatened by upland overgrazing
CENTRE SPLASHES OUT
One of the best known outdoor personal development organisations, Outward Bound, is celebrating its 50th anniversary with a £1.5m refurbishment of its centre in Aberdovey, West Wales.
Most of the money has been spent on improving the accommodation for students.
The 12 person dormitories have been replaced by five purpose-built houses, each with rooms catering for between two and six people.
The houses have common rooms and dining facilities.
Staff accommodation has also been improved and the swimming pool has been refurbished.
The centre is able to cater for 120 people at any one time.
The revamped centre was officially opened by the Duke of Edinburgh on June 26.
In his speech he said the facilities will ‘add further value to the courses which Outward Bound offers and will ensure an even more enjoyable and worthwhile experience for all participants.’
The official inauguration coincided with the opening of the fourth Outward Bound International Conference.
The Duke of Edinburgh was once again guest of honour.
COMPETITION PRIZE WINNERS
The two first prize winners of our £1000 vauDe gear spectacular in the June issue of Outdoor Action are lucky Andy Cunningham of Wisbech, Cambridge and E Pearse of Port St Mary, Isle of Man.
They each win a Hogan lightweight backpacking tent worth £150.
Riga Microsoft/Sympatex jackets worth £143 each are on their way to second prize winners M Geldard of South Ruislip, Middlesex and Kathleen Floyd of Settle.
D Vincent of Glastonbury and Stefan Ellis of Pontcanna, Cardiff are the fortunate duo soon to receive a 65 litre Profile 2 rucksack retailing for £140.
The two fourth prizes of £50 Sioux 2 sleeping bags are speedily making their way to C Brown of Oncham, Isle of Man and K Fairbanks of Nether Edge, Sheffield.
And finally, the three lucky winners of the fifth prizes are Ray Smith of Normanton, Kirsty Stevens of Wavertree, and H P Doherty of Bletchley.
They will each receive a handy Nost daysack.
The answers are: 1 vauDe gear comes from Germany.
2 Johnny Dawes was the young British climber who recently took part in an expedition to Bhagirathi. 3 vauDe use Sympatex in the manufacture of the majority of their outdoor clothing.
4 You can learn more about the vauDe range by ringing 0434 320744 and asking for a catalogue.
Don't get too depressed if you didn't win anything — just enter this month's competition on page 29!
News from the National Parks
SALTY PROBLEM IN THE BROADS
The Broads are suffering from seeping seawater.
The problem is occurring because of low river flows and breaches of the flood defence affecting many miles of riverbank.
The increased salinity has an adverse impact on the dyke flora, threatening the habitat and also affecting stock grazing on the marshes.
As well as taking remedial measures, the Broads Authority will be monitoring the situation together with the National Rivers Authority and the Ministry for Agriculture, Food and Fisheries.
MORECAMBE BAY
English Nature (formerly the NCC) is proposing to designate Morecambe Bay as a Wetland of International Importance and a Special Protection Area.
The northern tip of the bay lies in the Lake District National Park.
At extreme low water about 120 degrees miles of the bay is exposed, representing the largest continuous inter-tidal area in Great Britain.
The site supports a large number and wide variety of bird species and so is considered to be a Wetland Site of International Importance.
Birds using the bay as a stopping-off point for migration include the ringed plover and sanderling.
The bay also supports over 20 000 wintering birds including pink-footed geese, shelduck, oyster-catcher, curlew and redshank.
NEW GUIDELINES FOR COMPETITIVE EVENTS
There is increasing pressure on the popular mountains of Snowdonia National Park, and damage to fragile areas from competitive and sponsored events over and above existing informal recreation use is increasing.
This has led the National Park Authority to propose issuing guidelines for such events.
The proposed guidelines allow for the established fell races to continue but with an upper limit on the number of competitors and, where necessary, agreed variations to the route to avoid vulnerable areas.
In addition races should conform to a code of practice prepared by the National Park Authority themselves.
The guidelines include a presumption against other large scale events — over 200 competitors — including fundraising events, on moorland and open mountain.
Smaller groups of more than 30 competitors will be considered on their merit.
FARMING AND CONSERVATION
The Yorkshire Dales National Park is opposing a MAFF-supported scheme to regenerate pastureland and erect fencing on farmland near Kilnsey.
The Park is objecting because the land, which is within the Malham Arncliffe SSSI, is unimproved pasture with herb-rich flushes, including birds-eye primrose, devils-bit scabious and Black bog-rush.
The addition of lime, fertiliser, phosphates and herbicide to ‘improve’ the land would ultimately mean the loss of meadow species and plant communities.
The proposed fencing would impinge on a public bridleway which traverses the field.
It would also detract from the open aspect of the field and more generally from the landscape character of the areas.
The Park proposes to offer a Management Agreement in order to safeguard the landscape.
News supplied by the Council for National Parks 
Outward Bound students can look forward to a high standard of accommodation after a day on the hill
NEWS IN BRIEF 
TRUST WINS AWARD
The UK2000 Campaign has given a merit award to the West Cumbria Groundwork Trust for their work on footpaths in the area.
The programme completed its first year in May during which time 25 miles of footpaths were improved.
The work involved the erection of new stiles, waymarker posts, surfacing and drainage where necessary.
The Trust aims to complete work on all 125 miles of designated paths over the next four years.
HILLS PROTECTED
A popular area for walkers, Blackdown Hills in South Devon and Somerset, has been designated an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty by the Countryside Commission (CC).
It is the 35th area in England to be given this designation.
CC spokesperson Edward Holdaway said ‘The recognition by the Government of the nationally important qualities of the Blackdown Hills is as exciting development in securing the long term future for the area.’
FIRST TRAIL OPENS
A five mile forest route called the Phoenix Trail has been opened in Rendlesham Forest in Suffolk.
The waymarked route signals the rebirth of a forest which was almost completely destroyed in the Great Storm of October 1987.
At the height of the storm two million trees were lost in two hours.
Forest District Manager Bob Hands said ‘The trail is the first of a series of new public facilities.’
NEW FOREST JOB
The Forestry Commission have created a new post to oversee their involvement in community forest projects throughout Britain.
The first person appointed Community Forest Officer is Marcus Sangster.
He is a botany graduate and has a Master's Degree in Forestry.
BRIGADE WINNER
A Boys Brigade team from Stirling beat over 100 teams from all over the country to win the 1991 West Lowland Hike.
The three person team was the first to cover 30 miles of rough terrain over two days.
They also had to meet other outdoor challenges to win the competition.
Their prizes included a trophy and sleeping bags from Vango.
SHOTS FIRED OVER PARK
Military training will continue on Dartmoor for another 21 years as the result of an agreement between the Ministry of Defence and the Duchy of Cornwall which is owned by Prince Charles.
Some concessions have been made to conservationists who want to see an end to all military use of national park land.
Alan Mattingly of the Ramblers' Association (RA) described the decision as ‘a slap in the face by Prince Charles to the National Parks Review Panel who recommended only last March that live firing should be removed from national parks as quickly as possible.’
The government's Countryside Commission argued that the licence should only have been renewed for a few years during a thorough review of military land requirements.
Concessions contained within the agreement include the reduction in the number of days on which firing can take place, the replacement of high explosive high artillery rounds with training rounds by September 1998 and the exclusion of training from 400 acres of land at Quintin's Man and Rough Tor.
A spokesperson for Prince Charles said ‘In negotiating this licence the Duchy of Cornwall has endeavoured to take account of the nation's interests as a whole, including the government of the day's stated continuing requirement to train on Dartmoor.’
HEDGEROW INCREASE
Within the next five years the Greater Manchester Countryside Unit plans to develop over 71 000ft of hedgerows throughout the county.
Approaches are being made to the Countryside Commission and the private sector to help with the funding of the project.
It is hoped that the Council for the Protection of Rural England will be a partner in the venture and that the British Trust for Conservation Volunteers will help with the planting.
The Unit's forester Andy Powell said that because of the changing nature of agriculture the need to remove hedgerows for farming efficiency is now less important.
NEW WALK OPENS IN THE LAKE DISTRICT
A new 13 mile waymarked route between Arnside and Kirkby Lonsdale in the Lake District has been officially opened.
The Limestone Link will take walkers through a rare limestone area with a wide variety of flora and fauna and limestone pavements.
Special wooden footpath signs have been put up along the route.
A free leaflet has been produced outlining the route.
It is available from tourist information centres.
The Limestone Link is the second in a series of walking routes promoted by South Lakeland District Council — the first was the Cistercian Way opened in May 1990.
BIKE WINNERS
Lucky June A Peall of Malmesbury and Graham Nelson of Formby are the winners of our Raleigh Pioneer Venture mountain bike competition.
They will each receive one of these brand new bikes worth £250.
The twenty-five runners up will each win a handy Raleigh Pioneer Pak, worth £17.
They are:
Answers: 1, The frame of the Raleigh Pioneer is made from high tensile steel.
2.
It has twenty-one gears. 3.
Raleigh are based in Nottingham.
4.
The first mountain bike was invented in California.
The National Park Review Panel recommended an end to live firing in national parks like Dartmoor
Special signs mark the route
TOUGH WALKER BREAKS RECORD
A postman from Cheshunt in Hertfordshire has broken the British Isle's solo endurance record by walking over 7200 miles non-stop around the coasts of Britain and Ireland.
And he hasn't finished yet.
John Westley broke the record when he reached Cape Wrath on the north west tip of Scotland on June 25.
This is 10 months after he started his marathon walk from Tower Bridge on August 5 last year.
He intends to push the record to over 9000 miles by walking another 2000 miles to complete the circuit.
John's gruelling daily schedule requires him to walk at least 15 miles every day carrying a 40lb rucksack to maintain an average 154 miles per week.
On occasions he has walked up to 40 miles in a day.
He has already taken over 12 million paces and worn out six pairs of tough walking boots.
John's route first took him along the south coast of England during a heatwave then around the south west peninsula and Wales to Holyhead where he crossed to Dublin in November.
He walked around the 2500 miles of Irish coast in record time before returning to England in March to begin his clockwise trek around the coast.
John hopes that his mammoth walking achievement will raise £100 000 for research into multiple sclerosis.
He said ‘The one thing that keeps me going is knowing that for every step I take and every pound donated we are one step nearer to finding a cure.’
Donations to the ‘Around the Isles’ charity fund for multiple sclerosis may be paid in at any branch of the Halifax Building Society and Bank of Scotland.
Alternatively cheques can be made out to Around the Isles Campaign and sent to 40 Laburnham Road, Maidenhead, Berks SL6 4DE.
For further details tel: 0628 25330.
CYCLE TRACKS OPEN IN SCOTLAND
Over 200 miles of new waymarked cycle routes have been opened on Forestry Commission (FC) land in Dumfries and Galloway.
The circular routes vary from five to 20 miles covering the Mabie and Dalbeattie Forests and Galloway Forest Park.
A major through-route for cyclists has also been created.
Free route maps and leaflets are widely available from tourist information offices, Forestry Commission centres and cycle hire firms throughout the area.
The FC are also considering installing leaflet dispensers at the start of some of the routes.
The new routes result from a three month detailed study conducted by John Taylor, a keen cyclist who is also a retired Forestry Commission forester.
Christina Tracey of the Forestry Commission said the routes have been ‘carefully selected to enable cyclists to enjoy the most attractive forest scenery in safety and avoid areas which are often heavily used by walkers or forest traffic.’
CHARITY CHALLENGE FOR ALL ABILITIES
Outdoor enthusiasts of all abilities are being challenged to test themselves to the full in an exciting sponsored event in the Peak District taking place this autumn.
The charity event known as Trailbusters offers a wide choice of routes from an easy access trail of up to five miles, accessible by wheelchair, to a 14 mile ‘Tiger Route’ covering difficult terrain.
All money raised will go to the British Leprosy Association (LEPRA) and the Fieldfare Trust which promotes access to the countryside and environmental education for disabled people.
Teams who take up the challenge, in the Upper Derwent Valley on Sunday October 20 will be joined by LEPRA's President, celebrated mountaineer Chris Bonington.
In 1990 Trailbusters attracted over 250 entrants from schools, companies, adult training centres and youth groups who raised over £8500 for the two charities.
Chris Bonington said ‘This year we are hoping to attract teams from all over the country to an event that we believe to be a great way of linking people here with the millions still suffering from probably the world's most disabling disease.’
Entries for Trailbusters are welcome from any team of three to eight members.
For details contact the Trailbusters office on 0742 701668.
FOOTPATH WORK WINS MAJOR AWARD
Voluntary workers in Scotland beat 354 other groups to win Shell's Best of Better Britain Award for footpath restoration near the city of Edinburgh.
The winning group, the Roslin Heritage Society, reconstructed a previously impassable right of way from Rosslyn Castle to Hewan.
This provides easy access for the public to the historic Roslin Glen.
The award-winning work involved pretty heavy work including renovating and constructing 35 new castle steps, removing the huge fallen trees and restoring three bridges.
There are 65 members within the society with seven of the eight active members over 60 years old.
At a special ceremony Magnus Magnusson presented the £1000 award to the group's 81 year old chairman George Campbell.
Magnusson said ‘Each member of this group has worked quite selflessly, tirelessly and with boundless energy and enthusiasm to create this wonderful footpath through the historic Roslin Glen.
They are a tribute to those over 65.’
John Westley has taken over 12 million paces to raise money for charity
Footpath work has opened up the Rosslyn Castle to Hewan right of way
Trails of the Unexpected
JUST WHEN YOU THOUGHT IT WAS SAFE TO STEP OUT, CATHERINE MOORE TELLS OF GIANTS, GHOSTS AND GHOULISH GOINGS-ON
An air of mystery undeniably clings to some places.
You feel it most keenly when you're walking alone and keep looking behind you, sure that something's there.
It can make a walk eerie but memorable.
All over Britain you can find places where ancient settlements leave their mark, where legend tells of bizarre events and where even now hauntings are reported.
Walk these areas and you'll be amazed at the rich and intricate web of home-grown mythology.
SCOTTISH MYSTERY WALKS
Scotland's highest peak, Ben Macdhui, stands at 4294ft in the Cairngorms.
It provides one of Scotland's classic hillwalks with a popular route starting from the end of the ski road running from Loch Morlich.
The route continues south-west to Cairn Lochan and on to Ben Macdhui itself.
But Ben Macdhui has been known to give walkers more than they bargained for on several occasions.
Professor Norman Collies was a man noted for his logical mind.
He was Professor of Organic Chemistry at the University of London and an experienced mountaineer.
So when he fled in terror from the slopes of Ben Macdhui in the Cairngorms one day in 1891, people were reluctant to dismiss his story of how he had crossed paths with the ghostly Big Grey Man — Am Fear Liath Mòr.
It took him more than 30 years before he told anyone other than friends of his terrifying experience.
At a meeting of the Cairngorm Club he told a hushed audience ‘For every few steps I took I heard a crunch as if someone was walking after me but taking steps three or four times the length of my own.
As I walked on and the eerie crunch, crunch sounded behind me, I was seized with terror and took to my heels staggering blindly.’
His is not an isolated story — to this day many people report hearing or seeing a strange presence on  the slopes of the mountain.
One report even tells of an encounter with a yeti-like creature.
Some say the Big Grey Man is the ghost of a long dead giant.
Some Buddhists believe he's a ‘Bodhisattva’, one of five perfect men who control the destinies of the world.
Buddhists who've seen him describe him as a 6ft 4in tall man with big limbs and hands.
Members of the Aetherius Society — who think that Earth has long been visited by benevolent travellers from outer space — believe that Ben Macdhui houses an underground dome-shaped auditorium visited by aliens.
The Isle of Skye, as well as being a magnet for walkers, also attracts its fair share of strange tales.
Fairies are reported to be thick on the ground living in grassy mounds all over the island.
According to folklore you can protect yourself from the fairies by carrying iron, steel or oatmeal.
Some of the finest coastal walks on Skye are around the Duirnish peninsula in the north-west of the island where there are spectacular cliffs and bizarre rock stacks.
Most famous are MacLeod's Maidens at Idrigill Point where a Macleod clan chief's wife and daughter drowned.
The rock undeniably looks like a mother nodding down to her two children.
Inland are Macleod's Tables, Healabhal Bheag and Healabhal Mhor which are odd-looking flat-topped mountains, both easily walkable.
Legend has it that the once-rounded peaks had their tops lopped off by a supernatural force to make a flat-topped bed and table for St Columba when he visited the island in AD585.
He had been turned away from the door of a local clan chief and needed a place to spend the night.
And, according to local stories, a MacLeod chief once dined his guests on Healabhal Bheag after tiring of endless stories of the splendour of the banqueting hall in Edinburgh's Holyrood Palace.
Strange physical phenomena often have their explanations in legend — a particularly colourful story accounts for the scree slope of Sgriob na Cailich on Beinn a Chaolais on the Inner Hebridean Island of Jura.
The Witch of Jura had forced a man called MacPhie of Colonsay to stay on the island.
Whenever he tried to go home the old woman would throw a magic ball of thread into his boat and draw him back to shore.
Eventually MacPhie found he could break the spell of the magic thread if he cut it with the woman's magic hatchet.
So he stole the hatchet, cut out the magic thread and escaped.
The woman, in despair, slid all the way down Beinn a Chaolais, her heels creating the scree slope.
HIDDEN WALES
Welsh folklore has a richness all of its own and exploring some of the areas with strange tales takes you to unbeatable walking country amid fantastic scenery.
The mountains of Snowdonia have some marvellous tales to tell, many connected with King Arthur and his heroic Knights of the Round Table, not to mention Merlin, his talented magician and faithful friend.
The rocky hill of Dinas Enrys near Beddgelert is a beautiful spot for what was once a stronghold of a British ruler, Vortigern.
Vortigern The Thin had made foolish deals with Saxon invaders who'd double-crossed him and occupied major cities and plundered the countryside.
Vortigern consulted magicians who told him he should build a stronghold in Wales but as his workers set to work on a hill in Snowdonia their building materials sank into the earth.
The magicians told Vortigern he must find a boy with no father, sacrifice the child and sprinkle his blood on the fort's foundations.
A boy was duly found whose mother denied sleeping with any man — the child had been conceived with a spirit.
When the boy was brought before Vortigern it became apparent that he had very special powers.
He revealed that the reason for the subsidence was the presence of an underground pool where two dragons lived, a red one and a white one.
They had been imprisoned there by a long dead ruler, Llud.
The dragons were released whereon the red dragon killed the white and eventually took up residence on the Welsh flag.
The boy grew up to become Merlin.
According to Welsh legend Merlin still lives to this day on the mysterious Bardsey Island off the Lleyn Peninsula in North Wales.
Merlin is said to be sleeping in a cave or an invisible glass house.
He keeps with him the Thirteen Treasures of Britain which are ancient talismans and magical objects.
He also guards the true throne — Arthur's.
Snowdon also has its place in the magical history of Britain.
It was here that Arthur fought and killed the giant Ritho, a fierce character who lived on the slopes of the mountain and wore a cloak made from the beards of chiefs he had slain.
Arthur wasn't always so lucky though.
Snowdon is one of the likely sites of Arthur's last battle with the treacherous Mordred.
Mordred was killed and Arthur mortally wounded.
As his faithful knight Bedivere cast Arthur's sword Excalibur into the waters of Llyn Llydaw the hand of the Lady of the Lake rose up to catch it and draw it down into the depths forever.
The sword gone, a boat drew up full of women wearing black hoods including Morgan le Fay, Arthur's half sister.
The women took Arthur away across to the mystical Isle of Avalon where he still sleeps waiting to claim the British throne once again.
To get the best of the Arthurian sites of Snowdon ascend the mountain using the Watkin Path which starts at Nant Gwynant to the south.
This takes you up over Bwlch-y-Saethau, the Pass of the Arrows, where the battle with Mordred is actually supposed to have taken place.
Once you're at the summit descend by the more popular Miners' Path which will take you down across the causeway over Llyn Llydaw and finishes up at Pen-y-pass at the top of the Llanberis Pass.
TALES OF ENGLAND
The south west is the place to go if you're searching out spots with hidden significance.
You could make no better start than the Ridgeway national trail, running from Overton Hill in Wiltshire to Ivinghoe Beacon in Buckinghamshire.
One of the strangest sights on the path is the Wayland's Smithy Long Barrow on the Oxfordshire stretch of the path near Ashbury Hill.
The strange standing stones, remnants of a burial chamber, are said to house an invisible living occupant — Wayland.
According to folklore if a traveller on horseback leaves a horse needing a new shoe together with a coin, the horse will have been shod when they return to the spot.
Try to time your walk so that you arrive at the Smithy very early or very late.
It's not half so mysterious when you've got a horde of parents dragging screaming kids around it.
Close by the Smithy you'll find the Vale of the White Horse, The Uffington White Horse on Whitehorse Hill is the oldest hillside figure in the country.
Tradition says it was cut by Alfred the Great to commemorate his victory over the Danes at Ashdown in the year 871AD.
You can actually walk on the hill, though you should not walk on the horse itself.
For a really good view of it you'll need to go a couple of miles to the north.
Below the figure of the horse is Dragon Hill — the site where St George slew and buried the dragon.
The hill is small and bare with a flat top.
It is said that the blood of the dragon flowed out and made the hill-top sterile.
Another famous hillside figure harks back to the days when, according to legends, giants walked the land.
The Cerne Giant at Cerne Abbas in Dorset is a naked man, 180ft tall, brandishing a 120ft club and displaying a huge phallus.
He's supposed to be the figure of a Danish giant who ran amok in the area.
He was beheaded by local peasants as he lay down on the hill to sleep after a large meal of local sheep.
The peasants are said to have cut the outline of the giant in the chalk around his dead body.
Giants were reputedly the first people to colonise the British Isles.
Their king was Albion, the son of Poseidon also known as Neptune, the sea god.
However some say the giants were born after a band of women, banished from another land for murdering their husbands, slept with demons.
If you take the south west peninsula coast path near Penzance you'll see the famous landmark of St Michael's Mount.
Supposedly a giant called Cormoran, known as the Lord of St Michael's Mount, carried the boulders from the mainland and dumped them in the sea to make the mound.
The Cornish giants were reputed to be a stupid and murderous bunch, fond of hurling boulders around the countryside.
Many large rocks you'll come across will be the remnants of one or other of the giants' squabbles.
At Trencern Hill, you'll see the Giant's Cradle where legend says victims were taken long before being murdered.
Places like the Giant's Rock near Zennor, the Giant's Quoits on the coast east of Land's End and the Giant's Grave north east of Penzance, all hark back to the days when the big people supposedly ruled.
No mystery tour of Britain should leave out the ancient stone circle of Stonehenge on Salisbury Plain — reputedly transported from County Kildare by the magician Merlin.
But nearby are equally fascinating sites where you won't be nearly so bothered by the crowds.
Try to see these places in early morning solitude.
Avebury is a prehistoric enclosure measuring 1400ft across — some of the present day villages lie within its boundary.
Nearby is the West Kennet Long Barrow, 350ft long with a stone-lined burial chamber.
And close to this is Silbury Hill, the largest artificial mound of the Neolithic era in Europe.
It's supposed to be the burial chamber of King Sil, a knight known for his splendid suit of armour made of gold.
All of these fascinating sites are connected by local footpaths so it's easy to walk between them all.
You won't be allowed on Silbury Hill as it's a Site of Special Scientific Interest but you can walk around it and get good views.
There's speculation about the connections between the standing stones and the mounds in the area.
Some say they formed a complex of sites for religious rituals.
Linked with this idea of ritual is the belief that Silbury Hill with its moat is shaped to represent the Earth Mother goddess.
Another fascinating area to explore is Glastonbury Tor in Somerset.
Walk around the Tor and on the footpaths of the surrounding levels to get a feel for this legend-full land.
Ley lines — channels of energy or guide routes for prehistoric travellers — are said to converge at the Tor.
The Tor was reputed to be the home of Gwyn ap Nudd, king of the fairies and the entrance to Annwfn, the fairies' underworld.
Glastonbury is also said to be the Isle of Avalon where Arthur sleeps.
Joseph of Arimathea is supposed to have visited the area in his travels, bringing with him the Glastonbury Thorn and possibly the Holy Grail, the cup used at the Last Supper.
And some say that Jesus himself visited Glastonbury, after his resurrection, living for a while in a house where Glastonbury Abbey now stands.
And if these stories are to be believed then Jesus was a walker too, liking nothing better that a hearty stroll in the beautiful Mendip Hills in Somerset.
Main picture: Glastonbury Tor was reputed to be the home of Gwyn ap Nudd, king of the fairies.
Top right: Merlin the magician is said to have transported the ancient stone circle of Stonehenge to Salisbury Plain from County Kildare.
Above: King Arthur defeated the giant Ritho on Snowdon; when Arthur died his sword Excalibur was taken into the depths of Llyn Llydaw by the Lady of the Lake
MacLeod's Tables are said to have had their once rounded peaks flattened by a supernatural force
The solitude of early morning is a good time to visit these fascinating places
Above: the Uffington White Horse is the oldest hillside figure in the country
NEWS IN FOCUS
SCOTLAND
THE FUTURE LOOKS STORMY FOR THE NEW NATURAL HERITAGE AGENCY.
RENNIE McOWAN REPORTS
HACKLES RISE AS NEW AGENCY IS BORN
Magnus Magnusson has a reputation for being a tenacious man (‘I've started so I'll finish’) and he's going to need to be as chair of the new Scottish Natural Heritage Agency.
That's the new body that will look after conservation and environmental issues in Scotland after 1992.
The setting up of the agency has aroused strong emotions, but there are widespread misunderstandings about it.
Let's set the record straight.
It will be a non-departmental government body, accountable to Parliament through the Secretary of State for Scotland and funded by the Scottish Office.
In theory, it will be an independent body able to express its views publicly on issues concerned with any aspect of Scotland's natural heritage.
Magnus Magnusson, TV presenter, president of the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, chair of the Ancient Monuments Board for Scotland and currently chair of the Nature Conservancy Council for Scotland, will be taking on the most demanding environmental job in Scotland as the first chair of the new agency.
In many ways he's got a thankless task — he and his colleagues have to build partnerships between bodies and individuals who often hold totally opposite views on how Scotland's countryside should be protected.
My own view is that such an agency is an excellent idea , provided it is properly funded, adequately staffed, and truly open and accountable to public opinion.
Hopefully it will take constructive criticism well and will carry on the excellent scientific work of the NCC.
As well as being truly Scottish it needs to have strong international links.
Unfortunately unwise criticisms of Magnus Magnusson are already being made — some verge on the absurd.
And there was widespread concern when two outstanding Cairngorms experts, Dr Adam Watson and W Drennan Watson, were omitted from a working party on the future of the Cairngorms.
People feared that only ‘safe’ opinion would be sought on important matters.
And some voluntary bodies felt they were not being given adequate enough attention.
It is arguable to what extent Magnus Magnusson was personally responsible for the composition of the Cairngorm group and he issued a public statement saying he was most willing to meet with voluntary groups.
He also issued a tough statement when changes were made to the Natural Heritage (Scotland) Bill in the House of Lords which appeared to diminish the status of Sites of Special Scientific Interest.
The Ramblers' Association magazine was exaggerating in saying he was proving a disaster and that there were widespread complaints about his actions.
It is only fair to Magnus Magnusson and the new structures that they be given time to prove themselves.
To attack a new chair for the conduct of one organisation which has just come into being and to attack him as chair-designate for another organisation which has not yet come into being, seems extremely odd and unwise to me.
To express constructive criticism and voice well researched concerns is of course healthy and legitimate.
But it is far too early in the day for lasting verdicts to be made.
RUM DEAL
The Nature Conservancy Council for Scotland (NCCS) have decided to take the H out of the island of Rhum, in the Inner Hebrides, in all future documentation.
The rogue H has always been an irritant to those interested in the origin and meaning of place names.
There is no ‘Rh’ prefix in Gaelic and the Rhum H was added by the Bulloughs, a notorious wealthy family who used to own the island.
They thought the original was too alcoholic.
They also prevented the general public from landing on the island, one of the most interesting and spectacular in Scotland.
NCCS permits visitors to land and stay although there are rightly some constraints because of research programmes in this National Nature Reserve.
The Norse people probably called the island Rumsay, adopting an older Celtic name of Ruiminn.
The modern Gaelic form is Ruma.
Congratulations to NCCS for a minor piece of linguistic accuracy and here's hoping others will follow suit.
SAD LOSS
Matthew J Moulton, one of the best liked and most experienced hill trampers in Scotland, has been killed in a fall when descending from Stob Dubh on Buachaille Etive Baeg, between Glen Coe and Glen Etive.
He was 80 and had completed all the Munros five times, the Corbetts at least twice, all the Donalds and a myriad of other hills in Scotland and abroad.
He was a former distinguished deputy editor and senior leader writer on The Scotsman and with myself and journalist Robin Crearie was one of the three founder members of The Scotsman mountaineering club, later the Ptarmigan Club.
It is a cliché to say he died where he would have wanted to be, but true nonetheless.
He loved the mountains and his knowledge and experience were valued.
He was a dear friend to many and will be greatly and sadly missed.
NATURE WATCH
AUGUST
NOW'S THE TIME TO LOOK OUT FOR SPIDERS, SNAKES AND FLEA-KILLING PLANTS.
RICHARD MARPOLE GUIDES YOU AROUND THE COUNTRYSIDE IN AUGUST
WADERS
Many waders will be leaving their summer breeding grounds at the end of August and moving to their wintering areas around our coast.
This is an ideal time to watch them since many will still be in summer plumage while others will be in winter allowing a unique comparison between the two.
The ruff here (top) in its winter state will have journeyed from north-eastern Europe and Scandinavia, while the dunlin, shown (above) in its summer plumage, is Britain's most common wader.
BLUE FLEABANE
Blue fleabane Erigeron acer grows up to 20in tall in lime-rich areas.
It's so called because in the past it was burnt and the smoke used to rid dwellings of fleas.
Its success is questionable.
SOAPWORT
A tall — up to 3ft — attractive plant, soapwort Saponaria officinalis was once cultivated for the soapy extract which can be obtained by crushing and boiling its leaves.
It is often found near old mills where the extract was used for washing the woollen cloth produced there.
GARDEN SPIDER
Many spiders will be going through their mating rituals now.
And it can be a hazardous time for the male — usually much smaller than the female — as he could end up as a meal if he's not careful.
The male garden spider Araneus diadematus will vibrate a strand of the female's web as he approaches her, to let her know that he is not just another small insect caught in the web.
A certain amount of delicate touching will also take place to lull the female before mating begins.
Spiders can go long periods between meals but cannot do without moisture — becoming dehydrated very quickly.
Unfortunately, in this country at least, they have an undeserved bad reputation as none of our native spiders are poisonous.
ADDER
If you are walking in an area where adders are found — dry heath and common land — then as long as you do not go along like a herd of elephants there is a fair chance of coming across one.
Much maligned, the adder is our only  venomous snake, feeding on other reptiles and small mammals.
But it will only bite humans as a means of self-defence.
GRASS OF PARNASSUS
Grass of Parnassus Parnassia palustris is not a grass at all but a beautiful flowering plant which grows up to 12in tall in wet or marshy areas.
The delicate white flowers top stems which arise from a cluster of attractive heart-shaped leaves.
It gets its name from the belief that such a flower could only come from the home of a god — Mt Parnassus.
It's not very common in the southern part of the British Isles and so is rarely seen.
REEDMACE
Great reedmace Typha latifolia or bullrush is common along canals, slow-moving rivers and pond edges, spreading by seeds and by creeping underground stems.
This plant can soon choke disused waterways if left unchecked.
The velvety-brown cylinders towards the top of the stems are the female flowers which also produce the seeds.
Located immediately above this and resembling a length of millet (as bought for budgerigars) are the male flowers.
MARKET ROUNDUP
Kids' boots
IT'S ESSENTIAL TO LOOK AFTER WALKERS' FEET, HOWEVER LARGE OR SMALL.
WE LOOK AT BOOTS DESIGNED FOR LITTLE PEOPLE
LLEWELYN WYNNE YOUTHS' TRAIL BOOT
Features: two-tone leather uppers, deep cleats on sole with right angled heel.
Padded ankle collar and rand to protect base of uppers.
Lacing uses conventional D-rings and hooks.
Full bellows tongue, suede and leather lining.
Sizes: British 3–5
Colours: light/dark brown
Price: £24–£27
Contact: Llewelyn Wynne, Business Park 8, Barnett Wood Lane, Leatherhead, Surrey KT22 7DG.
Tel: 0372 377713
DB LITTLE LANGDALE
Features: soft leather uppers and lining.
Deep padded ankle collar and full bellows tongue.
Lacing is by means of D-rings and hooks.
Cleated Davos sole unit features cut-away heel and small rand to protect front of boot.
Sizes: 30–35
Colours:brown
Price: £36.95
Contact: Field and Trek, Unit 3, Wates Way, Brentwood, Essex CM15 9TB.
Tel: 0277 233122
ALPINA CANDY
Features: mixed suede and Cordura uppers with brushed nylon lining.
Half bellows tongue and lacing using conventional holes and one set of hooks.
Sole has mid-depth tread and rand to protect base of uppers.
Sizes: 26–35
Colours: purple/pink/gold
Price: £25
Contact: Euroski Ltd, Dolphin House, 67a North Road, Brighton BN1 1YD.
Tel: 0273 688258
ZAMBERLAN ADVENTURE
Features: leather uppers, leather and Cambrelle lining — to wick moisture away from the foot.
Skywalk sole with cut-away heel and small rand to protect front of boot.
Soft, full bellows tongue and deep padded ankle collar.
Boot laces up using D-rings and hooks.
Sizes: 30–35
Colours: mid-grey/black
Price: £45
Contact: Europa Sport, Ann Street, Kendal, Cumbria LA9 6AB.
Tel: 0539 724740
LLEWELYN WYNNE OXFORD JUNIOR BOOT
Features: suede and nylon uppers with two part padded ankle collar.
No bellows tongue, lacing uses strip of four plastic rings.
Shallow tread on sole with slightly cut-away heel.
Rand protects base of uppers.
Polycotton lining with a removable insole.
Sizes: British 3–5
Colours: purple/jade/red
Price: £22–£27
Contact: Llewelyn Wynne, Business Park 8, Barnett Wood Lane, Leatherhead, Surrey KT22 7DG.
Tel: 0372 377713
CIME SOBRETTA JUNIOR
Features: suede and Cordura uppers with Cambrelle lining to wick moisture away from the foot.
Full bellows tongue and padded ankle collar.
Rubber sole with cut-away heel.
Lacing uses four sets of D-rings and two hooks.
Sizes: 30–36
Colours: pink/green
Contact: Vango (Scotland) Ltd, 70 East Hamilton Street, Layburn Greenock PA15 2UB.
Tel: 0475 441122.
HAWKINS WANDA
Features: leather boot with heavily cleated PVC sole unit featuring right angled heel.
Padded ankle cuff, boot laces using one set of D-rings, four sets of hooks.
Full bellows tongue with leather lining.
Sizes: British 11–5
Colours: brown
Price: £21.95
Contact: G T Hawkins Ltd, Overstone Road, Northampton NN1 3JJ.
Tel: 0604 32293
Water Wings
WINDSURFING IS FAST, FUN AND FREQUENTLY FURIOUS — AND EASY TO GET THE HANG OF.
TONY DALLIMORE TELLS YOU HOW TO TAKE TO THE WATER.
Pass any beach or gravel pit during the summer and more often than not you'll come across colourful sails skimming on the water.
Windsurfing is taking off.
The comparative simplicity of the equipment and the fact that it's so easy to transport and launch has got loads of newcomers out onto the water.
Windsurfing's a true family sport.
With just one board and maybe a couple of different size sails anyone from eight to eighty can get out there and have a go.
Current newcomers to the sport have never had it so easy.
Previously there were many beginners' boards available but most were supplied with a massive 6.5m 2 sail which stretched and distorted to make it unmanageable in more than a few knots of wind.
Nowadays the equipment has become more refined and user friendly.
The range of boards and sails available is vast but you should realise that the majority of the equipment is designed for highly specific uses.
If you're a first-time buyer you'd be wise to ask about beginners' boards at a reputable shop, which is a member of the Windsurfing Retailers Association (WRA).
If the sport attracts, but the pocket suggests caution, the logical step is to try windsurfing before you buy.
Learn the basics under the watchful eye of a qualified instructor at an RYA Recognised Windsurfing Centre.
Over 250 centres at home and abroad will offer you an ideal learning environment, suitable equipment and will make sure your first experiences afloat are safe — and highly enjoyable.
The RYA has a National Windsurfing Scheme, sponsored by Wimpy International, divided  into five different levels.
Courses are available at centres at home and abroad and last for anything from an hour to two weeks.
As a beginner at Level 1 every effort is made to prepare you for your first experience on the board.
The instructor will use a dry land simulator to take you through the basic techniques and introduce the equipment gradually.
Your first attempts afloat will be controlled by the instructor who will allow you to practise the new techniques before returning to the simulator for coaching.
Every course will involve an element of theoretical knowledge to ensure that your next trip away from the controlled environment is safe.
When you've completed the RYA Level 1 course you'll be able to sail in any direction in light winds.
Further courses are coaching orientated, examining what the individual needs to learn and offering it in a digestible format.
By the time you've got to Level 5 you'll be able to do spectacular aerial manoeuvres.
For children the RYA Junior Windsurfing Scheme has been developed along experimental learning principles.
With the use of smaller, lighter boards and rigs the children are guided in their play with the equipment towards an understanding of the principles of windsurfing.
Progress is often alarmingly rapid as their enthusiasm and natural abilities adapt to the new environment.
To assist in the development of the scheme and to ensure that the right equipment is available, the RYA have over twenty fleets of junior boards located around the country for hire to clubs or groups wishing to introduce children to the sport.
Recognised junior equipment is also available to buy or hire at many RYA centres.
While learning at an RYA centre guarantees success, there will always be people who will learn on a friend's board or prefer to buy a board and teach themselves.
Unless you start off with the right board, though, you're going to make learning a lot of unnecessarily hard work.
BUYING A BOARD
When you're buying a board think about what experience you've had, where you'll use the board, who else will use it and what level of skill you want to achieve.
Boards come in many different sizes, colours and materials.
The basic beginners' board, like one you'd find in a windsurfing school, is a hardy beast with excellent stability and durability.
It'll be suitable for different sizes of people in a variety of conditions, but won't be suitable for more sophisticated windsurfing techniques.
Choose a board with the following characteristics:
Length: 360–380cm
Volume: 200–240 litres — the lighter the use, the less volume you need.
Construction: Ideally polyethylene — a material which gives indestructible qualities often at the expense of weight.
Cost: £300–£600
For the potentially more dynamic beginner the choice of board can be expanded into the realms of the long ‘funboard’.
Not that all boards aren't fun — the funboard describes a group of boards which may be a little unstable during the first steps afloat, but can be used in higher winds allowing the sailor to develop techniques such as the use of footstraps to cope with the speed of sailing in strong winds.
Look for these characteristics when choosing a board:
Length: 340–370cm
Volume: 180–200 litres
Construction: A great variety of options are available.
You can go for a durable polyethylene or — for a price — the lighter more fragile composite materials which bring improved speed and performance.
Cost: £400–£800
Most shops will also offer a range of second-hand boards which can produce excellent savings provided they aren't too old.
Try to be realistic about your requirements and how the board will be used.
An expensive composite construction may be very fast, easy to lug about ashore, but will it stand the knocks of inexperienced users or being dragged across the pebbles or concrete sides of a reservoir?
Shops offer a variety of sail sizes with any board you choose and sail size can be critical to success in the early stages.
Sails vary in size from 2m 2 up to the monster 8m 2 sails, allowing windsurfers the option of choosing the right sail size for the conditions.
The average recreational sailor owns around three sails, allowing them to sail in a wind band of between force one and five.
The beginner should be looking at an initial purchase of one sail to allow them to learn in light winds of up to force two.
Sail size, like board size, corresponds to the sailor's weight.
A large adult will ideally cope with a sail of 5–5.5m 2 while lighter children or small adults will find a sail of between 4–4.5m 2 of sufficient power.
A smaller sail will also be lighter in weight, making it easier to haul up.
Most beginners' boards will be offered with a ‘soft’ sail having, at most, two full length battens giving the sail shape, making it light and very used friendly.
If you want greater performance a fully battened ‘RAF’(Rotational Asymmetric Foil) sail will be less forgiving but more powerful.
You'll also need a one piece wetsuit, costing between £80 and £200 and a buoyancy aid or vest in the region of £25 for added security during the initial stages.
Footwear gives protection, comfort and warmth on and off the water.
Trainers may suffice, but an investment in a pair of wetsuit boots brings added comfort and increased security.
WHERE TO SAIL
Ideal learners' conditions are flat water with a steady wind undisturbed by buildings or trees.
This could be in the middle of the Solent, but many inland or sheltered coastal venues are more reasonable.
Before you load up  your board on the car to go off in search of solitude, remember that it is wisest to sail in a controlled situation with plenty of others to keep an eye on you.
Until you're proficient consider the following before you set out to sail.
Is all your equipment seaworthy and suitable?
Wear appropriate clothing.
In this country that generally means a wetsuit — even in the summer.
Make sure you can be seen and wear a personal buoyancy aid until you feel confident with a harness — a strength-saving device allowing the sailor to be attached to the sail and use body weight more efficiently.
All your gear must be in good condition and regular checks cost nothing.
Pay particular attention to the ropes and the mastfoot fittings.
Replace anything that is showing signs of wear and always have a strong safety leash joining the rig to the board.
Carry distress signals just in case.
Ideally on the open sea you should carry a flare pack.
Pinpoint orange smoke flares are available in various forms.
In addition, or on inland waters a dayglo orange flag is sufficient, which can be waved to indicate to onlookers that you are in difficulty.
Failing all this, raising and lowering your outstretched arms at your side is an accepted international distress signal.
Carry a whistle and a spare length of rope which can be used for towing others or making repairs.
Have you told someone where you will be going and when you will be back?
Try to sail in a location offering safety cover — a rescue boat to pick you up if you get into trouble.
Let someone know where you are going and what time you expect to be back and don't forget to let them know when you are back.
The rescue services have more important things to do than look for windsurfers who are comfortably seated in the bar!
Have you obtained forecasts for the local area?
Listen to the radio and television forecasts.
Check the tide times and find out what conditions will be like at your location.
If adverse conditions are forecast — take note.
Call the Coastguard for information if in doubt — they would rather speak to you on the phone than have to rescue you on the water!
Are you capable of sailing in the prevailing conditions?
Windsurfing can be tiring.
You must be reasonably fit and be sure you can handle the prevailing wind, weather and tidal conditions.
Be honest when assessing your own abilities.
Use a sail which you know you can handle.
Learn your own limitations and if in doubt, don't go out.
Sail with a friend.
Be sociable.
If either of you should get into difficulties, help will be at hand.
Don't try and help if it will endanger yourself, but remember — there's safety in numbers.
Avoid strong tides, offshore winds, poor visibility or sailing in the dark.
Offshore winds are very deceptive.
The sea appears calm near the shore and the wind feels quite light but will increase in strength dramatically the further away from the shore you sail.
Get to recognise the signs of these conditions.
Strong tides will carry you quickly in a direction you may not want to go.
They can be recognised as they swirl around buoys and posts.
Steer clear.
Consider other water users.
All water users have rights — be sure your sailing equipment does not impinge on other's enjoyment.
Once you have your board, a degree of proficiency and an awareness of your own and the environment's limitations, the waters of the world are your plaything.
Once the initial skills have been mastered, progression relies upon plenty of practice interspersed with further instruction and coaching.
You'll naturally find your own level — whether it's getting into the growing competition circuit or sticking to a local reservoir.
Windsurfing is what you make it.
Tony Dallimore is Windsurfing Manager for the RYA.
For further information on any aspect of windsurfing, RYA staff are here to help you get the most from the sport.
Contact: RYA Windsurfing, RYA House, Romsey Road, Eastleigh, Hampshire SO5 4YA.
Tel: 0703 629962.
Above: for speed, exhilaration and scenery windsurfing is hard to beat.
Right: there are over 250 RYA Recognised Windsurfing Centres where you can learn in safety
It's essential to wear a buoyancy aid when you're first learning
Above: the RYA Junior Windsurfing Scheme has had great success in getting young people involved.
Right: sometimes it's easier to get the hang of it on dry land
TEST REPORT
DOME TENTS
Six of the BEST
DOME TENTS OFFER LOTS OF SPACE AND ARE LIGHTER TO CARRY THAN OTHER TYPES OF TENT.
DAVE WEATHERLEY FACES THE ELEMENTS TO PUT SIX OF THE BEST TO THE TEST
NORTH FACE VE 25
This is a very well made, five pole geodesic-designed mountain tent, suitable for base and high level camps.
And it's proved itself on many expeditions — you could live in it for weeks.
At 9lb 12oz, however, it's a little heavy for long distance backpacking unless the weight is spread out.
It's designed to sleep two or three but on one occasion we had four adults sleeping inside.
It took me five minutes to put up the inner, which is erected first and another five minutes to fit the flysheet and peg out on one wild and windy night.
It is however twice as quick to erect with a friend to help you.
Four black shockcorded aluminium poles are inserted into sleeves on the inner.
The sleeves aren't continuous but are colour coded to help identify each arch.
The base of each pole is then inserted into brass eyelets on nylon webbing which are attached to the groundsheet.
The flysheet also has eyelets at its base which, once draped over the inner, then fixes onto the poles at ground level.
Having both the fly and the inner secured to the poles is a good idea.
A small arched pole is then threaded through a sleeve in the front of the flysheet which extends it into a good size porch.
The whole tent is kept firm and rigid with six guylines.
Only top quality materials have been used on the VE25.
The inner has been lightly coated with Scotchgard, which helps to prevent the fabric from absorbing water.
The flysheet is silicone protected on both sides, something that not many manufacturers do.
Both the inner and fly are made from strong ripstop nylon.
The groundsheet is made from a strong pu-coated taffeta nylon.
There are entrances at both ends.
The back fly entrance has a single zip, giving a small bellend space to store a rucksack and boots.
The front porch which has various door openings gives excellent room for cooking and storing the rest of your gear.
The living space is excellent with plenty of height and room inside.
It's light and bright inside due to the pastel yellow inner.
The price is high but you are buying a top quality tent and one of the North Face's most popular.
VANGO ODYSSEY 200
Vango have been making strong, well constructed tents for as long as I can remember and the Odyssey 200 dome tent certainly lives up to Vango's good name.
It's a geodesic shape with two longer poles running diagonally across the frame of the tent and two shorter poles arched at either end.
There's plenty of room for two.
The inner is made from ripstop nylon and is erected first.
The four shockcorded aluminium poles are inserted into split mesh sleeves and secured around the base of the Oxford pu nylon groundsheet by inserting each end of the poles into small eyelets.
Once the inner is up and pegged out the flysheet, made from 190D double coated pu nylon, goes over the top and is pegged to the ground using eight ground points and two guylines.
At both bellends there are four groundstraps which can be tensioned, giving shape to the fly.
It took three minutes to erect the inner tent on its first outing but because it was raining constantly, the inner was a little wet before I had a chance to put the flysheet over.
The triangular mesh vent on the inner roof let a small spray of rain in but not enough to really worry about.
Personally, I prefer to put the flysheet up first or use a tent that erects all in one.
But for the small time it took to put this inner up it made little difference.
There are two entrances, one at either end, but no alternative door openings or variations as there only a zip at each entrance.
I fell that the extra options available with an extra zip would justify its inclusion.
Unfortunately the Odyssey 200 includes one of my pet hates, door ties.
They're just annoying strips of nylon that flap in the breeze.
Both inner doors have mosquito nets at each end and the headroom inside the tent is excellent.
However I found that the bellends weren't especially spacious but the larger 300 and 400 Odyssey tents both have extended bells.
The tent is extremely stable especially in very high winds as I found out on a few wet and wild nights.
It seemed to be the most stable of the six tested.
The tent bag is handy as it's designed as a zipped holdall with two carrying handles.
I recently took an Odyssey 400 to the Himalayas and used the bag as hand luggage — there's room for the tent and other items inside.
The whole package weighs in at 8lb 13oz, 4.02kg, which is fine for a top quality tent of this kind.
Certainly a tent for all seasons.
VAUDE SPACE 2
This was the first time I had used a vauDe tent and I was impressed with its performance.
The space is just large enough for three adults but it's more comfortable for two.
It's a conventional dome tent with two poles running diagonally across its apex making it square-sided with long funnel-shaped bellends.
The aluminium shockcorded poles are thicker that most other tent poles of the same design, which adds strength but surprisingly adds little extra weight to the tent.
It's 6lb 14oz — the lightest tent on test.
It takes less than five minutes to put up as it all erects in one — a great advantage.
The two poles go through sleeves on the flysheet.
The flysheet is made from nylon which has been polyurethane coated.
The inner, which is made from a cotton polyester blend, is attached to the flysheet using a toggle and eyelet system so it can be detached for drying.
At both ends of the tent there are three options when opening the fly door — including rolling up the bellends to the top.
Great for fine weather or for airing.
There's a good stable guying system.
Four guylines are attached halfway up the pole sleeve to storm-lash the tent — great for very high winds.
There are three ground pegging points at each bellend and one on either side of the fly.
Each guyline is fitted with anti-slip guy adjusters.
The bellends are long and low and though they give good shape for wind deflection I found at times I needed a little more height when cooking.
If you need more space in the bell then vauDe make a Space Plus adding an arched pole which extends the length and height of the bell.
Inside there's a small hanging shelf that is handy for storing small items or for hanging a torch.
There are also two inner pockets and a mosquito net in each door.
The groundsheet is made from pu coated nylon and all the joining tapes are sealed.
The Space 2 is a versatile tent, suitable for many activities.
It's light enough for backpacking and touring, yet strong enough for youth groups.
PHOENIX PHREESPIRIT SUPALITE
I like the Phreespirit a lot.
It's a straightforward dome tent which is quick and easy to erect — it goes up all in one.
Three shockcorded alloy poles cross at the apex of the dome and slot into small cupped pockets at the base of the fly.
The oblong inner is attached under the hexagonal shaped flysheet by elastic cords and toggles and is positioned at an angle to the flysheet doors.
This arrangement gives you quick and easy access into the tent.
Because of the shape of the dome there is plenty of headroom both in the tent and in each of the two porches, so there's plenty of room for cooking.
The flysheet is made from Supalite 1.5oz ripstop nylon which is pu coated.
The inner is also made from ripstop and has a strong neoprene groundsheet.
All seams are sealed.
All this adds up to make a strong, well constructed tent.
I took the comfortable two person tent with me on a number of solo trips as its packed size is small and the weight is good at 7lb 2oz, 3.25kg.
Extra stability is added with the triangular guying system.
Each triangular guyline is attached at two points halfway up on the pole sleeve 18in apart.
The continuous lines then come straight out from the pole and are pegged to the ground forming a triangle shape.
ARIEL A417 EXTENDED DOME
This is a 2/3 person dome tent for the budget camper.
At around £115 it's definitely a reasonably priced tent.
It's rather heavy and bulky to carry at 10lb 14oz, so is best suited for lowland campsites and ‘car boot’ camping.
The inner goes up first and is clipped onto the two glassfibre poles which cross at the apex of the tent using several plastic hooks.
The poles then slot into eyelets at each corner of the groundsheet.
Once this is achieved the flysheet is draped over and pegged to the ground.
The guying system is efficient with nine guylines well placed around the tent.
As the tent is quite high it is prone to catching winds broadside which distorts the shape.
Although it is not a mountain tent I did take it on a high camp with a family group.
We camped at Blind Tarn close to the Coniston fells in the Lakes.
We had to contend with some extremely high winds and found it needed extra guys to hold upright.
The groundsheet is made from heavy duty polyethylene.
The inner is a fairly thick substantial nylon and the flysheet is made from pu proofed nylon.
At present the flysheet is vivid purple and sky blue but Ariel tell me that this tent will appear in apple green and gold for next season.
There's a great deal of room inside and excellent headroom — a child can stand up inside.
There's a mesh vent and cloth flap in the top at one end of the inner which can be opened or closed by a small zip.
Quite a nice idea.
There is a hook dead centre for hanging a small torch.
The inner door has a large mosquito net, although I did feel the mesh should have been on the outside of the door flap so you could keep bugs out.
The tent has a very large extended bellend which has plenty of room for cooking and storing equipment.
There are two see-through plastic window panels on either side of the porch.
The side panels and door give three opening possibilities and can be rolled up if needed.
I wouldn't take the Ariel A147 on the mountains again but would use it at low level campsites.
Its reasonable price recommends it.
BIG PACK VENTO VS 300
The first time I took the VS 300 tent out my ten year old daughter came with me.
She put the inner up in four minutes, not bad at all— and she hadn't seen the tent before.
With a little practice she'll halve that time!
We found it a comfortable and roomy two person (one teddy) tent with plenty of headroom.
It has three main shockcorded poles made from anodised Supertough aluminium crossing at the centre.
The flysheet is made of pu coated polytaffeta nylon, all seams are taped.
On request the VS 300 tent and the larger VS 400 tents can be equipped with a winter thermo-outer flysheet, claimed to reduce heat loss.
At the base of the flysheet there are elastic loops which hook under each of the pole ends once the inner is up.
The advantage with this method is that you can move the whole tent in one if you need to re-position for any reason.
Two side guylines are then pegged out to secure the flysheet.
There are bellends at either end and both are big enough to store a couple of rucksacks and cooking gear.
Inside the tent are two funnel shape air vents, both have mesh netting and drawcords which can be closed.
There are two entrances both with mosquito nets.
At the front entrance there are two wide door openings so access in and out is extremely good.
The groundsheet is made from pu nylon and include the unusual feature of a funnelled air vent in one corner, this too has a drawcord.
Unfortunately the tent bag is too short for the poles.
I sometimes carry my poles separately from the tent anyway.
I have used the tent on many occasions and apart from the usual condensation most nylon flysheets produce, it has given excellent performance.
The weight is good too at 8lb 10oz, 3.92kg, which makes it good for long trips.
The North Face Ve 25 is a mountain tent which has proved itself on many expeditions
The Vango Odyssey 200 is extremely stable, especially in very high winds
VauDe Space takes less than five minutes to put up as it erects all in one
The Phoenix Phreespirit Supalite gives plenty of headroom inside
Ariel A147 is a budget tent best suited to campsites and car boot camping
The Vento VS 300 is a roomy two person tent with lots of headroom
OUT & ABOUT IN BRITAIN
EVERY MONTH WE FEATURE A GREAT WALK AND VISIT AN ACTIVITY CENTRE IN YOUR REGION OF THE COUNTRY  
MOUNTAIN BIKING IN CORNWALL P39
WALKING IN THE PEMBROKESHIRE COAST NATIONAL PARK P38
HIGHLANDS & ISLANDS
1.
Very easy 2.
Easy 3.
Moderate 4.
Energetic 5.
Demanding
GLEN COE AND GLEN ETIVE
A good non-mountaineering round walk in an otherwise demanding upland area, leading through or past seven glens.
Follows valley floors all the way, with close-up views of some daunting-looking peaks.
Boggy (but passable) from 7 to 8; don't expect to return with dry feet.
Not all paths are defined, but valley floors are obvious; easy route-finding.
Ascent 2100ft: 800ft gently up Lairig Eilde, then 1300ft more steeply from Dalness up Lairig Gartain.
Length 11 miles (17.5km), 7 hours Difficulty 4 Start Lay-by on A82, 3¾ miles E of Glen Coe NT visitor centre and just where the road enters small rocky gorge (¼ mile after first house on left).
On left side of road as you come from NT visitor centre.
Grid reference NN 181565 OS maps 1:50 000 41; 1:25 000 NN 05/15
WALK DIRECTIONS
1
Left on main road for 600 yds.
2
Turn right on stony path signposted to Loch Etive head.
Path rises for ¼ mile then descends into valley.
3
Cross stream by easy natural stepping-stones as soon as it is reached.
Clear path continues on right side of stream and later recrosses it.
Path leads to the top of valley and descends ahead.
4
Towards bottom of descent go down to road, reaching it near driveway with cattle-grid at small larch wood.
5
Left along road (ignore signpost after 200 yds for footpath to Glen Coe (a)) for 300 yds, then across road-bridge, then turn left (no path) and follow contour of hill round, with stream down on left.
6
About 100 yds after passing confluence of streams cross right-hand path to river where safe, and ascend a few yards to reach well-defined path which leads parallel to right-hand stream, following it up to its source.
Keep to left side of stream; path becomes intermittent, and route steepens.
7
At top by large cairn proceed down valley past further cairns.
Shortly after river begins (away to right), pick up path (boggy) and follow glen to reach main road by car park and AA box.
8
Cross road, continue on other side (no path for 30 yds) to reach remains of old road (track covered with prominent strip of heather); turn left on it.
9
On rejoining main road proceed along it for 250 yds before picking up track on right.
Follow for ¾ mile to cairn and viewpoint (b), at which take path on left down to car park.
WHAT TO LOOK OUT FOR
(a) Easier alternative to sign-posted route.
(b) Glen Coe.
A vast glacial trough whose steep sides rise to over 3000ft from near sea-level.
Here in 1692 the Campbells of Glenlyon slaughtered the Macdonalds of Glencoe, ostensibly under the orders of William III.
When the Highlanders failed to accept William and Mary in place of James VII of Scotland (James II of England), the last day of 1691 was set as an ultimatum by William III.
Macdonald tried unsuccessfully to find a magistrate to receive his oath at the last minute, then sent his papers to Edinburgh, where Secretary of State and Master of Stair Sir John Dalrymple suppressed them.
Jumping on the chance of making an example of them Dalrymple issued the order to slaughter the clan Macdonald.
Forty perished and three years later the Scottish Parliament voted that the killing had been unlawful murder.
GLENCOE OUTDOOR CENTRE
Address: Glencoe, Argyll, Scotland PA39 4HS.
Tel: 08552 350 Activities on offer: skiing, winter skills, winter mountaineering, canoeing, climbing, abseiling, hill walking, orienteering, sailing, windsurfing.
The Glencoe Outdoor Centre has one of the best locations in the country for outdoor activities.
The centre has as its base a large house in the village of Glencoe which is surrounded by fantastic mountains — ideal for skiing and mountaineering in the winter and for hillwalking in the summer.
And the centre also has a waterside base on the nearby shores of Loch Leven where you can hire out dinghies, windsurfers or canoes as well as take courses in watersports.
You can either stay at the centre during an activity holiday where you'll sleep in a room for two to eight people and have all meals provided.
Alternatively you can join in activities on a daily basis if you live or are holidaying in the area.
The structure of courses is flexible and if you don't fancy multi-activity then you can come along on a specialist week concentrating on one sport.
The centre is a friendly place run by the Williams family and is open all year except December.
A seven-day multi-activity course costs £142.
Expect to pay around £20 for a day's activities.
LOWLANDS & BORDERS
EYEMOUTH TO ST ABB'S HEAD
A coastal walk with several variants: do the whole coastal stretch, looking round inland and finishing at the visitor centre for the bus back, or start a shorter walk from Coldingham (walking back along the road or taking the bus).
Try the shortest route from St Abb's visitor centre, or split the full walk into two separate excursions.
The scenic highlight is St Abb's Head, but there are also good beaches (popular in summer) at 2 and 4.
Frequent bus service on weekdays, less frequent on Sundays (when you are advised to park by the visitor centre and take the bus to Eyemouth before starting the walk).
Length Eyemouth to St Abb's Head visitor centre 6½ miles (10.5km), 3½ hours; Coldingham to St Abb's Head visitor centre 4½ miles (7km) 2½ hours; round walk from St Abb's Head visitor centre 3 miles (5km), 1½ hours.
Difficulty Full walk 3, Short 2 Start 6½-mile walk Sea-front, Eyemouth, grid reference 946645;4½ mile walk Coldingham (car park in village centre opposite war memorial, grid reference 902659; take B6438 signposted St Abb's, turning right at end of village in road signposted ‘Sands ¾’; opposite ‘unsuitable for motors’ sign take path parallel on left-hand side of road and follow to beach where turn left to start walk directions as 4;3-mile walk St Abb's nature reserve visitor centre (turn off by sign for St Abb's Head; to start walk, go to right of coffee shop to reach road, and take waymarked path opposite, on left-hand side of road and parallel to it reach 30mph road-sign, where turn left on path sign-posted St Abb's Head); grid reference 913675 OS maps 1:50 000 67; 1:25 000 NT 86/96 (Pathfinder 423) Refreshments Full range in Eyemouth; pubs and shops at Coldingham; café and hotel at Coldingham Bay; shop at St Abb's; coffee shop at the St Abb's visitor centre
WALK DIRECTIONS
1
(a) Facing Eyemouth sea-front, turn left along esplanade, joining beach at Dolphin Hotel (which is to left); leave beach by prominent path up on to cliff-top, and then keep along top of cliffs ignoring left forks, with caravan site on left and soon diverting out to headland (with cannons)(b).
2
After going around edge of large bay (ignoring path descending to beach), path keeps to edge of fields on seaward side and crosses three stiles;
3
just after the third stile, path goes over footbridge and drops down on to shore, where turn left.
250 yds later, pick up path on left which climbs up to regain cliff-top.
Path soon descends into small bay and climbs hillock to reach Coldingham Bay (with huts and café).
For Coldingham (c) turn left inland on tarmacked track between café and lifeguard hut and follow road (signposted path runs parallel to it on right-hand side for a distance to avoid road-walking).
4
To continue main walk After beach huts, take steps up on to cliff and follow path to St Abb's village (d), where keep as close as possible to coast, to drop down into harbour; take steps between last two cottages in harbour (with red-tiled roofs) and ascend path to road where turn right, past church to end of village.
5
Turn right by 30mph speed derestriction sign, on enclosed path signposted St Abb's Head, soon along cliff-top (e).
By fence corner on left sea briefly disappears from view; soon after, cross stile; path goes ahead up valley floor (becoming less defined towards top), but there are much better views by ascending steep slope on right
6
and walking along cliff-top.
Meanwhile the main path route goes up the valley until sea reappears (where these two routes merge).
Continue along the coast soon keeping to left of lighthouse buildings at St Abb's Head; briefly join lighthouse road, but it is best almost immediately to divert off it to rejoin cliff-top for sea views.
Eventually drop steeply to reach corner of the road
7.
Either retrace steps to St Abb's or (easier) keep right along the road, over cattle-grid to reach visitor centre (g)(which is on left just before road junction).
At B6438, you can get the bus back to Eyemouth via Coldingham; to the latter it's an easy walk along the road to the right.
ON THE ROUTE
(a) Eyemouth is a busy fishing port specialising in shellfish,(b) The cannons are 32-pounders cast about 1830. (c) Coldingham (off route); site of an 11th-century Benedictine priory, largely destroyed by Cromwell's men in 1648. (d) St Abb's Quiet fishing village with picturesque harbour.
(e) St Abb's Head Some of the best scenery of the Scottish E coast.
(g) Visitor centre for St Abb's has a small exhibition and a café.
WESTERTOUN RIDING CENTRE
Address: Westruther, Berwickshire TD3 6NE.
Tel: 05784 270/202
Activities on offer: horse riding
When you're not out walking around this lovely area of the Borders try seeing it from the back of a horse — the Westertoun Riding Centre will take you out on anything from an hourly ride to a half day trek through the Lammermuir Hills.
You don't have to be an experienced rider either.
Cross country treks are tailored to suit individual ability.
As well as the popular cross country rides centre, which is approved by the British Horse Society, offers lessons in a variety of riding styles.
A half day cross country ride costs £25.
There's an indoor school for when the weather gets rough.
Riding holidays are organised for unaccompanied children who stay in the farmhouse and for adults who stay in the village in the Old Thistle Inn.
The Westertoun centre is run by husband and wife team Andrew and Alison Isles and is open all year round.
NORTHERN ENGLAND
SIMON'S SEAT
One of the most varied walks in Yorkshire.
Ascends gradually through woods, up the Valley of Desolation, then over moorland to the crags of Simon's Seat.
After the descent follows banks of the Wharfe, with woods in the final sections.
Shorter route omits Simon's Seat, follows edge of Barden Fell down to road, then continues down to river.
Paths and tracks mostly well defined; route-finding quite easy.
Barden Fell is an access area, closed on Saturdays in the grouse-shooting season; notices will be displayed.
For information telephone estate office (0756 71 227).
No dogs at any time.
Length Full walk 8½ miles (13.5km), 4½ hours Difficulty 3 Start Bolton Abbey, 6 miles NW of Ilkley, in riverside car park (fee) at N end of village.
Turn off B6160 by ornamental fountain.
Notices tell you if Barden Fell is closed to public.
OS maps 1:50 000 104; 1:25 000 SE 05/15 Refreshments Pavilion at start and end of walk (Cavendish Tower); tea-room by post office, Bolton Abbey; team-room at Howgill pub (with restaurant) at Barden Tower
WALK DIRECTIONS
1 (a) From car park on banks of River Wharfe cross bridge at refreshment pavilion and continue straight ahead for 70 yds on other side, avoiding riverside footpath.
Turn left at crossroads then, after 300yds, turn right on path opposite five rough stone bollards.
2 Where path rejoins road, turn right on path, immediately leaving road and passing through gate on right side of cottage.
Head across field to gate in wall ahead.
Track is now well defined and descends, entering Valley of Desolation (b).
3 At waterfall it climbs steep bank on right and descends to cross footbridge.
Ignore right fork but continue on main track which ascends to leave forest after ½mile by stile 5.
For shorter walk turn left on track (later becomes path), walking alongside wall on your left at edge of moorland.
¾ mile later cross ladder-stile on left, follow stony track down to road and then turn right along it.
At road junction ½mile later turn left and 200 yds later fork right on path following river, soon reaching Barden Bridge at 10.
For full walk continue forward across moorland on prominent track which ascends gently and passes stone table after ½ mile.
Shortly after, turn right at T-junction of tracks and follow cairn-marked track to Simon's Seat (c) 6.
Turn left on track signed Howgill and Barden.
7 ¾ mile later, track bends right to descend between forest walls.
After ½ mile turn right by barn on right, signposted Barden.
Descends to tarmac land (café is 200 yds on right).
8 Cross lane and descend on track opposite and slightly to left signposted Barden Bridge.
Keep left on path along wall on reaching River Wharfe. 9 Follow riverside path.
10 At Barden Bridge you can detour to Barden Tower (d) by crossing bridge and keeping left.
11 After another 2 miles (e) path enters woods (f); take any of a number of criss-cross paths, still following line of river, emerging at road 1 mile later.
Turn right across bridge and take path on right for Bolton Abbey/Cavendish, which leads back to bridge.
WHAT TO LOOK OUT FOR
(a) Bolton Abbey
Part of the Duke of Devonshire's Chatsworth's Estates; glorious parkland and among England's most romantic abbey ruins.
(b) Valley of Desolation
Lugubrious name as prompted by a landslip in the last century.
(c) Simon's Seat
Rocky outcrop at the highest point of the grouse moors; view over Wharfedale towards Burnsall and of Skyreholme, a tributary valley.
(d) Barden Tower (always open; free)
Ruined hunting-lodge.
(e)
The path crosses a stone aqueduct bearing water from reservoirs in Nidderdale to Bradford.
(f)
The woods are mainly oak woods, rich in bird-life.
THE DALES CENTRE
Address: Grassington, Skipton, North Yorkshire BD23 5AU Tel: 0756 725757 Activities on offer: caving, gorge scrambling, rock climbing, abseiling, mountain biking, orienteering, bivouacking , raft building, pony trekking, walking, team building games.
The Dales Centre aims to provide a full range of outdoor activities making use of the beautiful surroundings of the Yorkshire Dales — so those who are looking for great climbing and caving are especially well catered for.
The centre doesn't have accommodation of its own, rather it organises accommodation for visitors in anything from local bunkhouses up to country hotels — depending on how much people want to pay.
From these local bases the team of instructors under manager Mark Radtke organise the activities.
Most people who come to the centre are in groups — the centre recommends a group of eight for bookings.
A week's multi-activity holiday based at a youth hostel costs around £120–£130.
NORTH WALES AND CENTRAL ENGLAND
MOEL SIABOD
A pyramidal mountain on the eastern edge of Snowdonia, with particularly good views.
Easy first few miles before the start of the ascent with the formidable wall of Siabod in your right.
Route to summit requires some tough scrambling, before a descent on the grassy northern slopes.
Paths are undefined up to summit and for much of the descent, but route-finding is quite easy in clear weather.
Compass is essential, however, in case of mist.
Ascent 2250ft.
Length 7 miles (11km), 4 hours Difficulty 5 Start Capel Curig, at junction of A5 and A4086, 15 miles SE of Bangor.
Roadside parking OS maps 1:50 000 115; 1:25 000 Outdoor Leisure 16 Refreshments Hotels (with bars) and shop in Capel Curig
WALK DIRECTIONS
1 Follow A4086 out of village.
After 600 yds, immediately after Plas y Brenin outdoor centre (a), take signposted footpath on left.
Follow this over bridge then turn left on track.
¼ mile later avoid left turns into farm but proceed into forest.
2 ¼ mile later, and 50 yds after avoiding sharp right turn, fork right on track immediately passing through barrier.
This eventually leads up steps and reaches signpost before bridge down on left (do not cross) 3.
Continue forward from signpost, descending to river, then turn right along river bank, at first in woods, then entering fields by ladder-stile. 4 Leave second field by gap 30 yds away from river, then immediately turn left below cottages and follow track through gate to tarmac lane.
Turn right on lane, then 50 yds later, at the cottages, turn right (signposted) on lane over cattle-grid (signed ‘no cars’).
After ¼ mile, at farm, continue uphill on obvious rough track to left of farm.
Cross two sets of gate/ladder-stiles in next ½ mile and continue up ladder-stile 50 yds to right 5.
From stile continue slightly downhill to lake, then follow right side of lake on clear path that then ascends past old slate quarries, at top of which is a dark pool just on right of path 6.
From pool path is less clear but continue forward heading to lowest point of shoulder ahead, from where clear path leads to another lake.
After end of lake turn right up ridge: a tough path is marked with cairns to begin with, but make your own way, keeping close to steep slope on right, up to summit (a stiffish scramble)(b) 7.
From trig point turn right along ridge, heading for lesser summit (no path).
After 400 yds, just before ridge rises, bear half left down off ridge: soon lake and outdoor centre passed at start of walk are seen below — make down for right-hand end of lake.
½ mile down you should pick up path that soon becomes well defined and leads to ladder-stile in wall 8.
Stony path is now obvious: follow it for ¾ mile to reach forest track.
Turn left along it then, after 50 yds find narrow path on right alongside stream.
200 yds later take clear path on left leading down through forest to bridge crossed near the start of the walk.
WHAT TO LOOK OUT FOR
(a) Plas y Brenin Built by Lord Penryn, one of the richest slate-quarry owners, as an inn for travellers.
He also constructed the road along the S side of the Upper Llugwy Valley and the one along this valley.
It is now run by the Sports Council.
(b) View W to Snowdon (3560ft); NW to the Glyders (3279ft) and Tryfan (3010ft) just top the right of them; N to Penyrhelgi-du (2733ft), NE over the chain of lakes N of the Llugwy Valley; ENE to the Clwydian Range (181ft); E over Llyn Elsi Reservoir and the hills near Betws-y-coed; SE to the Arenigs (2810ft) and Berwyn (2712ft); SSE to Dolwyddelan Castle (immediately below); S to the Rhinogs (2362ft).
PLAS Y BRENIN
Address: Capel Curig, Gwynedd LL24 0ET Tel:
Activities on offer: rock climbing, mountaineering, mountain leadership training, mountain first aid, ski mountaineering, dry slope skiing, canoeing, orienteering, mountain walking, Alpine and Scottish climbing.
Plas y Brenin is well known as the Sports Council's National Mountain Centre — a centre of excellence for rock climbing and mountaineering skill training.
But don't let this put you off if you're a beginner.
There are plenty of courses for novices and you can be sure you're getting high quality, safe tuition in what can be a difficult and dangerous environment.
Based as it is on the north western edge of Snowdonia the centre is an ideal base for all kinds of climbing.
And when that area runs out of difficult enough challenges there are trips organised to Scotland and the Alps.
Plas y Brenin is a residential centre, based in what used to be an hotel — it sleeps 71 in two- or three-bedded rooms.
There's also separate self catering accommodation on-site.
There's a bar and a lecture room too.
Courses usually last two or five days but during the summer there are two hour long ‘turn-up-and-try-it’ activity sessions open to all.
Courses run all year round.
You'll pay around £128 for a rock climbing weekend, £77 for a weekend's multi-activity holiday and £225 for a multi-activity week.
SOUTH WALES & THE MIDLANDS
ST DAVID'S HEAD AND CARN LLIDI
An impressively rugged coast walk with perhaps the finest sea-board hill in Pembrokeshire for the climax; the changes of direction provide an interesting sequence of views.
Easy route-finding.
Length 3½ or 4½ miles (5.5km or 7km), 2–2½ hours Difficulty 2 Start Whitesand Bay car park, NW of St David's.
Grid reference 735272 OS maps 1:50 000 157; 1:25 000 SM 62/72 (Pathfinder 1055) Refreshments Snack kiosk in Whitesand Bay car park
WALK DIRECTIONS
1 (a) Take signposted coastal path to right of telephone box.
Proceed between fences; after 150 yds fork right (left goes to promontory (b)).
Follow coast path along top of rugged cliffs (c), past National Trust sign, over footbridge (left is optional detour to sandy beach), past promontory of St David's Head (d).
Keep close to cliff-top.
2 200 yds after St David's Head, look for burial chamber (e) 30 yds off path to right but easily missed; it is just before big crags begin.
Inland to your right is the big hill of Carn Llidi.
Continue along the coast path.
3 When you have almost passed Carn Llidi, fork right inland, heading uphill and immediately to right of prominent stone-walled enclosure to go up on to left-hand shoulder of Carn Llidi.
4 At top of shoulder, where view ahead opens, wall joins on left: you can turn right up to summit of Carn Llidi (f), but path is not defined near top.
(if you want to continue along ridge make your way slightly along right-hand side to ridge until reaching concrete and brick foundation of old radar hut, where you turn right on concrete path, down steps, and soon between iron posts and along track; rejoin directions at 5).
To continue descend from the shoulder, on well-defined path with wall on left; where wall bends right, keep right alongside it, and soon ignore a stile on left.
Turn left on reaching junction with hard track 5.
Follow the track to farm, keeping forward as signposted in centre of farm (ignoring left fork), and descend gently to main road.
Turn right on road to reach car park.
ON THE ROUTE
(a) Whitesand Bay The mile-long beach is one of Pembrokeshire's most popular bathing places.
At very low tide, remains of a forest are revealed, consisting of stumps of birch, fir, hazel and oak trees.
The Bay was on a Bronze Age route from Stonehenge to the Wicklow mountains in Ireland.
(b) The small promontory on the left is the site of St Patrick's Chapel (no ruin survives), built 6th to 10th century on the spot from where St Patrick is thought to have sailed for Ireland.
(c) Views SW of Ramsey Island, Wales' major breeding ground for Atlantic grey seals.
(d) St David's Head Penmaen Dewi) Described in a Roman survey of the known world in AD 140 as the ‘Promontory of the Eight Perils’, this low but rugged headland looks W to the Bishop's and Clerk's Rocks.
(e) Coetan Arthur A 5000-year old burial chamber with an 8ft capstone and supports.
Despite its proximity to the path, it can be easily missed.
(f) Carn Llidi (595ft).
A rough path leads to the summit of this miniature mountain, whose lower slopes have discernible traces of enclosures made by Iron Age farmers.
Stirring view, even in poorish visibility, of the nearby coast; in clear conditions the Waterford and Wicklow mountains in Ireland are visible.
From the top you can continue along the seaward side (care needed on the rocks), instead of rejoining the main route; it is rough going until rejoining the concrete steps, near foundations of old radar station in the last war, which later becomes a track, which you descend to 5.
TWR Y FELIN OUTDOOR CENTRE
Address: Caerfai Road, St David's, Dyfed SA62 6QS Tel: 0437 720391 Activities on offer: kayaking, climbing, abseiling, surfing, windsurfing, orienteering, coastal climbing/swimming.
One of the more unusual activities that Twr y Felin is able to offer is what they call coasteering — climbing, scrambling and swimming around the lovely Pembrokeshire coastline.
And the centre's location also makes it ideal for windsurfing and kayaking.
Twr y Felin is actually in the city of St David's (it's a city because of its cathedral — not its size).
Around 32 people can stay there at any one time in multi-bedded or twin rooms.
All meals are provided and the centre specialises in vegetarian cooking.
There's a bar and a lecture room for guests' use.
The centre's been running for four years and is still looked after by Andy Middleton who set it up.
A wide variety of activity holidays are provided including some special weeks for unaccompanied children.
People who aren't staying at the centre can book for half a day or day long activity sessions too.
A day costs £22.
A week's multi activity costs £259.
SOUTH WEST ENGLAND
HIGH CLIFF AND CAMBEAK
First along a deep wooded valley, then a section across pasture leads into the return along the highest cliffs in Cornwall, giving a long, effortless descent over short grass.
Route-finding is easy to begin with, though enthusiastic signposting unfortunately pegs out just when paths become undefined, across fields.
Length 6 miles (9.5km), 3 hours Difficulty 3 Start Crackington Haven (two car parks in village), 6 miles NE of Boscastle.
Grid reference SX 143968 OS maps 1:50 000 190; 1:25 000 SX 19 Refreshments Compass Inn, Crackington Haven
WALK DIRECTIONS
1 (a) Follow road from Crackington Haven, with sea on right, Boscastle direction.
After 100 yds pass road on right signposted High Cliff.
Do not take this, but take next right turn, leading to farm.
At farm keep straight on (avoiding half right turn down to gate and sharp left turn uphill) to gate with yellow marker, and continue on well-trodden paths into woods.
2 After 300 yds cross bridge.
Beyond bridge keep right by signpost to Woodgates (avoiding straight on to Hallagather) and cross second bridge 3.
Keep left (yellow waymark) after second bridge.
4 After ½ mile reach signpost indicating Woodgate on right, and continue half left on well-trodden path signposted ‘Sheepdip’ to continue along main valley (path blocked by fallen trees at time of writing but these are quite easy to scramble under).
Path emerges briefly by stile into field after ¼ mile but soon leads back into woods.
5 300 yds later reach four-way signpost.
Keep straight on/half right (signposted Pengold) through gate/stile and over stream.
Immediately after stream turn right up to field.
In field bear uphill aiming for double electricity posts.
Keep to the right-hand side of bank ahead, following it until reaching electricity posts, then bear quarter right to gate at brow where a clear track turns left across corner of field then continues to Pengold farm.
Enter farmyard by public footpath signposts, between farm on left and Nissen hut on right.
6 Turn right on farm track through farmyard and keep on main track after farm, avoiding left fork.
Follow track to coast road, along which turn left.
7 Turn sharp right after 100 yds to climb steps up to High Cliff (NT sign).
Bear half left to coastal path (not well defined initially) at edge of cliff 50 yds away.
Turn right on coastal path and follow for 2 miles back to Crackington Haven (avoid any paths leading inland)(b).
WHAT TO LOOK OUT FOR
(a) Crackington Haven Has a graveyard for shipwrecked sailors who were not allowed to be buried in consecrated ground.
(b) the first rise (after 300 yds) is High Cliff which is the highest cliff in Cornwall.
OUTDOOR ADVENTURE
Address: Atlantic Court, Widemouth Bay, Bude, Cornwall EX23 0DF Tel: 0288 361312 Activities on offer: windsurfing, canoeing, surfing, ski surfing, coastal expeditions, climbing, mountain biking
Outdoor Adventure is one of the few outdoor centres which makes adults its top priority.
The centre doesn't take anyone under 16 years old on a residential basis, though on non-residential activity days children over 13 are welcome.
A variety of multi-activity courses are on offer together with specialist windsurfing courses up to advanced and instructor level.
Outdoor Adventure also hire out windsurfers, canoes, surfboards and mountain bikes.
The centre is located on a cliff top above Widemouth Bay in grounds of ten acres.
It used to be a couple of coastguard cottages but has now been converted and sleeps twenty five in twin bedded rooms.
There's also a private beach.
The centre has been run for the past ten years by Richard Gill and his brother Jeff — they say that three quarters of their guests come as individuals though they are happy to take groups.
Organised trips to the local Cornish pubs, barbecue and party nights are especially popular.
Outdoor Adventure is open from March to November and a week's multi-activity costs £230.
A windsurfing week costs £240 and a single day's activities costs £16.
SOUTH EAST ENGLAND
ALDEBURGH AND THORPENESS
Of special interest for bird- and plant-life.
All on the level, yet quite varied, leading along an old railway track through heathland, past a lake near Thorpeness and along a shingle beach.
One section on road.
Easy route-finding.
Length 5½ miles (9km), 2 hours Difficulty 1–2 Start Moot Hall at N edge of Aldeburgh OS maps 1:50 000 156; 1:25 000 TM 44/45 Refreshments Various pubs and the celebrated Fish and Chip Shop at Aldeburgh.
The Dolphin and a café (opposite the Meare, an artificial lake) at Thorpeness
WALK DIRECTIONS
1 (a) From Moot Hall cross to Mill Inn opposite and take road to left of it, signposted A12.
Just before church take gate into churchyard and follow path to kissing-gate on far side.
Continue along enclosed path beyond, ignoring a right turn after 200 yds, to take wooden kissing-gate leading to caravan site 2.
Cross to tarmac track on the far side of toilet block ahead, ignoring track on near side.
Turn left through the caravan site to stile leading to abandoned railway track, on which turn right.
Follow for ½ mile.
3 Where railway track is barred by metal gate take signposted track over left stile, past houses to main road.
Turn right along road for 500 yds. 4 At dip in road turn right alongside footpath to Thorpeness.
Wall is succeeded by garden hedge.
Where it ends, do not continue on track past nature reserve notices but look for narrow path bearing left and passing through small copse on to area of grassy heathland (b).
Continue along this path to edge of reedbeds.
5 Turn right at junction of paths with reedbeds now on left.
Path winds through banks of gorse and broom.
6 After ½ mile turn left on path at T-junction through wood to rejoin old railway, on which turn left and follow for short distance, crossing small river by low walled bridge.
7 On leaving wood turn right on footpath across garden of ex-railway cottage and follow along edge of golf course and by left side of clubhouse and on to track.
Follow track between House in the Clouds and windmill (c) into Thorpeness itself (d).
8 Turn right on reaching tarmac road and walk round edge of Meare; cross road by café and go down to beach (e).
Turn right and walk either along beach proper or path at back.
Latter is best route to take for flowers, insects and birds.
WHAT TO LOOK OUT FOR
(a) Aldeburgh Birthplace of the 18th-century poet George Crabbe and the home of Benjamin Britten, whose opera Peter Grimes , set on this coast, was based on a character in Crabbe's poem The Borough .
The walk passes two buildings of particular interest, the 16th-century timber-framed Moot Hall and the church of St Peter and St Paul (largely 16th-century interior; shop auctions used to be held inside at that period), but the rest of the town also deserves exploration.
(b) North Warren RSPB nature reserve of 250 acres (leaflet from Minsmere, further up the coast towards Dunwich).
It provides a varied habit of heath, woodland and wetland, attracting a range of birds including willow, redpolls, bitterns, linnets and stonechats. (c) The windmill (open to public) dates from 1803.
Originally a corn mill, it was moved to its present site to pump water for the House in the Clouds, the curious disguised water tower opposite.
(d) Thorpeness Built between 1910 and 1930s as a planned seaside resort adjoining the Meare, an artificial lake of 65 acres.
(e) Birds Terns and ringed plovers.
Flora Yellow horned poppies and rare sea-pea.
EAST ANGLIA SCHOOL OF SAILING
Address: PO Box 64, Studio 1, Fox's Marina, The Strand, Ipswich, Suffolk IP2 8NN Tel: 0473 684884
Activities on offer: dinghy sailing, cruising
This RYA recognised school offers a variety of sailing courses catering for the absolute beginner right up to the most advanced sailor.
You can choose from weekend or week long courses in either dinghy sailing or cruising on larger yachts.
There are also special courses organised for children and young people.
Sailing takes place up and down the east coast.
The school doesn't have any accommodation of its own but will help if you're not local to find a decent bed and breakfast in the area.
That's if you're on a dinghy sailing course.
If you're on one of the cruising courses you'll be sleeping aboard your yacht.
It's a well established school, set up in 1973 and run by Bill Smith.
It is open throughout the year.
The cost is £186 for a week long dinghy sailing course and £285 for a yacht cruising course.
Walks reproduced from Holiday Which?
Good Walks Guide and Holiday Which?
Town and Country Walks Guide published by the Consumers' Association and Hooder and Stoughton 
COMPETITION
RELUM GEAR
win over £1,500 of gear
First prize in our huge Relum competition is a great tent as used on two Everest expeditions and worth £459.
The Super 7/K sleeps up to seven so it is also ideal for family walking holidays.
There are a couple of second prizes of Ios geodesic tents, two-person backpacking models worth £99 each while four winners will take away our third prizes of Tinos sloping ridge tents.
The Tinos is a two person backpacking tent worth £55 in the shops.
A waxed cotton jacket, ideal for country walks and worth £47, will go to eight winners of our fourth prizes.
And 12 people will be getting plenty of restful nights with our fifth prize.
We're giving away backpacking sleeping bags worth £25 each.
Finally we'll be helping 24 readers combat chilly summer evenings with our sixth prize of chunky woollen sweaters.
They're worth £20 each and not only will they keep you warm but they look great too!
So with 51 chances to win you've no excuse for not entering.
For full details of the Relum range contact: Relum Ltd, Carlton Park Industrial Estate, Kelsdale, Saxmundham, Suffolk IP17 2NL.
Tel: 0728 603271.
HOW TO ENTER
On the back of a postcard or large envelope not larger than six by five inches write down the answers to our three easy questions below which all relate to UK lakes.
Post your answers together with your name and address to: Outdoor Action Relum Competition, 13 Park House, 140 Battersea Park Road, London SW11 4NB.
Entries must arrive by last post on Friday August 30, 1991.
QUESTIONS
1 Which Scottish loch is famous for its monster?
2 In which national park will you find Grasmere?
3 Complete the name of the famous reservoir in Northumberland — Kielder…
RULES
1.
Entries must be on a postcard or the back of an envelope no bigger than 5in × 6in.
2.
Entries are limited to one per person.
3.
No cash alternative to the prizes will be offered.
4.
The judges' decision is final and no correspondence will be entered into.
5.
Employees of Hawkes Consumer Publications and Relum Ltd are ineligible to enter.
6.
No entry will be accepted after the last post on Friday 30 August, 1991.
Above: our first prize of a £459 Super 7/K tent is great for groups or families.
Right: there's an incredible 50 runner-up prizes of tents, sleeping bags and clothes
MOUNTAINS IN FOCUS
SWISS RHINE
MAJESTIC PEAKS AND STEEP RIDGES GIVE WAY TO HIDDEN VALLEYS, RIPPLING LAKES AND ALPINE MEADOWS.
DONALD BROWN DISCOVERS THE SWISS RHINE
Tourist Offices
In Britain enquire at the Swiss National Tourist Office (SNTO), 1 New Coventry St, London W1V 3HG.
Tel: 071 734 1921.
In Switzerland the sign Verkehrsbüro or the international ‘i ’ symbol indicates tourist offices which have full information in walking, climbing, skiing and all other activities in the area.
The staff are well informed and able to give you details in English about such things as transport and accommodation.
Mountain guides and ski-schools have their own offices.
Language
You will hear the old Romansch language spoken and see it written on the signs, but German is the predominant official language, with English widely understood in the majority of towns.
Where to Walk
The River Rhine rises in the Swiss Alps, just north of the St Gotthard Pass.
Rippling from a hidden mountain lake it runs eastward through the Tujetschtal, a beautiful and little-known valley.
In Chur, the oldest town, it turns north to Liechtenstein and Germany.
At the Oberalppass, explore the conical peaks and steep ridges which enclose the Rhine's source.
From the pass which stands at 6700ft, the Tujetschtal valley drops 3000ft through Alpine meadows to Disentis town, ten miles to the east.
Easy trails loop round mountain spurs as they follow the river.
To the north narrow valleys rise steeply through the craggy passes to peaks and mountain lakes.
On the southern flank great ridges stretch upwards to views of the crests and glaciers of the Italian Alps.
When to Go
Walk at any time from June to September.
May is the best month for flowers.
Be prepared for summer rain and remember that Alpine breezes turn cool in the late afternoon.
January to March are the skiing months with temperatures averaging around 25°F — but these days it's wise to check for snow first!
If you like firework displays, be there on the Swiss National Day, August 1.
Notice boards outside tourist offices often display weather forecasts for the next few days.
Within Switzerland you can also telephone 162 for a weather forecast.
How to Get There
In summer a seat on a charter flight from Gatwick to Zurich costs from £95 return, scheduled flights cost about £60 more.
In January charters cost £80–£100 from Gatwick, £110–£120 from Manchester.
Before leaving, buy a Swiss Federal Railways transfer ticket for £32 from SNTO.
The ticket provides scheduled rail/bus travel from the airport direct to your destination — and back to the airport from anywhere in Switzerland.
For £44 a Swiss Holiday Card provides the same transfer plus half-price on scheduled rail/bus services.
London to Zurich by train currently costs £173 return (youths £115, seniors £90).
Contact BR International.
Tel: 071 834 2345.
Overnight coaches go to Geneva from London's Victoria Coach Station for £94 return (£86 youths) or to Zurich for £98 (£88 youths).
Contact any local National Express Office.
The Dover car ferry costs from £83 with an extra charge of £13 per adult.
On the 550 mile drive south across France tolls cost about £50 and there is a £13 road-tax charge at the Swiss frontier.
After Basle and Zurich take the St Gotthard road south via Zug and Altdorf to Andermatt.
Internal Transport
Those who fly in are carried by escalator down to a railway platform.
The splendid Swiss train system takes you from Zurich on a four hour journey with four changes to Sedrun at the centre of the Tujetschtal valley.
For a small charge, avoid having to carry luggage by booking it through from airport to destination.
Reliably tied-in with the railway timetable are the yellow post-buses which take mail and people to every village.
Buy your ticket before getting on from ticket, rail or post offices.
Bus and Rail Holiday Cards give good discounts on tickets.
Currency and Prices
One pound buys 2.46 Swiss Francs (SwF).
Currency can be exchanged at railway stations.
Credit cards are widely accepted.
Unleaded petrol costs SwF 1.02 (42p) per litre.
It's SwF 2 (80p) for a cup of coffee or a medium loaf of bread, SwF 1.10 (45p) a small beer, SwF 2.60 (£1.05) 200gms cheese.
Food
Breakfasts are sustaining with fresh bread, cold meats, cheese and coffee.
Menus tend to be Germanic with large helpings of soup, veal or sausage and Rösti potatoes.
Pastas show the Italian influence.
Fresh fish from the lakes is delicious.
Cheese fondues are hard to  avoid, but try raclette , hot cheese with potato and pickle.
Indulge yourself sinfully with splendid ice creams, coffee and cakes.
Ordinary beer is special , draught is vom fass , shandy is panache .
Where to Stay
Hotels are excellent but pricey.
Expect to pay upward of £40 a day for half-board.
Cut costs by looking for the sign Zimmer if you want bed and breakfast in a private house.
For details of over 120 Swiss youth hostels (Jugendherberge ), contact YHA, Trevelyan House, 8 St Stephen's Hill, St Albans, AL1 2DY.
Tel: 0727 55251 or SYHA, 7 Glebe Crescent, Stirling, SK8 2JA.
Tel: 0786 51181.
The SNTO has information on apartments, chalets and farm holidays.
Mountain huts provide meals and accommodation around Oberalppass.
Wild Camping
Wild camping is not encouraged, but in wild country there is often no alternative — if a camp-site is available, it must be used.
Consult tourist offices about local requirements.
Caravans are restricted to official sites only.
Waymarking
Low-level paths,wanderwege are indicated by yellow fingerposts which show the destination and the time it takes to walk there.
Yellow paint at intervals along the way confirms the route.
The higher level bergwege are similarly indicated in red and white.
Routes are sometimes numbered on local signs and maps.
Walking is permitted almost anywhere in the mountains, apart from on private property and in areas where crops are growing.
Maps and Guides
The 1:50 000 Landeskarte der Schweiz maps are cartographic works of art.
The young Rhine is covered by Sheet 256 Disentis, available from any UK map dealer.
Baedeker's Switzerland , AA £10.95 and Blue Guide Switzerland , £9.95 are excellent.
Alternative Action
Cycling is easy and cheap in the area and also well served by the railway.
Most train stations hire out cycles and you can return them to a different station — look out for sign Velo am Bahnhof .
Sedrun has an indoor pool as an alternative to dips in glacial tarns.
Horseriding is available.
The nearest watersports are at Altdorf.
There is a climbing school at Andermatt.
In winter you can ski cross country all down the valley, or ski downhill at Andermatt, Disentis and Flims.
Organised Walking
Ask at the SNTO about packaged walking holidays — or go to the local tourist office for information on guided walks and climbs.
Walking fortnights in Laax, near Chur and cross country ski weeks in Sedrun are organise by Waymark Holidays.
Tel: 0753 516477.
Flora and Fauna
A wide variety of alpine flowers and grasses can be found at all altitudes.
Among 37 animal types, you'll see chamois and if you're lucky, ibex.
Birds you may spot include eagles, buzzards and choughs.
Main pic: classic ridge walk links Bostg and Piz las Palas.
Above: mountain waters collect in Lai da Tuma, source of the Rhine
JOURNEY OF A LIFETIME
ZANSKAR
ICE COOL
FROM CRUNCHING HER WAY ACROSS CRYSTALLINE ICE BY DAY TO CAMPING ON FROZEN RIVER BEDS AT NIGHT, JILL RANFORD'S TRIP TO ZANSKAR WAS CERTAINLY ONE TO REMEMBER
Nick's worryingly calm words, ‘I should watch out if I were you — there's an avalanche,’ triggered Steve and myself out of our sleeping bags like shots from a gun.
We were then treated to a description of the rapidly descending boulder: ‘It's about two feet square and a foot deep.’
It was the last thing I needed to know as I prayed it would miss us.
And luckily it did.
We were camped on ice and as usual my boots had frozen inside the tent.
When we had knocked against the nylon walls as we got up, snowflakes dropped on us, while above in a cave our six Zanskari porters and Dorje, our Ladakhi cook, were already crouched around a wood fire.
Never before had I slept on a river.
For a few weeks in mid-winter, the steel-blue waters of the Zanskar river freeze into a seventy mile ice passageway winding through a deep canyon in the remote mountains of the northern Himalaya.
Civilisation ends at Chilling, a small village on a rare stretch of cultivatable land above the river.
Beyond there the gorge walls are often vertical or steep slopes of rubble, impassable whatever the season.
In winter the frozen river is the only route into Zanskar.
Some Zanskaris make a six day shopping expedition to Leh taking goat wool and yak butter to trade and returning along the river with salt, tea, sugar, rice, matches and perhaps one or two luxury items.
Lobsang Junior, one of our porters, was taking a volleyball home to Pishu while another porter carried the net.
This particular winter the temperature was considered by the Zanskaris to be mild, never dropping below -20°C in the gorge.
Only occasionally was the river solid for most of its width — more often than not it was fringed by a thin strip of ice, our path.
Sometimes we crunched across crystalline ice, or slid tiny steps at a time over glass ice, so we created shiny black footprints in the dusting of snow.
We passed giant slabs of ice which had buckled up into a cracked swelling over a rock and saw ice discs spinning on the surface of the water like root-less lily pads.
Three days into our trek we were only a few hours short of the first Zanskari hamlet.
The cliffs closed in as the river swept round a bend, its waves slapping against vertical rocks.
Lobsang Senior, ill-equipped with one eye and welly boots, scrambled up a steep snow slope above the bend and reappeared on a rocky platform which overhung the blue-water grave.
There was no way down even with a rope.
We had to turn back.
Disappointed, we retraced our footprints and were obliged to camp on the same patch of ice as the night before.
Nesting on a high ledge a long way above our tent were two lammergeirs — yellow-bellied vultures.
They are so large that from 2000ft below they look like gliders.
Whenever a large bird circled around the peaks we stopped to watch — sometimes it was a griffon vulture with deep, white-edged wings, on other occasions the dark shape of an eagle.
We also saw the tracks of foxes and snow leopards.
When we came to move on from our camp we realised we were trapped by the river and the only way out was via a small rock face and a narrow traverse made lethal by snow and ice.
Steve had to fix a belay around a boulder while the porters lowered barrels, bags and sacks down the rock face.
As an experienced mountaineer Steve was not happy about standing on the lip of the 60ft drop holding the rope taut for people to descend.
But that is where he stayed with his legs braced on sloping, snowy ground.
My turn came and Lobsang coaxed me to the edge.
I was terrified but had to go over.
A rock jutted out which others had grabbed as they swung down, but as I tried to do the same there was no edge below for my feet and I whimpered pathetically dangling on the end of the rope.
I was heartily relieved to feel the hands of one of the porters, situated on a ledge below, guide my feet to a secure hold.
I continued down, grappling smooth water-worn rocks blessed with occasional knobs to support my feet.
Dorje greeted me at the bottom and pulled me by the hand across the slabs of ice which had cracked into pontoons, barely locked together.
The last two guides showed me how it was done, climbing quickly and fearlessly down the face.
I couldn't have been more grateful to our Zanskari friends that day for guiding us safely out of a rock and ice-water trap.
They are a special group of people — selfless, supportive and cheerful.
We continued into Zanskar safely, with their help — never ceasing to be amazed at their incredible toughness.
They slept under just a blanket in the mouth of a cave while we needed hot water bottles in our sleeping bags.
And they never needed to wear gloves, handling snow continually during the day and burning branches and steaming pans at night.
Despite our spectacular surroundings it was those people who made our trek the memorable experience it was.
For more information about the region contact: Govt of India Tourist Office, 7 Cork St, London W1X 2AB.
Tel: 071 437 3677/8.
Top left: roped descent to the ice bridge over the River Zanskar.
Right: Zanskar Gorge
BUYERS Guide
NEVADA JACKET AND PRIMA TROUSERS FROM PARAMO
Paramo's Nevada jacket and Prima trousers provide a good way of beating the rain.
Together they make a lightweight comfortable rainsuit which is great for activities such as walking, backpacking, cycling or climbing.
The jacket and trousers have a Pertex outer material, waterproofed with Nikwax's TX10, and a waterproof breathable lining made from soft polyester.
You can wear the suit with just underwear on warmer days or with thermals when it's colder.
Two zips running up the sides of the pullover-style jacket give good ventilation.
Inside there's a material flap to keep your hands warm but no zipped size pockets.
The hood has a wired peak and there's a useful map sized chest pocket protected by a stormflap.
The jacket is available in medium or large in grey and green or grey and purple.
The trousers come in sizes from small to large and are available in grey.
This is a performance suit which is reflected by the price of £90 for the jacket and £55 for the trousers.
But Paramo are so confident in the suit they'll give you your money back if you can prove it is out-performed by any of the other breathable waterproofs which are now on the market.
Contact: Paramo Breathable Clothing Systems, Unit F, Durgates Industrial Estate, Wadhurst TN5 6DF.
Tel: 0892 884477.
LENSMAN MICROSCOPE
Design: pocket-size powerful microscope designed for field use.
It has two magnifications 80× and 200× which allows you to view specimens with a combination of available and internal light.
The Lensman comes with sample slides, micro pages and manual.
Price: £99.95
Contact: Worldwide Systems Ltd, c/o Vector Services Ltd, 13 Denington Rd, Wellingborough NN8 2RL.
Tel: 0933 279300.
KARRIMOR TANAGER TROUSERS FOR WOMEN
Features: women's design trouser with semi-elasticated waist and adjustable buckle system to ensure comfortable fit.
Fabric: 100% polyester cotton twill
Sizes: 10–16
Colours: stone or navy
Price: £41
Contact: Karrimor International, Petre Road, Clayton-le-Moors Business Park, Accrington, Lancs BB5 5JP.
Tel: 0254 871721.
POCKET BINOCULARS
Design: compact binoculars which unfold automatically when removed from their carrying case.
Special lens coatings provide a sharper image, improved contrast and eliminate glare.
The Design Selection models come in magnifications, 8×20B and 10×25B.
Size: 4in × 3.7in, 4.7in × 3.8in Weight: 6.5oz, 7.2oz
Price: £295 and £319
Contact: Carl Zeiss, PO Box 78, Woodfield Rd, Welwyn Garden City, Herts.
Tel: 0707 331144.
SIGG OUTDOOR FLASKS
Design: durable, lightweight, taint-proof hygienic drinks flasks.
Material: spun aluminium Size: 0.9pts, 1.32pts
Colours:(0.9) black, silver, green,(1.32) purple, black, graffiti
Price: from £8.73–£15.28
Contact: Optimus, Holcot Lane, Sywell, Northants NN6 0BE.
Tel: 0604 790303.
STORM MATCHES
Features: weatherproof safety matches which burn with an extra large flame for 12 seconds.
The matches are designed not to blow out in strong winds or when immersed in water.
Very handy.
Size: 25 per box
Price: 50p
Contact: Octavius Hunt, Dove Lane, Redfield, Bristol BS5 9NQ.
Tel: 0272 556107.
THE BIKE TENT
Utilising your bike and the cycle pump the Bike Tent doesn't need poles.
It's pegged to the ground using 11 pegs, one of which is used for the back guyline.
Your bike acts as the tent's main support pole — the open bellend is draped over the crossbar and pegged to the ground using four pegs.
The rest of the tent is then laid and pegged out.
A clever well thought out design feature is the use of the bike pump as the upright internal pole at the end of the tent.
The tent's certainly large enough for two people to sleep in but unfortunately there's only one small entrance.
On the plus side it's quick and simple to erect.
There are two air vents on the model I tested, one in the side door, the other in the front panel.
An updated version has larger vents in the front and now includes a vented air flap near the back close to the outer guyline.
All vents are covered with mesh netting to keep out the dreaded mossies and other bugs.
It's a single skin tent weighing under 3lbs.
The Bike Tent does offer complete protection from the elements through using a durable, breathable Cascade coated material, said to help avoid condensation.
It certainly seems to work with only one person inside but is less effective with two.
When you're packed up and are ready to be on your way, the Bike Tent packs small and is carried under the crossbar to save precious space in your panniers.
Price: around £115
Contact: Bike Tent, Old Church Hall, Church Street, Kirkcowan Wigtownshire Tel: 0671 83438 
WEEKENDER
WEST DORSET
WEST DORSET IS A CHOICE PLACE TO EXPERIENCE RUGGED COASTLINE, ROLLING HILLS AND SENSATIONAL MOUNTAIN BIKING.
THOMAS HARDY LIKED IT TOO!
West Dorset's most famous resident was Thomas Hardy and any one who has read his books or seen the films, such as Tess , will already have a vision of the landscape — probably of stark rolling countryside with constant rain.
As we drove through from London it was good to see the sun shining and the wide open hills stretching out in front of us.
The power of the area to attract tourists has meant that quaint rural villages with thatched buildings are kept in peak condition.
They are lovely to visit — especially when you want to feast yourself on a Dorset cream tea — but it is the rolling countryside and stunning coastline which attract the many lovers of the outdoors.
Almost all of West Dorset's 417 square miles is designated an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty.
And with many rights of way and good marked trails it is also easy to get into the heart of the countryside.
Just outside Dorchester near Higher Bockhampton you can go on great walking or mountain biking trails and discover the cottage where Hardy lived.
There are breathtaking views from the Pilsdon and Lewesdon hills, the first and third highest points in Dorset, rising out of the Brit valley near Beaminster.
They are nicknamed the ‘Cow and Calf’ by sailors and ‘Jacob and Esau’by locals because of the stark contrast, one with trees and one without.
For many, West Dorset's main attraction is the coastline which forms part of the long distance South West Way walk starting from Minehead in Somerset and finishing at Studland in Dorset.
The West Dorset stretch runs from the fossil-encrusted cliffs of Charmouth to the 618ft high sandstone headland known as Golden Cap and on to Chesil Bank — a spectacular 18 mile pebble beach which joins the Isle of Portland to the mainland.
The section from Lyme Regis to Charmouth has been temporarily closed due to subsidence.
Evidence of the erosion is clear along the route and walkers should tread carefully.
A visit to West Dorset also offers a perfect opportunity to try your hand at windsurfing.
The protection of Weymouth harbour provides ideal conditions for the learner and the more experienced.
There are many good schools offering beginners' courses while the experienced can hire boards.
As a keen walker and lover of the countryside Hardy would surely approve of how West Dorset has been preserved to be enjoyed by people today as he enjoyed it in his own time.
WALK TO GOLDEN CAP
Any visit to West Dorset wouldn't be complete without a walk along a section of the coastal path.
Vanessa and I decided after a delicious cream tea to burn up some energy walking to Golden Cap, which at 618ft is the highest cliff in Southern England.
We started from the car park just outside Charmouth and were warned by the parking attendant that it was a harder walk than many thought.
As we parked the car we saw someone being carried off the path into an ambulance — the attendant wasn't kidding.
Although the sun was shining it wasn't that warm.
But as we went up the first steep hill we quickly worked up a healthy sweat and removed our fleece jackets.
Walking along the path it was fascinating to see how the sea and wind was slowly eroding the coastline, shaping it into intriguing nooks and crannies.
Erosion has also revealed many fossils in the past — the bones of a dinosaur were discovered here in 1913 and are now on view to the general public in the museum at Dorchester.
But my immediate thought about erosion was how perilously close to the edge the path sometimes lead us.
Obviously you should always take great care.
Once the first hill was climbed we could see Golden Cap off in the distance, two miles away.
It seemed closer but it was an illusion and there was a lot of up and down to do before the final climb to this high headland point on the south coast.
Time quickly passed as we savoured the views, enjoyed the sunshine and braved the sporadic showers.
The land we were walking on is part of the Golden Cap estate owned by the National Trust which runs from Lyme Regis to Eype.
The Trust says the estate is botanically some of the richest land the National Trust owns with a variety of trees, natural grasses, orchids, marsh flowers, insects and bird life.
We didn't see any orchids but we did see some beautiful foxgloves and were lucky enough to catch sight of birds high above.
The roller-coaster cliff-top walk was tiring but both Vanessa and I were spurred on as we approached the final climb up Golden Cap.
Our conversation, previously animated, took on a dogged silence as we climbed up the final leg.
But the effort was worthwhile as at the top we could see Portland Bill in the east, Start Point in the west and inland to Marshwood Vale.
We returned on a quicker inland route back to the car park in the early evening, tired but totally satisfied after our exhilarating coastal ramble.
Henry Druce
PONY TREKKING AROUND ABBOTSBURY
As our second day dawned with a cloudless sky I couldn't wait to get back out and explore more of the Dorset countryside — this time with a horse to take the strain.
I hired my somewhat reluctant steed from the East Farm in Abbotsbury, a working stud farm with the good fortune of having a 17th century thatched cottage as its farmhouse.
Abbotsbury itself is a wonderfully tranquil village at the western end of the famous Chesil Bank.
Both the village and surrounding countryside are worth some exploration and I was lucky as my trek gave me an insight into both.
To get to the lush meadows from the farm we had to weave a path through the narrow village lanes edged with cottages of golden stone and gardens in full summer bloom.
My horse Paddy obviously didn't share my enthusiasm to explore and took a considerable amount of cajoling, digging, tapping and firm slapping before he would lift one hoof from the ground and get going.
As Paddy realised that his stalling tactics weren't going to get him a morning off we went out of the village on a treelined bridleway sloping gently down to the coast.
Soon the open sea was in full view straight ahead with panoramic views of the coastline on either side.
The wide and undulating fields here provided good scope for riders of all levels.
There's enough space for whose who want a challenging gallop and captivating scenery all around for those who prefer a more leisurely pace.
Our course continued in a circle with the sea on one side and the impressive silhouette of the fourteenth century St Catherine's Chapel dominating a hill high above us.
The chapel is dedicated to the patron saint of spinsters Catherine of Alexandria and is worth a visit for even more impressive views on all sides.
By this time Paddy seemed to be quite enjoying himself as we trotted on through the silent, thistle-filled fields edged with woods.
Our terrain changed from fields to bridleways and lanes as we approached Abbotsbury once again past the old swannery.
Apparently the ballerina Pavlova came here to learn to dance like a swan for the ballet Swan Lake.
Pony treks from the East Farm are priced at £8 per hour, 7 days a week.
Tel: 0305 871363.
Vanessa Thompson
WALK AROUND EGGARDON HILL FROM SPYWAY
We began our afternoon walk from Spyway, one of the many tiny villages hidden deep in the softly rolling hills of ancient Dorset.
To say it is a hidden village is an understatement as it took some hawk-eyed map reading and signpost spotting to get us there in the first place.
We eventually found it on a road off the A35 east of Bridport.
Our first steps off the Spyway road took us through green and pleasant farmland where playful sheep frolicked alongside and a lone tractor droningly went about its work.
From a relatively flat and gentle start our clearly marked path soon began to lead upwards as we rounded the corner by South Eggardon Farm.
Our effort was well rewarded all the way by the increasingly open views of lush patchwork fields in the unfolding valleys beyond.
We continued climbing for a short while and were soon at the highest point of our walk.
Here the footpath ended so we had to walk for a few hundred yards along a stretch of country road.
Ahead lay the curiously curving ridge of Eggardon Hill, forming a stark silhouette against the sky and curving like a giant green bowl around the valley.
We rejoined the footpath just in front of the hill's ridge and followed its famous curving terrain before embarking in a straighter downward path back into the valley.
Here the fields unfolded like a great carpet of green before us.
Civilisation soon came back into evidence again as we approached the small collection of buildings of North Eggardon Farm.
We were soon making our way back to the road.
Vanessa Thompson
MOUNTAIN BIKING AROUND DORCHESTER
‘You'll love this route, it's got a bit of everything’, said Paul, who was renting mountain bikes to Vanessa and me.
The 15 mile route took us only 50 yards along the main road before we turned off to cycle alongside an idyllic stream.
Our route soon took us away from the stream to open rolling countryside.
And our thoughts changed from admiring the scenery to contemplating a long uphill stretch.
This burst of energy was worthwhile as it took us to Waterston Ridge and a level stretch of track.
We headed along the ridge for about three miles.
Paul's promise of variety was soon fulfilled as we turned off the ridge and headed into a forest of fir trees.
This wooded area — which includes the wonderfully named Tolpuddle Hollow and Puddletown Heath — is a dream place for mountain bikers as there are lots of little tracks to explore.
Following Paul's route was easier said than done as there were so many confusing tracks.
For the newcomer to the area it's a bit like being in a maze.
It's easy to get lost but never for very long.
We took one wrong turning — Vanessa firmly blamed me — but it was soon corrected.
It was worth getting back to Paul's route for it soon brought us to Hardy's birthplace, a small thatched cottage just outside Higher Bockhampton.
After this highlight we cycled on roads back to base and to a cream tea in Dorchester.
We hired mountain bikes from Dorchester Service Station, London Road, Dorchester.
Further information tel: 0305 264491.
Henry Druce  
GEAR GUIDE
RUCKSACKS
A RUCKSACK IS A MAJOR INVESTMENT SO TAKE TIME TO CHECK OUT OUR BUYING TIPS AND COMPREHENSIVE LISTING FIRST
A rucksack gives you the means of carrying everything you need without putting any demands on your arms.
But whether you're backpacking with all your camping gear, food and so on or just out for a day walk, it pays to take the trouble to assess your requirements before buying.
Capacity
What size rucksack do you need?
Broadly speaking there are three types — daysacks, weekend sacks and backpacking rucksacks.
Most manufacturers quote the capacities in litres — usually determined by pouring polystyrene beads into the sacks and then measuring their volume — and typical ranges would be 15–30 litres for daysacks, 35–55 for weekend sacks and 60 upwards for backpacking.
Size
This should not be confused with capacity.
The back length of a rucksack is critical for comfort when backpacking and if you don't have the right size of a fixed back length sack you won't be able to share the load efficiently between hip belt and shoulder harness.
Frames
External frames are all but defunct in the UK because most have accepted that the ergonomically contoured internal frame sack is much more stable to carry than an external frame pack, even at the expense of some loss of ventilation to the back.
Most internal frames are made from aluminium strips bolted together and to get the best fit you should try to bed the frame to fit your own back shape.
Fitting
Try on your pack with a realistic load.
Most retailers are quite helpful.
Women's rucksacks
Many leading manufacturers now have women's models in their ranges with designs catering for the shorter back length, wider hips and more pronounced bottom.
Such models also have shoulder straps shaped to fit around the bust.
Backs
The fact that the internal frame brings the rucksack in close proximity to your own back has brought about a wide variety of often ingenious ways of combatting the problem of lack of ventilation and consequent problems with perspiration.
Many sacks use texturised nylon fabrics with a sort of natural feel which can take up a certain amount of moisture but dry off quickly.
Others use stitching and padding in a variety of ways to create ventilation channels to keep air flowing over at least some of the back in order to limit the amount of sweat produced.
Adjustable back rucksacks
The heavier your pack, the more important it is to get a good fit.
Many manufacturers offer packs with adjustable back lengths.
Hip belts
Essential for backpacking rucksacks, the hip belt takes most of the load off the shoulders.
Cheaper sacks may have straight, thinly padded belts which can be incredibly uncomfortable.
The best are fairly wide to spread the load and well padded — often with dual-density foam.
They're either shaped, or attached so that the bottom edge of the belt flares out more than the top and it won't slip around uncomfortably.
Chest/sternum straps
Many rucksacks, large and small, have chest straps fitted.
Attached to the webbing on the shoulder harness the chest strap stops shoulder straps from sliding sideways and so keeps the sack much more comfortably in position.
Top tension straps
The natural tendency for a loaded rucksack is to lean away from the wearer, forcing them to lean forwards to counterbalance it.
Backpacking sacks have additional straps between the main body and the top of the shoulder straps which can be tightened to bring the top of the sack closer to the back and thus more upright.
Use of the top tensioners also helps to spread the load over the whole of the shoulder harness.
Waist strap
Often found on good daysacks, the waist strap doesn't take weight like a hip belt but it does provide extra stability.
Shoulder harness
Look at the way the shoulder straps are attached to the top of the sack.
Are they close together or far apart?
Are they straight or curved?
Buckles
Most rucksacks have quick release buckles, at least on the profile straps which secure the top to the body of the pack, and may have them on waist straps.
Sub-zero temperatures might make a lot of cheaper ones susceptible to breaking.
Compression straps
These are usually found as two straps and sliding buckles on each side of the rucksack and their great value is in reducing the internal volume of the rucksack.
They stop the contents of a partially filled sack moving around, keeping the load close to the back which is easier to carry.
Pockets
These are largely a matter of choice.
Some find it useful to have extra pockets on a rucksack as useful organisers, others regard them as a hindrance.
Accessory attachments
Some sacks have ice axe attachments, crampon patches and other straps which can be used for attaching sleeping mats, tents or other items.
Packing
The way you pack your sack depends on what you're doing.
Day and weekend sacks are light enough for you to simply pack them with accessibility to key items of equipment like waterproofs the main priority.
For backpacking the best way is to try to get the densest, heaviest items like tent and food close to your shoulders and therefore closest to your own centre of gravity.
For ski touring or walking over tricky terrain it helps to have the load still as close to your back as possible but lower down.
A badly packed rucksack can easily throw you off balance.
Backpackers should never carry more than one third of their own body weight and if you use decent lightweight gear and don't go mad packing three weeks supply of food, you should stay within this limit fairly easily.
Thirty pounds should be an achievable weight.
Water resistance
The complicated nature of the construction of most rucksacks means they can't be totally waterproof.
Better sacks have bound seams which do at least slow down the leaking process.
While some purpose-made waterproof liners are available the cheapest and easiest insurance is provided by plastic bags, either a bin liner for the whole sack or smaller plastic bags to protect individual items of gear.
a day out with…
STEPHEN SUTCLIFFE
NO TWO DAYS ARE THE SAME IN STEPHEN SUTCLIFFE'S BUSY LIFE AS A WARDEN OF THE NATURE RESERVE ON SKOMER ISLAND
‘There's no such thing as a typical day in my job as reserve warden on the Dyfed Wildlife Trust National Nature Reserve on the island of Skomer.
The island is home to one of the largest seabird colonies in Britain and is especially notable for its 160 000 pairs of Manx shearwaters — about one third of the world population lives here.
I live on the island with my wife and son.
An assistant warden and a field assistant also live here and work for the Trust.
Apart from us there are usually some research students on the island and up to six overnight guests and six volunteers who come from all over the world on working holidays.
Although relatively few people inhabit the island, our small community is a constantly changing and very busy one.
From April to September the reserve is visited by day trippers six days a week.
Boats come over from the mainland about three times a day and in total we get about 9000 visitors a year, including 2000 schoolchildren.
It's one of my jobs to meet the boats and this involves assembling the visitors and talking to them for a short while about the wildlife and rules of the island.
We don't actually guide visitors around the reserve, rather leave them to their own devices having informed them about what they're likely to see and drawn their attention to some safety aspects.
A footpath system runs around the island and we are anxious that visitors stick to the pathways in order to preserve the fragile environment in which the birds live.
Visitors can walk right round the island to see such highlights as the Wick — a cliff which is home to thousands of seabirds and where puffins walk around people's feet — and the Garland Stone where seals lie on rocks at low tide.
My days can involve patrolling the island to make sure that people are observing the rules and that the birds aren't being disturbed either on the land or from the sea.
Such daily routines are alternated between myself and my assistant.
We have a very detailed management plan on the reserve with our main aim being to maintain the habitat as it is and to ensure that any disturbance to the bird community is minimal.
In fact most of the pressures the wildlife face are actually out at sea and there's not really all that much we can do when that's the case.
A lot of our time is spent generally keeping the reserve in good order — carrying out repairs such as painting and fencing, controlling bracken, mending boats and tractors and improving the standards of accommodation.
Between April and June each year I'm involved in counting and monitoring the sea birds.
Skomer is the Dyfed Wildlife Trust's largest nature reserve and as well as being the habitat of the Manx shearwaters it is home to puffins, guillemots, razorbills, kittiwakes, fulmars and lesser black-back gulls.
We also do some ‘breeding success’ work which involves watching the birds from nest-building to fledgling stages and recording how many chicks are produced each year.
Such close monitoring allows radical changes within the bird community to be quickly pinpointed, reasons noted and action taken — if any is possible.
I meet every evening with the other members of the team and we keep a daily log of our activities and sightings.
These meetings are also a chance to swap ideas and plan what we'll do the next day.
My position as warden means that I have to spend a fair amount of time in the office, dealing with correspondence and the large amount of information that our fieldwork generates.
I also work on a Trust bulletin of information and news The Friends of Skomer .
I live on the reserve from March until early December and during this time I only go over to the mainland about once a month.
There's no electricity on Skomer and we get all our power from bottled gas which we have to carry 90 steps up the cliff-side to our house.
We do have a battery-powered TV but only see newspapers occasionally.
The major thing I miss about the mainland though is the trees, because although there is a varied landscape and a diversity of habitats there aren't any trees anywhere.
When I'm off the island during the winter I spend most of my time stuck in front of a computer writing reports.
I suppose the main difference I notice about living in the two environments is how my dress isn't bound by convention on the island, I just stick to wearing what is most comfortable.
On the mainland I feel I have to look much smarter.
I've lived on Skomer for six years now and before that I looked after a smaller seabird reserve on St Margaret's Island.
In all, I've been involved with the Dyfed Wildlife Trust for about 25 years.
I'd like to go on living and working on Skomer but as my son is four years old I'll soon be facing a dilemma over the need for his education and I might have no choice but to rethink our future.’
Report by Vanessa Thompson 
SUBSCRIPTION OFFER
FREE TORCH
Have you ever forgotten to take a torch on backpacking trips?
If so you soon realise just how important a piece of kit it is.
We at outdoor Action can't help you to remember to pack one but on our great subscription offer you can get a handy sized, high quality Nitech torch — for free.
The PL1 Onyx Diamond-Lite torch, which normally retails for £13.75, is durable, shockproof and waterproof.
The torch is switched on by twisting the head and you can choose between either a narrow or wide beam.
Other good features include a spare bulb in the tail cap and a useful key ring facility.
All you need to do to get this indispensable item is to take out a new subscription to Outdoor Action .
This guarantees that you receive the next 12 issues of Britain's brightest outdoor magazine filled with all you need to know about where to walk and activity centres, plus there are loads of equipment tests and all the latest news about what's going on in the countryside.
The offer's open only while stocks last so hurry to post off the order form.
If you don't want to cut your magazine it's perfectly OK to send a photocopy.