

Front Cover: Charles Garrett ‘taking five’ while out relic hunting with the GTA 1000 on a deserted Texan homestead
CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RESPONSIBLE DETECTOR USERS
1
Do not trespass.
Ask permission before venturing on to any private land.
2
Respect the Country Code.
Do not leave gates open when crossing fields, and do not damage crops or frighten animals.
3
Do not leave a mess.
It is perfectly simple to extract a coin or other small object buried a few inches under the ground without digging a great hole.
Use a sharpened trowel or knife to cut a neat flap (do not remove the plug of earth entirely from the ground), extract the object, replace the soil and grass carefully and even you will have difficulty in finding the spot again.
4
Help to keep Britain tidy — and help yourself.
Bottle tops, silver paper and tin cans are the last things you should throw away.
You could well be digging them up again next year.
Do yourself and the community a favour by taking the rusty iron and junk you find to the nearest litter bin.
5
If you discover any live ammunition or any lethal object such as an unexploded bomb or mine, do not touch it.
Mark the site carefully and report the find to the local police and landowner.
6
Report all unusual historical finds to the landowner.
7
Familiarise yourself with the law relating to archaeological sites.
Remember it is illegal for anyone to use a metal detector on a scheduled ancient monument unless permission has been obtained from the Secretary of State for the Environment.
Also acquaint yourself with the practice of Treasure Trove.
8
Remember that when you are out with your metal detector you are an ambassador for our hobby.
Do nothing that may give it a bad name.
9
Never miss an opportunity to show and explain your detector to anyone who asks about it.
Be friendly.
You could pick up some useful clues to another site.
If you meet another detector user, introduce yourself.
You may learn much about the hobby from each other.
ROMAN ARTEFACTS FOUND IN BRITAIN
Part Four
When the hobby of metal detecting first came to Britain in 1970, few people could have foreseen how popular and successful it was to become.
At first the simple machines available could only detect down a few inches, and — amongst other operating difficulties — encounters with tufts of grass caused them to constantly give off false signals.
By 1976 advances in electronic technology brought detectors on to the market with increased performance and stability, and this was directly reflected in the find rates of the users.
During the latter part of this decade many rare coins came to light and the world of numismatics  benefited from the inflow of new material.
Celtic coinage, in particular, proved to be more plentiful than experts had thought, with countless new varieties turning up.
In the early 1980s detectors were becoming even more sophisticated and versatile, particularly in their ability to cut out ferrous metal and locate small coins; the increase in the finding of Celtic silver minims and medieval hammered farthings stands as a good testimony to that.
One drawback with this increase of performance was that the amount of collectable coins being recovered was outstripping demand and the prices of certain coins started to fall rapidly.
For example, in 1978 a Caratacus silver unit of the Atrebates tribe (35–40 AD) was valued at £2,500; at present the same coin would be worth only around £250 and its value is still falling.
Although other factors are involved, the depreciation in value is principally due to the number of these coins found by detector users.
It is worth remembering that the rarity of ancient coins cannot increase, only decrease, so caution is advised when collecting them.
In Britain, well over 150,000 Roman coins are found by detectorists each year.
Most of these, it is true, are poorly preserved and common late Ae3s — but the total represents a phenomenal amount compared to twenty years ago.
The evidence for this is visible in all major museums when you look at their ‘new acquisitions’ sections.
Much of the new material is detector-found…perhaps from a declared hoard, or maybe coming into the museum as a solitary find.
Recently I have come to the conclusion that treasure hunters should have their own exclusive museum.
It could display a cross-section of typical detector finds, together with some collections that have been privately maintained.
It is certainly a scheme that could, with a little organisation and planning, be brought into fruition in the future.
Searching Early Sites
The tremendous variety of metal artefacts in use during the Roman Occupation of Britain does present something of a challenge to the detector user in the identification and evaluation of his finds.
If you are unable to recognise the various fragments that turn up on early sits, you may not consider the area to warrant further searching.
Careful and systematic dating of the fragments, however, may show the site to be important and worthy of further exploration.
A good example of this would be a site that has seen some activity in Saxon times, and where scarcity of metal finds would be normal.
Pic 1: Bronze bolt from a tumbler lock, value £10.00.
It is also important to consider any features that may have existed in the vicinity of the site, as these could help determine the age and purpose of items found.
Many detector users complain of the difficulties involved in finding early sites, especially as the majority of recorded settlements are classed as Ancient Monuments and as such cannot be legally searched.
Over the last few years, however, many detectorists have discovered new areas, particularly from the Celtic and Saxon periods.
Also, hoards and other important finds continually turn up in random fields or during building developments The possibilities for making early finds are therefore good, as is the potential for the future.
Having covered buckles and brooches, I now intend to examine the various bronze fittings and implements that should also turn up on Romano-British sites.
Locks and Keys
Locks and keys are further examples of artefacts introduced to Britain by the Romans.
Two types of locks had been developed by the Romans: the tumbler lock, and the lever lock.
The tumbler lock was made with a perforated bolt which could be slid along once a suitable key had been inserted, to lift vertical pins out of the bolt and thus release it.
Pic 1 shows an example of a bronze bolt which is sometimes mistakenly identified as a key.
The triangular holes would match up to teeth on a key, of a similar design to that shown in Pic 2.
To open the lock, the key would be inserted and turned pushing the teeth into the bolt; the interlocked key and bolt could then be moved sideways.
The bolts themselves can vary in size, and the example illustrated is quite small, probably having come from a box.
It would date to the 1st or 2nd century AD.
Apart from the bronze bolt, the other parts of the lock would have been made from iron, including a spring to hold the pins in place.
The perforations cut into the bolts, can be of circular, square or triangular shape.
The bronze key shown in Pic 2 is of similar date to the bolt.
It has two vertical rows of three teeth and these are positioned at right angles to the shank, to give maximum leverage in use.
The small circular bow is for suspension from a chain while the narrow square-sectioned shank is notched at each end and has a large incised ‘X’ on one side.
Most keys of this type appear to be marked in this way, with a varying numbers of Xs used to aid identification.
A much larger bronze tumbler key was found in Hampshire (Pic 3).
This has a total of nine teeth set in three rows, and could well have come from a lock fitted to the door of a villa.
It is quite elaborate, having an openwork trifoliate bow (part of which is missing).
Beneath the bow is a rectangular pedestal decorated with grooves, and the shank is notched at each end.
The second type of lock design developed by the Romans is the lever lock.
The working principle is that obstructions are built into the lock to prevent the wrong shape of key from working the mechanism, and similar designs of lock are still use today (although it has been suggested that the Romans were not able to invent a lock that could be operated from both sides of a door).
Both tumbler and lever locks were in everyday use quite early in the Roman period, as excavations at  Pompeii have shown.
The lever lock, however, was more favoured in late Roman times.
Pic 4 shows an example of a lever lock key in bronze with a simple bit to open the lock.
The bow is of the same openwork trifoliate design but has a additional small know mounted on the top.
The shank is slightly rounded in section and, in fact, all Roman lever keys have a tubular shank, sometimes hollowed out.
Pic 2: Bronze key with six teeth, for use in tumbler lock, value 35.00.
The lever lock key shown in Pic 5 has a hollow tubular shank, and a large circular bow with an extended knob at the end.
The bit has various clefts cut out and would have served quite an intricate lever lock.
Judging from this and its unusual style, the key could be late in period (3rd or 4th century), although I have no hard evidence to support this view.
Many of the keys used in Roman Britain had a bronze bow or handle combined with an iron shank.
As might be expected, the iron section of these rarely survives apart from where the keys have existed in waterlogged or very dry conditions.
Pic 6 shows two bronze handles with some remains of the iron shanks.
The larger trifoliate bow has an acorn knob on the end, and its extended rectangular pedestal — which was originally heavily silvered — is decorated with incised lines.
Iron was used for the shank as it provided greater strength and longer life than bronze would have done.
The shank was inserted into a circular socket on the handle for rigidity, and this would also have allowed the handle to be reused if such proved necessary.
Pic 3: Elaborate bronze key with nine teeth for use in tumbler lock, value 50.00.
Pic 4: Bronze key with plain bit for lever lock, value £70.00
I have seen one example of this type of key that had an iron shank of over 9cms length.
Pic 5: Bronze key with hollow shank, for lever lock, value £45.00.
Pic 6: Bronze trifoliate key handle with iron shank, value £20.00.
Bronze foliate key handle with iron shank, value £40.00.
The smaller key shown in Pic 6 has an unusual handle which consists of a single bow with double fluted sides.
The iron shank is quite short and rather delicate, and the key has a small part of the bit surviving.
A more elaborate version of a bronze key handle, moulded in the form of a hound's head, is shown in Pic 7.
The animals long ears are pinned back as if it was running, and a means of suspending the key is provided by a hole through the hound's mouth.
This handle was found near Wroxeter, in Shropshire.
An example of similar design to this was excavated at Richborough and dated 50–80 AD.
A further example of a cast bronze handle is shown in Pic 8 and is in the form of a seated lion.
It also dates 1st century and could have been intended as either a key or a knife handle (although the fact that it has a circular socket favours its use as a key handle).
Keys made entirely of iron were also in everyday use.
An L- shaped sliding iron key found in East Anglia is shown in Pic 9.
The key has two protruding teeth and the shank is of rectangular section, thickening towards the small circular bow.
An excavated example has been dated to 100 AD.
Keys of this type are fairly common and examples are known with two, three or four teeth.
When trying to date an early key, it is worth remembering that a distinctive feature of a Roman key is the placing of the bow horizontal in relation to the shank.
Although some Roman keys do have a vertical bow, keys from the Saxon and medieval periods rarely employ a horizontal bow.
The most distinctive form of Roman key is the one-piece bronze finger ring/casket key combination (see Pic 10).
Here two plain banded rings have been attached at right angles to the bit of a key.
Obviously the ring had to be designed so that it was not uncomfortable to wear, but at the same time the key part needed to be intricate enough to serve a lock.
Pic 8: Bronze key handle in the design of a seated lion, value £100.00
The example shown on the left in Pic 10, has a rectangular plain bit with a short hollow shank.
The hoop of the ring is square in section.
The other finger-ring key on the right of the photograph has a slot cut out of the bit, with notches on the end.
On this example the ring hoop is wider and flatter in section.
From the large numbers that have been found in this country ‘key rings’ must have been both popular and fashionable items: they also served a practical purpose for at the time pockets were not known.
From the various sizes of key rings found, and the fact  that some are quite delicate others heavy duty, it is likely that they were worn by both sexes.
Pic 9; Iron L-shaped key, value £35.00.
Pic 10: two bronze finger ring keys, value £35.00 each.
Pic 11: Bronze lock plate, value £20.00.
Pic 12: Folding knife handle in the design of a hound chasing a hare, value £35.00
Pic 13: Folding knife handle in the design of a panther, value £130.00.
Interestingly, the use of key rings is confined solely to the Roman period.
A few examples have been found made from silver, which was a metal commonly used for finger rings in the 1st century AD.
Most may therefore date from the 2nd century.
(Another curious suggestion I have heard is that these rings were worn as a souvenir of a marriage).
Other methods of keeping keys safe were also employed by the Romans, a good example being a bronze wrist bracelet found in Cambridge which has a key suspended on it.
Pic 11 shows a bronze end plate from a padlock.
It is decorated with dots and circles and the keyhole is distinctively L-shaped.
Two square escutcheon plates, each incised with a cross, have been  riveted on to the surface above and below the keyhole.
Originally there may have been a third piece joined to these to conceal the opening.
Knives are another class of object that were in use in Roman times.
These are rarely found complete as the blades are generally made of iron and have therefore rusted away.
The handles, however, were usually made of bronze and were often highly decorated.
Pic 12 shows the handle of a folding knife, in the form of a hound chasing a hare.
Modelled in the round, the knife blade slots into the underside of the animals between two bars forming the ground line.
Behind the hound there would have been a rectangular plate containing an iron rivet.
The rivet would have gone through the tang of the triangular-shaped blade and acted as a pivot point.
Although my example is not complete, the ‘hare and hound’ is the most common style of folding knife to be used in Britain.
The Celtic style of the animals reflects Romano-British workmanship, and dates the knife to 1st-2nd century AD.
The folding knife could have been used as a razor, if it was sharp enough or as a penknife for shaping reed pens.
In fact, the high quality of iron ore available to the Romans in Britain combined with the use of charcoal fuel in the smelting process, meant that they could have been producing steel which would have given a much harder and sharper edge to the blade than normal iron.
A complete example of the hare and hound folding knife with part of the blade intact would have a value of over £120.00.
There are many other varieties of folding knives known to have been produced during the Roman period, but most of these other types are rarely found in Britain.
Pic 13 is a bronze folding knife handle in the design of the forepart of a panther mounted on a solid pedestal base (slotted to take the blade).
The curved opening behind the body of the animal may have been intended to allow easy gripping of the blade when opening it out.
The panther design itself was also used on lampstands and casket legs.
Pic 14: Segmented folding knife handle, value £30.00.
A quite small example of a folding knife is shown in Pic 14.
Here the hollow handle is oval in shape, has a pointed finial, and is divided into five equal segments.
A slot runs along the length of the handle, and even the finial is grooved to receive the tip of the blade.
The Romans sometimes used handles to combine a number of different utensils…much like the Swiss Army knives of today.
Pic 15 shows a bronze handle in the design of a leaping dolphin.
The underside of the handle is slotted to receive a knife blade which was  riveted at the dolphin's tail.
Across the mammal's back are the remains of an iron tool which was  riveted to the upper part of the tail.
Through the mouth there appears to be the remains of a chain link from which the knife would have been suspended.
The dolphin's body is decorated with incised, semi- circular punch marks, imitating fish scales.
The knife handle was found in Colchester and may have been used by a legionary.
Pic 15: Multi-purpose handle in the design of a leaping dolphin, value £220.00.
During the 1st and 2nd centuries, knife handles were often made in the form of animals.
Each legion adopted an animal as an emblem, and the animal designs may have been purely military symbols.
(In the case of Legion XX, which was stationed in Britain, the symbol was a boar).
It is also possible that the animals may have had other significance.
Devouring animals (eg lions, griffins, dolphins, snakes and panthers) symbolise the triumph of death over life.
The dolphin can also be regarded as a symbol of rebirth into the after life, as it reflects the journey of the soul across the ocean.
Pic 16: Folding knife handle showing erotic scene.
Another fascinating knife handle shown in Pic 16 depicts an erotic scene involving three figures.
The handle is modelled in the round with a man engaged in sexual intercourse with a woman who is positioned on the shoulders of a kneeling figure.
The rear of the standing male is slotted  vertically to take the folded iron blade (now missing).
The figures are mounted on a square pedestal which still contains the iron rivet for pivoting the blade.
Pic 18: Top Celtic bronze knife handle, value £120.
Bottom: Romano-British bronze knife handle, value £40.00.
All three figures are naked, except for a single strap of bikini-like harness running across the woman's chest.
She is supported by the man's hands on her legs, and has her left hand on the man's shoulder and her right hand on the head of the kneeling figure.
This figure is quite small, almost dwarf-like, and has an oversize ape's head (probably a mask).
There is a faintly engraved inscription or dedication on each side of the pedestal, but sadly this has worn off.
All that can be made out is the letter ‘S’, then possible an ‘E’ followed by another letter.
On the other side there appears to t ‘N A’ with ‘IRI’underneath.
According to Catherine Johns, at least four parallels are known from Britain, and none from the Continent.
She suggests that the design may refer to some kind of public performance or entertainment, especially as one example was excavated from the theatre at Verulamium.
The illustrated example was also found in Hertfordshire, and dates from the late 1st or early 2nd century AD.
Pic 17; Dagger handle in the form of a horse's head.
Extremely rare.
The female figure on the knife handle appears to resemble Aphrodite or Venus, the goddess of love.
A comparison can be made to a group of marble figures recovered from a brothel in  Pompeii .
Here Aphrodite is shown with her hand on Priapus (god of fruitfulness), and she has a tiny figure of Eros sitting below her feet.
Apart from their use of folding knives, bronze handles were also commonly used on conventional knives and daggers.
Pic 17 shows the beautifully moulded head of an  unbridled galloping horse.
Of classical style this piece was certainly an import and it reveals the high quality of the Roman art form.
The flattened  rectangular section behind the neck contains traces of a large iron blade, possibly a double-edged dagger or short sword.
In contrast, Pic 18 shows two small knife handles.
The top one is Celtic in origin and is solid bronze.
In the centre is a circular sectioned baluster moulding and at the top an oval moulding which is decorated with a pair of deeply recessed ring and dot designs.
At the lower flattened end the design is repeated but the cells are petal boss shaped.
The handle has an elliptical-shaped opening which is 14mm in depth, by 3mm at its widest point, and this contains part of the iron blade.
From its size, the knife must have had a very specific use and may even have been a surgical instrument.
The second bronze handle is Roman in style and quite delicate in form — possibly indicating use as a scalpel.
The handle is squared and flattened at the end which could mean that it was used as a pestle for grinding.
The stem is circular in section, with a twisting, grooved design.
There are ring and dot punch marks on each end, and the iron blade would have slotted between the rectangular-shaped panels.
Where no provenance is given, the find spot can be assumed to be East Anglia.
The values stated represent the price a collector might expect to pay for the item, taking condition into account.
Castle's Corner
John Castle
Another Nazi Hoax?
The guy who faked the Hitler Diaries, Konrad Kujau, is at it again…or is he?
During World War Two the nazis stripped the Amber Room of Catherine the Great in a palace near St Petersburg.
The priceless treasure, dating from the 18th century, vanished in 1945.
Now Kujau claims to have found its hiding place by researching old documents.
It is supposed to be concealed in a secret bunker and contained in about 40 packing cases.
If Kujau is telling the truth and has found the location, the treasure should have been recovered by the time you read this.
I do hope that I am able to report thus next month.
I don't hold out much hope though!
Who Cares?
As I have already reported, work on the M3 extension across Twyford Down has started.
A protest was made by 500 people.
Only 500?
What a minuscule number!
Hospital closures provoke far greater numbers and rightly so.
The case for scheduling is once again undermined.
The Government can do what it likes with such sites and protests are too small to take into calculation.
Perhaps we have hit on the real reason for scheduling…land ear-marked for government use but no one else's?
Death and Dishonour
A seventy-five year old lady was refused admission to four hospitals after suffering a heart attack recently.
She got into the fifth one, only to die two hours later.
Meanwhile, the public money wasted on the heritage junta proceeds apace.
How do its denizens sleep at night?
Boot Sale Bargain
An oil painting worth £12,000 and which was nicked from the Marquess of Bute in 1987, has turned up at a car boot sale.
The price?
A mere £40!
It just shows that bargains are still to be had at such sales, and most are not nicked.
You have to be quick though to beat the sharp-eyed dealers who are there early to spot and buy such things.
The rest of the day is then spent selling what's left…usually overpriced household tat.
No State Lottery
As a letter in a daily newspaper recently reminded us, the building of the British Museum was funded by a state lottery some 200 years ago.
If the money so raised in a modern equivalent of this lottery is to be wasted on similar luxuries, it would be better if we saved our money or spent it on necessities.
The BM can flog off the contents of its cellars if it needs money.
Humour in the House
You wouldn't think a Museums and Art Galleries Bill would provoke much excitement in Parliament, and normally it wouldn't.
However, it certainly raised the temperature when it came up for debate on 12 February last.
The opposition, predictably, accused the Government of all sorts of things which spelt death to the arts, giving Arts Minister, Tim Renton a hard time.
‘A new dinosaur gallery is being planned’, he said.
‘We'll put you in it’, shouted the labourites.
Sounds like fun, and they get paid for it!
Heritage Madness
Mr and Mrs Coombs live in Dorset and they would very much like to sell off some of their land for building.
The problem is, it has been scheduled to ‘protect’ a motley group of buried Saxon pits, holes and ditches.
Two arkie surveys have produced almost nothing, and yet Mr Coombs — an elderly man — has been threatened with jail if he so much as uproots a tree in his own garden.
The Oxford Archaeological Unit has stated the site to be of limited interest and have said that a full excavation would suffice to investigate it.
The developer has even offered to pay the £80,000 needed for this, but English Heritage remain obdurate.
The term ‘heritage blight’ is used in the article I read on the situation, and seems very appropriate.
‘Saxon and Norman debris and post-holes must be preserved hidden at all costs’ stated the developer…doubtless with a correct note of scorn in his voice.
All this is the fault of the Government.
Last year the DoE sent out a circular to local authorities stating that planning permission should not be given unless the impact on any old junk (officially known as ‘archaeological remains’) had been fully considered.
Since then about ten new sites have been scheduled each week, and this could be seen as a deliberate blocking measure as it only takes place where the owner wants to do something with the site.
English Heritage does not even want these sites investigated it seems, because they regard excavation as crude and too intrusive.
This, in one way, is good news for us in that it means that there will be less and less arkies needed.
Those so denied their cushy jobs will be suitable miffed and less likely to care about slagging us off, or what we do.
And that's what we want, isn't it?
Only The Rose
In a nice piece of chicanery, designed to keep everyone happy, the Government has now scheduled the site of Shakespeare's Rose Theatre.
However, this has taken place after the building of the office block which now adorns the site.
One of those who fought to prevent the building said ‘We don't know if it is worth preserving after all the upheaval on site’.
No, I don't trust politicians.
They try to keep everyone happy, but somehow succeed in annoying us all.
Elgin Again
Another gentle swipe at the looting of Greece was taken in a recent ‘quality’ newspaper article.
It stated that British university teams, currently working there are ‘a far cry, mercifully, form the days when English (and Scottish) milords sent Greece's antiquities home by the shipload’.
The ‘and Scottish’ bit is an obvious reference to Elgin and I am glad to note the confirmation of the stolen loot as being the property of Greece.
The article was about a British archaeological laboratory in Greece which has apparently provided sterling service but is now suffering from a lack of funding.
If the original intention was to make the Greeks feel embarrassed at asking for their marbles back, the calls for their return may grow more strident if the laboratory folds up altogether.
Spoilsports
The latest move from the forces of  oppression is to restrict mountain bikes to surface roads only in the New Forest (where at least some of the riders will doubtless be subject to severe injury and death from motor vehicles).
Not that the oppressors care.
The excuse (as if we didn't know) is to protect the woodland.
Protect it for whom?
The green wellie brigade no doubt.
God knows what they would do if they caught you detecting on a mountain bike!
Art Gallery Theft
A £150,000 Lowry was recently stolen from a Glasgow art gallery.
A charity dance held on the night of the theft was attended by over 300 people.
An inside job?
Sounds like it!(ad)
Readers' Letters
Westerbury-on-Severn Volunteers
Going back a few years,Treasure Hunting , January 1983 issue, contains an article concerning a button that had been found, and requested information on the unit mentioned.
I hope that it is not too late to provide this.
The feature stated that the Lieutenancy records have not survived; however, the Public Records Office at Kew does have the pay returns for the unit under reference WO13 4353.
The Westbury-on-Severn Volunteers were raised on 11 November 1803, with a strength of one company.
They were inspected by Lt Col Probyn on his tour of inspection on 3 March 1804.
He was received with presented arms walked twice through the ranks, and saw the company perform several evolutions.
He stated himself pleased with the general appearance and appointments of the unit.
They were inspected again on 29 April 1804 by the same officer, and at this time were commanded by Captain Wintle.
Wilson's chart of volunteer units of 1806 gives: ‘Westbury on Severn Volunteers.
Infantry, Strength 100 Captain Jno.
Wintle.
Uniform red.
Facings blue.
Gold Officers lace, white breeches.’
I have found the following officers: Captain John Wintle, commissioned 11 November 1803, still serving 1813.
Lieutenant Daniel Bennett, commissioned 11 November 1803.
Mentioned in 1804 and 1805 lists, not in 1807 list.
Mentioned as ensign in 1813 list.
Ensign John Dowding, commissioned 24 April 1804.
In 1804, 1805 and 1807 list.
Mentioned in 1813 list as Lieutenant Ensign Joseph Bennett, commissioned 23 December 1809; in 1813 list as Lieutenant.
It should be noted that the life of this unit (up until all the volunteer units were disbanded in 1813, with scant thanks) is unusual.
Most of the Gloucestershire units ceased to exist in 1808 with the introduction of the Local Militia which absorbed them.
Only a few, such as the Royal Bristol Volunteers carried on, and in that instance it was to guard the many Napoleonic prisoners of war in Bristol.
With reference to the thought that this button might be the last relic surviving from this unit, I have in my collection the silver shoulder belt plate of Joseph Bennett (of Chaxhill House, Westbury-on-Severn) hall marked 1803/04 and probably handed on from his brother Daniel.
I have also his hand-written commission appointing him Ensign, signed by Lord Berkeley, and his 1797 pattern officer's sword.
The latter is the usual pattern and I only know it to be his as the items came from the family.
I hope this may be of interest.
If any reader had found any items relating to the Bristol and Gloucestershire volunteers of any period, I should be most interested to hear from them, and would give what advice I could.
Mizpah ring
With reference to the ‘Mizpah’ ring found by C Sedgewick of Barnsley (Treasure Hunting , January 1892 issue, page 58).
The word Mizpah is Hebrew and means ‘The Lord watch between me and thee when we are absent one another’(Genesis 31, Verse 49).
Baby's Rattle
With regards to M Hammerson's item in the ‘Question & Answer’ section in the February 1992 issue of Treasure Hunting,I believe the find could be a baby's rattle.
The substance inside is probably some form of resin to stop the rattle from being dented too easily.
The loops and rings around it would have had small bells attached to them, and at the broken end would have been a piece of coral or ivory to act as a teether.
See page 364 of the Lyle Price Guide to Collectables by Tony Curtis, 1983 edition.
Could J Plummer's item be a vesta case?
Better Than a Knife
In response to the remarks and letters that have recently appeared in the magazine concerning the use of knives for digging.
I feel I must say that in my view there is no such need to use such an unwise tool.
You can buy a strong slim trowel to do the same job and there are several on the market.
I have found the best of these to be the ‘Gardena’(see Treasure Hunting December 1990 and April 1991).
Nothing could be more simple to use, than the ‘Gardena’ and you have a knife and trowel all in one (no need to carry both).
The blade is 7 inches long, and only 1.5 inches wide at the handle, tapering down to a 0.75 inch point.
It also has a comfortable 5.5 inch long plastic handle.
The lower 2 inches or so can be sharpened, to almost a knife edge.
With this tool you cut a small 3 inch diameter plug, or a large one measuring 8 inches or more.
This trowel is every bit as strong as a knife or bayonet, and will easily prize up any large stones (I have done this often, even in rock-hard clay).
A trowel is not a dangerous weapon, just an everyday weeding tool well within the law.
Much Appreciated
I have been with you since the start of the magazine in 1978 and have every issue published, as well as the two Year Books.
I am writing to say how much I appreciate Nigel Mills' series on Roman Artefacts.
This is the more so in that he has put — as a guide — the value of such items to a collector.
For the average detectorist to do this would require a lot of knowledge, correct identification and a great deal of library work…not easy for those of us with limited free time available.
Quite apart from all the other interesting articles there are the field test reports which I feel to be of particular interest.
I believe it to be Treasure Hunting magazine that has kept us all together and interested in the hobby, for all these years.
Atmospheric Cover
I am writing to say how much I enjoyed the cover shot of the January 1992 issue of Treasure Hunting .
It captures the entire atmosphere of our hobby.
Out in the great outdoors, well-wrapped against the winter, dull frigid waters mirroring the distance to far-off shores and dreams.
And the girl?
‘Oh Mrs Lyon, Can I marry your daughter?’
Den Dunne Pittsburgh, USA     
News & Views
No Cause for Concern?
The depicted letter from The Baroness Blatch may well provoke feelings of satisfaction and safety among our brethren.
I trust such feelings will not prove misplaced…assuming the Conservatives are re-elected that is.
One bit of the letter I didn't like was the comment about strengthening the 1979 Act which, more properly should be abolished altogether.
From past experience ‘strengthening’ means more scheduled sites with ever-increasing circumferences.
One day these will all join up together and then we will have nowhere to detect.
As it is, huge tracks of land are being unreasonably placed out of bounds to the landowners as well as ourselves by this odious, creeping 1979 menace to freedom.
I don't like the Code of Conduct bit either.
Arkies will never agree to one which doesn't severely curtail our freedoms.
And the moral?
Never trust  politicians — but you all know that don't you?
John Castle
Department of the Environment 2 Marsham Street London SWIP 3EB BL/PSO/3504/92 Telephone  14th February 1992
Minister for the Heritage
Dear Member
Thank you for your letter of 1 February and this copy correspondence from which I note that your constituent, Mr Doust of  is concerned about the Labour Party's proposals for controlling the use of metal detectors.
You ask what the Government's policy is on this matter.
Under the provisions of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act 1979, the use of metal detectors is already prohibited on sites of scheduled ancient monuments without a licence obtained from English Heritage.
Your constituent may also be aware that the Department carried out a review into arrangements for the reporting and recording of archaeological finds and issued a consultation paper in 1988.
Having assessed the responses to that paper, we concluded that the best way forward was to strengthen the 1979 Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act to make it an offence to remove finds from scheduled sites whether or not they were discovered by means of a metal detector.
The Environment White Paper —‘This Common Inheritance’ announced the Government's intention to consult on this amendment along with various others proposed to the 1979 Act.
The consultation paper was issued in April 1991 and the Department is now considering the responses received including that from the National Council for Metal Detecting.
In addition, more flexible, non legislative, measures for non-scheduled sites are being considered possibly in the form of a Code of Practice.
These measures do not, however, involve a general ban on the use of metal detectors and detectorists who follow their hobby in a responsible manner have no cause for concern as far as the Government's proposals are concerned.
THE BARONESS BLATCH
The Rt Hon Cranley Onslow MP
Not an Earthly Chance?
The following extracts come from a current Labour Party document An Earthly chance: Labour's policy for the Environment.
Should the proposals come into force they would greatly affect the already unfairly restricted use of metal detectors.
The forthcoming General Election looks to be a close run thing, with fairly small groups being able to tip the balance of the outcome.
As the hobby of metal detecting in Britain has a present following of a quarter of a million people (plus sympathetic friends and family) the way we vote could decide which party is to come to power.
Each reader could do a great deal of good by taking up this matter with his or her local MP or prospective candidate.
Would you like to see Britain as virtually one huge archaeological site?
That is just about the threat contained in the following proposals.
The Labour Party states that:
‘We shall protect monuments by accelerating the programme of scheduling under the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act 1979.
In spite of the government's new faster track Monuments Protection Programme, only 13,000 out of the estimated 600,000 sites have been scheduled.
‘We shall for the first time protect landscapes, not one of which has been scheduled, by designating key landscapes as Areas of Archaeological Importance.
‘Under the same Act, we shall protect the environment of more of our historic cities.
At present only Chester, York, Exeter, Canterbury, and Hereford are covered.
‘We shall protect buried treasure by extending the provisions of Statutory Instrument 1199 for evaluation and mitigation statements to cover the buried historical environment, and shall introduce legislation to protect ‘portable antiquities’ superseding the existing legislation covering treasure trove.
‘We will ratify the 1970 UNESCO Convention on  illicit Trafficking in Cultural Property.
Had the Tory government done this we should not now be so impotent in seeking the return of the Icklingham Bronzes.
‘Local authorities will be encouraged to employ specialist archaeological officers, to develop archaeological policies and to include them in local and district plans.
We shall support this by widening the Town and Country Planning Act guidelines to cover archaeology and heritage.’
Stolen Romano-British Brooches
On Wednesday 19 February a group of Romano-British brooches that were in my custody for study, were stolen from my house in Nottingham.
The material consists of twenty-nine complete and fragmentary brooches of 1st century types — Colchester and Nauheim derivatives, thistle brooches etc — similar to those illustrated.
They are made of copper alloy and are about 3 to 4 cms in length.
They have been conserved and in the main appear green.
When stolen they were packaged individually in clear perspex boxes protected internally with white polystyrene.
Each box had a label giving the side code — SC 90 — and other excavation details including a four-figure small find number and a second four-figure context number enclosed in a circle.
If you are offered or have seen brooches of this description, please contact me.
We have X-rays and details that were recorded during the conservation process which may help identify them.
Unfortunately, because typological study had not started before they were stolen, we have no detailed catalogue descriptions or drawings.
I can normally be contacted on either  or , or at the following address:.
Any help you can give in this matter will be most welcome; as you will appreciate the loss of a group of archaeological material like this is something of a disaster.
New Dealer for North Humberside
Over the last twenty years I have been active in our hobby, I have lost count of the number of detectors I have used.
With each new machine I have wondered whether it would go deeper, and whether it would discriminate accurately.
I have in fact become something of an addict of detector technology.
Now I am in heaven — no, not dead just surrounded by metal detectors!
I have opened up a dealership for North Humberside and can now try out as many machines as I like.
From my past experiences and many finds I have plenty of knowledge in the field and this enables me to help people choose the right detector to suit them.
I have a number of machines in stock, and a large test area, but also operate a mail order service.
I sell Compass, Saxon, Tesoro, C-Scope and Viking detectors and usually have a few secondhand machines in stock.
Accessories are also available from me including Black Ada diggers.
Any reader wanting the right detector to suit his pocket and plenty of sound advice is welcome to give me a ring.
For an update of what I have in stock you can give me a ring anytime, but visits are by appointment only at the moment.
No one is pressured into buying; I give my advice and then let people make their own choice.
Also, if you purchase a machine from me I will do my best to help you find some new sites.
Give me a ring on  for details.
John Chapman with some of his stock
Centurion Coins
‘Centurion Coins’ is the name I traded under when I had a coin shop at Wimborne for ten years, and subsequently premises at Christchurch for two years.
For the last four years, however, I have been trading under the name of ‘Ancient Forum’.
I am now going back to the name ‘Centurion Coins’ which many customers will know from years past.
I issue a monthly list, with the main emphasis on Roman coins.
There is also, however, a selection of hammered and milled coins/tokens, plus antiquities.
For a free sample list write to: Centurion Coins,(tel:).
GOLD PANNING IN BRITAIN
Vincent Thurkettle
Gold…beautiful, bright, glittering, glistening, lovely yellow gold!
And what's more, it's fairly easy to find in dozens and dozens of Britain's streams and rivers.
This beloved metal is both precious and free — to those willing to hunt for it.
Before anything else, however, let's do some image adjustment.
The kit of the modern prospector includes no mules or checked shirts, no cast iron pots and pans, and there is no need to chew tobacco and spit; the equipment is mostly plastic and beards are entirely optional!
I'm not trying to spoil the romance of prospecting — far from it — but there is a Hollywood stereotype and nine out of ten goldpanners are nothing like it.
The British Team, just before they were due to fly out to compete in the World Championships, were photographed by a national daily paper.
Weeks passed and nothing was printed.
Apparently, the story was scrapped because the team ‘did not look like goldpanners’!
I have been told by well-meaning friends that I have a touch of fever…well, so be it!
For fifteen years I've spent much of my spare time scrabbling and grovelling about in the mud and gravels of our upland waterways.
And I've loved every minute of it!
From their experiences of metal detecting readers must know what it's like.
You research and plan a trip, and then there's the long hard job of searching an area, slowly and systematically.
Then, at some point, your intuition or sixth sense takes over and a good feeling creeps right into you.
You think ‘This is a good spot, there's something here!’
Inside yourself, you just know it.
I'm sitting here at the computer even now, with images flashing into my mind of all the spots I want to go to, but haven't had the opportunity yet.
Before I'm tempted too much I'd better, settle down a bit and describe how to get started in gold prospecting, what equipment you will need, and where to go.
Research
I have mentioned research, and this is of prime importance in gold prospecting.
It's the very first stage and anyone who ignores this aspect of the hobby, will spend no end of lovely days pottering about on river banks but will never be rewarded with a good show of colour (gold) in their pan.
But don't worry, I'm not going to get academic here (as if I could!); research is possible by many methods and it's simply a matter of what you fancy doing.
Beginners often hold the misconception that the best way to hunt gold is to get up into the remotest area they can find, and prospect virgin ground.
Wrong!
People have sought gold in our islands for at least two thousand years, and I don't believe any significant  pannable sites are left to be discovered.
Find where the old timers panned gold, and go to look for what they missed.
The panner who misses nothing is yet to be born.
(Although I must say that working behind ‘Ken the Nugget’ is a pretty fruitless occupation!).
And mention of Ken brings me to a quick word about British gold panners.
They are about an interesting a bunch of people that you could ever hope to meet.
Also, there are so few of us that we all know each other although living in different parts of the country.
So, lesson one is that where people have found gold in the past, that is where you will find gold in the future!
Using a simple manual operated suction pump to lift gold dust from crevices
Museums and Libraries
Britain has a fairly long winter, and I know of only a few very hardy souls who are willing to go gold prospecting during this season.
The rest of us use this time to make or mend kit, and to read up on possible areas to visit come the Spring.
Even when you think you know an area very well, just a small, simple further piece of information relating to the site can be literally ‘worth its weight in gold’.
So what I am saying, is that there is plenty of time in the annual cycle for visits to museums and libraries, and the research itself can be fun.
Books and other references sources can be extremely useful and I've found the staff at most libraries very helpful…that is, once they've been persuaded that they are not dealing with an imaginative miscreant!
There is something about a museum visit, however, that really fires me up.
Maybe you have read of gold being found in a particular locality, but now you can see it.
There, sitting safely behind the glass, the gold smiles up at you and glow faintly.
It can be almost unbearable!
After a visit to such a museum I'm always left pining for a chance to seek out my own sample of the lovely stuff.
Technically, it is always interesting to see these museum exhibits as natural gold varies slightly in shape and colour from location to location.
Pubs in gold-bearing locations are also good places to visit.
No, not for the ‘amber nectar’, but in the legitimate cause of research.
Talk to the locals but be careful not to believe every thing you hear.
If they suss out that you're a fanatical prospector they'll have a great time winding you up and sending you off on a series of wild goose chases.
I know of one pub where an ‘old timer’ will grudgingly show you a fine piece of ‘gold ore’that he was lucky enough to find years ago.
After a few drinks he will reluctantly sell it to you as he's a bit short of cash and you're so obviously interested…
The conversation needs to be turned to a good old chat about the  history of the area; for example, was there any mining?
People are, quite properly, proud of their home areas and if there is something special to tell you about it, tell you they will.
Last, but by no means least, look for the opportunity to meet other prospectors.
I cannot overstate the value of spending some time with a competent goldpanner.
I believe that the lessons learnt from my first five years of trial and error could have been imparted to me in a few days by any half-decent panner.
Where to Find Gold
Having carried out the research, let's say we know where we are going and arrive at a beautiful river.
Thousands and thousands of tonnes of rock and gravel face us, and the thought pops into mind that any gold there may be in the area seems to be pretty safe from any chance of extracting it.
But this is not so.
Gold is pretty heavy, being six to eight times the, weight of the gravels, and it follows a certain line down the riverbed.
In essence gold hugs the inside of bends and will get trapped behind large rocks and in crevices.
Having been trapped, and being so heavy, it will work its way down to the absolute bottom of wherever it is caught.
Of course, light flakes and gold on its way down can be found in the gravel, but the old basic rule is to work on — or just above — the bedrock.
Today's plastic gold pan is light weight and easy to use
Rocks like this are ideal traps for gold
Panning itself is a practical skill and the technique is not easy to describe in words.
The principle it works on is that of flotation.
With gold being so heavy, if you put a panful of gravel into motion under water the gold will work down into the pan base.
Flat flakes of gold are more difficult to trap as their weight to surface area is small and they have a tendency to escape over the edge.
Also, watch out for ‘floaters’.
These are again flakes that can be lifted out of dry gravel and float off on the surface of the water.
The technique of panning, therefore, is to cause the gold to sink in the pan by jiggling it about and washing the gold-free surface gravel out over the rim of the pan.
This process goes on until you have about half a teacupful of ravel left.
At this stage, you take some water and gently wash the little gravel heap until the brilliant, sparkling flecks of colour show themselves.
So you have some gold at last…or is it?
There is a lot said about ‘fools gold’(pyrite), most of which is much exaggerated.
If it truly looks like gold it most probably is gold.
You will soon learn how it behaves in the pan, but if agonising doubts gather as you gaze down upon a yellow heavy flake, pick up a stone and crush the flake.
If this reduces the flake to a silver grey powder, then what you have is something other than gold; if not, then well done!
I was so excited by the first decent piece of gold ever found, that a test I once read about came into mind.
I took a pin and pushed it into the nugget.
What should have happened is that the soft, natural gold would be spiked by the pin…what actually happened was that the nugget was pinged out into the river like a tiddly wink.
Moral: care is advised when testing; gold, is hard to find and distressingly easy to lose.
In time you will gather a few grammes of gold, and you may even hit a ‘glory hole’ and fill a phial in a day.
So, now you have your gold, what will you do with it?
Personally, I'm mostly interested in it as a mineral specimen.
My wife Jeannie, however, makes jewellery and has made some lovely bits and pieces from my gold (mind you, she is a perfectly capable panner and often finds her own!).
My cousin Angela collects tortoises and fancied a pendant made of solid gold with garnet eyes and black (garnets are easily panned in northern Scotland).
Finally, one can always sell the gold and any good jeweller is likely to be interested; in my experience, however, they only offer a modest premium over the world's spot price and, quite honestly, it is a meagre reward for all the effort.
Something I should have mentioned earlier is just how good gold prospecting is as a family hobby.
I have already mentioned that Jeannie is pretty good, but not that our three children — Daisy (eight), Jack (six) and Ralph (four)— are all keen gold panners.
There is something beautifully simple and old fashioned about the whole family working and playing together on a warm afternoon beside a clean, bubbling stream.
It certainly keeps me on my toes as the children alternate between bouts of great industry and water fights!
They have even been known to raid the picnic basket if  I am overly engrossed over a little‘hot spot’ I have found.
A simple riffle system can speed up the processing of the lode
All this has led to some skill rubbing off.
Daisy came to the World Championships with me in Sweden last year and came fourteenth in the under fifteen year old class — a good result for her first competition.
The sport of competitive gold panning is becoming more and more popular.
The events are a good reason for the enthusiasts of this largely non-social past time to gather and renew acquaintances.
Britain's National Championship is held annually, usually over a weekend in late summer and if the idea of attending this quaint and somewhat unusual event appeals, then you have a real treat in store.
This year (3 to 6 September) Britain is hosting the World Goldpanning Championships in the old mining villages of Leadhills and Wanlockhead, south Scotland.
Over 500 panners from all over the world are due to take part in what promises to be a most memorable event.
The villagers are great, and with full support from the local authorities both communities have thrown themselves into planning the social side of it.
This leaves us, the goldpanners, to get on with the actual preparations of the championship.
I can report that things are going well.
Permission to Pan
Before concluding I would just like to put down a few words on permission and such like.
The first courtesy of a prospector is to have the land-owner's permission to be there.
In some places this is quite formal, and you will need to hold a letter of authority or be issued with a licence.
On other sites it is no more than an amused smile and a wave of the hand.
The second courtesy is to respect the land you are on and this is more than mere observance of the country code.
It is to learn when fish spawn and avoid disturbing them; it is not to dig vegetation from the bank; and it is to work quietly and unobtrusively.
In fact, try to act in the spirit of the Himalayan maxim: ‘Take only photographs, leave only footprints’.
There is a weekend course available that will give a good foundation in the techniques of panning and prospecting.
As stated, this could well save you years of wasted time if you would otherwise rely on trial and error alone.
It is based at: Blackaddie House Hotel, Sanquhar, Dumfriesshire.
The course starts with an introduction to gold deposition and environmental considerations; it then teaches how to use a goldpan.
Once this skill is mastered it's off to the hills to put all the theory to test in local gold-bearing streams.
Gold prospecting is wonderful.
It's a vocation, an adventure, a quest to recover the most alluring and compelling of treasures.
It satisfies man's hunting instinct, and can be as safe and homely, or as wild and enterprising as you wish.
But beware…once you have found this living metal there is no looking back.
advert 
Editorial Note: Vincent Thurkettle is Current British Goldpanning Champion
DISCOVERIES IN UNKNOWN AREAS
Part Two
John Webb
My searches this month have followed exactly the same lines as those of last month; that is to say, I have been venturing into areas possessing no known or recorded activity.
The items I have found on such sites have proved to be of great interest, and I have been logging them down very carefully.
The amount of time I have been able to spend detecting has been hampered, unfortunately, by several setbacks.
It all began with a dose of ‘flu which cleared and went away…only to be followed by a heavy cold.
This also cleared, only to develop into bronchitis, which slowed down my activities considerably.
The searches I have been made, however, have been far from dull.
The first field that was available to me certainly fitted into the category of ‘no known site’.
A general wander up and down on a previous occasion had produced some interesting items, but I knew that the site had not seen past habitation.
My conviction on this count was based on the fact that I had researched this area very well and knew that there was nothing on record.
Also, I employed my usual technique of talking a quick walk up and down the field in parallel lines and with my detector switched on.
From the amount of iron signals and other factors it would soon be possible to determine if the land had seen habitation in the past.
Once again, I concluded that there had been no habitation.
In this instance, however, the mystery as to why there should be artefacts at all in the soil was easily solved.
There was a fairly decent-sized watering hole right in the centre of the field.
This had long since dried up, but it seems that in the past the population from all the local area would come to this one patch.
This was not on a massive scale, for the area was sparsely populated in the past, and remains thinly populated even today.
The watering hole must also have been the only one in the area for all sides produced finds, and finds of a reasonable age.
When I set myself to search this site, my first little breakthrough came when I uncovered a bronze coin weight; this was in very poor condition but I was able to make out that it was 17th century in date.
Ten yards from this, and on the same side of the pond, I recovered an almost identical coin weight.
Some of the coins found over the past month.
Top line, left to right: Edward VI shilling, Elizabeth I sixpence.
James I sixpence.
Bottom line, left to right: Edward III half-groat, George I Maundy fourpence, Charles II threepence, Papal States coin (?).
I had put in about two hours detecting time by now and these were the only two non-ferrous items I had found apart from some scrap lead.
However, I continued to work the whole of this one section quite thoroughly in order to dismiss it or not (depending on what was found).
Although this turned out be the quietest piece of the whole site, at the far extreme a very small hammered coin came to light which looks to be 16th/17th century and of Italian or Papal States origin.
Encouraged by the finding of this tiny coin, I turned my attention to the second side of the pond and began the same operation along its full length.
This proved to be more interesting and was certainly more lively by way of finds — every few yards produced a Georgian or Jacobean halfpenny.
These came up in some numbers right from the beginning to the end of this strip.
At the far end, once again my, detector gave a nice small signal, quite different from the copper halfpennies, and as I dug down to retrieve this I had some idea in mind that this might be a hammered.
In fact, the target turned out to be something totally different, although just as an attractive find.
This was the Tudor seal that is illustrated.
The seal is in quite decent condition considering the appalling soil it had been buried in.
In total about twenty-six copper coins were recovered from this section, which is quite a lot from just one part of a field that had no habitation on it.
I next attempted the third side to the pond, this part being on a slightly raised level to the pond itself.
Soon after starting my search I found my first good hammered — the Edward half-groat illustrated.
I was more than encouraged by this, and  even more uplifted when in a space of less than 5 yards, an Edward VI (1547–53) shilling came to light.
Apart from a small stain on the edge this came up in almost the bright and shiny condition that it appears in the illustration.
This may not strike some of you as unusual but in my area silver coins rarely come from the ground in their natural colour; they are usually black or slightly grey.
I was certainly happy to make this find as the larger hammered silver coins of this period are not common and certainly do not pour out of the ground no matter where you live.
It was at this stage of my search that I started to find lead weights.
Their presence is one of the most curious aspects of the history of this field.
For reasons now totally unknown, people in the past had chosen to travel to this field to weigh various substances.
Most of the farm weights and unofficial weights are of the crude variety (compared to the loom weights) but when you add their existence to the three bronze coin weights that also came from the same field something of a picture starts to build up.
Farmers in the past, just as now have had to weigh their goods somewhere, but it seems a curious activity to carry out in the middle of a field and down through quite a number of generations (the weights span at least two centuries).
I still have no explanation for why things needed to be weighed in this area, and what connection it could have with the watering hole, but I am certain that my finds from the four sides of the pond resulted from these activities.
The fourth side of the pond proved to be the busiest and also the best in terms of good finds.
From this section came the really nice, but unfortunately broken, 17th century spur that is illustrated.
Other finds included four buckles (16th and 17th century), one complete crotal bell (and several broken ones), and a 15th century thimble.
A few dozen Jacobean and Georgian coppers came to light, a fair quantity of musket balls, and the other hammered coins illustrated which were all discovered in this one section.
Loom and farm produce weights
Pond finds — a 17th century spur, 16th and 17th century buckles, a complete crotal bell, and 17th century coins weights.
Foreshore finds — an early Victorian pewter whistle and a Georgian syringe.
The coins themselves spanned the period 14th to 17th centuries and four of them were of quite high denomination for the period they were in circulation; not the highest value coin available, but nevertheless high.
It was certainly not poor people who had lost these coins for each would have represented about a week's wages.
Now as to what type of person came into this field and from where I can only guess, but I believe it was not people from the very close area although they would have lived in the vicinity.
It all leaves an interesting question mark over the area so far as I am concerned.
The hammered coin finds do not indicate the same form of activity that would have occurred at the time the weights would have been lost so two different forms of activity must have taken place.
I will be slowly searching the whole area in the future and hope that other finds will provide more information.
Certainly, the number of items to come from the field so far are considerable in view of the lack of occupation.
It has also led me to think along the lines of who needs to work habitation sites when finds like this are popping up in random places?
Having searched this field to the  best of my ability I left with the intention to return at the earliest opportunity.
Illness interrupted these plans, however, and when I next ventured out it was to a piece of woodland that was more local to where I live.
I had spotted this on my travels a few months previous to this time and had made a mental note to return and search it.
The 15th century thimble
Some of the growth looked old but the trees themselves were not very substantial.
In fact it looked as if the trees had been cut down in early Victorian times.
If this was coppicing, it had been somewhat fierce and the trees would have been cut back to soil level.
Not all the trees had suffered this treatment, however.
It may have been an attempt to clear the wood of all the trees, but before this was achieved the attempt was abandoned.
There was a through-way running the length of this wood but it looked more like a path than a substantial track.
No amount of research revealed this as a recorded route, even in Georgian times.
The growth looked settled, undisturbed and very original, however, and the ditches wide and quite deep.
When you have these on either side of a path it often indicates an ancient trackway or road of some description.
The earth from the ditches would have been dug out and used to bank up the path to keep people out of the quagmire that is the norm in my county.
Thus, the deeper the ditches the higher the track.
A search made of this path, however, produced very little.
I found the odd Victorian sixpence, some scrap and pieces of shrapnel but nothing substantial or of any age apart from these bits.
On my second attempt at the wood I walked the path end to end to try to judge if my feelings that the place was of good age were wrong.
I came to the conclusion that my hunch had been right, but that the ditches must have been dug in mid-Victorian times and the earth piled on the track, putting all the older items out of detecting range.
I nevertheless felt the wood itself to be worth searching, and the path which I had hopes for was only a part of the whole site.
A careful search of a fairly good section of the wood began to produce coinage, mainly Jacobean.
I had the odd George II and George III copper, but these were in the minority and it was the 17th century coinage that was popping up with some regularity.
In addition I recovered three William III sixpences that came up from a depth of between 9 to 10 inches.
This is quite a long way down for coins of this period and it would explain why I wasn't finding anything earlier.
No matter how carefully I listened, and the faintest signals that I dug up, all my finds proved to be items of 17th century date.
I found several broken crotal bells and some parts of buckles all, again of about mid-17th century/English Civil War period.
James I sixpence reverse
By now I had covered a fair expanse of this wood, and I had resigned myself to the fact that this would be the earliest I would get, regardless of what was in the ground.
The area suggested that there could be earlier finds but I was not too disappointed with what I was finding.
Woods can be extremely variable as to the depth that metal reaches.
In some places metal sinks and is covered over so quickly that even Victorian losses can be out of range; at the other end of the scale I found a 14th century key in a wood, that came up from a depth of only 2 inches.
Although it is rare for medieval finds to be at such a shallow depth in woodland, the (amongst other finds) proves that the older objects can be recovered.
My next bout of health problems prevented me from continuing this search, and I was forced to wait for the weather to become a little sunnier before taking the risk of venturing out.
When the break in the dull, rainy weather came I decided on a day's search of the river foreshore.
I still wasn't feeling strong or back to my normal fitness, but I thought that some fresh air would do me good (well that was my excuse anyway!).
I've got to say that I did enjoy this outing; although the day began with a freezing start it warmed up later and I had a pleasant time working amongst the iron and other junk that abounds on the riverside.
I had picked for this exercise a place that I had visited many years before., but to which I had never returned.
All I could remember of my first visit was that I had found several items, including a Tudor buckle.
As buckles are amongst my favourite finds this was a good enough reason to choose this spot for a further search.
The day progressed and I had searched a reasonably large expanse of foreshore without much to show by way of finds apart from a few pennies and halfpennies.
I therefore extended my area of search slightly and as I did this out popped one of the shop tokens illustrated.
This was of five shillings value and in excellent condition.
I then found another and another, and they kept coming up until I had recovered twenty-two of them in all.
They are certainly not small targets to be found with a metal detector and I was amazed that they were there, for they proved that no detector user had worked the area since my last visit.
If anyone had searched the site, they would surely have found the tokens for they were only down  an inch or two.
The tokens encouraged me in my search a great deal, as did the next find to appear, a 14th century strap-end buckle.
This was followed by an early Victorian pewter whistle, a Georgian syringe, and a number of George II halfpennies (worn extremely thin).
However, my last signal of any importance was somewhat strange in sound; it was flat and sounded like iron, but it was positive enough to be worth digging.
Going down several inches I came upon some links of chain.
Tugging at these I found them fairly  firmly embedded, but eventually the mud yielded up a length of chain with the most beautiful padlock on the end of it.
This is 18th century in date, and has the maker's name on it.
When I cleaned it up, I found it to be in really good condition and one of the nicest I have ever seen come out of the river.
Unfortunately, there isn't space to illustrate it in this issue, but I will include a photograph of it next time.
This, sadly was my last foray for the month as I went down with an attack of bronchitis soon after this expedition, and form which I have not fully recovered.
Nevertheless, I hope to be back in action very soon and continue my study of discoveries in unknown areas.
READER'S FIELD TEST: Tesoro Silver Sabre Plus
Gordon Bailey
In some ways, I suppose buying a new detector is much like buying a new car.
One can gain a certain insight from manufacturers' advertising and reports from other people, but finally it comes down to whether the machine is suitable for the individual's needs and whether he can afford the price.
I have been metal detecting now for over twenty years, and in that time have owned and tested many detectors.
For the past sixteen years, however, I have seriously used only one machine.
I vowed I would never use anything else, for in that time this old faithful has found thousands of coins and artefacts for me — some very rare.
Even now, I consider it one of the best machines ever made.
Years of hard use, however, have taken their toll and my detector that at one time was new and gleaming from the factory, now looks like an advert for adhesive tape, for that is all that holds it together.
With the greatest of reluctance, I decided that it was time I bought myself another detector.
With this in mind I phoned a good friend who runs a detector shop and asked whether he had any decent second-hand machines for sale of the same type as my old one.
He replied that he did, but asked whether I had tried any of the new generation motion detectors.
I replied that I wanted a detector, not a wand to wave around, but after visiting the shop and seeing a demonstration I must admit that I started to become interested.
Henry IV (1399–1413) gold quarter noble
Queen Anne guinea
James II guinea, dated 1687
Edward I jetton
King John and Henry III short cross pennies
Rose farthings
Del Boy's words of wisdom went through my mind ‘There are none so blind as those who won't listen’.
I had heard good reports of the Tesoro Silver Sabre Plus (especially when fitted with a large coil).
I was pleasantly surprised at how light the detector was, for when I have the free time to get out, I like to put as many hours in at a stretch as possible.
After some further outside tests and a fair amount of soul-searching, I eventually bought this detector and the 10.5in accessory coil.
In the early part of 1991, before all this occurred, I went through a period of time when my find rate dropped drastically and on many occasions I went out and came back home with nothing at all.
I blamed my sites, my machine, and myself for this, but never really believed that the areas I was working had been totally worked-out.
Experimental site
There was one field in particular that I had made some good finds on and I had searched this piece of land time and time again.
As a result I knew that I had recovered everything within the detecting capabilities of my old machine and did not expect that there would be anything left to be found.
I decided this would be a good experimental site on which to try my new detector, and for the first hour of detecting felt that I had been right in my assumption that I had really cleaned this place out.
But then, in the far corner of the field I found a medieval buckle.
This  was soon followed by another buckle, some buckle plates, and a Henry III silver penny.
At this stage I stopped searching to have a little think.
To miss the odd target is acceptable, but not finds coming up at this rate and in such a confined area.
When I search a farmland site I always keep careful records, and looking back to my notes I started to search the areas where there had been the greatest concentration of finds.
These ‘worked out’ areas produced various buttons, seals, a bell, belt chapes, and a gold coin.
This last item did much to restore the confidence that seemed to have deserted me in the previous few months.
It turned out to be a quarter-noble of Henry IV (1399–1413)…and a rare one at that.
Above: Buckle, belt chape, and dagger chape, found together and dating 15th to 16th century
Above right: Belt and harness fittings, 16th to 17th century
Right: Various buckles and plates, 14th to 16th century
Complete example of 14th century brooch
I made a very careful search in the area where this find was made but the site yielded no more gold coins.
However, in compensation I did find a nice silver hammered halfpenny of Henry V and a few rose farthings.
Worked out sites?
Armed with restored confidence, a new machine and — hopefully — a little luck, I now returned to sites that had seemed promising but had yielded very little.
One of these areas was an arable field that had been rolled flat, and I felt that this would provide a good opportunity to experiment with the machine's settings.
Although the instruction books that come with new machines recommend certain ways of setting such machines up, I have always liked to experiment across the range of possible settings.
On this field I found the best combination was to set the Silver Sabre at minimum discrimination and maximum sensitivity.
(After quite a few months of use, I still think these to be the best settings for ploughed land.)
A few evenings on this field, which had previously seemed barren, produced: crotal and rumbler bones; medieval and Georgian buckles; fifty copper coins (17th to 19th century); buttons, a 17th century spoon; a piece of 18th century watch fob; and the smallest barrel lock that I have ever seen.
For some years now I have been researching an area where a certain event took place.
This event only lasted two days, but the amount of coinage and artefacts lost during that period would seem to have been enormous.
For this search I teamed up with two young friends, both experienced detector users, who had been searching a nearby farm and thus knew the area well.
On our first visit I was left standing by  these youngsters as one of them unearthed a good bag of finds ranging from Roman through to Georgian.
I was beaten again by these youngsters on our second visit and their finds included hammered, buckles, numerous buttons, and a pipe tamper.
On the third visit I switched over to the large search coil and within fifteen minutes was holding numerous buttons, buckles, seals, some copper coins and — best of all — a Queen Anne gold guinea.
Words failed me at this last find…but not so my companions!
Part of a 15th century purse frame.
It bears the crowned letter ‘W’ for Walsingham
18th century barrel tap — one of the smallest I have seen
Centre part of an 18th century watch seal, and impression
Below left: Various buckles, 16th to 17th century together with Cask key, 17th century
Sword belt buckle, 15th century
As you might guess, we searched the area where the guinea had come from very carefully but, alas, no more were to be found.
On the following weekend circumstances prevented me from getting out, but my companions made their way to the site on their own.
When I arrived home from my own (family) outing that evening I phoned one of the lads, expecting to hear some good news.
Their day, however, had not been that good; they had put in many hours of searching and had only made two finds of any note.
One of these was an heraldic pendant, the other a 15th century spur.
After some discussion, they felt that there was nothing else to be found on this site until the next ploughing and they would give it a miss until then.
Return visit
Come the following Sunday, therefore, I returned to the site alone and noticed that my friends had indeed given the field a careful search, for much of the soil was flattened by footprints.
Undaunted I commenced my own search and within minutes was holding a medieval buckle.
This was followed by numerous copper coins and buttons and then, actually amongst the footprints which were left by my companions, a gold guinea of James II.
As you might expect, come next weekend there were three of us back searching the site again.
Some hours of searching brought to light a few finds, these being small targets but nevertheless interesting ones.
My expectations of this field are still high and I believe that further visits will be rewarding.
The Silver Sabre has restored my confidence and I consider it to be one of the best machines that I have used.
Update
I have now bought a Tesoro Laser B1 (that has both auto and manual ground adjust) and will be returning to the site to see if the extra performance of this machine turns up any more finds.
Should this be the case, I will let you know soon.
PRODUCT REPORT
Buffallo Stainless Trowel
Readers who were detecting in the late 1970s and 1980s will remember the range of excellent specialist diggers designed and manufactured by Buffallo Tools of Rayleigh in Essex.
It is nice to know that Buffallo are still around and in fact have updated their foot-assisted trowel design into a really superb stainless steel version.
As you will know stainless is certainly the best material to use for trowels or diggers, but these can tend to be pricey.
Stainless itself is expensive in its sheet form, and is not easy to cut, press or weld.
Buffallo, however, have come up with a good trowel at a very modest price.
Besides possessing rust-resistant properties, stainless is a very strong metal and the blade can be of thinner gauge than normal steel while still possessing the same strength.
This means that the thinner blade is far easier to push into the ground.
If you haven't come across foot-assisted trowels before these have a long tubular handle and work as the name suggests allowing the whole weight of the body to force the trowel into the ground, rather than just relying on the arm muscles.
Not only are these particularly effective on hard ground, but they obviate much of the bending down needed with normal trowels and can thus save on the backache that sometimes results.
The new Buffallo trowel is 22 inches in length, and new features include a blade tapering from 3 inches to 2.5 inches, which is raked at a slight angle to provide extra leverage.
The foot bar is 8 inches from the tip of the blade to allow for a narrow deep hole to be dug.
The bar also has pressed ribbing to make it non-slip and can be supplied either left or right handed.
As stated this trowel is very modestly priced at only £10.50 inc Vat (postage and packing (£2.50) and is a useful and recommended accessory for every detector user.
It can be ordered from the sole UK agents:
Cure for Cold Feet
A day's detecting can often be spoilt, or even cut short, by feelings of physical discomfort brought on by being cold and wet.
The body can be protected by a wind-proof coat and layers of clothing to trap warm air, but the feet in particular seem to suffer no matter haw many pairs of socks you put on.
In fact, all the wearing of socks seems to do is to cramp the feet in your boots and create chaffing.
The inexpensive answer to the problem of cold feet is the purchase of a pair of fleecy boot liners made by Cazmatann.
These not only keep your feet cosy and warm, but are far more comfortable to wear than layers of socks.
A pair to fit wellies which reach right up to the knee cost a penny short of a fiver.
A longer pair for waders and which are prevented from slipping down by an elasticated band, cost a pound more.
Fleece liners are also available for shorter wellingtons (at £4.50) and for boots (at £3.99), Sizes cover the range 3,5,6–8,9–11 and 12 plus extra large.
Colour choice is that of grey, brown or navy blue.
The liners are available at the prices quoted post free and will be despatched return post.
Order from:
Xerotech Gloves
I have been a keen metal detectorist for some years now and shortly after I started detecting I became aware of how difficult it was to find a good pair of gloves which would keep the hands warm and dry, but still allow a reasonable amount of dexterity for detector operation.
Through my involvement with scuba diving I recently encountered a diving and wet work glove called ‘Xerotech’.
This glove has since fulfilled my requirements for treasure hunting being tough enough, warm enough and dry enough for use on land sites, the beach and — obviously underwater.
The  glove's outer shell is constructed from dip-moulded chemical and oil resistant chloropolymer matt coated to provide extra abrasion resistance and grip.
A comfortable loop pile liner is built into the glove to provide insulation and to prevent condensation.
The gauntlet cuff is provided with a bottle neck cuff seal which closes onto the wrist to prevent ingress of water, and construction is such to allow the gauntlet to abut comfortably with a protective garment, so affording double insulation at the wrist.
Xerotech is suitable for use between minus 40 degrees centigrade to plus 60 degrees centigrade and in pH values between 2 and 12.
They prevent contamination to the hands and so reduce the risk of contact diseases.
The gloves are machine washable and may be sterilised using dilute bleach.
They can also be repaired if punctured using PVC cement and/or patches.
The rubber cuff seals are factory replaceable.
Xerotech gloves are manufactured by  Tony Morse   
Mighty Shovel
This handy little tool comes in its own olive green nylon case with loop for attachment to your waist belt or kit bag.
It is based on army issue shovels and although very compact could be used to dig anything from a small surface hole to a trench!
Folded down, this little shovel measures only 27cms.
By unscrewing a ribbed locking collar the blade is allowed to swivel out into position and is then locked into place by screwing up the collar.
Extended the shovel is now 40cms in overall length.
In addition to the main blade (which measures 15cms long by 12cms wide) the shovel possess a small ‘pick’ type tapering blade, 11 cms long and of rounded section.
This small blade can also be locked in position at 180 degrees to the grip and is ideal for flicking up shallow-buried coins from manicured grassland.
Both blades can be locked at 90 degrees to the grip, the smaller to serve as a pick the larger as a form of mattock.
The edge of the main blade can also be used as a hacking tool to clear vegetation or cut through tree roots.
The shovel has a black rubber ribbed hand grip 12cms long and ending in a lanyard loop.
This provides really excellent grip even in slippery, muddy and wet conditions.
Overall the ‘Mighty Shovel’ is of rugged construction and is intended to survive years of hard use.
The applications of this little tool in treasure hunting are numerous: dump digging, beachcombing, industrial river foreshores, and farm fields.
Used in conjunction with a normal trowel for coinshooting, it can sit on the belt out of the way and be used for easy recovery of the deeper targets.
In general a very useful tool with multi-purpose applications selling at a very reasonable price.
The Mighty Shovel costs £8.45 plus £3.00 post and package, and available from:
Colour Posters
I am a Wiltshire-based detectorist who also enjoys a spot of photography.
I am embarking on a number of projects which I hope to be of interest to fellow treasure hunters.
Currently I am selling a range of large and colourful A3 size photo-posters depicting scenes of treasure hunting and metal detecting.
These are laminated with a glossy protective finish on both sides and can be framed or just used as they are as posters (great for brightening your den!)
They are also suitable for shop/point of sale display and for resale.
An illustrated list is available showing the five posters currently sold.
To receive this please send a stamped addressed envelope plus a loose second class stamp (to cover costs) to:.
THE TROUBLE WITH BATTERIES
One of the most important factors governing the good running and performance of any metal detector is also the most misunderstood and maligned.
By this I mean the selection, care and fitting of batteries.
In the three years or so that I have been working at Joan Allen Electronics I have become acutely aware of battery problems, in particular from the many cases where detectors have been sent back for repair needlessly.
If the owners of these detectors had only checked the batteries or battery fittings, they would have saved themselves postal costs and would have also avoided the inconvenience of being without their detectors for several weeks.
Battery Types
Detector manufacturers select the type and number of batteries used in any particular model, according to two main factors: the power required and the space available.
Some manufacturers have overcome the latter factor by placing the batteries in a compartment separate from the control box (eg Fisher 1266-X and C-Scope CS4ZX).
The type of batteries most favoured at present are either 1.5 volt AA pen-lights or the 9 volt PP3s.
However, a few detectors are designed to run on the 1.5 volt C cells such as the Garrett Grand Master and the White's Eagle Spectrum.
Polarity
Each battery has a positive and negative terminal.
Those on the PP3 are of the snap-on type: the male (post) is positive; the female (clip) is negative.
These two terminals should never be allowed to short across, which might easily occur if you carry a PP3 in your pocket along with some coins or other batteries.
Carry your spares in their original bubble pack or, if loose, wrap each battery in plastic.
On the cylindrical AA and C types of batteries, the small terminal at the top end is positive while the whole of the base is negative.
Pod to hold six AA cells (three on other side).
Where a manufacturer's instruction book specifies the use of alkaline batteries, then these should be used.
It is a common fallacy that the cheaper, carbon-zinc batteries will do the same job but with a shorter life.
While some detectors may run as normal for some time on cheap batteries, in other cases battery life will be ridiculously short leading the operator to conclude that a detector malfunction has occurred.
This phenomenon is entirely due to what I would call ‘battery stamina’.
Battery Test
Many detectors have an integral battery test but this is not very reliable, to say the least.
It may tell you that your batteries are good, but it doesn't say how long they will remain so!
Near-spent batteries are good, but it doesn't say how long they will remain so!
Near-spent batteries will often give an initial surge when the machine is first switched on and a ‘battery okay’ signal is no guide at all to their stamina.
Whilst I prefer the ‘low battery’ type of test/alert, I never rely totally on detector battery test systems.
These problems are also present on cheap battery testers.
If you were to try a new carbon zinc battery on one of these testers, and then an alkaline one, in both cases the needle would bang hard over.
But this does not mean that the carbon-zinc battery would be suitable for use in your detector.
These testers do not test under load, and it is only under load that the true condition and stamina of a battery can be assessed.
Meters are available which can test batteries under load.
Should the above experiment be tried on one of these, then a different result will be achieved.
With the carbon-zinc battery the needle will move a small amount and hold there.
When the alkaline battery is tried the needle will deflect much further and hold there.
Although both batteries show the correct voltage, the alkaline has far more stamina.
A problem we commonly encounter at Joan Allen's is one where batteries read good on the detector and on an unloaded test.
The owner thinks at this stage that the batteries are okay, and starts to fear an expensive repair will be required.
But then we test the batteries under load.
The needle moves to its usual place but does not stay there; it slowly drops back to zero.
This shows that the batteries had no stamina at all, despite the fact of reading the correct voltage.
A new set of decent batteries is then fitted, and away goes another happy and enlightened customer!
The lesson here is not to skimp on batteries, and always use alkalines if the manufacturer specifies them.
Where they are not specified, use them anyway if you want the best performance from your detector.
Lithium batteries are even better, but so far as I know are only available in PP3 size.
PP3 Problems
On the PP3 battery, the female terminal can splay, leading to intermittent contact.
Your detector will periodically switch itself off and on if this happens, and this can be very annoying…particularly if it automatically tests the batteries each time it comes on!
To cure the fault, gently squeeze the segments of the female terminal together with a small pair of pliers.
I have also noticed that some makes of PP3s have a tendency to swell after some hours of use.
This can make them difficult to remove from detectors with individual ‘drop in’ battery compartments.
Sorry but I can't mention the brand names of such batteries — I don't want to get sued!
The advantages of the PP3 are that it is small, compact and light.
The disadvantages are that the single battery has less stamina than a pod of AAs giving the same voltage, and the female terminal can splay (or the segments fold under if the battery is installed carelessly).
Penlight Problems
I have not noted any particular problems with C cells; this is because they are usually installed side by side, rather than one above the other.
Penlight or AA batteries are usually held in plastic pods.
They are situated side by side in the square type of pod, or one above the other in the oblong pods (usually in two columns).
A problem can arise with the latter type of pod, where the terminals of the batteries used are not very high, and the wrap around casing of the batteries causes the base contact area to be recessed.
When the individual cells are placed end to end, the positive terminal of the lower battery is held away from the base of the upper one.
This gives at best a very light contact, and in some cases none at all.
Watch for this when buying batteries if your machine uses ‘end-to-end’ pods.
This also applies to a few P1 units which take a column of C cells end-to-end.
The advantages in the use of cylinder-type batteries are that such batteries have no snap terminal to splay or fold under, and they have more stamina when used as a group than an  equivalent voltage single PP3.
Disadvantages of penlights are that  these are used in pods or packs and are thus heavier.
A battery pod has also many more contact points than a single PP3, each of which is a potential problem area.
Battery Holders
Battery pods containing groups of AA cells have been used in vast numbers by nearly all detector manufacturers for many years.
Such pods are currently used by Fisher, Tesoro, C-Scope, Compass, White's and many other detector manufacturers.
Battery pods are of two types: square and oblong.
Both types have snap-on terminals used to connect them to a detector in a similar way to a PP3.
Square types usually hold six or eight AA cells and the pods are used in pairs.
Each cell is held in its own compartment by a spring at the base of the pod.
Oblong pods work in a similar way but with two — and sometimes three — AA cells in each compartment.
Most problems that arise are common to both types.
Pods, by design, are fairly flimsy.
If they were made any thicker, they would grip the batteries too tightly to allow the springs to push them against the positive contact.
Pods can also warp, allowing the batteries to slip out of contact, and the contacts themselves are often quite small.
Fatigue is another factor that can effect the pods causing the end plates to bend or crack and lose contact.
As with the PP3, the female terminal can splay.
The springs can also become fatigued and lose their tensile strength.
In a six battery pod there are fourteen points of contact (two on each cell and two more on the pod); failure from any one of these will result in no power.
That's twenty-eight potential problem points on a dual six cell pod detector!
Another problem we have found is that batteries vary in size, particularly nickel-cadmium rechargeables.
These tend to pop out of the oblong types of pods and may not line up with their positive contacts properly.
The advantages of pods, are that they are cheap and easily replaced.
They are sold by many electrical retail outlets, and spares are easy to carry.
The disadvantages are that they are flimsy, and have many potential contact problems.
Battery Packs
These are currently used on some White's and Garrett models, and typically hold four C cells.
They are more substantial than pods and rarely, if ever, crack or warp; however, the spring/contact system is used and springs can become fatigued.
Contact with the detector's power pick up terminals is maintained by pressure from the battery door (no snap on contacts are used).
Two PP3's.
Female terminal of left is crimped, while right is hooked.
Battery Trays
To my knowledge Garrett is the only manufacturer to use multi-battery trays.
These trays take four or six PP3s (depending on the model of detector) which push on to snap terminals in the bottom of the tray.
Each battery is in a separate compartment and the tray slides into the machine on runners; contact is made by a multi-socket pushing on to pins.
Splaying can be a problem on the female terminals in the tray, and a pair of long-nosed pliers are required to cure this.
When installing the tray it is necessary to ensure that it is pushed home firmly and squarely to enable the internal pins to line up.
Some PP3s are bigger than others and are very tight in their compartments.
Trays containing just one PP3 each are used by Rimatron.
The battery is held firmly in the rigid tray which slides and clicks sideways into position.
Internal spring contacts in the detector transfer the power.
AA's in pod installed in a White's metal detector.
The advantage of the Garrett system is that it is a convenient way of handling largish numbers of PP3s.
The disadvantages are that they are  expensive and only available from Garrett outlets.
The trays used by Rimatron are fairly universal and can be found in outlets other than detector retailers.
They are cheap and it is easy to carry spares.
Power Transfer
Terminals and wires are widely used for power transfer by nearly all manufacturers.
Two wires culminate in a snap-on terminal which pushes on to a PP3 or a pod.
Again, the female terminal can splay.
Wires should be treated with care if they are not to break internally.
Eventually they could become brittle with age, but this might take some years.
Terminals must never be removed by pulling on the wires, and loaded pods should never be left hanging outside the detector as the soldered terminal joints may break under the weight.
Terminals need to be tight if good contact is to be maintained, abut if they are very tight they may distort or even break if they are pulled up at one end to remove them.
(I prefer to gently lever them off from the underside with a small screwdriver).
Where pods are used the terminal can be left in place, except when the pod needs replacing.
On board recharging of ni-cads obviates removal altogether.
If a detector is well-used, the wires and/or terminals will eventually need to be replaced.
If the old wires are in good condition the new terminal assembly can be joined on to them, but it may well be better to replace the whole assembly.
This will mean taking the control box apart and some soldering, so it might be a good idea to let your dealer carry out this work; it is not an expensive job.
The drop-in system of battery connection is mainly used by Fisher and Compass.
With this system the batteries, usually PP3s but sometimes AAs in pods, just drop into the detector's battery compartments where they are held against internal contacts by pressure, usually from the battery door.
This is a very convenient system and there not wires to break or terminals to splay.
The pressure must be adequate, however if good contact is to achieved.
If the pressure is too light, contact may become intermittent and energy in the form of heat created.
This heat can cause certain circuit-board components to malfunction or fail altogether.
Rubber panels or inserts on the inside of the battery door are often used to apply the pressure, which is also the case with some packs.
These should be replaced when they lose their resilience.
There are various types of internal contacts, including flat plate, bent spring, and coiled spring.
In the flat plate system there are two contacts, positive and negative.
The plate itself is a small rectangle of metallic material.
Problems can arise if battery or pod terminals are of differing heights (the plate will then tilt when the door is closed leading to bad contact and eventual plate failure).
In the case of the bent spring system, this is a flat piece of metal bent to provide a firm, sprung contact.
It is generally better than the flat plate as each battery or pod terminal mates with its own individual spring.
Unequal height terminals are not a problem with this system.
The coiled spring system is used in Compass Scanners.
This also provided individual contact for each battery or pod terminal.
A problem has arisen with certain PP3s (pods are not normally used with this system) where the female terminal has hooked rather than completely crimped segments.
The hooked segments can get caught in the contact spring.
Drop-in system on Fisher 1225-X.
If you own a detector working from this system you should try to use only batteries with proper crimped terminals.
If this is not possible batteries should not be pulled out as hooked terminal segments may catch the springs and pull them out (ruining the contact and rendering a none-too-cheap dealer repair necessary).
When batteries need to be removed simply tilt the control box and allow them to slide out into your hand.
Any batteries that do not come out should be gently moved from side to side to allow them to unhook.
Deep trying if you do not succeed at first, and then they will eventually come out.
This is a very convenient system, but as well as contact problems electronic ones can arise if pressure is insufficient.
Should they become damaged, replacement is not a DIY job.
Multi Penlight Compartments
With this system large numbers of AA batteries (typically twelve or more) are loaded directly into two compartments located in the underside of the detector's control box.
This system is favoured by Compass on the X-100 these are at each end of columns of AA cells which are held together by the spring pressure.
Teknetics had the same arrangement plus further springs between each ‘top and tail’ of each battery.
The disadvantage of this system is that the AAs can be a bit fiddly to load.
The detector should also never be laid in mud or on wet ground as water may enter the battery compartments.
The plastic springs on the battery doors can break.
Multi-AA battery compartments are not used on current Teknetics machines; they now use PP3s with terminals and wires.
Battery Clamps
The installation of batteries by means of clamps is another system peculiar to Garrett.
A sturdy clamp, removable via a screw holds three PP3s firmly in place on to snap-on terminals on the circuit board.
Batteries are held so firmly that good contact is maintained even if the female terminals splay.
The whole circuit board has to be removed to install batteries and for obvious reasons this should never done in the rain or near wind-blown sea spray.
The advantage of the system is that it is very positive.
However, batteries larger than normal can render the clamp tight to install.
Battery changing is also not very convenient — particularly outdoor.
Internal Holders
Some detectors — Fieldmaster and Pulse Technology for example— do not have separate battery compartments.
The control box has to be unscrewed and its top removed to change the batteries.
A suitable screwdriver thus needs to be carried in case batteries have to be changed in the field.
The advantages are that manufacturing costs (and final retail prices) are kept down marginally, and the batteries are less likely to be affected by damp.
The disadvantages are that  the batteries are inconvenient to change and severe battery leakage can be disastrous to the circuit board.
Corrosion and Damp
To all the above problems must be added two others: corrosion and damp.
If dead batteries are left in a detector they may well leak and cause corrosion; damp will cause pod or pack springs to rust.
Any batteries, pods, packs or trays showing signs of corrosion or rust must be replaced.
A thin smear of Vaseline on all snap-on terminals, and internal spring and pins will help keep corrosion at bay.
If you have to lay your detector up for any length of time remove the batteries.
Batteries will also slowly discharge with time so don't re-use old ones unless a test under load shows them to be okay.
Leaking, discoloured, swollen, rusty or corroded batteries should never be used.
Re-Chargeables
Re-chargeable ni-cad batteries can obviously save you a lot of money.
They start at a slightly lower voltage than ordinary types; also, they do not lose their power gradually, but die very suddenly when they are exhausted.
Compass Scanner battery compartment.
Hooked female terminals can catch
Some detectors have a high power drain and alkalines (or perhaps lithium) only should be used.
Running costs will thus be quite high and ni-cads should be considered.
You may have to carry a spare set if you are going out for a full day's detecting as charge life can be as low as five hours, and ni-cads should not be recharged until they are spent.
Some detectors are supplied with charger and ni-cads as an all-in package.
There are a few detectors where rechargeables are not recommended; in such cases it is best to stick to alkalines.
After a couple of years' use the charger's output may fall slightly.
To ensure you get a full charge, just leave on for a half hour or so longer than normal.
Ni-cads, by the way, should not be left in a discharged state for very long periods.
The advantage of ni-cads is that they will save you a lot of money if used correctly; the disadvantage is that the initial purchase cost is high.
To sum up, check all terminals and contacts for wear, corrosion and splaying regularly.
Do not skimp on batteries, it is a false economy.
Batteries and their method of contact are the heart of any detector…keep 'em clean, tight, and right!
John Castle.
A GUIDE TO Metals and Alloys
Apart from the precious metals of gold, silver and platinum, which are used mostly in jewellery, there are seven base metals that are commonly employed in the making of coins and artefacts.
These are:
Aluminium — from bauxite ore
Copper — from copper pyrites ore
Iron — from haematite/magnetite ore
Lead from galena ore
Nickel — from garnierite ore
Tin — from cassiterite ore
Zinc—from blende/calamine ore
In practical applications it has been found advantageous to alloy base metals one with another.
By varying the combinations and proportions or the ingredients, and by mixing in other additives, it has been possible to ‘tune’ the physical properties of the various alloys to suit the purpose for which they are intended.
So far as modern alloys are concerned, their names (eg ‘copper-nickel’, aluminium-copper’ etc) often indicate the main ingredients.
With the older alloys, however, the descriptions used seem more intended to conceal rather than reveal the ingredients!
Another means of enhancing the qualities of base metals and alloys, at least in regards to surface appearance, is to bond together different metals in a process such as plating.
Again, the finishes may be obvious from the terms used | (eg ‘chromium- plated’, ‘silver plated’ etc).
Once again, however, some metal finishes are not obvious from their names.
The glossary that follows sets out to clarify the names given to both alloys and metal coatings.
Where examples of uses are given, these indicate typical applications only and are not meant to suggest limitations.
Anodisation
A factory process whereby the surface of aluminium is coated with a build-up of aluminium oxide.
This acts as a protective finish, which can also incorporate colouring.
Stainless steel also lends itself to this modern form of finish.
Anodisation is used to protect aluminium components that are likely to be exposed to the elements.
Ashbury Metal
A form of hard pewter made up of tin, zinc and antimony.
Its use in the past included the manufacture of spoons and snuff boxes.
Babbitts Metal
A special form of bronze, having antimony added to the tin and copper constituents.
It is used for making small castings.
Bell Metal
A type of bronze, where the alloy possesses a greater proportion of tin to copper.
This gives the metal special ductile qualities.
Although — as the name suggests — this metal is used for the casting of bells, it is also used for beaten and worked forms.
Brass
A zinc, copper and tin alloy forming a bright yellow metal that responds well be polishing.
It is popular for handles and fittings, besides countless other domestic and industrial applications.
Britannia Metal
An alloy of copper, antimony and tin having an appearance similar to pewter but being much lighter in weight.
It was used as a cheap substitute for pewter and as a base for electroplate finishes.
In the past it was much used for teapots, milk jugs and other forms of tableware.
Bronze
An alloy made up mainly of copper and tin, but with zinc and lead often added.
Its durability makes it suitable for ships' fittings, and its casting qualities make it suitable for sculptures.
(Special bronze alloys such as silicon-bronze and aluminium-bronze contain no tin, but another alloy, manganese- bronze does contain a minute percentage).
Cast Iron
Iron with a high carbon content.
It is weak in tension but very hard.
It is used in domestic castings — such as fireplaces — often with intricate ornamentation.
Cock Metal
A general term for cheap, soft alloys usually lead or copper based and used for simple castings.
Electroplate
The process of applying a thin coating of silver or other metal upon a nickel or copper base.
It is an electrolytic deposit technique, and the process has come to supersede Sheffield plating.
Galvanised Steel
This is a zinc coating applied to steel for rust protection.
Originally this was achieved by dipping, but electroplating is now the general means used.
Sherardising is another form of zinc coating, but this is brought about through a diffusing process.
German Silver
An alloy of copper, zinc and nickel used to imitate silver (but it is more grey in colour).
This alloy is also known as ‘nickel silver’ or ‘white silver’.
In the past this metal was often used for tableware and as a base for electroplating.
Gilded Finish
Gilding is a process of overlaying a base metal with a very thin layer of gold.
In the past this was achieved by ‘mercury gilding’(using an amalgam of gold and mercury) but modern processes employ electroplating.
Gun Metal
A copper based alloy including tin which was originally used for casting cannons.
In more recent times zinc and lead have been added and the alloy used for bearings and steam fittings.
Latten
An obsolete brass type of alloy, consisting of copper, zinc and silicate.
When used it was hammered or battered into sheets (hence the fact that it is sometimes referred to as ‘battered brass’).
This metal will be of particular interest to readers as early horse brasses were cut from it.
Ley
Pewter with a high lead content unsuitably used in the past for food vessels (!).
It is also known as ‘Test Pewter’ or ‘Laclaire étoffe.
Paktong
A similar alloy to German Silver but with ingredients of different proportions, which tended to give the metal a more yellow colour.
The alloy is Chinese in origin, and its most noted use is in the making of ornamental hinges.
Paris Bronze
An alloy of copper, zinc and lead forming a pinkish-looking brass.
Used mainly for making trinkets.
Pewter
A tin-based alloy mixed with copper and antimony, originally having a lead content.
Lead is omitted from modern pewter which is often termed ‘English Pewter’.
Used for tableware in the past, pewter is now probably best known in the form of drinking tankards.
Phosphor Bronze
Copper and tin alloyed with phosphorus.
It is non-magnetic and used industrially in electrical mechanism as well as for bearings.
Pinchbeck
An alloy of copper and zinc, used as an imitation of gold in jewellery.
Princes Metal
An alloy of copper and zinc, which after chemical treatment and burnishing, has a gilt-like appearance.
Used for furnishing mounts, and sometimes described by its full name of ‘Prince Rupert's Metal’.
Sheffield Plate
A technique whereby a thin skin of silver was rolled under pressure and heat to cause it to fuse onto a copper sheet base.
It was used to produce a cheaper form of tableware than solid silver.
The process has been superseded by electroplating.
Spelter
Low grade type of pewter comprising zinc and lead.
It was used for casting small, quite intricate sculpture pieces and often finished to imitate bronze.
Stainless Steel
This was not invented until 1913 and in its early simple form consisted of steel with a chromium content: this made the alloy highly resistant to corrosion.
Besides its industrial uses, the metal has been readily adopted for tableware.
Steel
Steel is basically an alloy of iron and carbon, but various additives may be introduced to enhance particular functional qualities.
The metal is widely used for implements and structural components.
Tin Plate
This is steel sheet with a thin coating of tin fused to its surface, thereby combining the strength of steel and the corrosion resistance of tin.
So-called ‘tins’ are made in this way, and are not composed of tin itself.
Tool Steel
Steel with tungsten included in the alloy to impart the ability to cut hard materials at high speed.
It came into use around the turn of the century.
Tunenag
A similar alloy to Paktong, but originating in India.
White Iron
A form of cast iron where the carbon is in cementite form; the metal has a silvery-white finish and is highly resistant to abrasion.
One of its main uses was the making of plough shares and other farm implements.
White Metal
A generic term for various silver-coloured alloys, usually comprising zinc and lead.
It is a term often used in the description of military medals and badges.
Wrought Iron
Iron possessing a very low carbon content, which makes it tough and malleable.
The metal is much used for decorative ironwork.
Yellow Metal
A generic term for unidentified brass-coloured alloys.
Zamac
An alloy of zinc and lead used for cheap castings and chased work.
It patinates to give an appearance like bronze.
Dennis Blair   
YOUNGSTERS START HERE
Pete Watson
Next time you walk down the High Street in your home town, or the main shopping street of your region's biggest city, stop at every telephone box you see.
Then, have a quick look at the floor area in — and immediately surrounding — the kiosk.
A sharp eyed youngster should have no difficulty in spotting the loose change, that so often litter such areas.
Until recently, 1p coins topped the league when it came to money lost in or near telephone boxes.
Since the introduction of those fiddly little 5p's the position has changed and 1p's now take second place.
Alongside 1p's and 5p's you will come across plenty of 2p's and that still leaves the occasional one-pounder lurking amongst the litter.
I have called your attention to telephone boxes because the money lost in their vicinity remains visible…at least until the next British Telecom cleaner or council sweeper comes along.
Once you own a detector, however, you can start to take an interest in invisible losses…losses that can only be found by detector owners.
These lie in the soil — entangled in grass roots, beneath fallen leaves, under snow, or covered by sand — in vast quantities.
People lose money from pockets, purses, wallets and handbags in such large amounts that their carelessness with coins actually has an effect on the profitability of the Royal Mint.
One of the main reasons why new halfpennies went out of use was that too many were lost.
The Royal Mint simply could not afford to replace them.
Losses of the one pound coin during its year of introduction were also alarmingly high, although people have now begun to take better care of them.
Nevertheless, one pound coins are still lost at a rate of tens of thousands per year.
Add to that all the lost 50p's, 20p's, 10p's and so on, and they add up to enough to make buying a metal detector for the sole purpose of finding spendable cash a very profitable investment.
Modern metal detectors are extremely good at finding such losses.
So good that, providing you take it to the right places and use it expertly, you should have no difficulty in doubling your pocketmoney every week .
Let me give you a few tips on how to make your pockets bulge…
Leaving aside the money that people drop in the street (or when making telephone calls) here is a list of the top five places where coin losses occur
1
Beaches
2
Recreation grounds and parks
3
School playing fields
4
Riverside and lakeside fishing areas
5
Grassy slopes used as back-rests while picnicking.
Viking I, a good first machine
If you take your detector to these areas regularly you will soon be in the money.
You must, of course, know how to tune and operate the detector correctly before you embark on your first search.
You must also have some knowledge about exactly where people lose their money when they visit the five places listed above.
Practice at home, preferably in your back garden or on a patch of waste grass nearby your house, until you can tune in and use your detector as explained in the operating instructions.
Bury a 5p, 10p, 50p and one pound coin an inch or two below ground, and then locate them with your machine.
Notice that each coin makes a slightly different sound.
Try to tune your ear so that it can distinguish between noises heard in your headphones.
When you know you have located a one pound coin before you dig it up, you can call yourself an expert detectorist.
As you become more experienced you will begin to appreciate that a coin can in fact sound slightly different when detected in varying types of ground.
Whenever you go to a new site, start your search by burying a couple of coins and reminding yourself of the different note each one makes in your headphones.
It takes only a few minutes to carry out this simple exercise, but it will greatly improve your ability to recognise genuinely lost coins when your search head passes over them.
Gaining knowledge about exactly where people lose their money is called research.
To obtain that information you need do little more than watch people.
When you go to a seaside resort, spend an hour or two walking along the beach without your detector.
Notice how people gather at certain spots: they crowd the sand at the foot of the steps leading from the promenade; and they gather in groups near the places where deck-chairs are hired, where icecreams are sold, or where swings and roundabouts occupy pitches on the beach.
Memorise the locations where you spot the crowds or better still, make a few written notes.
Those are the places where you will find most of the lost money.
If you do your searches during the evening when the crowds have departed you will be able to sweep the head of your detector over the very spots where people dropped their cash.
In recreation grounds the patches of well-worn grass close to the swings and roundabouts will hold the most money.
However, your observations will show that while kids play on these spots their parents (who have more coins to lose) usually sit some distance away.
On playing fields, the perimeters of football and other pitches will hold plenty of money, but observe how much thicker the supporters gather around goal-mouths.
If a field has a wooden hut where teams change into their kit you will certainly find plenty of lost coins around it; money drops from pockets when players carry their clothes carelessly in and out of the hut.
All detectorist know how rich in losses the banks of rivers and the edges of ponds can be.
Anglers always seem to carry large amounts of equipment.
They become so engrossed in looking after it, or in trying to hook fishes, that they often fail to notice when money spills from their pockets.
Spend a day watching anglers enjoying their hobby.
Make notes on the spots along the riverbank, or the edges of fishing ponds, where they choose to sit down.
When they go home you can get on with some electronic angling with your detector.
Carry out researches and observations wherever you spot grassy slopes and lots of people sitting them to enjoy picnics.
Sweep your detector over the ground at the foot of those slopes.
It will soon give a ‘bleep’ to let you know that it has added another con to your growing pile, another contribution to that bulging pocket that will soon hold your double helping of pocketmoney…
Pete Watson.
LONE STAR STATE OF THE ART
In the foyer of Washington DC's Space and Aviation Museum visitors will see on display a slice of grey volcanic rock polished smooth by the caresses of countless thousands of admiring fingers.
I saw this piece of rock back in 1986 when I went to America with Gerald Costello for the NCMD to help set up the World Council for Metal Detecting.
At the time little did either of us realise the historical importance of this ‘pebble’ in its relation to the modern metal detector.
The fact that the sample was on display at all, bore silent testimony to the success of the most expensive and profound voyage ever to be undertaken by man.
Although it is Neil Armstrong who will be forever immortalised in the history books, his ‘One small step for a man, one giant leap for Mankind’ represented just the tip of a huge pyramid of courage, research and dedication by the foremost scientific brainpower the human race has ever mustered.
All of this was to conquer one single problem: to put Armstrong safely on to the Sea of  Tranquillity , and to get him (along with that sliver of lunar rock) safely back to Earth.
On the periphery of the Lunar landing operation itself, Armstrong was required to carry out a series of tests and experiments.
One of these was to ‘plant’ a  seismic amplifier, a gadget that would monitor and transmit back to Earth precise details of lunar tremors.
This information has significantly increased man's knowledge of the lunar environment.
Charles Garrett gold prospecting with the Grand Master Hunt CXII
Twenty-five years ago, that team of scientists and electronics engineers charged with the awesome task of producing such a piece of equipment, included a thirty-seven year old Texan electronics engineer, whose star was rapidly rising in another quarter.
In a backyard shack in a Dallas suburb, and outside of normal working hours, he was turning out custom-built metal detectors that were of such advanced design for their day, that they wee superior to many of the commercially available machines of the time.
The electronic engineer's name was Charles Garrett.
A quarter of a century on, that once obscure yet brilliant engineer now heads one of the world's foremost electronics companies specialising in the production of commercial and industrial metal detection equipment.
Metal detectors designed especially for the professional and hobbyist markets represent just a tiny fraction of the Garrett electronics empire, but it is in this latter sphere that the Garrett name comes to life.
There is hardly a treasure hunter anywhere in the world who has not heard of Charles Garrett, read at least one of his numerous books on the subject, or at one time or another used one of his metal detectors.
Biography
But what of the man?
What do we know about the life and times of the man whose steel-rimmed spectacles and well-trimmed beard have become just as much of a trade mark as the well-known company logo?
The son of a furniture and domestic appliance merchant, Charles Garrett was born on 1 April 1932 in the small Texas town of Lufkin.
His early childhood was unremarkable, and his education followed the usual well-worn path of youngsters struggling to adulthood in the austere days of the depressed ‘30s: local authority primary education then the progression to High School.
Unlike the case with many of his schoolday contemporaries, however, it was soon apparent to his tutors that the young Garrett possessed a sharp and inquisitive mind and, given one or two of life's lucky breaks, the young millionaire- in-waiting would one day become a millionaire-in-fact.
The first step to fame and fortune came at the age of twelve, in an incident that was to prove to have a profound effect.
In an aunt's loft he happened to chance across what he regards as his first hoard: a collection of dust-covered National Geographic magazines.
In one of these dusty tomes he read in wonderment of the treasures of Tutenkamen and it was this that ignited in young Garrett a fire of enthusiasm for treasure hunting  that still burns strongly today.
Following graduation from Lufkin High School, Garrett was enlisted in to the US Navy for the duration of the Korean conflict.
Following demobilisation, he opted for a period of higher education at Lamar University in Beaumont.
There, his quick and brilliant mind gained him a degree in electrical engineering and a well defined career path with the Texas Instruments and Teledyne Geotech companies, with whom he was to make his not inconsiderable input to NASA's Apollo Space Programme.
Spare time
Even though Garrett was totally immersed in his work for the NASA Space Programme the treasure hunting flame still flickered.
In what spare time he had, Garrett put his electronics experience into the building of metal detectors for use in treasure hunting.
Gradually, Garrett's home manufactured machines began to be noticed by his peer group of treasure hunters.
Word spread that he was producing custom-build detectors able to meet the most demanding requirements, and the foundations of the Garrett legend had been laid.
The point came where Garrett could no longer produce enough detectors to meet the demand without setting up his own production line.
To do this he had to resign from Teledyne Geotech, but their loss was treasure hunting's gain.
Hand of Faith  nugget , gold pan top left is 10½ in in diameter
The embryo Garrett company was a far cry from the high-tec complex in Garland today.
It was what he describes as: ‘A boot strap company.
That is, we pulled ourselves up by our own boot straps!’
The small amount of finance used to set up the company came from Garrett's personal savings.
The first detectors he says were ‘Made literally on a garage workbench’.
Underwater treasure hunting with the XL500 pulse induction unit
Garrett's decision to set up in the business of metal detector manufacture was a brave one for there were in his immediate locale several rival ‘cottage industries’ vying to capture a share of the young and burgeoning market.
A major part of his success — besides making a good detector — can be put down to his own strength of character, and a deep and lasting commitment to the Christian ethic.
Throughout his life Charles Garrett has remained a God- fearing man with a strongly held yet straightforward attitude to life.
He believes ‘That all individuals should be considered to be good, worthwhile and honest until he or she proves to the contrary’, It is a sentiment that still today remains his guiding light, and he would add that ‘All things are possible through God’.
Garrett has become, through his many books, writings, honours and personal appearances an unofficial spokesman for the treasure hobby in the United States.
He is respected and kept at arms- length by those academics having a vested interest in the heritage circus, many of whom have displayed a less-than-equal intellect and an ability to shoot themselves and their often spurious causes in the foot!.
Garrett's attitude to  archaeology and archaeologists is uncompromising if the following is anything to go by…
‘Certainly, hobby and professional treasure hunting is compatible with the ethics of archaeology.
In fact, the long range future of our hobby demands that we recognise this compatibility and work to prove that it exists.’
While the Council for British Archaeology's Philip Thatz stated in an honest but politically inept way what treasure hunters have been saying for years that…
‘Archaeology needs treasure hunting more than treasure hunting needs archaeology’, Garrett is more cautious, stating that archaeology does indeed need ‘us’ but that…
‘This is difficult to prove, and most archaeologists appear to be totally blind to the advantages that can be accorded to them through the effective and proper use of the metal detector’.
He is less than adulatory of the Smithsonian Institute, the American opposite number of the British Museum.
Garrett states…
‘Certainly its aims are noble, but it is a large institution with vast hoards of treasures that will probably never be shown to the public.
Any hobbyist or treasure hunter should think carefully before donating a find to this institution; that is if the treasure hunter wishes the treasure to be displayed’.
Today the Garrett manufacturing vase shows the company to have come a long way from the first detectors built on the garage bench.
The detectors are now designed and constructed in a high- tec purpose-built 15,000 sq ft complex in Garland, a suburb of Dallas, Texas.
At this factory an immense research and development programme is headed by electronics wizard Bob Podhrasky, and in recent years more than $3 million has been pumped into the never ending pursuit of treasure hunting's Holy Grail…the ‘perfect’ machine.
US Patents records show that the Garrett company holds a host of ‘firsts’ in the design and manufacture of metal detectors, notably with the use of microprocessor technology in the vanguard of modern production techniques.
Famous finds made by the use of Garrett machines include the ‘Hand of Faith’ nugget uncovered from an Australian goldfield; and the Middleham Jewel a pendant that once belonged to Richard III.
Underwater successes include the fabulous treasures from the Atocha , a Spanish treasure galleon wrecked off the Florida Keys.
These were recovered by treasure diver Mel Fisher and his team, using in part the Garrett XL 500 pulse induction metal detector.
Gruelling schedule
Charles Garrett today, enjoys a life that would be the envy of most treasure hunters the world over: using his own products he prospects worldwide for treasure.
He has searched for and found treasure.
He has searched for and found treasure on every continent (except Antarctica), and he has dived for treasure in every ocean.
All of this is with the avowed intent of improving his company's products.
In his gruelling work schedule, sixty-year old Garrett continues at a rate that would tax many men half his age.
His ambitious filming programme for the popular ‘Treasure Video’ series continues, alongside an equally ambitious timetable of writing.
His previous books have become classics and have been read by countless thousands.
John Howland   
Club Round-Up
Newtownabbey & District MDC AGM
On 20 January 1992, the Newtownabbey and District Metal Detecting Club held its AGM.
The following members were elected to the Committee.
Chairman — B Blair, Secretary — A. Glass,.
The venue for meetings is now .
Club meetings are held on the third Monday of the month at 7.30pm.
The Newtownabbey Club is soon to hold its first major yearly rally.
All members of the metal detecting fraternity — novice or experienced — are welcome to attend.
The rally is to be held at  on Saturday 27 June 1992 at 12 noon.
For more information on this event please contact the Secretary of the club.
Finally, attention all detector owners in Northern Ireland.
If you are looking for new sites and new friends please come down and attend one of our meetings.
We wold like to make it clear that we welcome new members from both sides of our community.
Alan Glass
Ipswich & District Detector Club
At the February meeting Chris Mattson came along to present his superb talk and slides illustrating the First World War.
The artefact Find of the Month competition was won by Dave Cummings with his cast bronze arrow head c1000 BC.
This is a rare item as flint was still generally used at this period for such ‘high risk’ use Coin of the Month was a superb silver hammered Spanish coin of Ferdinand and Isabella (1476–1516).
The results of the Annual Club Find of the Year Awards were as follows: Best medieval coin — Reg Wiggins with a Henry VII gold angel.
Best Saxon Coin — Derrick Palmer with an Anglo-Saxon sceat.
Best Roman Coin — Mick Seager with a silver denari of Plautilla.
Best Iron Age coin — Terry Marsh with a North Thames silver stater.
The results of Club Detectorist of the Year were 1st Mick Seager with 139 points 2nd John Goodall with 90 points 3rd Martin Brunt with 83 points.
Chris Behn
Bloxwich RAMD Club
The sixteenth AGM of the Bloxwich Research & Metal Detecting Club took place on 28 January  at the Royal Naval Association Club,.
The weather prevented many members from attending, but forty-five people did manage to make their way through the fog.
In his report, the Chairman Reg Simmons thanked the retiring committee for all the work they had done.
The Secretary, Liz Tildesley, was leaving the club as a result of work commitments; and the Treasurer, Alan Pedley, would not be standing again after having been in the post for six years.
Many members were concerned that the Sunday club searches had become too crowded, and club membership has now been limited to 75 people.
The new committee to serve for the next two years was elected and is Chairman — Reg Simmons, Vice-Chairman — Ian Johnson, Secretary — Sheila Hamson, and Treasurer — Phil Johnson.
Ian Johnson presented the ‘Coin of the Month’, ‘Artefact of the Month’ and ‘Detectorist of the Year’trophies all of which went to Colin Pearson.
During 1991 there had been over 300 finds entered into the by twenty-six members.
The photograph shows Colin Pearson with one of his finds, an  officer's shako plate of The Kings Own Staffordshire Militia (1812–16).
The Club has several outings and talks lined up for 1992.
The new Secretary is Mrs Sheila Hamson,.
Meeting are on the last Tuesday of the month at 8pm.
Ian Johnson
Cleveland Discoverers MD Group AGM
At the AGM of the Cleveland Discoverers Metal Detection Group the following officers were re-elected by popular demand from the floor: Chairman — G. Fletcher, Treasurer — R Bowes, and Secretary — K Dalton.
Find of the Year was won by Malcolm Price.
We are a family club with good membership and have been long active; our first club meeting, in fact, goes back to November 1977.
Ken Dalton
Bambridge MDC Annual Rally
The Bambridge and District Metal Detecting Club are holding their annual rally on Sunday 3 May 1992 in the scenic setting of Gosford Forest Park, Markethill, Co Armagh.
The park has caravan and camping sites available for visitors but you need to book as it is a Bank Holiday weekend .
The Rally will start at 11am and should be a really enjoyable day for detectorists from all over Ireland and any visitors from the mainland.
For more information on the rally, contact Club Secretary Fred Owens .
Colin  Pearson with his  officer's shako plate, 18812–16
At the Club's AGM in January, Colin Reddick was elected Chairman for the year.
Colin is a regular visitor at most of the English rallies and we look forward to an interesting year under his leadership.
Fred Owens was re-elected Secretary and Hugh Young holds the money for another year, having been re-elected treasurer.
Hucclecote Rally Cancelled
The Hucclecote Metal Detecting Club of Gloucester apologises that the Hucclecote Rally, has been cancelled due to circumstances beyond their control.
The Rally was due to be held on 11 and 12 July 1992.
S.T.A.R.T.
National Rally
The START National Rally is to be held at Lower Box Hill Farm, Old Reigate Road, just off the A25 near to Dorking, Surrey on 23 and 24 May 1992.
The Rally site is beneath the shadow of Box Hill, has the River Mole flanking part of the site, and is near the remains of Bletchworth Castle.
The site is approachable from the  Bletchworth roundabout coming from Reigate, or the Dorking roundabout from the other direction.
The weekend is planned so that the free search will take place on the Saturday; this will give people who are travelling long distances plenty of time to settle in.
In the evening a fun event will be held to get into the swing of things.
The main competitions will be held on the Sunday together with a free  children's event.
Regarding fees, pre-booking is available at £12.50 per adult and £6.00 per child up to twelve years old.
On arrival, booking is £15.00 per adult and £8.00 per child (the fees for children only apply if they wish to take part in the main competitions.
For advance bookings apply to:(cheques should be made payable to E G Lake).
Further information is available by phoning .
Overnight camping is available at £2.00 per night per unit, with all the usual facilities.
There will be trade stands, displays, and one or two surprises.
This is going to be a great rally so why not come and join us?
Ted Lake
Chesterfield Club — Change of Venue
The Chesterfield Metal Detecting Club has recently changed venue.
Meetings, held at 7.30pm on the first Monday of the month, now take place in a private room at the New Inn, Winsick, Nr.
Hasland, Chesterfield.
However, readers are advised to phone the Club Secretary on  before a long journey to check on meeting and/or speakers etc.
If any detectorist would like to be considered for membership contact Paul Vann,.
Rose Attridge and the hoard she found
Herts and District MDS
We are able to look forward to pastures new this year thanks to our Sites Officer Tony Message who has been adding new farmland to our club's existing search areas.
This was announced at our February meeting and was met with great approval from the fifty or so members present.
The first place in Coin of the Month was taken by Dave Chalk with a silver denarius of Hadrian.
First place in Artefact of the Month went to Miriam Hammond with her 14th century buckle.
Looking to the future we hope to have news of a guest speaker or two for the early part of the summer and also the club intends to have some representation at the Hertfordshire Show.
David Roberts
Tudor Purse Hoard
The illustrations show a small hoard of silver coins consisting of one Elizabeth and four Mary groats that I found near Bridgewater, Somerset.
At the time I was out detecting with the Weston Historical Research and Detecting Association, of which I am a member.
The coins were found in a fairly straight line, indicating that they may have fallen from a torn purse.
I reported the find to the landowner and then the Coroner, and subsequently an inquest was held on 13 December 1991.
The Coroner complimented me on my prompt reporting of the find, and after a short deliberation declared them not to be Treasure Trove and handed them back to me.
I contacted the landowner immediately after the inquest to inform him of the result and gave him three coins, one for each of his sons.
Rose Attridge
Secret Collections Go Public
Museums and art galleries across the Midlands will soon be filled with obscure, bizarre and colourful collections of objects amassed by ordinary people.
‘The Peoples Show Festival’ will feature over 200 individual collections of tens of thousands of items.
These range from pianos, plastic bags, pigs and all things purple, to James Bond, Marilyn Monroe, Lego models, and the Beano.
The idea for the Peoples Show was born in Walsall in 1989.
The town's Museum and Art Gallery decided to invite the people of Walsall to display their own collections and were overwhelmed by the response.
From hundreds of applicants sixty-four people aged from six to eighty were chosen to take part in the show, displaying over 16,000 items from Madonna memorabilia to international airline sickness bags!
The show attracted over 10,000 visitors in seven weeks, and became one of the town's most successful ever exhibitions.
Peter Jenkinson, Head of Walsall's Museums and Art Galleries commented: ‘When we launched the first show three years ago, we were amazed at the amount of secret collectors we discovered behind ordinary  people's front doors.
It was also surprising to see the incredible range of items that they collect’
‘We realised that the whole psychology of collecting is a fascinating area and that it had a lot more potential…hence the reason for the Festival.
In fact, we believe the concept is so popular that it may soon become a national, or even international event’.
STOP PRESS…
Charity Treasure Hunt
A Charity Treasure Hunt in aid of the  Alzheimer's Disease Society is to be held at Lyde Green Farm, Rotherwick, Nr Basingstoke, Hants on 5 April 1992, starting at 10am.
For full details telephone:(day) or  (24 hours).
Yorkshire Federation Rally
Incorrect Date
In the March 1992 issue of Treasure Hunting the date given for the Yorkshire Federation Rally was 12 and 13 September.
Please note that this date is incorrect.
The Rally will be held on the weekend 19 and 20 September 1992.
For details contact Trevor Austin on .
CIRCLES OF TIME: Part Five
At the end of the last article I promised a visit to Wales, to see whether the same geometric patterns existed in that part of the country.
However, since finishing last month's article, several new and exciting happenstances have arisen concerning the Wiltshire circles.
These promise to be of such importance that I shall briefly relate them here, before journeying north.
To recap on the last article, the hypothesis of a pair of interlocking circles existing near the Vale of Pewsey in Wiltshire was proved using the standard methods outlined in parts one and two of this series.
A diagram of the circles (see Fig 1) shows two interlocking circles constructing ‘Vesica Piscis’ elliptical shape where they overlap.
A line constructed through the centres of the two circles cuts the left hand circle at Bishops Cannings and I must admit that at the time I did the preparation for the article thought little more about this point.
However, whilst searching through various books in my library, I chanced upon my copy of Folklore, Myths and Legends of Britain and wondered if there were anything mentioned about the Silbury Hill area that I had been writing about.
I thumbed through the book and was confronted on page 157 by a photograph of a wrought iron replica of the diagram laid out across the Wiltshire Downs.
It was a picture of the Chalice Well cover at Glastonbury, the legendary resting place of the Holy Grail.
The cover, made of wrought iron, depicts two interlocking circles joined through their axis by a straight piece of iron.
Now although I am a born sceptic, suddenly being brought face to face with a seemingly identical facsimile of what I had been working on did make me pause for a few moments!
Of course, I realised that it was an example of pure coincidence and that there could be nothing more to it.
Nevertheless, it was worth checking.
A series of brief telephone calls put me in touch with the keeper of the Chalice Well at Glastonbury who was able to give me chapter and verse on the well cover.
He destroyed my dreams in his first sentence by assuring me that the current wrought iron well cover only dated to the beginning of this century.
Fig 1:The Wiltshire Circles of Time showing the principal positions and the axis joining Bishops Cannings church with the  tumuli , West Dennett long barrow, standing stone and the centres of the West Overton and Ogbourne St Andrew circles.
Note also the line through the widened Vesica Piscis intersection ‘A’ & ‘B’which lies at the ‘root 2 × radius’distance from Bishops Cannings church, assuming that the radius = 1 unit
His second sentence, however, rekindled the dream, for it transpires that the ironwork was designed by a certain Mr Bligh- Bone, who amongst other achievements is credited with the rediscovery of the abbey at Glastonbury.
He was employed by the Church of England as a church architect and was later dismissed by them because of his esoteric interest in Paganism and the occult.
Suddenly, Mr Bligh-Bond had become a more interesting character.
Had he, I wondered, based his design for the Chalice Well cover on an earlier cover?
Was there a special link between Glastonbury and the design of two interlocking circles?
There were several possibilities — amongst them, reading through the several books Mr Bligh-Bond wrote on the subject of church architecture, Paganism and the occult.
My next call was to a local Somerset newspaper, where I spoke to a gentleman about the subject of the Chalice Well cover.
He stated that it had only been made some fifteen to twenty years ago by, of all people, his uncle.
So there could be no significance to it whatsoever.
I didn't press him on the question of where the design had originated from, for his ready answer was ‘off the top of my uncle's head’.
I decided to rest those particular enquiries until at least I had perused Bligh-Bond's weighty tomes.
A day later, my copy of the R.I.L.K.O. journal fluttered through the letter box (a publication dedicated to research into lost areas of  knowledge).
Although the substance of the issue contained little of specific interest to me, I was surprised by some thing in the letters section from a Mr Paull of Clapham.
He related the story of his visit last year to the crop circles at Alton Barnes.
Now Alton Barnes is situated inside one of the Wiltshire circles.
It was the home last year of the most famous crop circle complex of them at all— the series of circles interconnected by straight pathways and curious ‘key’ -shaped elements as featured in the newspapers around the world.
I had visited it last year out of curiosity.
Fig 2: Diagram showing the alignment of the axis of the Wiltshire Circles of Time.
Note that even without the exact position of the original markers being known, the line from Bishops Cannings church through the WKLB and the centres varies by less than  of a degree.
One of Mr Paull's interests is dowsing and after a visit to the famous crop circle, he returned home with samples of the cereal from inside and outside the circle.
He also took a small stone from the centre of the strange formation, and shortly after his return home, he attended a meeting with other dowsers and suggested that it might be interesting to dowse the crop circle samples.
Whilst they achieved no reaction at all from the cereal taken from outside the phenomena, that from inside the circle and the stone gave three clockwise gyrations on the pendulum followed by three anti-clockwise.
Mr Paull and his colleagues regarded this as very strange indeed.
He commented that it was a result ‘very similar to the reaction which I have found with water from the Chalice Well at Glastonbury ’
Now when I stumble across two written connections in several days linking the Wiltshire circles with the Chalice Well, my scepticism goes into overdrive.
With coincidence being stretched a little too far, I decided to recheck my work to see if I had missed the obvious.
The circles were there, perfectly.
My notes showed the mathematical and geometrical proofs.
As the line that seemingly connects the two circle centres needed close scrutiny, I went back to the 1:25,000 scale maps or the area and laid a straight edge along the apparent intersection.
What I saw was staggering for the line which passed through those three points apparently intersected three others—a standing stone, just off the Marlborough Road, a bi-section of two round barrows — the line passed cleanly through the narrow gap between them, and finally the most important of all — the west end of the West Kennet long barrow.
Anyone delving into the local archaeology and history of the West Kennet long barrow will quickly discover that it is one of the largest ever discovered and also one of the best-preserved Neolithic burial chambers in Britain.
Archaeologists date it to 3,700 years BC and while its excavated eastern end is open to the public, its western end has always remained closed.
Its length is approximately 100 metres and whilst if the axis had run through any part of its length I would have shrugged it off as coincidence again, the fact that it intersects the relatively tiny west end of the barrow suggests a high degree of precision alignment.
I realised that I was in danger of being fooled by the maps.
After all, they were susceptible to stretch and shrinkage and what looked to be a perfect alignment might just as easily evaporate using more precise calculations.
I returned once more to my geometry books.
First, I needed to know whether the axis running through the circle centres continued to the church at Bishops Cannings.
These three points were the bedrock of the idea of the axis connecting the three points and if they didn't hold up, the other targets would fall by the wayside.
Fortunately the maths for this is quite simple.
I already had the grid coordinates for both circles and centres and Bishops Cannings church.
They are as follows: Table A 
Don't be put off by the two sets of coordinates.
The Ordnance Survey grid references relate to the maps, with the grid lines 1 kilometre apart.
The second set also relate to a 1-kilometre grid drawn to cover a larger area than the map so as to be able to extend the axis line fully.
The important point here is to remember that this grid has a central point located at 30,80.
Everything right of 30, east grid  line is positive whilst every left of the 30 line is negative.
Likewise, everything above the 80 northing is positive, whilst everything below is negative.
Remember, these calibrations of positive and negative values are necessary for the maths to work!
What I intended to test was quite simple.
When using the drawn grid the line running from Bishops Cannings church through the centres of the two circles makes an angle with any of the horizontal lines of the grid.
If the left hand end of the line is fixed by the co-ordinates of Bishops Cannings church, then the angle it makes with its horizontal base assumes a value, which we shall call angle ‘a’.
Drawing a line from the Bishops Cannings church co-ordinates to each of the salient points of the line and comparing the angles of each of them will tell us if they were linked by a straight line of not.
If the end of the line is fixed and the angles remain the same, then the conclusion can be made that a straight line links the various points.
This would be a very impressive ‘proof’ because the centres of the circles concerned exist only by reason of calculation.
We have no way of knowing whether any physical marker once stood there.
Below is the equation for calculation a straight line: where ‘Y’ and ‘X’are calibrations of the respective axes, where ‘M’is the angle or value of slope and ‘C’is the constant where the line cuts across the ‘Y’axis, Using a small programmable pocket calculator, the X and Y coordinates of each end of the line are entered into the equation below.
X1, Y1, represent one point and X2, Y2 the other point.
and 
With the West Overton centre (X1, Y1) being represented by — 17.75, -11.27 and the Ogbourne centre (X2, Y2) being represented by — 10.71, -7.56, applying the first formula,(formula A )
Now if we replace the West Overton coordinates with those of Bishops Cannings church and recalculate our slope value, and if it is the same as that between the centres and has the same starting point, then a line joining the centres will have been proved to extend through to Bishops Cannings church.
Therefore, with the Ogbourne X1 and Y1 coordinates of –10,71,— 7.56 and Bishops Cannings X2 and Y2 are -26.225, -15.82.
Applying the formula  gives us (formula B )
If we compare the two slopes then the line from circle centre to circle centre has a slope of 27.789 degrees whilst that from the Ogbourne centre to Bishops Cannings church is 27.74 degrees, less than  of a degree of arc.
Now although this is a small error, it does amount to 14 metres over a range of 17.57 kilometres, the distance from Bishops Cannings church to the Ogbourne St Andrew circle centre.
We should remember also at this stage that the circles themselves are the result of extrapolated figures which also have an error of ±0.5% which in real terms is within ±47 metres.
What I needed were points on the line which exist rather than those which are only theoretical.
A check on the map showed that the axis when projected north east terminated in a church at Didcot some 54 kilometres distant from the church at Bishops Cannings.
I would surely settle for an error of  of a degree at that distance.
Didcot X1, Y1 coordinates are 21.76,9.845, Bishops Cannings are -26.225, -15.72.
Once again the formula was applied giving a slope value of 0.5327706575.
Reciprocal tan gives the angle as 28.047 degrees, which differs from the Bishops Cannings to Ogbourne angle by only 0.307 degrees.
This possibly indicates that the alignment was intentionally placed over the countryside from the church at Bishops Cannings to the one at Didcot some 54 kilometres away.
However, as Didcot church is no more a precise point than the Bishops Cannings church, the case for a precise alignment must remain unproven.
In comparison the other points on the line gave the following results (Table B )
A line taken between the theoretical centres of the West Overton centre and the one at Ogbourne St Andrew produces a straight line link (perhaps a ley line) that unites the centres with the north west corner stone of the West Kennet long barrow.
The three points on this line lie within  of a degree and the line extends to the church at Bishops Cannings with a better than ⅛ degree accuracy.
Bearing in mind that we can possibly never be sure of the exact positions of the original markers, calculations using the evidence we do have shows a remarkable accuracy within the error parameters imposed by the geometry.
It surely cannot be thought coincidental that these precise geometric patterns have been set out in the Wiltshire countryside.
But before we leave Wiltshire, the geometry has one last surprise in store.
Earlier, it was stated that the two circles cross each other in the shape of the ‘Vesica Piscis’ of sacred geometry, but that for this to be perfect, the radius of the second circle is marked out from the perimeter of the first circle at the same radius.
This is not so with the Wiltshire circles.
They are not just out as if an error had been made, but the centres are displaced by something like 3 kilometres.
With the symmetry of the rest of the geometry we can only assume this to be from choice rather than from the limitations of the designers' technology.
There has to be a reason for it and I believe the answer lies in the ‘widened’, unorthodox ‘Vesica Piscis’, for by drawing a line through the north and south intersections (see Fig 1) and comparing the distance from the westernmost point of the West Overton circle (conveniently marked by Bishops Cannings church) to the point where the line crosses the axis of the centres.
It has a precise value.
And that value is 1.414 × the radius.
In other words it represents the square root of 2 — the problem that so worried the Greeks because its answer was an irrational number!
And so to pastures new…and the small town of Gresford which lies near the Welsh border close to Wrexham.
It is an area I do not know and the reason for choosing it came from a close friend who has put up with the knowledge of my obsession for many years now and still remains the closest of friends.
A few months ago she sent me a letter, informing me that during a recent visit to All Saints church, Gresford, she had discovered that the church contained a standing stone.
That item of news is of great interest to me, for if true, it must be one of the few surviving examples of how the church, since the earliest times, has absorbed Pagan shrines into Roman temples into Saxon churches, etc.
Armed with the phone number of the vicar of All Saints, I determined to find out all I could about  the mysterious stone.
I was put in touch with a local historian who thought that the stone was possibly a Roman altar stone and said that it had been discovered set into the wall of the church when renovations were made a few years ago.
According to the vicar and the historian, the stone stands some 2 feet 8 inches high, is 8 inches square in section and is decorated by a curious pattern and contains a pictogram of a female with a pair of scissors/shears.
A 1:50,000 flat sheet map of the area was quickly acquired and I set to work scouring the area for my standard size circles, using Gresford All Saints as a perimeter marker.
Although I hoped that I would find that the church stood at least on one circle, I was not prepared to find that four Circles of Time passed through it!
The computer did most of the hard work and produced four circles with radii 4,781 4,647, 4,718 and 4,685 metres.
Curiously, the centre of one stands on the perimeter of another creating an imperfect ‘Vesica Piscis’ again.
Imperfect, because the radii differ by about 60 metres.
However, as I haven't yet had the opportunity to study the large scale maps of the area, there may be hidden markers which may firm up the circles and so narrow the discrepancy.
Fig 3: The Gresford Complex.
All the centres are marked ‘+’ and all the markers are churches except where marked ‘MS’for Mile/Mark stones.
Note that several churches stand on the perimeters of more than one circle and that a further circle has been drawn, centred on Gresford church, connecting the circle centres with two churches.
What also remains a tantalising possibility is that two circles include a milestone as a marker.
Were they really placed as milestones or could we be on the track of the elusive mark stones of great antiquity?
The Ordnance Survey map, Sheet 117 in the Landranger series, shows Gresford itself standing on low hills about 30/40 metres high above the flood plains of the Dee estuary.
To the west and south lie the Welsh mountains and hopefully I shall find ancient markers indicated in the large scale maps which lie in the hills.
My quest for finding any such remote objects will, I hope, be eased by the arrival of a hand- held Global Navigation System, supplied by courtesy of Messrs Ampro for testing over land conditions.
The GPS system made its public debut in the recent Gulf War when it enabled allied troops to navigate at night across hundreds of miles of desert to within a few metres.
Hopefully it will do the same for me in the Welsh mountains, and enable me to walk onto specific grid bearings and find some ancient markers.
Of course, you can navigate without such a wonderful piece of kit, but I find I spend so much time locating an off-road search area, that it severely reduces the time available on site.
The system works by emitting a series of signals to orbiting satellites, timing the return signal and computing its position from the resulting ‘fixes’.
Overland, it needs to see 4 satellites at any one time to give a three dimensional ‘fix’ including altitude.
Moreover it can also be used to pinpoint any archaeological finds by giving accurate latitude and longitude positions.
Accurate, that is, to within ± 25 metres which is accurate as they are liable to get.
It seems rather strange that the accuracy for navigating/surveying now, by state of the art technology, is of the same order as  has been used to set down the Circles of Time several thousand years ago.
I am aware, however, that surveying techniques of the last 150 years have been to standards of accuracy of centimetres over the same sort of distance and landscape.
It's just that the standard methods of triangulation and trigonometrical calculation take so much more manpower and time and are only possible with the advent of modern mathematics and the invention of the decimal point and zero, which the circle markers did not have.
And so to next month's final article when I shall report on the outcome of the trip to Gresford and give a full report on the practical side of the GPS navigating system.
Ian Campbell    
Questions & Answers
Unofficial Roman Coin
I enclose a photograph of a Roman bronze coin which still has traces of the silver wash on it.
The obverse reads IMP.
CONSTANTINUS MAX.
AUG.
On the reverse is VICTORIAE LAETAE PRINC.
PERP.
Two victories hold a shield above an altar.
On the shield are the words VOT PR and the mint mark is STR.
Please could you identify this coin for me?
You've described your coin very carefully and therefore I am able to tell you that it is a barbarous version of a standard issue from the reign of Constantine the Great (307–337 AD).
The intention was to publicise the many victories achieved in his long reign and the generous  largesses given when celebrating his good fortune.
The mint mark STR might have been used at Treveri (Trier in Germany), but it is rather suspect.
So is the PR (for Populi Romani?) on the shield where ‘X’ or ‘XX’would normally be found.
A large number of rather similar ‘irregular issues’ are known and it is suggested that one or more private ‘mints’were producing them.
Later on, of course, there were even more of these unofficial bronzes in circulation.
The British Museum might be glad of the opportunity to study your find, so why not send it to the Keeper of Coins and Medals, who will quickly return it with his comments?
Lastly, I fear I may have to disappoint you when I say that the coin is more interesting than valuable.
Mixture
Could you help identify these recent finds?
Item 1: Roughly circular about 40mm diameter, bronze or brass with a hard green patina.
About 2 mm thick on the perimeter but thinner towards the centre with a pierced design like a miniature horse-brass.
The face was probably polished at some time, the reverse is rougher but beaten rather than cast.
Item 2: Made of pewter, 45mm × 25mm overall and 8mm deep, possibly the bowl of a spoon but of what period?
Item 3: Small brass ingot 10mm × 12mm × 4mm with a thin green patina.
A peculiar ‘number three’ symbol on both sides.
Item 4: Bronze, 60mm × 50mm overall, the loop swivels through the cross-bar which is worn at both ends.
I believe this to be a purse frame, but what was its purpose?
Item 5: Brass, 30mm diameter, perhaps a keepsake or good-luck piece?
Slightly convex with fleur-de-lys on a shield, the lettering is very ornate but after many hours I read it as AVE MARIA GRAVIA.
Item No 1: this appears to be a 17th century cloth fastener though it is much larger than normal.
Item No 2: this spoon is Roman in style.
The handle would have measured about 5in in length and terminated in a point.
Item No 3: this is a pre 18th century pharmaceutical weight.
These would be in various sizes and housed in a small oblong box along with a set of scales.
Item No 4: the large loop would normally be attached to a belt as this is a purse frame dating to the 15th to 16th century.
All that is missing is the outer framework.
Item No 5: it is extremely difficult to date these religious medallions, struck to be blessed by a priest and kept as a talisman.
The wording is AVE MARIA GRATIA (not GRAVIA), the beginning in Latin of the prayer Hail Mary.
Horse decoration
Please give your opinion on this artefact found below plough depth in a Hampshire field.
It is made of brass or copper, about 1mm thick with an engraved design.
At least 80% green patina remains with enough traces of gilt to show that the overall effect was golden.
Superficially it resembles a shield boss with three fixing holes but I thought that they were heavier and cast.
The centre rivet is ornamental, and tapered with flat sides.
This is a most ornate and interesting item.
It is medieval, though I have never seen anything like it before.
I doubt if it is a shield boss having gold gilt.
Judging by the small holes it would probably have been attached to either wood or leather.
It could be a horse decoration, not a snaffle boss but a hanging brass.
French medal
Could you please help me with information about this French bronze medal?
Napoleon's portrait is on the obverse and, on the other side is the Arc de Triomphe, the focal point of Paris's streets.
AUX ARMEES  FRANCAISES and FONDE PAR NAPOLEON EN 1806, TERMINE PAR LOUIS PHILIPPE I are inscriptions that tell us indirectly why the piece was made.
In 1806, Napoleon made the most of his victories by imitating the Caesars and decreeing that a great monument should be set up in honour of the Great Army that had done so well.
He laid its foundations, but it was not finished when he met his Waterloo and the Allies who defeated him were not inclined to allow the work on the Arch to continue.
A generation passed and in 1836, King Louis Philippe, who had his own reasons for fostering public enthusiasm and patriotism, finished the construction.
Betrothal Ring
I have been a keen detectorist now for three years and my best find to date is a ring.
It was almost dark when I found it and it was not until I arrived home that I could see its lovely design.
The most striking feature is the clasped hands.
The ring is yellow coloured on the outside, silver inside but carries no hallmark.
I have a feeling that it is very old.
Could you please help me by telling me something about it?
Your finger ring dates to the 15th century and is gold on silver.
Rings of this style are known as ‘betrothal’ rings and the design of the clasped hands has been popular for many centuries.
Judging by your drawing your find looks to be in excellent condition.
Badges and Buttons
Please could you identify some of my finds from the enclosed drawings?
Item 1 is an enamelled badge that I found in the garden of an old house.
It reads ‘Butlins Ireland 1954’ and shows a yacht, golf club and tennis racket, flowers, and the sun.
Is there still a Butlins in Ireland?
Item 2 is a ribbon scroll in brass worded ‘Royal Warwickshire’.
Item 3 is a brass button reading ‘H.M.
Prisons’ on the front and ‘E. Milns & Co, London’on the back.
As evident, Item 1 is an enamelled badge from Butlins holiday camps; there were in fact over 1,750 different badges issued by Butlins.
In 1948 Butlins acquired the Mosney Holiday Centre which was twenty miles from Dublin.
In 1982 Butlins sold it to Mosney Irish Holidays plc.
Item 2 is the brass scroll which was once part of the Royal Warwickshire regiment's cap badge.
The missing part of the badge — which was worn between c1900–1958 was a white metal antelope with a coronet around the neck.
Item 3 is a button, as the words tell us, from the uniform of a prison officer.
The ‘Kings Crown’ puts the button's date at some time between 1901 and 1953.
Unfortunately, I have been unable to identify the makers from what you have been able to decipher of the wording on the back.
Assortment
Please can you identify these objects?
The spoon is made of silver, and the silver marks look foreign.
Could you tell me the date and country of origin?
Item No 1: is a publicity item issued from William Allen's boot and shoe business at 36 Chandos Street; Covent Garden, which was active in the latter half of the nineteenth century.
It carries the arms of the Cordwainers' (Shoemakers') Company — a chevron and three goat's heads.
On the other side is the Allen Family's arms, featuring six martlets.
Item No 2: is a 1794 halfpenny issued by Dally & Sons, who were drapers in Chichester.
It features on the reverse a representation of Bishop Storey's High Cross, and a bust of Queen Elizabeth on the obverse.
Item No 3: is a 1794 Hendon half-penny, issued by B Price who was probably the landlord on an inn named The Greyhound, which would be why that dog is featured on the token.
Item No 4: is probably 17th century Dutch or Flemish.
Roman Coin
After years of searching farmland and finding silver coins from Elizabeth I to George III, I have at last found by first Roman coin.
It is a small silver piece, rather battered I'm afraid.
I'm glad you drew your coin, Mr Dance, as a rubbing would have been very difficult to make out.
Your find is a denarius minted in honour of the Emperor Antoninus Pius who died in 161 AD.
If they ruled well, emperors were deified — consigned to the place where the gods lived.
When this happened they were given their own temple and, of course, in the temples were altars such as the one on the reverse of the coin.
Its inscription reads ‘Divo Pio’— To the Divine Pius.
Byzantine Follis
I enclose wax impressions and a rubbing of what I think to be a coin.
This was found in Scotland on the surface of a field ‘eyes only’.
The coin is made from copper bronze but has no patina.
Your coin is a Byzantine follis of Justin II (565–578 AD), struck at the Cyzicus Mint (near Istanbul).
AA Key
I was recently given permission to search a derelict town house and made a 50/50 agreement with the owner as to the value of any finds.
One of my finds was an iron key in very good condition.
I have been told by a friend that this is an early AA key, and that it is quite valuable.
I am writing to request any information you may be able to give as to the key's history and value.
The Automobile Association was established on 26 June 1905, a few months after Charles Jarrott and William Letts had set up a warning system to advise motorists of police speed traps on some sections of the London to Brighton road.
At first they called themselves the ‘Automobile Mutual Association’.
The original AA badge was issued in 1906, and bore the signature of the association's first secretary, Stenson (later Sir Stenson) Cooke.
The first AA telephone boxes were erected on the Ashford to Hythe (Kent) road in July 1912.
The key you have found is a fairly early issue to members and a collector of automobilia would pay about £5 for it.
Horse boss
Could you help identify and date this object?
It is made of lead and was found on ploughed land.
The front has traces of red paint or enamel and a raised rope pattern around the edge.
The  reverse has the remains of fixings.
What you have found is a horseboss.
These harness decorations were attached to the snaffle bit or the band below the horses ear.
Many bosses were made of pewter or a brass alloy, some being a thin coat of brass alloy filled with lead.
Your example is possibly a poor quality pewter with a rope border design, and dates to the 18th century.
Help us to help you
Help our experts to identify your finds.
Please do not send the artefacts or coins, but provide either a good quality drawings or photographs of front and reverse, and include details of dimensions, material of manufacture and any other helpful information.
Do please send your full address (for office use only).
Good Hunting!